 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2013-14] 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013/ Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2012-2013) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
22 
 

 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2013-14] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24th August, 2013 
 
                         Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26th August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2013/ Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. 106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2012-2013………………………              (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (v)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….                1            
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...                   42          
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…                 57 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………                 58       
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………                    60 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty- Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee           
on External Affairs held on 14.08.2013…….…………………           76 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                             
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….            78   
 
III. Annexure……………………..                                                         79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2012-2013) 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Member 
   1.       Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
                            Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  
3.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
4.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
5.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
6.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
7.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
8.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
9.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
10.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
11.  Shri J. Ramesh  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13.  Shri Elangovan T.K.S.  
14.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
15.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
16.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
17.  Shri Sultan Ahmed * 
18.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari @ 
19. Vacant $ 
20. Vacant ** 
21. Vacant @@ 
                                      
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
                Rajya Sabha 
  
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Shri D. P. Tripathi  
31 
 
Smt. Ambika Soni# 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Committee Officer 
5. Ms. Kiran Bhargava  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
_________________________________________________________________ 
 
* Shri Manish Tewari ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
appointment as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 and Shri Sultan Ahmed is 
nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012. 
 
@ Dr. Shashi Tharoor ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
appointment as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 and Shri Inder Singh 
Namdhari is nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012 . 
 
$ Shri Nama Nageswara Rao ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon change of nomination to Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 13.12.2012.  
 
#  Smt. Ambika Soni has been nominated to the Committee vice Dr. M. S. Gill who 
has been nominated to the Committee on Urban Development w.e.f. 27.12.2012. 
  
** Dr. Girija Vyas ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon her 
appointment  as Minister w.e.f. 17.06.2013 
 
@@ Shri M.B. Rajesh ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
change of nomination to Committee on Science & T echnology, Environment & 
Forests w.e.f. 27.6.2013. 
(iv) 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 12-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 22nd Report (15th 
Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 20th 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2013-14. 
 
2. The 20th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 29 th April, 2013.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 24th July, 2013. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Acti on Taken Report at their sitting held on 
14th August, 2013. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the 20th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
23  August,  2013                                                                              Chairman,                           
Bharapada 01 , 1935 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(v)                                             

 1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations /observations contained in 
their Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (20 13-14) of the Ministry of 
External Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013 and laid  in 
Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2013. 
 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the 29 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 
23, 26 and 28.  
 Total-14 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. NIL. 
 Total-00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 13 and 25. 
Total- 02 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 17, 21, 24, 27 and 29 
Total-13 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government and also the recommendations/  observations on which the 
Committee have made their comments should be furnished within three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
 

 2 
4. The Committee will now deal with  some of the replies received from the 
Government, which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
 
5.  While analyzing the budgetary allocation of the Ministry of E xternal 
Affairs, the Committee had observed that it was dismally inappropriate as 
compared to the mandate assigned to the Ministry.  Though, the total outlay 
for the Ministry for the financial year 20 13-14 was Rs. 11719.00 crores yet 
interestingly, out of the total allocat ion, Rs. 7343.23 crores, which wa s 
62.66% of total allocation was in nature of mandatory/obligatory expenditure 
in view of India‟s internat ional commitments as it included  „Contributions to 
International Organization‟, „Technical and Economic Cooperation‟, „Loans 
to Foreign Governme nts‟.  Only Rs. 4375.77 crores wa s available wit h the 
Ministry that too included  Rs. 1320.00 crores earmarked for „Special  
Diplomatic Expenditure‟ which wa s disc retionary in nature and wa s not  
readily available to Ministry for its inte rnal use and Rs. 209.12 crores w as 
earmarked for „Grants to institutions‟. Hence, in real terms only Rs. 2846.65 
crores were available to the Ministry to cater to its mandate of conducting 
India‟s foreign policy, maintenance of its international relations via 
establishment of 179 Missions/Posts and rendering of services by 
Missions/Passport Offices and all other establishments including Indian 
Cultural Centres/Chairs across the world and conduct diplomacy, politica l, 
economic and cultural and maintain high level of services rendered by these 
offices in India and world and engage with various academic and research 
institutes.  The Committee  had noted that the Ministry ha d been functioning 
under immense financial pres sures and wa s hindered in performing upto the 
expected level due to financ ial constraints.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
taken a serious note of the state of affairs and had recommended that the 
Ministry must take up the issue of low allocation of funds w ith Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“The Ministry, as rightly observed by the Committee, has been 
functioning under severe financial strain and has not been able to 
discharge some of its important commitments only for lack of funds. 
The commitments from the highest levels, if not honoured in time, 
adversely impact the image of the country, which is why the adequate 
budgetary allocation is important.  
  
It may also be of relevance to point out that the establishment 
expenses of the Ministry, comprising of Headquarters, Embassies and 
Missions, Passport Offices and Hostels/Residential Complexes, added 
up to about `2498 crore in 2012 -13 (provisiona l). The allocation for 

 3 
the establishment expenses for 2013 -14 is only ` 2390.01 crore, as 
against the demand of `3089.18 crore. 
  
The Ministry will take up the issue of augmenting funds at 
Supplementary Demands and RE stages.” 
 
 
7. The Committee note the candid acceptance by the Ministry about their 
working under severe financial strain and its impact across the arena of its 
functioning.  However, it has not g iven any description about the  efforts made 
so far to overcome such continuous trend of inadequate budgetary allocation 
over the years.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take 
up the matter of inadequate budgetary allocation  more seriously with the 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and further sensitize them 
regarding urgent requirement of funds for  fulfillment of  international 
commitments as well as completion of  ongoing projects in foreign countries 
and functioning of its Missions/Posts,  during the current financial year and 
also to prepare for the  forthcoming budgetary exercise so as to ensure 
henceforth adequate budget ary allocation. The Committee would like to be 
apprised by the Ministry about the efforts those have been made in this regard 
and the augmentation of funds at RE and Supplementary Demands stage s as a 
result thereof. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
8. The Committee we re distressed to note that high level international 
commitment had to be kept on hold or partially implemented due to lack of 
budgetary support.  The Committee were appalled to  note that due to 
budgetary constraints Government of India was unable to fully implement 
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) decision for 100 million US$ grant to 
Bangladesh in pursuance of announcement of a grant of US$ 200 million to 
Bangladesh made during the bilateral visit of then Finance Minister in May 
2012.  The Committee had further noted that the 2nd installment could not be 

 4 
released in 2012-13 as no additional funds were provided by the Ministry of 
Finance, despite the demand bein g made in 2 nd batch of supplementary 
demands.  The Committee had also noted that resources were augmented for 
the 1 st installment from within the already allocated resources of the 
Ministry. 
 The Committee ha d taken a very serious note of the Ministry of 
Finance‟s refusal to grant funds for timely release of 2 nd installment for 
grants to Bangladesh, though, it was provided later at the fag -end of the 
financial year.  The Committee we re of the opinion that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should pursue the m atter further and CCS must be apprised 
of the situation.  The Ministry of External Affairs must ensure arrangement 
for funds for 3 rd and 4 th installment.  The Committee had further 
recommended that the payment of grant to Bangladesh must not be delayed 
on account of budgetary constraints. 
 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“It is respectfully submitted that the Ministry of Finance had been 
sensitized about the commitments made at highest levels and details of 
these commitments were also shared with them. As per the decision of 
the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), the first instalment of US$ 
50 million was to be released from the existing budgetary allocation of 
the Ministry. Though not explicitly  stated, it was implied that the 
remaining instalments would be released with additional funding by 
the Ministry of Finance. The first instalment of US$ 50 million was 
released from the savings of Ministry‟s own resources, after Ministry 
of Finance acceded  to the request for provisions of funds in the form 
of „Technical Supplementary‟ in the 2 nd Batch of Supplementary 
Demands for Grants. The request for Cash supplementary for 
releasing 2 nd instalment of US$ 50 million to Government of 
Bangladesh was not considered favourably by the Ministry of Finance.  
Hence, the second instalment of US$ 50 million could not be released 
within FY 2012-13 due to paucity of funds.   
 
 It may be pertinent to mention that provision for only two more 
instalments of US$ 50 millio n each exists in the Ministry‟s budget of 
FY 2013 -14, out of which one instalment of US$ 50 million has 
already been released in May 2013.  Therefore, the Ministry would 
have to approach the Ministry of Finance in the Supplementary 
Demands stage for augmen tation of budget to provide for the las t 
instalment of US$ 50 million.” 
 
 

 5 
10. The Committee do not approve of not  honouring th e commitments 
made at the highest  levels. The Committee specifically note that the second 
instalment of US$ 50 million could not b e released to Bangladesh within 
Financial Year 2012-13 due to paucity of funds and during financial year 2013-
14, a provision has been made for only two more installments of US$ 50 million 
each.  However, for the release of the last installment of US$  50 million , the 
Ministry is still uncertain and has to approach the Ministry of Finance  to 
obtain funds at t he stage of Supplementary Demands.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that such situation should not arise again and Ministry 
should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance and sensitize them 
continuously so that payment of the last installment is not delayed and made 
during the current financial year itself positively. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
11. The Committee  had found that in several case s, the MEA ha d not 
been able to provide funds for the projects committed and announced by the 
Head of States/Government/Ministry of External Affairs on strategically 
important visits to the foreign countries due to budgetary constraints. The 
Committee, had, therefore, desired that a separate head should be created for 
India‟s International Commitments announced by the Head of 
State/Government/Minister of External Affairs at international fora, wherein 
it should be mandatory for Ministry of Finance to provide funds for 
fulfillment of such commitments without any scope of discretionary 
reduction of allocation by the Ministry of Finance or the Planning 
Commission. 
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
  
“India‟s developmental assistance to foreign countries is budgeted 
under the various heads such as „Aid to Bhutan‟, „Aid to Nepal‟ etc.  
under the Major Head 3605.  Opening a new budget head dedicated 
for funds earmarked for India‟s commitments made at the highest 
level may also not guarantee adequate provision of funds as these have 
to be ultimately provided by the Ministry of Finance.  Nevertheless, 
the Ministry would take up the matter as suggested by the Hon‟ble 
Committee with the Ministry of Finance.”  
 
 

 6 
13. The Committee had taken a serious note of the Ministry’s continuous 
failure in providing funds for projects committed and  announced by the Head 
of State/ Government/Minister of External Affairs at inte rnational for a or 
during strategically important visits to foreign countries.  The Committee had, 
therefore, desired for creation of separate head with sufficient funds for 
fulfillment of such international commitments.  The Committee are not 
convinced with  the Ministry’s expression of casual vi ew that opening a new 
budget head may also not guarantee adequate provision of funds.  Considering 
the necessity of funds in this regard and involvement of nation’s pride in the 
matter, the Committee would like to strongly reiterate that Ministry must take 
initiatives in consultation with the Ministry of Finance  for the creation of a 
separate budget head for such international commitments and also ensure that 
allocation of funds  under this new budget head is made mandatory and no 
discretionary reduction of allocations are carried out either by the Ministry of 
Finance or the Planning Commission  in any case .  The Committee should be 
informed about the outcome of the efforts made in this direction.  
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
14. The Committee had noted that as part of the inter -governmental 
model, three ongoing hy dro-power projects in Bhutan had  faced se rious 
shortage of funds and it wa s really unfortunate that for second successive 
year, the funds for three hydro -power projects in Bhu tan had exhausted mid-
year.  The Committee we re appalled to know that due to problems in timely 
release of funds, the project author ities in one of the projects had  to face 
difficult situation even in releasing salary for its employee s.  The Committee 
had acknowledged the Ministry‟s endeavour to augment funds from internal 
sources by re -appropriating funds allocated for various projects so that the 
work in th ose ongoing projects did  not come to a halt.  The Committee  had 
opined that innovative ways of financing based on secu ritization of the likely 
revenue stream from such hydel power might  be explored to obviate the 
paucity of resources.  The Committee had, however, desired that the Ministry 
should endeavour to ensure timely release of funds for ongoing projects, as 

 7 
delay in release of funds would result in slow pace of work leading to gradual 
cost escalation and also affect the prestige of India in the comity of nations. 
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The funds required for India to provide assistance to hydropower 
projects in Bhutan are allocated by the Planning Commission under 
the Plan component of the “Aid to Bhutan” head of the Ministry‟s 
budget. However inadequate funds have been provided to the 
Ministry. For instance, the Ministry projected Rs.1644 crore under the 
plan expenditure for Bhutan in the FY 2011 -12, but was allocated 
Rs.1030 crore. In the Financial Year 2012 -13 also, Rs. 1138 crore was 
provided for the Plan expenditure in BE and RE 2013 against t he 
projection of Rs. 2045 crore.  It was only after persistent efforts made 
at the level of EAM/PM additional Rs 400 Crores was provided at the 
very end of the financial year 2012 -13. The Ministry has received Rs. 
2520 Crores for the three ongoing HEP‟s  for the Financial Year of 
2013-14 against the projected demand of Rs 3726 Crores. 
The Ministry from time to time is drawing the attention of the 
authorities concerned about the requirement of funds to three ongoing 
Hydroelectric Projects in Bhutan. EAM wrot e to the Finance Minister 
on December 3 rd, 2012 about the importance of providing necessary 
funds. Foreign Secretary also wrote to the Finance Secretary on 22 nd 
January, 2013 about the necessity of providing funds in an urgent 
manner to these projects. The  issue was also brought to the notice of 
the PMO by FS, through a letter addresse d to PS to PM in February 
2013.” 
 
16. In view of the serious shortage of funds for three ongoing hydro power 
projects in Bhutan, the Committee had desired that the Ministry sh ould 
endeavour to ensure timely release of funds.  The Committee are dismayed to 
note that Ministry has not furnished any details of the action taken by the 
Ministry on the issue and has  merely rehashed the details which had already 
been submitted to the Committee during the examination of the Demands for 
Grants.  The Committee, therefore, desire to be updated about the  further 
efforts made by the Ministry in this regard  and the outcome thereof .  Also 
considering the dire shortage of finances faced in the implementation of the 
projects during the last two financial years, the Committee would like to 

 8 
emphasize that expeditious efforts should be made by the Ministry to ensure 
timely release of funds by augmenting funds through Supplementary Demands 
or if required, from the internal resources for the three ongoing hydro projects 
in Bhutan.  
 Further, the Committee are dis pleased to note the silence of  the 
Ministry on the Committee’s suggestion that innovative ways of financing 
based on securitization of the lik ely revenue stream from hydel power may be 
explored to obviate the paucity of resources.  The Committee, therefore, would 
like to reiterate that the Ministry should work upon the suggestions made by 
the Committee and furnish the updated details of the prog ress made in this 
matter.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
17. The Committee had observed that MEA wa s in the process of 
revamping all the websites of the Ministry under its web portal project. 
Standard templates had been circulated to all Missions and Posts and they ha d 
been asked to integrate themselves with the official portal as per new d esign. 
But only 100 Missions had  integrated their web pages with the official web 
site of MEA. Under the project a doz en websites of the Ministry had  already 
been redesigned and others were yet to be undertaken to make them more user 
friendly. The Committee had noted that the presence of several websites of the 
Ministry might create confusion and user might be unable to get complet e 
information at one place. The Committee had  been frequently asking the 
Ministry to create one integrated website of the Ministry with focused links 
rather than a multiplicity of websites. The Committee had hoped that  after  
completion of  the  process o f  integration and revamping of  websites at the 
earliest, the Ministry would constantly upgrade their website and make it  user 
friendly, easily accessible and interactive.    
 
18. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“Ministry acknowledges the Committee's recommendation for the 
need to create one integrated website where all information related to 
the Ministry and its various Missions/Posts can be made available. In 
this regard it is submitted that the main objective of  the Ministry's 

 9 
Web Portal Project was to develop a web portal which is not only 
easily accessible, user friendly and web 2.0 compatible but has also all 
the Missions' and Posts' web pages integrated within it so that it can 
act as a comprehensive single s ource integrated platform through 
which users can access all information generated both from 
headquarters and all Missions/Posts of the Ministry. In pursuit of this 
objective, as of June 3, 2013, almost all Missions' web pages have 
already been successfull y integrated with the new official MEA 
website (www.mea.gov.in). Some of our Missions (like those in Iraq, 
South Sudan, Mali etc.) which could not integrate because they are yet 
to have an independent websit e or they are yet to become fully 
functional, will do so at the earliest.  
 
The work of redesigning all websites of the Ministry was taken up as 
part of the Web Portal Project with the objective of providing a 
uniform, corporate look and feel to all the Mi nistry’s websites so as to 
have a standard image for the Ministry in the digital space with which 
users from across the world can associate with. As on June 3, 2013 
twenty one Missions/Posts have completed the redesigning work and 
migrated to the new offic ial templates. Forty more Missions/Posts are 
in the process of re -designing. The remaining Missions/Posts have 
been asked to initiate action in this regard at the earliest. Ministry is 
regularly following up with the Missions for early completion of the 
redesigning exercise. 
Ministry also notes the Committee's observation for the need to 
constantly upgrade and update information on all its websites and has 
been regularly writing to all Missions/Posts to take extra effort to 
ensure that their websites reflect the most updated information.” 
 
19. The Committee had stressed upon the Ministry, the need to create one 
integrated website of the Ministry with focused links rather than a multiplicity 
of websites.  However, the Committee are surprised to note that in t his digital 
era, some of the Indian Missions are yet to have their independent websites. 
The Committee are further concerned over the slow progress of Web Portal 
Project particularly relating to redesigning of all websites and migration to the 
new official  templates.  The Committee would strongly urge the Ministry to 

 10 
adhere in this matter to the defined timeline and ensure steps towards early 
completion of the projec t.  The Committee are not satisfied with the present 
system of only writing to Missions/Post s to display the updated information on 
their websites because it has no impact on the  Missions/Posts.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that Ministry must develop an internal mechanism for a 
regular monitoring that websites are upgraded and updated so that the display 
of the updated and precise information is made ava ilable on the Mission’s 
webpage as well as on various other interactive channels. 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
20. The Committee had noted that India‟s diplomatic efforts had led to global 
engagement at governmental level.  The Ministry‟s efforts  had been  
supplemented by Public Diplomacy, Press and Media Relations.  The 
Committee had also acknowledged  the Ministry‟s digital presence in social 
media. The Committee were of the o pinion that in the information age, the 
virtual social space ha d provided a unique platform to the Ministry to engage 
with the public and particularly the young generation.  The Committee  had, 
therefore, desire d that the Ministry should adopt a holistic ap proach and 
coordinated efforts must be made in th at direction.  The Committee  had, 
however, emphasized and cautioned the Ministry that diplomatic paradigms and 
stringent digital safety standards were adhered to. The guidelines under 
preparation for safe use of social media should be finalized at the earliest and the 
Committee should be informed accordingly. 
 
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“a)  Public Diplomacy Division consults with other Divisions on  
regular basis. 
  b) (i)  The Department of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Ministry of  Information Technology had issued detailed 
guidelines for the use of Social media by Government 
organizations (August 2012 ). These are comprehensive 
guidelines dealing with various aspects a nd use of Social 
media such as account governance, content governance, 
information security governance, responsiveness, impact 
analysis, etc.  
 

 11 
(ii) Public Diplomacy Division had issued a circular to all the 
Missions containi ng „Do‟s and Don‟t‟s‟ of Soc ial media in 
December 2011.   
 
c)   EG & IT Division is in process of finalizing another set of 
guidelines which deal specifically with safety aspect of Social 
media.  
 
22. The Committee take note of the initiatives taken by the Ministry 
regarding safety aspects of Social Media. The Committee, however, desire that 
an effective mechanism should be established within the Ministry to ensure 
that the detailed guidelines issued by the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology, Ministry of Information Technology for the use of 
social media b y the Government organizations are followed and strictly  
adhered to.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should also 
formulate additional guidelines  for its internal use particularly in view of the 
nature of Ministry’s interactio n and engagement with the world -wide 
audiences and its diplomatic connotations.   The Committee would also like to 
emphasize on digital safety and recommend that if necessary, proper training 
may be imparted to  the staff and particularly to the divisional head s for 
conducting diplomacy through the medium of web. 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
23. The Committee had note that  Indian Missions/Posts form ed India‟s 
resident diplomatic pres ence in the host country.  However, i n light of India‟s 
growing international profile and presence, during the meetings with the 
Committee, various foreign delegations visiting India had  expressed their desire 
to have Indian Mission/Post in their country a nd several such requests were 
pending in the Ministry.  But, the Committee were informed that no new 
proposal had even reached at a stage of consideration of opening of new resident 
Mission.  In  that context, the Committee had  a view that such proposals sh ould 
be extensively examined on priority basis and after due diplomatic and other 
considerations, the Ministry must come to a decision in each case and such 
efforts should not be stalled or delayed at least due to financial constraints.   

 12 
24. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The Ministry of External Affairs will review all such cases once 
again in consultation with the concerned Territorial Divisions and take 
further action as necessary.  It is confirm ed that no proposal which is 
otherwise justified and meets the criteria for setting up a resident 
Mission at any station abroad, shall be allowed to be stalled because of 
financial constraints.” 
 
25. The Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry’s reply of too general 
nature without any information about the pending requests for opening new 
Indian Missions/Posts and status thereof .  The Committee , therefore,  would 
like to know about the requests/proposals received through formal as well as 
informal chan nels for opening of Indian Missions/Posts in various countries 
alongwith the action initiated by the Ministry and the progress made in each 
case.  The Committee desire that all such proposals should be actively 
reviewed with appropriate follow up action within a fixed timeframe.  Further, 
the Committee would also like to urge the Ministry to draw a list of countries 
with no indepen dent Indian diplomatic presence and explore the feasibility of 
having Indian presence at such places so as to provide a platform to India to 
pursue its interests across the world and widen its engagement with all the  
strategically important countries. 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
26.  The Committee were of the view t hat the Missions/Posts must be 
empowered to cater to various demands according to the changing pro file of 
the role and job which wa s expected to be fulfilled by the Missions/Posts.  
The Committee  had taken note of the Ministry‟s efforts in regard to taking  
stock of the changing functional and human resource needs of the 
Missions/Posts through O&M study and conduct of regular inspections.  The 
Committee had, however, expressed their dissatisfaction over non-availability 
of any report of inspection in Mission s/Posts since May 2011.  The 
Committee had, therefore, desire d that there should be a regular review and 
inspection of functioning of Missions/Posts particularly on the parameters of 

 13 
overall functioning, coordination mechanism between the Headquarters, 
Missions and other Ministries, channels of communication and 
implementation of Ministry‟s instructions/directions in most efficient and 
diligent manner. Simultaneously, Ministry should also ensure that due 
resources, physical and human, were provided to the I ndian establishments 
abroad so that they were able to maintain minimum standards and deliver 
standard services.  The Committee had further reiterated that Ministry must 
ensure due training to the officers/staff about local legalities as well as soft 
skills and the system should be made more responsive to the needs of the 
people seeking information/services from the Missions/Posts.   
 
27. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The list of reports submitted by the Ministry in response to the 
queries related to "Inspection of Missions abroad" pertained only to 
the comprehensive inspections conducted by the Dire ctorate of 
Inspections. Besides such inspections, various Divisions in the 
Ministry also conduct regular inspections/evaluations on specific 
issues such as administrative/establishment/consular/security matters 
and other important aspects of bilateral rela tionships.  Generally such 
subject specific reports have not been included in the list of 
comprehensive inspections carried out by the Directorate of 
Inspections. With a view to rectifying this situation so that the records 
of the Directorate are comprehen sive, holistic and complete, in future, 
in addition to the full inspections carried out by the Directorate, 
records of specialized reports shall also be maintained in the 
Directorate.  As far as the resources are concerned, the Ministry 
always endeavors to  meet the functional needs of Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to the best of its capacity. The Ministry is also 
attaching high priority to the training and capacity building aspects.  A 
new comprehensive training framework for the MEA in pursuance of 
the Nati onal Training Policy 2012 is currently under process. Once 
implemented, this Training Framework would substantially upgrade 
the necessary skills for better delivery of services.”   
 
 
28. The Committee are surprised to note that proper records of reports on 
specific issues like administrative/establishment/consular/evaluation matters 
are neither included in the list of comprehensive inspections nor  maintained in 
the Directorate of Inspections.  The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that 
the Ministry sh ould ensure that the Directorate of Inspections start s 
maintaining comprehensive details of all the inspection Reports and action 

 14 
taken thereupon, if any , in their records  with immediate effect .  The 
Committee further reiterate that review s and inspection s of functioning of 
Missions/Posts particularly on the parameters of overall functioning, 
coordination mechanism between the Headquarters, Missions and other 
Ministries, channels of communication and implementation of Ministry’s 
instructions/directions in most effective and diligent manner should be held  at 
regular intervals. The Committee desire that conclusions/observations made in 
such Reports and insights gained through these exercises should be 
incorporated in the Ministry’s policy documents. 
 In order to enhance the skills and capacity building within the structure 
of the Ministry,  the Committee hope that MEA will be able to arrive at new 
comprehensive training framework at the earliest. The Committee, however, 
suggest that the training framework should  incorporate and address  specific 
and specialized requirement s for officials serving the Ministry . Moreover, in 
view of their placement in foreign countries, the training must necessarily 
include specific modules on local legalities, soft skills, language and orientation 
on local culture and customs before their posting to the foreign countries  for a 
better, well equipped and responsive system in Indian establishments abroad . 
Further, the Committee are not satisfied with the endeavor being made by the 
Ministry to meet the functional needs of Indian Missions/Posts abroad  and 
reiterate that the Ministry should undertake sincere efforts in this regard. 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
29. The Committee had noted that the Ministry was regularly a nd 
increasingly dealing with private parties particularly in view of outsourcing of 
visa process/passport process and participation of private sector in various 
projects.  The Committee  had, however, observe d that there wa s neither any 
specific Standard Operating Procedure to be fol lowed in that regard nor there 

 15 
was any separate Division to deal with issue of tenders, evaluation of bids, 
selection of service providers, deciding on terms and conditions and to ensure 
whether th e related terms and conditions w ere adhered to or not.  The 
Committee, therefore, were of the view that the Ministry must develop a 
mechanism or create a sub -division to have a uniform and coordinated 
approach by creating standard operating procedures and to look into the nitty -
gritties of the entire process.  The Ministry must ensure regular monitoring 
and evaluation of services in a due diligent manner.   The Committee had 
further suggest ed that the Ministry should adhere to stringent norms and 
exercise transparency in the process perta ining to tendering and outsourcing 
while giving paramouncy to the security concerns. 
 
30. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“i) In regard to Stand ard Operating Procedures (SOP), Ministry‟s 
circular Egram  of October 24, 2011 forwarding Guidelines 
from AS (CPV) is considered SOP. Further guidelines were 
issued vide Ministry‟s circular Egram March 7, 2013 detailing 
the procedures to be adopted for award of contract. These two 
circulars form the instructions for SOP. However, as pointed 
out in the Recommendation No. 11 Ministry would issue a 
comprehensive SOP by compiling the information.  
 
ii) Regarding creation of a separate Cell, it may be mentioned that 
currently, the outsourcing of visa/passport/consular services 
have been implemented in 68 Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
Besides two more Mission/Post would join the scheme soon 
while two Missions have limited outsourcing services. Thus the 
total number of Missions/Posts which have outsourced 
Visa/Passport/Consular Services would be 72. All legal issues 
are handled in consultation with Legal and Treaties Division of 
the Ministry. In rare cases, the opinion of Ministry of Law and 
Justice is also obtained. All important issues are cleared with 
the approval of Ad ditional Secretary/Secretary and Foreign 
Secretary if required. Considering the volume of work and the 
mechanism to deal with the matter available with Ministry, the 
concept for a separate cell for dealing with outsourcing matters 
was not considered earlie r. However, keeping in view the 
suggestion by the Standing Committee, the matter is being 
considered separately from the administrative and financial 
angles as the creation of a Cell would involve additional 
expenditure and additional staff.  
 
 
 

 16 
iii) In re gard to monitoring and evaluation of services, it may be 
mentioned that CPV Division is closely monitoring the tender 
process being followed by Missions/Posts abroad. The system 
of outsourcing services is stabilising and CPV Division 
monitors the implement ation of the tender process in 
Missions/Posts regularly as Missions/Posts have been advised 
to keep the Ministry informed of every stage of the tender 
process namely uploading the tender documents, pre -bid 
conference, opening of the Technical Bids and Fina ncial Bids 
and finally the signing of the Agreement. Ministry has 
circulated model tender documents and also issued a detailed 
proforma to evaluate the Technical Bids to reduce subjectivity 
to the maximum possible levels. Ministry also takes note of 
complaints from different quarters and seeks clarification from 
the Missions/Posts concerned.  
 
iv) In regard to adherence to stringent norms and transparency, the 
tender documents are uploaded in the websites of the Mission 
and Ministry simultaneously. The Requ est for Proposal is a 
detailed document which gives information on various aspects 
of the tender process. The proceedings of the pre -bid 
conference in the form of Questions and Answers are circulated 
to all the participating companies. The Technical Bids a nd 
Financial Bids are opened in the presence of The 
Representatives of the participating companies and the 
members of the Outsourcing Committee. Missions have been 
instructed to give detailed reasons for disqualification to the 
disqualified companies. Further Ministry‟s guidelines are based 
on CVC guidelines and General Financial Rules (GFRs) and 
also the Orders of Hon‟ble Delhi High Court. Whenever, the 
bids are disqualified, the reasons for the same are informed to 
the companies concerned.  
 
v) In regard to security concerns, it is pointed out that only 
peripheral work relating to visa, passport, consular services are 
handled by the outsourcing companies. The policy matters and 
other security related work pertaining to issue of visas and 
passports are hand led by authorised India -based officers. 
Further as per the extant guidelines, only Indian/Indian origin 
companies are eligible to take part in the tender process as the 
principal company with or without a local partner of 
Indian/foreign origin. Further loc al partner companies are 
cleared from security angle by the Ministry in consultation with 
authorities concerned.”  
 
 
 

 17 
31. The Committee observe that the Ministry has understood the need 
of preparation of a comprehensive operational procedure regarding 
outsourcing of visa process/passport process and participation with 
private sector in various projects.  T he Committee can now expect that the 
comprehensive Standard Operating Proce dures (SOP)  is compiled by the 
Ministry in a time-bound manner and if required, the Ministry may amend the 
circulars in view of its experiences so far. 
 The Committee also note that outsourcing of these services is presently 
being done in more than Seventy Missions and it may be done in many more.  
At present, all issues relating  to outsourcing are being cleared by the Heads of 
concerned divisions and the legal issues are handled in consultation with the 
Legal and Treaties Division  of the Ministry and in rare cases, the opinion of 
Ministry of Law and Justice is also obtained.  In Committee’s view, the present 
arrangement is not suitable to maintain uniformity and transparency in the 
system. Considering the inevitability of increased  private sector participation 
in this matter in future, the Committee , therefore, would like to reiterate the 
creation of a separate sub -division to build in -house capacity within the 
Ministry to deal with the specific issue s of outsourcing including its legal, 
financial, diplomatic and security aspects. This would subsequently facilitate 
minute examination of the documents as well as ensure uniformity of approach 
and procedure across all the establishments abroad.  
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
32. The Committee in their deliberation s and Reports over the years had  
expressed serious concern over the lower establishment stre ngth of the 
Ministry but there wa s no satisfactory improvement.  The Committee had 
once again observe d that there wa s a huge gap between the actual number of 
employees and approved strength in Gro up A & B services.  As against the 
total number of 7346 posts, 5761 employees were in position.  The 

 18 
Committee were not convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for 
such gap.  The Committee  had, therefore, desire d that sincere efforts should 
be made by the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of Personnel 
and Training to fill the vacant posts at the earliest. The Committee had also 
taken note of the „Medium Term Expansion Plan‟ and various methods for 
induction through different chan nels.  The Committee, however, were not 
convinced with such slow pace of expansion of service spanning over ten 
years. The Committee had suggested that the Ministry must approach the 
Ministry of Personnel and Training with fresh proposals for further expansion 
in the cadre of the Ministry in both Gazetted as well as Non -gazetted posts 
during a shorter period.  The Committee had made a note of the la teral entry 
scheme to build in -house capacity within the Ministry and had appreciated 
Ministry‟s efforts for recruitment of experts for Technical Cell in Projects 
Division as well as Development Partnership Administration (DPA).  The 
Committee had, however, noted that the present approach of lateral induction 
and those with domain knowledge at various levels both in Headquarter and 
in Embassy was far too slow.  In Committee‟s view with such approach, 
shortage of personnel w ould continue to handicap the Mini stry‟s work.   The 
Committee had, therefore, desire d that lateral induction must be substantially 
accelerated at various levels through contractual or deputation so that in the 
course of the next thre e years, the current shortages we re substantially 
overcome.  However, the Committee had cautioned the Ministry that while 
engaging the experts, through deputation or outsourcing consultants, the 
Ministry must give due consideration to the security and diplomatic aspects. 
The Committee had suggested that Ministry should come up with innovative 
ways for attracting the desired expertise and specialists to conduct various 
activities in view of increased arenas of diplomatic engagement particularly 
in terms of emerging contours of economic and environmental diplomacy. 
 
33. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“Ministry of External Affairs has undertaken an extensive exercise of 
Cadre Review to cover the shortages at staff level and an expansion 
plan to address the deficit at the officer level. MEA has submitted 
revised indents to the concerned recruitment agenci es such as Union 
Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection Commission 
(SSC) to increase the intake to adequately address the gap in existing 
and required manpower.  
 Till the recruitment agencies are able to provide regular 
candidates against va cant posts, the Ministry has been hiring 
consultants for specialized jobs in addition to filling routine secretarial 
vacancies through temporary engagement of outsourced staff.  
For the specific requirement of domain expertise in Development 
Partnership Ad ministration, MEA has been regularly inviting 
nominations/applications from other specialized Cadres/Departments, 

 19 
with the result that the immediate needs of the DPA for ex -cadre 
expertise have been met. This is an ongoing process and as and when 
further expertise is required, the Ministry will take necessary steps.   
While selecting ex -cadre officers, the Ministry pays due attention to 
meeting the need for necessary diplomatic skills for the identified jobs 
besides adhering to the standard security precautions.” 
 
34. The Committee are anguished with the vague and incomplete reply 
furnished by the Ministry  regarding the present staff strength in the Ministry 
and status of the expansion plan.  They have also not conveyed any reasons for 
the gap between actual number of employees and approved strength in Group 
‘A’ and ‘B’ or the details of the progress made under ‘medium term expansion 
plan’  and the response of concerned recruitment agencies on the issue of 
increase in the intake to adequately address the gap in existing and required 
manpower.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts being 
made by the Min istry and outcome thereof  alongwith the initiatives taken for 
recruitment under lateral entry scheme.  Further, in context of  the Ministry’s 
programme  to hire consultants for specialized jobs in addition to following 
routine secretarial vacancies through temporary engagement of outsourced 
staff, the Committee would like to suggest that even at the lowest level due care 
should be ex ercised and security clearance be obtained for the outsourced  
staff. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
35. The Committee t ook note of the reports of several vacan t 
Ambassadorial positions and did  not find any transparent policy and 
justification in this regard.  Th e Committee were of the view that a proactive 
approach should be adopted by the Ministry and they should come up with 
the practice of announcement for placement of Ambassadors well in advance 
in cases of anticipated vacancies on account of retirement etc.  The 
Committee had also expected the Ministry to ensure due regard to the policy 
in matters of appointment of Ambassadors for an efficient carrying out of 
diplomatic responsibilities. 

 20 
36. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“Every effort is always made to ensure appointments of Heads of Mission 
in a timely manner, with due regard to the requirement of the posts and 
suitability of the appointees. The movement of personnel between a large 
number of Missions aro und the world necessarily entails some gaps 
between the departure of one HOM and the arrival of another. Different 
diplomatic procedures in various countries for grant of agree‟ment also 
account for some gaps. The Ministry endeavours to ensure that the 
movement schedules do not affect the smooth functioning of our 
Diplomatic Missions, which is looked after by other Mission personnel in 
the absence of our HOM.”   
 
37. The Committee are not convinced with the replies furnished by the 
Ministry regarding the policy and delays in appointment of Ambassadors.  The 
Committee are of the view that different diplomatic procedures being followed 
by various countries and delays in movements cannot become excuse for delays 
in these high level appointments .  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
system should be regularized and in view of anticipated vacancy, the procedure 
should be completed well in advance before the end of tenure.  
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
38. The Committee were concerned to note that there was no connectivity 
between the Central Passport Organization (CPO) and the Missions/P osts and 
the Missions/Posts had  access to Passport Central Data (PRIDE) only to 
check data but passport related services we re rendered by Mission/Post only 
through old system and that the process of data migration  from old system to 
new system wa s done and the work was in progress for bringing 
Missions/Posts under the Passport Application System.   The Committee  had, 
therefore, strongly recommend ed that the Mini stry should prepare a 
dedicated action plan and implement it with a fixed time frame for 
establishing connectivity between the Headquarters and Missions/Posts as 
well as with the Passport Seva Application.   
 The Committee were concerned that the Ministry was only in initial 
phase of the digital process in the project for „creation of image retrievable 
database‟ and the Ministry was yet to embark on the phase -II which includes 
capturing of data only of 34 Missions/Posts.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
strongly recommend ed that the Ministry should expedite the process of 
digitization of data, across its establishments.  The Committee had also 

 21 
desired that the Ministry must take necessary steps on urgent basis for data 
management in the Missions/Posts. 
   
39. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“It is submitted that currently Missions/Posts are working as part of   
pre-PSP application while rendering the Passport related services and 
PRIDE is used for checking dup lication and antecedents of the 
applicant. At present, 25 Missions/Posts are classified as large and 155 
as small.  The   pre -PSP passport-service related data is migrated to 
PRIDE. In the large Missions/Posts, passport printing is done there 
itself like R POs, whereas small Missions/Posts transmit the data 
digitally to Central Indian Passport Printing System (CIPPS) 
Unit.CPV Division, MEA for printing of passports which are then sent 
back to originating Mission/Post for handing over to applicants. 
 
Ministry proposes to commence „AS -IS‟ study by 15 th July 2013 for 
integration of Missions/Posts with   Passport Seva Application, 
including its mode of connectivity to PSP data centre. Two (2) Small 
and Two (2) Large Missions/Posts would be taken up as part of Pil ot 
„AS-IS‟ study for preparation of detailed project report (DPR). In the 
DPR, the roadmap and timelines to integrate all the Missions/Posts 
(location-wise) with the Passport Seva application as part of 
centralised application/database (PRIDE) would be out lined. It may 
take 6 -8 months (after the DPR process is over) for establishing 
connectivity to the Missions/Posts including integration with PSP 
application. 
 
As informed earlier, the digitization project commenced in June 2012 in 5 
Indian Missions viz. at  London, San Francisco, Dubai, Abu Dhabi and 
Riyadh, having nearly 50% of the total anticipated volume of the consular 
documents to be digitized. The digitization job has  been completed in 
these Missions. In the IInd phase, the Ministry is undertaking the  
digitization project in another 34 Indian Missions/Posts having another 
40% of the balance consular documents to be digitized. Out of these 34 
Indian Missions/Posts, the work orders for 5 Missions have been issued 
to   the vendors, who have commenced thei r work. There was a slight 
delay in execution of project in these 34 Indian Missions/Posts on 
account of delay in payment to the vendors for the job undertaken earlier 
in the 5 Indian Missions/Posts due to budgetary problems. The project, as 
intimated earlier, is likely to be completed in 2014.  
 
 
40. The Committee note that the Phase-I of the Passport Seva Project (PSP) 
has already been  completed.  The Committee are , however, dismayed to note 

 22 
that all the Indian Mission/Posts are still working as part of a pre-PSP 
application and are yet to be integrated in the Passport Seva Project.  The 
Committee wonder as to why such integration was not made a part of Phase -I 
of the PSP. The Committee desire that the Ministry should expeditiously 
furnish details of Mini stry’s strategy to integrate all Missions/Posts alongwith 
furnishing an anticipated timeline  for the same .  It appears that consequent 
upon the Committee’s recommendation, the AS-IS Study was thought of and 
launched in July, 2013.  The Committee desire to be apprised about the 
launching of  this study and urge the Min istry to furnish status report 
alongwith its recommendations/conclusion to the Committee after the said 
study is completed .  The Committee would also further like to  be apprised  
whether integrat ion of Missions/Posts website is in conjuncture with the 
launch of Phase-II of PSP along with details of the role of service provider and 
responsibility for system upkeep etc. 
 The Committee are also constrained to note the delays in 
implementation of Phas e-II of digitization job of Indian Missions and desire 
that Ministry must make arrangement for financial resources, if required , 
even from its internal sources so that the project is not delayed further on 
account of insufficient funds. The Committee  woul d also desire to be updated 
about the progress made in the matter and the anticipated timeline for 
digitization of remaining Missions/Posts.   
 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
41. The Committee had observed that the Ministry ha d opened all the 77 
Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) in various States but several Passport Seva 

 23 
Kendras/Regional Passport Offices(RPOs) were not connected online with 
State Police Headquarters or District Police Headquarters in many states. 
Due to such situati on in those states, police verification takes time of 30 -150 
days.  Therefore, the main objective of Passport Seva Project i.e. reducing the 
time period for po lice verification process wa s not being achieved. Though, 
the Committee understood that it was primarily the responsibility of the State 
Governments, yet the Ministry or RPOs ha d to pursue the matter with police 
authorities in those States  The Committee  had, therefore, desire d that the 
Ministry/RPOs should sincerely follow the issue with respective S tate 
Governments and Police Authorities continuously and impress upon them the 
need and importance of establishing online connectivity between PSKs, 
RPOs and the Police Headquarters, as by Ministry‟s own admission wherever 
DPH/SPHq. model exist, the results had been very encouraging. 
 
 The Committee desired to be assured that the new procedures for 
issuance of passports have substantially benefitted the potential applicants.  
However, an objective external assessment might  be undertaken by any 
reputed consultant to study and track passport issuance to ascertain the cases 
of delay and adopt such changes necessary for the benefit of passport 
applicants. 
 
42. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“As on 30th May, 2013, 10 States have implemented the DPHQ model 
of police verification and the PSP application is accessed at the 
DPHQ. Five States have implemented SPHQ model as laid down in 
the RFP. Remaining States are still working on manual model that was 
followed in the pre-PSP system. 
 It is submitted that RPOs are instructed to follow -up with 
concerned State Governments for implementation of either SPHQ or 
DPHQ model. Due to sustained efforts by the RPOs as well as by the 
CPV Division, UP, Bihar and Maharasht ra have implemented the 
DPHQ model in a few locations as per the availability of ICT 
infrastructure required to start DPHQ model. Efforts are underway to 
connect all the remaining locations in the said States, either to SPHQ 
or to DPHQ model. 
 The Ministry is also examining PVR process for due approval, 
to connect all locations uniformly across all the States/UTs to DPHQ 
model, which is the best model for speeding up Police Verification 
Process. 
 
 As regards the Committee‟s observation for engagement of 
reputed consultant, it is submitted that Ministry has requested the 
National Institute for Smart Government (NISG) to conduct a study 

 24 
and identify the gaps due to which delays occur  in passport issu ance  
and to submit a report to Ministry for remedial actions.”   
 
 
43. The Committee note that DPHQ/SPHQ model of Police Verification has 
been implemented only in Ten States and the Ministry  is also examining PVR 
process for due approval to connect all locations across the States/UTs to 
DPHQ Model uniformly for speeding up the Police Verification process.  
However, considering the existence of varied models and procedural 
differences across the states, the Committee are of the view that th e Ministry 
may call a meeting of Director s General of Police of all the states/UTs to take 
up the matter to shift to the DPHQ/SPHQ model and to ensure uniformity i n 
approach and procedure across  the states so that the process of police 
verification is expedited. 
Further, the Committee desire that the Ministry should also suggest 
ideal procedure and uniform guidel ines to be followed during police 
verification process, uniform channels and levels of verification, timely 
uploading of police verification reports, procedure and timelines to be followed 
in case of post verification/ adverse reports or discrepancies etc. , to the 
concerned police departments of all the states. 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
44. The Committee had been pursuing the matter of establishment of Mini 
PSKs in North-Eastern States.  The Ministry had assured the Committee that 
Mini PSKs would be established in Aizwal by 2010 and in other States of 
North-East by December, 2011.  However, the Committee had noted that 
Mini PSK ha d been established only in Aizwal after much delay in 2012 
and all the other PSKs in North Eas t were yet to be established.  As per the 
information furnis hed to the Committee, the work wa s in progress at 
Passport Seva Laghu Kendra (PS LK) at Shillong, while at Gangtok an d 
Agartala only the location had  been identified.   The Ministry  was  still 
silent on the establishment of PSLK or Mini -PSK in other States of North -

 25 
Eastern Region and ha d also shown its inability in providing defined 
timelines for the establishment of these PSLKs. The Committee had 
deplored such approach of the Ministry and had strongly recommended that 
Ministry should expedite its efforts to ensure establishment of all the 
PSLKs/Mini-PSKs in North -Eastern States at the earliest though active 
engagement with State Governments for overcoming the problems with 
creative solutions. 
 
45. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee  as regards 
speeding up setting up of mini -PSKs, especially in the North -East. It 
is, however, submitted that the Ministry would not like to indicate any 
artificial timeline. It is also submitted that it is essential for the 
Ministry to strictly comply with Financial Rules and Procedures in the 
matter of acquiring goods and services for setting up of mini -PSKs so 
as to avoid any audit objections. 
 
The Hon‟ble Committee is informed that out of 8 NE States, 
PSKs/PSLKs have been made operational in Guwahati an d Aizawl. 
PSLK in Shillong is likely to be made operational over the coming 
months. Similarly, site has been taken over in Sikkim. A site has been 
identified in Agartala and a team will be visiting soon to take the 
property on rent. The Ministry will be sp eeding up liasioning with the 
remaining State Governments i.e. Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal 
Pradesh.” 
 
46. The Committee are constrained to note that  establishment of Mini -
PSKs in North Eastern states has been unduly delayed. The Committee would 
categorically like to emphasize that they do not  desire to be given  artificial 
timelines and suggest the Ministry to furnish  exact and achievable timelines . 
Further, the Committee also note that expediting the Project does not mean 
avoidance of strict compliance of Financial Rules and Regulations.  Moreover, 
Financial Rules and Regulations  may also not be treated as  the reason for 
delay in setting up of Mini -PSKs.  The Committee hope that as per the 
information furnished by the Ministry, at  least 3 Mini -PSKs one each  in 
Shillong, Agartala and Sikkim would become operational  in the near future  
and earnestly urge the Ministry to intensify its liasioning wi th remaining State 

 26 
Governments in the region  as per the drawn timeline . The Committee would 
further like to suggest that the Ministry shou ld explore possibility of engaging 
other agencies for setting up of Mini-PSKs in the region  and for providing 
basic infrastructure for these facilities within the limits of Government norms. 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
47. The Committee had noted that even after much delay, the project to 
introduce e -passport for general category wa s yet to commence.  The 
Committee were e arlier informed that the delay wa s due to fresh security 
clearance from Ministry of Home Affairs  (MHA) in respect of a technically 
qualified bidder.  The matter had  not been resolved even after sending a 
communication at the level of Foreign Secretary and External Affairs 
Minister.  More surprisingly,  the Committee had also noted that the security 
clearance in question pertained to the firm that was engaged for securing chip 
for e -passport in diplomatic/official categories and wonder that how the  
clearance for the same agency wa s not being given by the MHA and the 
matter is pending with them for a lo ng time.   The Committee  had, therefore, 
desired that the matter should be taken up with MHA at the highest level to 
get it resolved or adopt any alternate mechanism to secure the desired chip so 
that the project would rolled out at the earliest. 
 
48. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The Security Clearance from Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of 
one technically qualified bidder for supply of e -Passport chip inlays is 
still pending. The Ministry of External Affairs is seized of the issue 
and MHA is being reminded from time to time to expedite issue of 
security clearance so that the tendering process could be completed. 
MHA has so far not responde d to periodical reminders in this regard 
by MEA nor intimated any progress in the matter of security 
clearance. The validity of the tender bids are however being extended 
periodically. In compliance with the recommended practices of ICAO, 
over 100 countries have already issued ePassports, while India, having 
launched the pilot project in 2008, is lagging behind in issue of 
ePassports, which affects the overall security of Indian travel 
documents and consequently the international standing of India. The 
Committee‟s observations and MEA‟s views have been conveyed to 
MHA once again.”   
49. The Committee note that the matter pertaining to the security clearance 
from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of one technically qualified 
bidder for supply of chips f or e -passport is still pending.  The Committee 

 27 
further note that Ministry is silent on Committee’s observation regarding 
security clearance being given for securing chips from the same firm for 
issuance of e -passport in diplomatic/official category, while it is not being 
cleared for the general category of e -passports.  The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Ministry to give its justification on the issue. 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that when over 100 countries of 
the world already issue  e-passports and despite the early launch of the e -
passport project in India, the Government of India is still unable to proceed 
further due to want of security clearance from the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
Moreover, in view of the fact that the Ministry of Home Af fairs has failed to 
respond to several communications over a period of time, the Committee 
would like to suggest that the Ministry of External Affairs may take up the 
matter at the highest level for an early resolution of the issue. 
  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
50. The Committee had noted that the three ongoing Hydro-power Projects 
in Bhutan had been  continuously facing a situation of paucity of funds.  The 
Committee were aware that India wa s committed to the Government of 
Bhutan for generation of 10000 MW of  power by 2020 and for so the 
Ministry of External Affairs, along with the Government of Bhutan ha d 
identified few projects and were considering and working upon the modalities 
of new Hydro-Power projects.  During the course of evidence, the Committee 
were informed that the Ministry wa s considering a new creative model 
through joint venture and formation of Special Purpose Vehicle.  The 
Committee were of the view that to avoid lack of continuous and timely 
budgetary support, the Ministry must explore altern ative options and come up 
with innovative procedures to ensure that the ongoing as well as new projects 
did not come across budgetary constr aints and continuous cash flow wa s 
available to them, so that implementation of project was ensured without any 
element of time overrun and cost escalation.  However, the Committee were 
also of the opinion that since, tho se projects were bilateral projects, the 
Ministry must dwell upon the diplomatic considerations  while giving due 
regard to the sensitivities of both t he sides and Ministry must adopt a holistic 
view and consider all the aspects of alternative models for funding of the 
Hydro-Power Projects in Bhutan. 
 
51. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 

 28 
“Government of India (GoI) and the Royal Government of Bhutan 
(RGoB) signed an umbrella agreement on cooperation in the 
hydropower sector under which India committed to import 10,000 MW 
hydropower from Bhutan by 2020. Ten HEPs with an estimated 
capacity of 11,576 MW were  identified to meet the target. Of the ten 
projects, the following four projects have been identified for execution 
in the Joint Venture (JV) mode, 
1. Chamkharchhu-I (670 MW) 
2. Bunakha (180 MW) 
3. Kholongchhu (486 MW) 
4. Wangchhu (600 MW) 
During the 9 th EJG meeting held in Thimpu on 11 -12 June 2012, the 
EJG nominated the Secretary, MoEA from the RGoB side and JS 
(Hydro), MoP from the GoI side to lead the Sub Group of the EJG 
and finalize the JV Agreement by involving DGPC and the 
designated JV partner PSUs from India and resolve all outstanding 
issues without further delay.  
The sub Group met in New Delhi in July 4 -5, 2012 and discussed all 
outstanding issues with DGPC and Indian PSUs. The following issues 
were discussed:- 
(i)           Financing of the project 
(ii)          Royalty energy for the Royal Government of Bhutan 
(iii)        Management structure of the project 
(iv)         Reversion of the project 
(v)          Dividend policy 
(vi)         Power Purchase Agreement 
(vii)       Signing of IG MOU for the implementation of JV projects 
(viii)     Infrastructural facilities 
(ix)        Implementation of Sankosh and Amochhu Projects 
 
On the issue of financing the projects the following decisions were 
taken 
  The debt will be raised on the JV Company 
  Indian CPUs shall ensure the raising of loan as required for the 
project 
  The project assets shall be mortgaged 
  If required by bankers, PPA shall also be concluded; and 
  The shareholding pattern shall be that of equal partners with 
50% basis each, subject to clearance by both Governments 
 
Decision was taken to implement the JV projects as equal partners 
with 50% stake each. M/o Finance has given its clearance for the 
formation of JV‟s with a 50% stake for Indian and Foreign entities. 
Royal Governm ent of Bhutan has forwarded the draft 
intergovernmental agreements proposed to be signed between Royal 
Government of Bhutan and Government of India for the development 
of Joint Venture Hydropower Projects. It has been forwarded to the 

 29 
Ministry of Power, Pl anning Commission and other agencies for their 
comments. Consultations with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of 
Power, Planning Commission are therefore ongoing.  
The Ministry of External Affairs has also been in constant touch with 
the Project Implementi ng Authorities of the concerned projects in 
order to ascertain the exact fund requirements to ensure that sufficient 
funds are available for the implementation of the projects. As far as 
financial allocation for the HEPs in Bhutan, the Ministry takes 
necessary actions to get sufficient allocation. In inter -Ministerial 
meetings held in PMO to review progress of our cooperation agenda 
with Bhutan in the hydropower sector MEA has been drawing 
attention to the fact that allocation of Plan funds for HEPs in Bhut an 
had been consistently lower than projected requirements.  
 
Request for funds has been made in accordance with the requirements 
received from the Project Implementing Authorities, as given below: 
 
(In Crores) 
Project BE requested 
for 2102-13 
BE /RE 
Allocated 
Additional Funds  
over Allocated RE 
BE requested Allocated BE 
2013-14 
Punatsangchhu-I HEP 1050 500 198 1950 735 
Mandechhu HEP 315 160 101 896 885 
Punatsangchhu-II 680 478 101 880 900 
 2045 1138 400 3726 2520 
 
In addition, another Rs. 1 Crore each has been provided for the five 
projects on which work is expected to be started soon viz.Sankosh, 
Chamkharchu, Bunakha, Kholongchhu and Wangchu. The allocation 
has been made against a demand for 120 Crores, 84.50 Crore s, 36.00 
Crores, 45.10 Crores and 55.70 Crores respectively ie Rs. 5 Crores has 
been allocated against a demand of 341.3 crores. 
 
The efforts of the Ministry are directed towards the goal that the 
effective implementation of these projects does not suffer due to any 
inadequacy of funds. In the financial year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs. 
1138 crore was allocated at RE stage against projected requirement of 
Rs. 2045 crore. There was no augmentation of funds at RE stage. 
However, in March 2013, an amount of Rs. 40 0 crore was provided to 
the Ministry against the additional projected requirement of Rs. 907 
crore. 
 
The Ministry from time to time is drawing the attention of the 
authorities concerned about the requirement of funds to three projects. 
EAM wrote to the Fin ance Minister on December 3 rd, 2012 about the 
importance of providing necessary funds. Foreign Secretary also wrote 
to the Finance Secretary on 22 nd January, 2013 about the necessity of 
providing funds in an urgent manner to these projects. The issue was 

 30 
also brought to the notice of the PMO by FS, through a letter 
addressed to PS to PM in February 2013. 
 
The Ministry thankfully acknowledges the appreciation of the Hon‟ble 
Committee for its efforts to reduce financial burden on Govt. of India 
vis-à-vis the new Hydroelectric Power Projects (HEPs) to be taken up 
for implementation in Bhutan. Preliminary meeti ngs have already 
been held in the Ministry with the representatives of the EXIM Bank 
and some PSU banks to explore the possibility of raising funds from 
the Indian capital market for the HEPs proposed under the Joint 
Venture model. Further, the matter has been discussed in detail in a 
meeting of the Empowered Joint Group (EJG) of India and Bhutan 
held in Thimphu on April 4 2013.  
 
52. The Committee had taken note of continuous paucity of funds for hydro 
power projects in Bhutan as well as the modalities bei ng worked out for the 
new funding pattern for upcoming projects  there.  The Committee desire that 
Ministry should actively pursue the matter related to draft inter -governmental 
agreement forwarded by Royal Government of Bhutan with the concerned 
Ministries in India.  The Committee further suggest that due consultations 
may be held with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and they 
be convinced about the current practice of inadequate allocation of funds for 
existing projects so as to arrive at re alistic strategies , projections and 
allocations for the future, considering diplomatic sensitivities in this matter as 
well as in its overall engagement with Bhutan .  The Committee would also like 
to be apprised of the progress made in this regard on a quarterly basis. 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
53. While observing the progress of various projects being implemented in 
Sri Lanka, the Committee were deeply concerned about the slow pace of 
implementation of the Housing Project for Internally Displaced Peopl e in Sri 
Lanka.  The Committee we re of the view that th at was totally unacceptable 
and the Committee expressed their serious  doubt whether it would be 
completed as per the fixed target.  Though, the Committee were apprised of 
progress in direction of identific ation of implementing agencies and 

 31 
beneficiaries and follow up of various models for construction of the Hou ses, 
however, the Committee had suggested that the Ministry must ascertain the 
mechanism being adopted to identify the genuineness of the beneficiar ies and 
ensure that not only the benefits of the projects reach the targeted 
beneficiaries but also ensure that cash wa s not diverted to other purposes and 
this needs to be carefully monitored.  The Committee had further 
recommended that immediate measure should be undertaken by the Ministry 
to expedite the process of identification of beneficiaries for the remaining 
projects and ensure expedi tious release of money and faster pace of 
implementation.  The Committee had desired that the Ministry should furnis h 
a detailed report on the status of the project based on the visit of senior 
officials from the Headquarters. 
 
54. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“1. The Committee have suggested that Ministry must ascertain the 
mechanism being adopted to identify the genuineness of the 
beneficiaries and ensure that not only the benefits of the Projects reach 
the targeted beneficiaries but also ensure that the cash is not diverted 
for other purpose.  
2.0 In this rega rd, it is stated that the second phase of the owner 
driven model of the Sri Lanka Housing Project focuses on the 
internally displaced people in the war affected areas of the Northern 
and Eastern provinces of Sri Lanka.  The list of affected villages from 
each Division in a District is prioritized by the Sri Lanka Government 
authorities and approved by the High Commission of India, Colombo.  
The verification of the master list prepared by the District heads 
(Divisional Secretary) of the area is carried out b y the Implementing 
Agencies(IAs) appointed by the GoI for the project. The IAs verify the 
list of beneficiaries in their area of jurisdiction by visiting each 
house/beneficiary.  After verification, the officials of the 
Implementing Agency and the Division al Secretariat then allot scores 
to each beneficiary figuring in the list based on the information 
collected and an agreed scoring criteria which takes into account 
various factors like number of family members/dependents, their age, 
level of disability/in come, year of displacement, present status of 
dwelling(huts/under tarpaulin shelters) etc. The eligibility list so 
drawn is published in the notice board of the Divisional Secretary and 
the village office. It is also shared with the community Advisory 
Groups formed in each village.  A two week grievance period is given 
for families to voice their grievances, if any, on the selection of any 
beneficiary.  If there are any complaints, these are examined by the 
Grievance Redressal Committee chaired by the Divisional Secretary in 

 32 
the presence of beneficiaries, IAs and the Community Advisory 
Groups. The schedule of such meetings are informed in advance by 
the concerned DS, IA and also posted on the Mission‟s website.   The 
recommendations of the Grievance redressa l committee is 
communicated to the High Commission of India who also deliberates 
on it and conveys its acceptance of the list for further processing.  This 
involves checking all records (land title, ID, bank account etc.) 
thoroughly and subsequently the pr ocess of remittance of the 
installment into the bank account of the beneficiary begins. The 
progress of work is closely monitored by the IAs and HCI, Colombo 
to ensure that installments are released on completion of each stage of 
work.   
2.1. The selection of beneficiaries for the Housing Project is done in 
a fair, objective and transparent manner. The process is quite 
exhaustive and thorough; there are sufficient checks and balances to 
ensure that only genuine beneficiaries who were displaced by the 
armed conflict only receive the funds into their bank accounts.  The 
details of the steps involved in process of identification of the 
beneficiary and the payment of installments may be seen at Annexure. 
2.2 The Project is reviewed in the field by the Implementi ng 
Agencies appointed by the Government of India, the Indian Banks, the 
officials of the High Commission of India, Colombo and the Consul 
General of India‟s office in Jaffna. 
2.3 The target set for the second phase of the Housing Project is to 
complete 11,000 houses by the end of 2013 and to commence 
construction of another 16,000 houses by March 31 2014.  27,000 
houses are expected to be completed by the end of 2014. The entire lot 
of 43,000 houses is scheduled for completion by the end of 2015. 
3. Further, the Committee have recommended that immediate 
measures should be undertaken by the Ministry to expedite the process 
of identification of beneficiaries for the remaining projects and to 
ensure expeditious release of money and faster pace of 
implementation. 
3.1 It is mentioned that the existing mechanism of selection of 
beneficiaries will continue for the second phase of the Housing Project 
involving the construction of 43,000 houses in the Northern and 
Eastern Provinces under the owner-driven model.  
3.2 The process of finalizing the criteria for selection of 
beneficiaries for the third phase of the Project involving construction 
of 4,000 houses in the hilly Central & Uva Provinces of Sri Lanka 
under the agency -driven model is underway.  M/s WAPCOS Ltd., a 
Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) of Government of India, has been 
selected as the Project Management Consultant for this part of the 
Project. The land for construction of these houses is yet to be finalized 
by the Sri Lankan authorities. The work on this ph ase of the housing 
project would begin in right earnest as soon as this exercise is 
completed.  

 33 
4.0 The Committee have desired that the Ministry should furnish a 
detailed report on the status of the project based on the visit of senior 
officials from the Headquarters.  
4.1 The status of the Housing Project as on 29 May 2013 is 
enclosed as Annexure. A Monitoring Committee comprising Special 
Secretary (DPA) and Special Secretary &  Financial Advisor, MEA, 
and two technical experts, inspected the Housing Project sites at 
Tellipalai DS Division in Jaffna District on 10 April 2013 and Palai 
DS Division in Kilinochchi district on 11 April 2013 and interacted 
with the concerned beneficia ries and officials of the implementing 
Agencies and the Sri Lankan government. The Committee while 
expressing satisfaction on the overall progress of the Project has also 
highlighted a few areas for further pursuing and monitoring.  A brief 
report on the Committee‟s visit is attached as Annexure.” 
 
 
55. While taking note of the progress made in implementation of Housing 
Project for Internally Displaced People in Sri Lanka , the Committee observe  
that the progress made in the Phase -I is satisfactory and time line and target 
for next Phases have also been drawn  up.  The Committee would, therefore, 
like to be assured about the pace of the implementation of the project and 
stress upon the timely completio n of the project.   The Committee would also 
desire to be updated about the final decision arrived at regarding beneficiary 
selection criteria in light of the visit of the Monitoring Committee to Sri Lanka.  
The Committee would further like to suggest that  the Ministry must look into 
the particular issues related to single women and women headed families as 
well as child headed families.  The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to 
explore the possibility of further assisting child headed families during th e 
process of construction of houses and enlighten the Committee about the steps 
taken to facilitate such beneficiaries particularly in financial transaction s and 
construction processes. 
 
 

 34 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
56. The Committee had taken note of the new “Connect Central Asia” 
policy of Government of India to deepen their engagement with Eurasian 
countries.  In context of the developmental engagement, the Committee had  
suggested the Ministry to expand areas of cooperation and come up with  
more proposals for projects in the region.  The Committee had appreciated 
the Government„s proposal for Central Asian e -network project for Tele -
Education and Tele -Medicine and had hoped that India‟s experiences in 
Africa would be fully utilized for quicker and efficient implementation of the 
project.  The Committee had further hope d that Project Manager cum 
Consultant (PMC) for implementation of the project would be finalized soon 
so that the process for actual execution of the programme was initiated. 
 The Committee were concerned over the pace of Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline Project .  However, the 
Committee were happy to note that the countries ha d created alternative 
arrangement to finance the project.  The Committee had hoped that 
finalization of the modalities would be reached upon so t hat further process 
might be initiated. The Committee had urged the Ministry to approach the 
Cabinet regarding India‟s contribution to the Special Purpose Vehicle at the 
earliest and the Commit tee m ight be kept apprised of India‟s effort for 
execution of the Project.  
  
57. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 Through our reformulated Connect Central Asia Policy, 
publicly articulated in June 2012, we have a balanced strategy of 
engaging with Central Asia, based on political, strategic, economic, 
cultural and multilateral elements. The Ministry of External Affairs is 
engaged in deepening its engagement with countries in Central Asia 
with its more pro-active policy. Some of the flagships projects that we 
are working on are setting up of a Central Asian University in 
Kyrgyzstan which will impart high level education in fields like IT, 
Management, languages, philosophy etc. We are also considering 
setting up a few multi -speciality hospitals in the region. A special 
package for Tajikistan is under implementation and this includes 
industrial projects like fruit and vegetable processing, an 
entrepreneurship development centre, an IT centre for excellence, 
language laboratory for teaching English and Hindi and emergency 
medical centres. 
2. Another flagship project for connecting India with Central Asia 
through e-network for delivery of tele-education and tele-medicine has 
been announced. Bids have been called for Project Manager -cum-
Consultant (PMC) for implementation of the project. The bids are 
presently under evaluation. 
3. The Government of India had already approved the formation 
of the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for the Turkmenistan -

 35 
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline Project and to permit 
GAIL India Ltd. to join the SPV.  
4.  The SPV will take up the Feasibility Study and Design work of 
the TAPI pipeline to meet the agreed timelines for the project, as well 
as search for a consortium lead. 
5. The Committee will be kept apprised of India's effort for 
execution of the TAPI Project.” 
 
58. The Committee take note of the efforts being made  by the Government 
under the Connect Central Asia policy.  The Committee hope that with the 
establishment of Development Partnership Administration (DPA), the 
Ministry would be able to properly plan and execute its flagship projects in 
timely and cost effective manner.  The  Committee further desire that the 
Ministry may keep the Committee apprised of the progress made in various 
projects on regular basis. 
 The Committee also welcome the approval of formation of Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for the Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-India 
(TAPI) Pipeline Project by the Government of India.  The Committee hope 
that the SPV would be able to undertake various technical activities and meet 
agreed timelines alongwith search for a consortium lead.  Further, the 
Committee would also like to urge the Government to extend adequate support 
to the SPV as and when desired for the project. 
 
 (Recommendation No. 25) 
 
59. Referring to their recommendations i n context of India‟s partnership 
with Africa, made in 14th Report, the Committee had expressed concern over 
tardy implementation of the decisions taken during India Africa Forum 
Summit (IAFS-I).  However, the Committee were appalled to note that many 
of the implementing agencies were either directed to delay implementation or 
their payments were carried forward to the next financial year because of the 
inadequacy of budgetary allocation. The Committee were of the opinion that 
Ministry should strive to balance its budgetary allocation between competing 
demands for various projects.  The  Committee had further taken note of the 
fact that next IAFS Summit was scheduled to be held in 2014 and India had  
not been able to fulfil its commitment of IAFS - I&II. The Committee  had 

 36 
recommended that necessary funds should be allocated for these projec ts.  
DPA should make efforts for an early execution of these projects and if 
required, could approach for fund enhancement at RE stage.  However, the 
Committee had urged the Ministry to take due care of the quality aspects in 
setting up of these institutes. 
 
60. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The allocation under Aid to Africa budget is quite inadequate and it 
is hoped that more funds will be made available at the RE stage. 
All the capacity building institutions under IAFS are being 
implemented by various line Ministries and their chosen 
Implementation Agencies (IA). MEA has been kept in the loop by 
various Ministries on this issue. Selection of IAs has also been done 
after consultation with MEA. MEA has repeatedly stressed on the 
quality of the proposed institutions, and as far as possible, an MEA 
representative has been part of the visiting delegation from the line 
Ministry/implementing agency. Our Missions have also been 
sensitized about the need fo r high quality in se tting up of these 
institutions.” 
 
61. The Committee had expressed their concern over tardy implementation 
of decisions taken during India -Africa Forum Summit (IAFS -I).  In this 
context, the Committee had taken a strong view of the fact that many 
implementing agencies were directed to delay implementation.  The Committee 
are not happy with Ministry’s reply and note that the Ministry is silent on the 
issue and has not furnished any justification for these directions.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry must furnish the reasons for 
such directions.  The Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry for 
prioritization of its budget requirements and ensure that at least adequate 
allocations are provided for such international commitments.   
 Further, the Committee suggest that the pace of implementation of 
various projects must be increased and in accordance with the spirit of 
strengthening of India -Africa engagement  and the Ministry should aim for 

 37 
completion of its projects befo re the next India -Africa Forum Summit 
scheduled to be held in 2014. 
 (Recommendation No. 27) 
 
62. The Committee had observed that South Asian University (SAU) Act 
was passed by the Parliament in 2008 and it was notified in January, 2009.  
The first academic session commenced in August 2010 and during 2012 -13, 
the University worked with 323 students and 57 faculty members.  The SAU 
had been working from Akbar Bhawan.  It wa s very painful to observe that 
they were paying around Rs. 1.5 crores as rent every month.  They have 5.32 
acres of land in posse ssion since 2010.  But they had  still not reached upto 
the Master Layout Plan lev el.   The Committee  had, therefore, strongly 
recommended that South Asian University (SAU) authorities must expedite 
the process of pre-construction activities and ini tiate the construction process 
on the undisputed area, particularly in view of higher ren tal liabilities.  The 
Committee had noted that out of the annual projection of Rs. 557.60 crores, 
only Rs. 43 crores have been allocated at BE stage which will not even be 
able to cover the operational costs of the projects.  The Committee  had, 
therefore, desired that for SAU allocation should be enhanced during RE 
stage as per their actual annual bu dgetary projections so that it would be  able 
to fulfil its obligations.   
 The Committee had also observe d that SAU wa s not able to get 
desired number of expert s/faculty to run the specific courses in the 
University.  The Committee had, therefore, desired that SAU should also find 
non-SAARC experts with expertise in South Asia so that the University could 
truly emerge as a pan South Asian Institution.   
 
 
63. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
“The Committee‟s rec ommendations pertaining to the South Asian 
University (SAU) have three components.  Action Taken Replies to 
these three recommendations are furnished below: 
 
I. With regard to the Committee‟s recommendation that South Asian 
University (SAU) authorities must expedite the process of pre -
construction activities and initiate the construction process, on the 
undisputed area,   the SAU has, on May 10, 2013, conveyed the 
following with regard to its construction  
project at Maidan Garhi: 
 
(i) The contour survey of the plot to establish topography, details 
of vegetation/trees have been prepared.  Also soil investigation 
has been done to facilitate foundation design of structures.  

 38 
(ii) Master Layout Plan of the project has been approved by the 
Building Works Committee of SAU and estimate framed on 
this plan has been submitted to MEA for approval and release 
of funds.  
(iii) Layout plan already submitted to the South Delh i Municipal 
Corporation for approval, after obtaining NOC from the DDA. 
(iv) Application for environmental clearance of the project filed 
with Delhi Pollution Control Committee which is under process 
of approval after examination by the State -level Expert 
Assessment Committee (SEAC). 
(v) A leading Project Management Consultancy firm, namely M/s 
Tata Consulting Engineers Ltd. has already been engaged for 
project management activities of the construction project.  
 
SAU has also conveyed that it is ready to ta ke up the construction activity as 
soon as statutory clearances are obtained and funds are made available to 
them.   
 
This Ministry got a communication from DDA on May 6, 2013 that it has 
allotted land measuring 17397.85 sqm in an isolated pocket adjacent to the 
SAU‟s plot including few pockets of Gram Sabha land in lieu of the land 
affected by proposed Master Plan/Zonal Plan Road with the approval of the 
Hon‟ble Lieutenant Governor of Delhi.  In order to proceed further on the 
construction of the campus at  the land,  this Ministry has requested DDA 
vide its letter of May 9, 2013 to take urgent action on the following : 
 
(a)    Intimate the date on which MEA could take over the land from 
DDA 
        formally, as has been done on the previous two occasions. 
 
(b)   Issue a revised NOC to enable SAU to obtain approval of the 
civic  
       bodies to its Master Layout Plan;  and 
 
(c)   Get the revised boundary physically marked on the ground to 
enable the  
  SAU to construct the boundary wall.  
 
        A reminder letter to DDA has been issued.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
       
II. With regard to Committee‟s reco mmendation that allocation for 
SAU should be enhanced during RE stage as per their actual 
annual budgetary projections so that it is able to further its 
obligations, the Finance Division of this Ministry has conveyed 
that the initial allocation at the BE s tage for SAU is Rs. 43 crore.  

 39 
This was the allocation which could be made within the overall 
non-plan allocation of Rs. 8719 crore for BE 2013 -14.  The 
augmentation at RE stage would depend upon the RE 2013 -14 
ceiling, the augmentation in the Supplementar y Demands for 
Grants, if acceded to by the Ministry of Finance and also any 
foreseen savings in any other head of account during the course of 
the FY.  The Ministry proposes to project the demand in the first 
Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants.       
 
III. Committee‟s recommendation that SAU should also find non -SAARC 
experts with expertise in South Asia is being conveyed appropriately 
to SAU.” 
 
 
64. The Committee find that allocation of funds for the South Asian 
University (SAU) during BE 2013-14 is hugely disproportionate and the SAU is 
unable to even fulfill its operational costs of projects to be undertaken during 
the year. Now, the master layout plan has been submitted to MEA for 
approval and release of funds and also to civic authorities for approval.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry should release the desired fund on 
priority basis after approval of Master layout Plan.  Moreover,  since allotment 
of additional land in lieu of pending land  has also been made, the work should 
also start after getting the possession of the land.  T he Committee are of the 
view that the MEA should apprise the Ministry of Finance while pursuing the 
matter of additional resources during the first as well as second batch of 
Supplementary Demands for Grants for the project.  
The Committee urge the Ministry /SAU to actively proceed with the 
construction activity in a planned, time bound and diligent manner and would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by them on regular basis. 
 
 
 
 

 40 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 
 
65. The Committee in their reports over the years had  recommended to the 
Ministry to enhance budgetary allocation for Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) in view of emerging contours of cultural diplomacy. The 
Committee had noted that it was essential to expand the network of Indian 
Cultural Centres and establishment of chairs abroad, howev er, tho se 
endeavours w ould require additional funds.  With the funds allocated to 
ICCR, they were not even able to manage the established Centres outside 
India, then how c ould they think about new centres?  The Committee had 
observed that though the m atter of enhanced allocation had  been taken up 
even at PMO level, but not much headway was made. The Committee  had, 
therefore, once again strongly recommend ed that the Ministry should allocate 
additional funds to ICCR at RE stage in view of their proposed requirements 
and further expansion.  However, at the same time, the Committee had 
suggested that ICCR must explore alternative ways to generate revenue for 
conduct of its regular activities. 
 
66. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“For enhancement of budget allocation up to BE of Rs. 282.50 Cr for 
the CFY 2013-14, Finance Division of MEA is being requested to take 
up the matter at appropriate level and at appropriate stage i.e. at Ist 
Batch of Supplementary or at RE stage. FS is also  being requested to 
approach the Finance Secretary in this regard.  
 
As far as generation of revenue is concerned, there is little scope of 
revenue generation for ICCR being an Indian Culture Promotion 
Agency propagating Indian Culture in abroad. However, the Indian 
Cultural Centres in abroad have been advised to charge registration 
fees and periodical nominal tuition fees from the foreign students while 
imparting training in various streams viz Yoga, Dances etc. But no 
substantial receipt is reported from any of the Centres fearing low 
turnout which defeats the very purpose of propagation of Indian 
Culture in abroad.  
 
The Council has also explored for ticketing of shows, Public – Private 
Partnership and Corporate sponsoring of events. 
Further, the Council has certain revenue generation areas as depicted 
below which contribute very meager income:  
 
1. Sale of Publications 
2. Summer Camp/Study tour Fee 
3. Sale of Africa Quarterly 

 41 
4. Admn expenses from British library 
5. Rental income from Auditorium/Art Gallery/Foyer” 
67. In view of lower budgetary allocation over the years, the Committee 
had strongly recommended that ICCR should be allocated additional funds 
and also suggested that ICCR must explore alternative ways to generate 
revenue for conduct of regular activities.  H owever, the Committee find that 
not much has been done in terms of increasing the financial allocation of 
ICCR.  The Committee, therefore, would like to strongly reiterate that the 
matter should be taken at the level of Foreign Secretary at the earliest so  as to 
ensure additional allocation during 1st batch of Supplementary Demands. 
 The Committee further observe that the Indian Cultural Centres 
abroad have been advised to charge registration fee and periodical nominal 
tuition fee from foreign students.  Th e Committee have also a fear that such 
step may hinder ICCR’s agenda of promotion of Indian cultural activities 
amongst the students/learners in such centres  as well as may also deter 
prospective learners.  The Committee, therefore, desire that  ICCR should 
review this decision in the light of existing facts and experiences in this regard.  
While considering the  ICCR’s initiative to explore  the option of ticketing its 
shows, the Committee would like to suggest that the ICCR should only ticket 
the perfo rmances given by popular and distinguished artistes who command 
large audiences. 
  

 42 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 1)  
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of External Affairs had 
sought an allocation of Rs. 19,228.64 crores, including the Plan component 
of Rs. 5026.37 crores and Non -Plan component of Rs. 14202.27 crores.  
However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the proposed budgetary 
allocation for the Ministry  for the financial year 2013 -14 is pegged at only 
Rs. 11719 crores including the Plan budget of 3000 crores and Non -Plan 
budget of Rs. 8719 crores. The Committee express their concern at serious 
under-resourcing of the Ministry of External Affairs whose bu dgetary 
allocation and staff strength do not commensurate with the global nature of 
its responsibility and emerging & expanding arenas of engagement.  The 
Committee note that there is a vast gap between the requirements and actual 
resources available at the disposal of the Ministry. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry 
must be substantially enhanced and prioritized so that the Ministry is able to 
fulfill its role in domestic and global arena. 
     
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry thankfully acknowledges the concern expressed by the 
Committee in appreciating the deficit faced by the Ministry and the vast gap 
existing between the resources available and the requirements. It would 
certainly give the ne cessary fillip to the Ministry‟s efforts in getting 
additional allocations. The Ministry, on its part, had undertaken detailed 
consultation with all the stakeholders, particularly the Development 
Partnership Administration, to ensure that there is optimum allocation of 
funds within the overall budget.  Depending on the progress of expenditure, 
and keeping in view the various commitments remaining to be fulfilled, the 
Ministry would approach the Ministry of Finance for supplementary funds to 
be allocated in its favour. 
   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that as part of the inter -governmental model, 
three ongoing hydro-power projects in Bhutan have faced serious shortage of 
funds and it is really unfortunate that for second successive year, the funds 
for three hydro -power projects in Bhu tan have exhausted mid -year.  The 
Committee are appalled to know that due to problems in timely release of 
funds, the project authorities in one of the projects have to face difficult 

 43 
situation even in releasing salary for its employee.  The Committee 
acknowledge the Ministry‟s endeavour to  augment funds from internal 
sources by re -appropriating funds allocated for various projects so that the 
work in these ongoing projects do not come to a halt.  The Committee also 
opine that innovative ways of financing based on securitization of the likely 
revenue stream from such hydel power may be explored to obviate the 
paucity of resources.  The Committee, however, desire that the Ministry 
should endeavour to ensure timely release of funds for ongoing projects, as 
delay in release of funds will result in slow pace of work leading to gradual 
cost escalation and also affect the prestige of India in the commity of nations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The funds required for India to provide assistance to hydropower 
projects in Bhutan are allocated by the Planning Commission under the Plan 
component of the “Aid to Bhutan” head of the Ministry‟s budget. However 
inadequate funds have been provided to the Ministry. For instance, the 
Ministry projected Rs.1644 crore under the pla n expenditure for Bhutan in 
the FY 2011 -12, but was allocated Rs.1030 crore. In the Financial Year 
2012-13 also, Rs. 1138 crore was provided for the Plan expenditure in BE 
and RE 2013 against the projection of Rs. 2045 crore.  It was only after 
persistent efforts made at the level of EAM/PM additional Rs 400 Crores was 
provided at the very end of the financial year 2012 -13. T he Ministry has 
received 2520 Crores for the three ongoing HEP‟s  for the Financial Year of 
2013-14 against the projected demand of Rs 3726 Crores. 
The Ministry from time to time is drawing the attention of the 
authorities concerned about the requirement of funds to three ongoing 
Hydroelectric Projects in Bhutan. EAM wrote to the Finance Minister on 
December 3 rd, 2012 about the importanc e of providing necessary funds. 
Foreign Secretary also wrote to the Finance Secretary on 22 nd January, 2013 
about the necessity of providing funds in an urgent manner to these projects. 
The issue was also brought to the notice of the PMO by FS, through a l etter 
addressed to PS to PM in February 2013.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee have been finding discrepancy in the Budget 
documents furnished by the Ministry and bringing it to the notice of the 
Ministry particularly the issue of variation in the figures contained in various 
documents or within the documents.  But several discrepancies have been 
noted by the Committee in the budget documents submitted to the Committee 
and have been accepted by the Ministry.  The Comm ittee, therefore, reiterate 
that the Ministry must be cautious in furnishing information to the 
Committee and must ascertain correctness of information while furnishing 
the documents and the replies to the queries raised by the Committee. 
 
 

 44 
Reply of the Government 
  
It is respectfully submitted that one of the conspicuous errors crept up 
in the brief supplied by the Ministry on the Detailed Demands for Grants 
2013-14.  The error occurred due to the fact that `400 crore was allocated 
under Plan at the fag end of the budget cycle and consequently, the RE 2012 -
13 ceiling was also revised to `10062 crore, in supersession of the earlier 
ceiling of `9662 crore.  The material, however, had been prepared on the 
basis of earlier communication of ceiling from Minist ry of Finance.  The 
error is regretted. All possible precautions would continue to be taken before 
furnishing the documents and replies to the Committee.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 The Committee observe that MEA is in the pro cess of revamping all the 
websites of the Ministry under its web portal project. Standard templetes have 
been circulated to all Missions and Posts and they have been asked to 
integarate themselves with the official portal as per new design. But only 100 
Missions have integrated their web pages with the official web site of MEA. 
Under the project a dozen websites of the Ministry have already been 
redesigned and others are yet to be undertaken to make them more user 
friendly. The Committee note that the prese nce of several websites of the 
Ministry creates confusion and user is unable to get complete information at 
one place. The Committee have been frequently asking the Ministry to create 
one integrated website of the Ministry with focused links rather than a 
multiplicity of websites. The Committee hope that  after  completion of  the  
process of  integration and revamping of  websites at the earliest, the Ministry 
would constantly upgrade their website and make it  user friendly, easily 
accessible and interactive.    
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry acknowledges the Committee's recommendation for the need 
to create one integrated website where all information related to the Ministry 
and its various Missions/Posts can be made available. In this regard it is 
submitted that the main objective of the Ministry's Web Portal Project was to 
develop a web portal which is not only easily accessible, user friendly and 
web 2.0 compatible but has also all the Missions' and Posts' web pages 
integrated within it so that it  can act as a comprehensive single source 
integrated platform through which users can access all information generated 
both from headquarters and all Missions/Posts of the Ministry. In pursuit of 
this objective, as of June 3, 2013, almost all Missions' web  pages have 
already been successfully integrated with the new official MEA website 
(www.mea.gov.in). Some of our Missions (like those in Iraq, South Sudan, 

 45 
Mali etc.,) which could not integrate because they are yet to have an 
independent website or they are yet to become fully functional, will do so at 
the earliest.  
 
 The work of redesigning all websites of the Ministry was taken up as 
part of the Web Portal  Project with the objective of providing a uniform, 
corporate look and feel to all the Ministry ’s websites so as to have a standard 
image for the Ministry in the digital space with which users from across the 
world can associate with. As on June 3, 2013 twenty one Missions/Posts have 
completed the redesigning work and migrated to the new official templates. 
Forty more Missions/Posts are in the process of re -designing. The remaining 
Missions/Posts have been asked to initiate action in this regard at the earl iest. 
Ministry is regularly following up with the Missions for early completion of 
the redesigning exercise. 
 
 Ministry also notes the Committee's observation for the need to 
constantly upgrade and update information on all its websites and has been 
regularly writing to all Missions/Posts to take extra effort to ensure that their 
websites reflect the most updated information. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
  The Committee are of the view that the Missions/Posts must be 
empowered to cater to various demands according to the changing profile of 
the role and job which is expected to be fulfilled by the Missions/Posts.  The 
Committee take note of the Ministry‟s efforts in regard to taking stock of the 
changing functional and human resou rce needs of the Missions/Posts through 
O&M study and conduct of regular inspections.  The Committee, however, 
express their dissatisfaction over non -availability of any report of inspection 
in Missions/Posts since May 2011.  The Committee, therefore, desi re that 
there should be a regular review and inspection of functioning of 
Missions/Posts particularly on the parameters of overall functioning, 
coordination mechanism between the Headquarters, Missions and other 
Ministries, channels of communication and im plementation of Ministry‟s 
instructions/directions in most efficient and diligent manner. Simultaneously, 
Ministry should also ensure that due resources, physical and human, are 
provided to the Indian establishments abroad so that they are able to maintain  
minimum standards and deliver standard services.The Committee would 
further like to reiterate that Ministry must ensure due training to the 
officers/staff about local legalities as well as soft skills and the system should 
be made more responsive to the n eeds of the people seeking 
information/services from the Missions/Posts.   

 46 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The list of reports submitted by the Ministry in response to the queries 
related to "Inspection of Missions abroad" pertained only to the 
comprehensive inspections conducted by the Directorate of Inspections. 
Besides such inspections, various Divisions in the Ministry also conduct 
regular inspections/evaluations on specific issues such as 
administrative/establishment/consular/security matters and other important 
aspects of bilateral relationships.  Generally such subject specific reports 
have not been inclu ded in the list of comprehensive inspections carried out 
by the Directorate of Inspections. With a view to rectifying this situation so 
that the records of the Directorate are comprehensive, holistic and complete, 
in future, in addition to the full inspect ions carried out by the Directorate, 
records of specialized reports shall also be maintained in the Directorate.  As 
far as the resources are concerned, the Ministry always endeavors to meet the 
functional needs of Indian Missions/Posts abroad to the best of its capacity. 
The Ministry is also attaching high priority to the training and capacity 
building aspects.  A new comprehensive training framework for the MEA in 
pursuance of the National Training Policy 2012 is currently under process. 
Once implemented, this Training Framework would substantially upgrade the 
necessary skills for better delivery of services.   
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 The Committee feel that in view of the evolving strategic and dynamic 
diplomatic and the ever evolving technological scenario, there is a need to 
arrange regular orientation programmes for the personnel of MEA and 
endeavour for in -house capacity building a nd expertise.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should come up with a comprehensive 
training policy in tune with the provisions of national training policy and 
futuristic orientation and expand the horizon for training and multi -
disciplinary approach to accommodate the evolving needs of diversified 
nature of diplomacy.   
 Moreover, in context of the Ministry‟s efforts for induction of 
personnel through various channels, the Committee would like to suggest that 
before posting, such personne l must be sensitized about the nature of 
Ministry‟s job and its diplomatic engagement through orientation or small 
duration training programmes, even if such personnel are engaged for purely 
technical jobs in Technical Cell of Projects Division or even in Development 
Partnership Administration.   The Committee further desire that 
alongwith Foreign Service Institute (FSI), Indian diplomats must be exposed 
to global institutes of eminence so that Indian diplomats are more in tune with 
global academic, intellectual and diplomatic discourse. 

 47 
   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Foreign Service Institute, which was set up in 1986, has been 
imparting training to the various cadres of MEA in accordance with the 
Ministry‟s functional needs.  In addition to the induction  training for Foreign 
Service Probationers, the FSI also organizes training for mid -career stages, 
including for officers belonging to All -India and Central Services.  Special 
training programmes are also organized for Foreign Diplomats.  
In pursuance of t he National Training Policy 2012, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has already drafted a revised, comprehensive multi -stage 
training framework both for induction and mid -career for all the cadres of the 
Ministry at various stages.  The training framework f ollows competency based 
approach for imparting knowledge and creating relevant skills for addressing the 
diverse needs of the Ministry.   
The training programme would be conducted both at the FSI and other 
premier institutions and centres of excellence dealing with policy issues relevant 
to India. There is a specific module proposed for deputationists which would 
equip them to adapt their skills to the diplomatic nuances required of officers 
posted in the MEA or India‟s Missions/Posts abroad.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry has opened all the 77 
Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) in various States but several Passport Seva 
Kendras/Regional Passport Offices(RPOs) are still not connected online with 
State Police Headquarters or District Police Headquarters in many states. 
Due to such situation in those states, police verification still takes time of 30 -
150 days.  Therefore, the main objective of Passport Seva Project i.e. 
reducing the time period for police verification process is not being achieved. 
Though, the Committee understand that it is primarily the responsibility of 
the State Governments, yet the Ministry or RPOs have to pursue the matter 
with police authorities in those States  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry/RPOs should sincerely follow the issue with respective State 
Governments and Police Authorities continuously and impress upon them the 
need and importance of establishing online connectivity betwee n PSKs, 
RPOs and the Police Headquarters, as by Ministry‟s own admission wherever 
DPH/SPHq. model exist, the results have been very encouraging. 
 The Committee would like to be assured that the new procedures for 
issuance of passports have substantially be nefitted the potential applicants.  
However,  an objective external assessment may be undertaken by any 
reputed consultant to study and track passport issuance to ascertain the cases 
of delay and adopt such changes necessary for the benefit of passport 
applicants. 
 
 

 48 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 30 th May, 2013, 10 States have implemented the DPHQ model 
of police verification and the PSP application is accessed at the DPHQ. Five 
States have implemented SPHQ model as laid down in the RFP. Remaining 
States are still working on manual model that was followed in the pre -PSP 
system. 
 
It is submitted that RPOs are instructed to follow -up with concerned 
State Governments for implementation of either SPHQ or DPHQ model. Due 
to sustained efforts by the RPOs as well a s by the CPV Division, UP, Bihar 
and Maharashtra have implemented the DPHQ model in a few locations as 
per the availability of ICT infrastructure required to start DPHQ model. 
Efforts are underway to connect all the remaining locations in the said States, 
either to SPHQ or to DPHQ model. 
 
The Ministry is also examining PVR process for due approval, to 
connect all locations uniformly across all the States/UTs to DPHQ model, 
which is the best model for speeding up Police Verification Process. 
 
As regards the Committee‟s observation for engagement of reputed 
consultant, it is submitted that Ministry has requested the National Institute 
for Smart Government (NISG) to conduct a study and identify the gaps due 
to which delays occur  in passport issu ance  and to submit a report to 
Ministry for remedial actions.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 The Committee note that even after much delay, the project to 
introduce e -passport for general category is yet to commence.  The 
Committee were earlier informed that the delay is due to fresh security 
clearance from Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) in respect of a technically 
qualified bidder.  The matter has so far not been resolved even after sending a 
communication at the level of Foreign Secretary and External Affairs 
Minister.  More surprisingly,  the Committee also note that the security 
clearance in question pertains to the firm that was engaged for securing chip 
for e -passport in diplomatic/official categories and wonder that h ow the 
clearance for the same agency is not being given by the MHA and the matter 
is pending with them for a long time.   The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the matter should be taken up with MHA at the highest level to get it resolved 
or adopt any alternate mechanism to secure the desired chip so that the project 
is rolled out at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 

 49 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Security Clearance from Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of 
one technically qualified bidder for supply of ePassport chip in lays is still 
pending. The Ministry of External Affairs is seized of the issue and MHA is 
being reminded from time to time to expedite issue of security clearance so 
that the tendering process could be completed. MHA has so far not 
responded to periodical reminders in this regard by MEA nor intimated any 
progress in the matter of security clearance. The validity of the tender bids 
are however being extended periodically. In compliance with the 
recommended practices of ICAO, over 100 countries have already i ssued 
ePassports, while India, having launched the pilot project in 2008, is lagging 
behind in issue of ePassports, which affects the overall security of Indian 
travel documents and consequently the international standing of India. The 
Committee‟s observat ions and MEA‟s views have been conveyed to MHA 
once again.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
 The Committee take note of various projects being implemented in 
Afghanistan.  Considering the  evolving strategic and security scenario i n 
Afghanistan, the Committee would like to urge the Ministry to expedite the 
implementation in the already delayed projects and hope that the Ministry 
will be able to complete the construction of Afghanistan Parliament Building 
and the two sub -stations as per the revised timelines and there is no further 
delay. The Committee further urge the Ministry to evolve mechanism to 
ensure safety of the personnel working at these sites as well as at the sites of 
other projects with Indian involvement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All efforts are being made to ensure the completion of projects in 
Afghanistan in accordance with the revised schedule of completion. 
According to CPWD, the Afghanistan Parliament building is expected to be 
completed by June 2014 and the two -sub stations at Doshi and Chairkar are 
expected to be completed by December 2013 in accordance with the original 
schedule of completion. A mechanism has been in place to closely monitor 
the security situation to ensure safety of the personnel working at these  sites 
as well as at the sites of other projects with Indian involvement. Based on the 
assessment of the security situation, security advisories are issued by the 
Embassy of India in Kabul for necessary precautions that need to be observed 
including by pro ject personnel. All Indian nationals residing in Afghanistan 
including those at project sites are advised to regularly review security 
arrangements at their place of work and residence, follow utmost security 
precautions and maintain extra vigil. In additi on, the Embassy of India in 
Kabul and the Consulate Generals in Afghanistan keep regular contact with 
the concerned authorities of Government of Afghanistan to ensure the safety 
and security of Indian personnel and project sites.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 

 50 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 The Committee take note of increasing engagement with Bangladesh.  
However, the Committee recommend that India‟s International commitments 
must be respected and that the Government must ensure timely release of 
funds for US$ 200 million to Bangladesh.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that Ministry must make efforts to expedite various projects in Bangladesh.  
The Committee are hopeful that since MoU has been signed between the two 
countries on Akhaura -Agartala rail link project, the pace of the activities 
related to pre -construction activity will accelerate. The Committee further 
urge the Ministry to look into the issues leading to delay in signing of the 
contract with regard to river port at Ashuganj and stri ve for resolution of 
issues or decide upon the alternative course of action. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. The second instalment of US$ 50 million was handed over to 
Government of Bangladesh in early May 2013. The third instalment is 
proposed to be released shortly.  
2. The first meeting of the Project Steering Committee (PSC) on 
Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link project took place on May 21, 2013 in Dhaka 
wherein agreement was reached on various important milestones of the 
project. A time frame has been agreed upon  by both sides for finalization of 
terms of reference, identification and acquisition of land etc.  
3. The Consultant (M/s WAPCOS) engaged for preparing a Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) for establishment of an Inland River Port at Ashuganj 
has begun work fr om April 2013. They have submitted the Inception Report. 
The DPR is expected to be finalized by November 2013. 
4. Ministry is engaged with the the GoBD on a regular basis to resolve 
outstanding issues on ongoing projects. Currently, all identified developm ent 
projects are under different stages of implementation. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
 
 The Committee take note of progress made in respect of various 
infrastructural projects in Nepal and express hope that various small 
developmental programmes are adhering to the cost and timelines and are 
able to benefit the local community. The Committee take note of signing of 
MoU in respect of cross border rail links.  However, the Committee express 
concern over allocation of Rs. 25.36 cr ores only for two rail links especially 

 51 
in light of the fact that during the preceding years, there was more allocation 
and over -utilization of funds for these projects.  The Committee are of the 
view that considering the pace of the project, the allocatio n should 
appropriately be enhanced at RE stage.   
  
The Committee also express concern over the pace of the Tarai  Road 
Project.  The Committee understand the hurdles being created by local 
administration and population in land acquisition and execution of these 
projects, however, the Committee would like the Ministry to engage with the 
Government of Nepal to expedite  the land acquisition and the project 
execution.  
 The Committee express their concern over the approach of the 
Government showing lack of interest in resolving the issues relating to 
Saptakoshi, Sunkoshi and Pancheshwar dams on the rivers flowing through 
both the countries.  The Committee desire that the MEA in consultation with 
Ministry of Water Resources and State Government of Bihar should engage 
with Government of Nepal on enhanced cooperation in this sector and resolve 
all the hurdles relating to thes e important and long pending projects with due 
commitment. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
During FY 2013 -14, the estimated expenditure on the two Rail link 
projects, viz., Jogbani -Biratnagar and Jaynagar -Bijlapur-Bardibas, is approx. 
Rs.180 crore. The Ministry of Railways, the Implementing Agency, has 
raised a bill of Rs. 180 crore for the current financial year for land 
acquisition, construction of embankments, bridges, station buildings, track 
lying, etc. Ministry of Railways has also indicated that delay or i nadequate 
release of funds may have adverse impact on the project. In view of the fund 
requirement for the project and the recommendation of the Hon ’ble 
Committee, it is proposed to seek additional allocation of funds for this 
project at the first supplementary stage.  
The Ministry as well as the Embassy of India in Kathmandu is in 
regular touch with the Government of Nepal for the earliest completion of 
land acquisition and availability of encumbrance free land for the on -going 
Terai road project.  
The Sma ll Development Projects are community based projects and 
are designed to meet the felt needs of the local community in areas such as 
education, health and community infrastructure. There are more than 200 
projects that are currently ongoing. The Embassy of  India in Kathmandu 
remains in close touch with the local Government to ensure timely and 
efficient execution of these projects. The projects are also regularly inspected 
by the Embassy officials to ensure that work is proceeding well. It is ensured 

 52 
that all projects are executed within the parameters of time, cost and quality. 
It is has been the endeavor that the project costs are reasonable and quality 
work is produced within the prescribed time and cost limits. 
MEA is working in coordination with the Min istry of Water 
Resources (MoWR) to oversee execution of Saptakoshi, Sunkoshi and 
Pancheshwar projects. The funding of these projects is being provided for by 
MoWR. MEA is working in close consultation with MoWR.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
 While observing the progress of various projects being implemented in 
Sri Lanka, the Committee are deeply concerned about the slow pace of 
implementation of the Housing Project for Internally Displaced People in Sri 
Lanka.  The Committee are of the view th at this is totally unacceptable and 
the Committee seriously doubt whether it would be completed as per the 
fixed target.  Though, the Committee are apprised of progress in direction of 
identification of implementing agencies and beneficiaries and follow up  of 
various models for construction of the Houses, however, the Committee 
would suggest that the Ministry must ascertain the mechanism being adopted 
to identify the genuineness of the beneficiaries and ensure that not only the 
benefits of the projects reac h the targeted beneficiaries but also ensure that 
cash is not diverted to other purposes and this needs to be carefully 
monitored.  The Committee further recommend that immediate measure 
should be undertaken by the Minsitry to expedite the process of ident ification 
of benerficiaries for the remaining projects and ensure expedious release of 
money and faster pace of implementation.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should furnish a detailed report on the status of the project based on 
the visit of senior officials from the Headquarters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Committee have suggested that Ministry must ascertain the 
mechanism being adopted to identify the genuineness of the beneficiaries and 
ensure that not only the benefits of the Projects re ach the targeted 
beneficiaries but also ensure that the cash is not diverted for other purpose.  
2.0 In this regard, it is stated that the second phase of the owner driven 
model of the Sri Lanka Housing Project focuses on the internally displaced 
people in the war affected areas of the Northern and Eastern provinces of Sri 
Lanka.  The list of affected villages from each Division in a District is 
prioritized by the Sri Lanka Government authorities and approved by the 
High Commission of India, Colombo.  The v erification of the master list 
prepared by the District heads (Divisional Secretary) of the area is carried out 
by the Implementing Agencies(IAs) appointed by the GoI for the project. The 

 53 
IAs verify the list of beneficiaries in their area of jurisdiction b y visiting each 
house/beneficiary.  After verification, the officials of the Implementing 
Agency and the Divisional Secretariat then allot scores to each beneficiary 
figuring in the list based on the information collected and an agreed scoring 
criteria whi ch takes into account various factors like number of family 
members/dependents, their age, level of disability/income, year of 
displacement, present status of dwelling(huts/under tarpaulin shelters) etc. 
The eligibility list so drawn is published in the no tice board of the Divisional 
Secretary and the village office. It is also shared with the community 
Advisory Groups formed in each village.  A two week grievance period is 
given for families to voice their grievances, if any, on the selection of any 
beneficiary.  If there are any complaints, these are examined by the 
Grievance Redressal Committee chaired by the Divisional Secretary in the 
presence of beneficiaries, IAs and the Community Advisory Groups. The 
schedule of such meetings are informed in advance by the concerned DS, IA 
and also posted on the Mission‟s website.   The recommendations of the 
Grievance redressal committee is communicated to the High Commission of 
India who also deliberates on it and conveys its acceptance of the list for 
further proce ssing.  This involves checking all records (land title, ID, bank 
account etc.) thoroughly and subsequently the process of remittance of the 
installment into the bank account of the beneficiary begins. The progress of 
work is closely monitored by the IAs an d HCI, Colombo to ensure that 
installments are released on completion of each stage of work.   
2.1. The selection of beneficiaries for the Housing Project is done in a fair, 
objective and transparent manner. The process is quite exhaustive and 
thorough; there are sufficient checks and balances to ensure that only genuine 
beneficiaries who were displaced by the armed conflict only receive the 
funds into their bank accounts.  The details of the steps involved in process 
of identification of the beneficiary an d the payment of installments may be 
seen at Annexure. 
2.2 The Project is reviewed in the field by the Implementing Agencies 
appointed by the Government of India, the Indian Banks, the officials of the 
High Commission of India, Colombo and the Consul Gener al of India‟s 
office in Jaffna. 
2.3 The target set for the second phase of the Housing Project is to 
complete 11,000 houses by the end of 2013 and to commence construction of 
another 16,000 houses by March 31 2014.  27,000 houses are expected to be 
completed by the end of 2014. The entire lot of 43,000 houses is scheduled 
for completion by the end of 2015. 
3. Further, the Committee have recommended that immediate measures 
should be undertaken by the Ministry to expedite the process of identification 
of beneficiaries for the remaining projects and to ensure expeditious release 
of money and faster pace of implementation. 
3.1 It is mentioned that the existing mechanism of selection of 
beneficiaries will continue for the second phase of the Housing Project 
involving the construction of 43,000 houses in the Northern and Eastern 
Provinces under the owner-driven model.  

 54 
3.2 The process of finalizing the criteria for selection of beneficiaries for 
the third phase of the Project involving construction of 4,000 houses in the 
hilly Central & Uva Provinces of Sri Lanka under the agency -driven model is 
underway.  M/s WAPCOS Ltd., a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) of 
Government of India, has been selected as the Project Management 
Consultant for this part of the Project. Th e land for construction of these 
houses is yet to be finalized by the Sri Lankan authorities. The work on this 
phase of the housing project would begin in right earnest as soon as this 
exercise is completed.  
4.0 The Committee have desired that the Ministr y should furnish a 
detailed report on the status of the project based on the visit of senior 
officials from the Headquarters.  
4.1 The status of the Housing Project as on 29 May 2013 is enclosed as 
Annexure.  A Monitoring Committee comprising Special Secretary (DPA) 
and Special Secretary & Financial Advisor, MEA, and two technical experts, 
inspected the Housing Project sites at Tellipalai DS Division in Jaffna 
District on 10 April 2013 and Palai DS Division in Kilinochchi district on 11 
April 2013 and interacted with the concerned beneficiaries and officials of 
the implementing Agencies and the Sri Lankan government. The Committee 
while expressing satisfaction on the overall progress of the Project has also 
highlighted a few areas for further pursuing and monitoring.  A brief report 
on the Committee‟s visit is attached as Annexure.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
 The Committee welcome the establishment of Developmental 
Partnership Administration (DPA) and incorporation of technical expertise 
into its organizational setup.  The Committee are hopeful that the 
establishment of DPA will lead to efficient and on time de livery of India‟s 
international projects as well as ensure proper coordination amongst various 
departments and Ministries.   
 The Committee expect that DPA would be able to streamline the 
process for appraisal of the project, award of contract, implementat ion, 
supervision as well as evaluation and ensure due measures of economy and 
efficiency. The Committee however, desire that DPA should develop 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) as well as guidelines for each step from 
the inception of the project to actual delivery of the project.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 DPA is in the process of analyzing the entire range of India‟s 
development cooperation, including projects under grant assistance, lines of 
credit and capacity building programmes, to identify areas r equiring critical 
attention, to initiate rectification of procedures requiring change, and to 
develop operating procedures for every stage of projects from conception, 
appraisal, launch, monitoring and evaluation.  

 55 
 To equip itself with the range of skills  required to carry out these 
tasks, DPA is pursuing the twin track of incorporating technical expertise 
into its organizational set up and accessing technical consultancy services 
from outside.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 
 The Committee take note of the progress made in respect of 
establishing the Nalanda University.  As per the original proposed timeline 
for the project, the construction was to begin in January 2012, however, due 
to procedural delay, the construction activi ty will now commence in 2013.  
The requirement of funds is being deferred and it has been scaled down for 
the year 2013-14 from Rs. 547 crores to Rs. 125 crores only.  The Committee 
are concerned about the University‟s budgetary projection for BE 2013 -14 in 
view of University‟s own admission that the construction is expected to begin 
in last quarter of 2013 -14.  The Committee, therefore, once again would like 
to reiterate their earlier view that University must streamline its budgetary 
projection process.  The Committee further note that University proposes to 
start two Schools in September, 2014.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
Nalanda University should strive to begin the academic activities of Phase -I 
at the earliest.   The Committee would further like to suggest that University 
in its academic endeavours should not adopt India -centric approach but be 
global in its outlook and should equally focus on Non -Indian/Indian Origin 
Intellectuals and academicians. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry appr eciates the Committee's concern regarding the university's 
budgetary projection for BE 2013 -14. The university has reaffirmed its 
commitment to ask for only as much money as would be required after 
careful re -assessment of ground realities in a realistic a nd rational manner, 
and taking into account procedural constraints. According to the university, 
the requirement of funds in 2013-14 has not really been scaled down, but only 
deffered for the time being, and may be required in the subsequent financial 
years. The bulk of the Rs. 125 crores allocated in BE 2013 -14 will be spent 
on construction, expected to begin in the last quarter of 2013 -14. The reduced 
demand for the current financial year demonstrates that the university is 
making genuine efforts to streamline its budgetary projection process. 
 As regards the need for starting academic activities in Phase I at the 
earlies, the university has reaffirmed its plan to start teaching at the Schools 
of Historical Studies and Ecology and Environment Studing in 
August/September 2014 from leased premises. The concept notes and focus 
areas for these two Schools are ready. The university is now working on 
curriculum. Hiring of faculty will begin after the Headquraters Agreement 
governing privileges and immunities of t he university's academic staff is 
signed and notified. 

 56 
 As for the need to follow a global rather than an India-centric approach 
to academic programmes, the university has reiterated that the speakers list 
for its international conference in Patna in July,  2012 included only 9 Indians 
out of panel of 27. Besides, People of Indian origin or Indian citizens also 
include brilliant academics of international excellence . The university has 
many international scholars on the Advisory Boards of Schools of Historical 
Studies and Ecology and Environment Studies . It plans collaborations with 
institutions that are mostly international. The university has recentrly signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding with the Australia Indian Institue based at 
the University of  Melbourne. It has reached out to scholars across the globe 
and hosted them both at the site in Rajgir and its office in Delhi . It would thus 
be seen that Nalanda University has a global vision and it will ensure at every 
state that thsi outlook is factored into all its academic endeavours. 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
 
  

 57 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES 
 
 
– NIL – 
  
  

 58 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 The Committee take note of the reports of several vacant Ambassadorial 
positions and do not find any transparent policy  and justification in this regard.  
The Committee are of the view that a proactive approach should be adopted by 
the Ministry and they should come up with the practice of announcement for 
placement of Ambassadors well in advance in cases of anticipated vac ancies on 
account of retirement etc.  The Committee also expect the Ministry to ensure 
due regard to the policy in matters of appointment of Ambassadors for an 
efficient carrying out of diplomatic responsibilities. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Every effort i s always made to ensure appointments of Heads of Mission 
in a timely manner, with due regard to the requirement of the posts and 
suitability of the appointees. The movement of personnel between a large 
number of Missions around the world necessarily entail s some gaps between the 
departure of one HOM and the arrival of another. Different diplomatic 
procedures in various countries for grant of agree‟ment also account for some 
gaps. The Ministry endeavours to ensure that the movement schedules do not 
affect the smooth functioning of our Diplomatic Missions, which is looked after 
by other Mission personnel in the absence of our HOM.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
 In context of India‟s partnership with Africa, the Committee in their 
14th Report had expressed concern over tardy implementation of the 
decisions taken during India Africa Forum Summit (IAFS -I).  However, the 
Committee are appalled to note that many of the implementing agencies were 
either directed to delay implementation o r their payments were carried 
forward to the next financial year because of the inadequacy of budgetary 
allocation. The Committee are of the opinion that Ministry should strive to 
balance its budgetary allocation between competing demands for various 
projects.  The Committee further take note of the fact that next IAFS Summit 
is scheduled to be held in 2014 and India has not been able to fulfil its 
commitment of IAFS- I&II. The Committee recommend that necessary funds 
should be allocated for these projects.   DPA should make efforts for an early 

 59 
execution of these projects and if required, can approach for fund 
enhancement at RE stage.  However, the Committee would like to urge the 
Ministry to take due care of the quality aspects in setting up of these 
institutes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The allocation under Aid to Africa budget is quite inadequate and it is 
hoped that more funds will be made available at the RE stage. 
All the capacity building institutions under IAFS are being 
implemented by various line Ministries and their chosen Implementation 
Agencies (IA). MEA has been kept in the loop by various Ministries on this 
issue. Selection of IAs has also been done after c onsultation with MEA. 
MEA has repeatedly stressed on the quality of the proposed institutions, and 
as far as possible, an MEA representative has been part of the visiting 
delegation from the line Ministry/implementing agency. Our Missions have 
also been se nsitized about the need for high quality in setting up of these 
institutions.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
  

 60 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 2)   
 While analyzing the budgetary allocation of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, the Committee, observe that it is dismally inappropriate as compared 
to the mandate assigned to the Ministry.  Though, the total outlay for the 
Ministry for the financial year 20 13-14 is Rs. 11719.00 crores yet 
interestingly, out of the total allocation, Rs. 7343.23 crores, which is 62.66% 
of total allocation is in nature of mandatory/obligatory expenditure in view of 
India‟s international commitments as it includes „Contributions  to 
International Organization‟, „Technical and Economic Cooperation‟, „Loans 
to Foreign Governments‟.  Only Rs. 4375.77 crores is available with the 
Ministry that too includes Rs. 1320.00 crores earmarked for „Special 
Diplomatic Expenditure‟ which is disc retionary in nature and is not readily 
available to Ministry for its internal use and Rs. 209.12 crores are earmarked 
for „Grants to institutions‟. Hence, in real terms only Rs. 2846.65 cores are 
available to the Ministry to cater to its mandate of conduct ing India‟s foreign 
policy, maintenance of its international relations via establishment of 179 
Missions/Posts and rendering of services by Missions/Passport Offices and 
all other establishments including Indian Cultural Centres/Chairs across the 
world and conduct diplomacy, political, economic and cultural and maintain 
high level of services rendered by these offices in India and world and 
engage with various academic and research institutes.  The Committee note 
that the Ministry has been functioning under  immense financial pressures 
and is hindered in performing upto the expected level due to financial 
constraints.  The Committee, therefore, take a serious note of the state of 
affairs and recommend that the Ministry must take up the issue of low 
allocation of funds with Ministry of Finance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry, as rightly observed by the Committee, has been 
functioning under severe financial strain, and has not been able to discharge 
some of its important commitments only for lack of funds. The commitments 
from the highest levels, if not honoured in  time, adversely impact the image 
of the country, which is why the adequate budgetary allocation is important.  
It may also be of relevance to point out that the establishment 
expenses of the Ministry, comprising of Headquarters, Embassies and 
Missions, Passport Offices and Hostels/Residential Complexes, added up to 
about `2498 crore in 2012 -13 (provisional). The allocation for the 
establishment expenses for 2013 -14 is only ` 2390.01 crore, as against the 
demand of `3089.18 crore. 
 The Ministry will take up  the issue of augmenting funds at 
Supplementary Demands and RE stages. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 

 61 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that high level international 
commitment had to be kept on hold or partially implemented due  to lack of 
budgetary support.  The Committee are appalled to  note that due to 
budgetary constraints Government of India was unable to fully implement 
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) decision for 100 million US$ grant to 
Bangladesh in pursuance of ann ouncement of a grant of US$ 200 million to 
Bangladesh made during the bilateral visit of then Finance Minister in May 
2012.  The Committee further note that the 2 nd installment could not be 
released in 2012-13 as no additional funds were provided by the Mi nistry of 
Finance, despite the demand being made in 2 nd batch of supplementary 
demands.  The Committee also note that resources were augmented for the 
1st installment from within the already allocated resources of the Ministry. 
 The Committee have taken a very serious note of the Ministry of 
Finance‟s refusal to grant funds for timely release of 2 nd installment for 
grants to Bangladesh, though, it was provided later at the fag -end of the 
financial year.  The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should pursue the matter further and CCS must be apprised 
of the situation.  The Ministry of External Affairs must ensure arrangement 
for funds for 3 rd and 4th installment.  The Committee further recommend that 
the payment of grant to Bangladesh must not be delayed on account of 
budgetary constraints. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It i s respectfully submitted that the Ministry of Finance had been 
sensitized about the commitments made at highest levels and details of these 
commitments were also shared with them. As per the decision of the Cabinet 
Committee on Security (CCS), the first in stalment of US$ 50 million was to 
be released from the existing budgetary allocation of the Ministry. Though 
not explicitly stated, it was implied that the remaining instalments would be 
released with additional funding by the Ministry of Finance. The firs t 
instalment of US$ 50 million was released from the savings of Ministry‟s 
own resources, after Ministry of Finance acceded to the request for 
provisions of funds in the form of „Technical Supplementary‟ in the 2 nd 
Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants . The request for Cash 
supplementary for releasing 2 nd instalment of US$ 50 million to Government 
of Bangladesh was not considered favourably by the Ministry of Finance.  
Hence, the second instalment of US$ 50 million could not be released within 
FY 2012-13 due to paucity of funds.   
 It may be pertinent to mention that provision for only two more 
instalments of US$ 50 million each exists in the Ministry‟s budget of FY 
2013-14, out of which one instalment of US$ 50 million has already been 
released in May 2 013.  Therefore, the Ministry would have to approach the 
Ministry of Finance in the Supplementary Demands stage for augmentation 
of budget to provide for the last instalment of US$ 50 million.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 

 62 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 The Committee find that in several case, the MEA has not been able 
to provide funds for the projects committed and announced by the Head of 
States/Government/Ministry of External Affairs on strategically important 
visits to the foreign countries due to budgetary  constraints. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that a separate head may be created for India‟s International 
Commitments announced by the Head of State/Government/Minister of 
External Affairs at international fora, wherein it should be mandatory for 
Ministry of Finance to provide funds for fulfillment of such commitments 
without any scope of discretionary reduction of allocation by the Ministry of 
Finance or the Planning Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India‟s developmental assistance to foreign countries is budgeted 
under the various heads such as „Aid to Bhutan‟, „Aid to Nepal‟ etc.  under 
the Major Head 3605.  Opening a new budget head dedicated for funds 
earmarked for India‟s commitments made at the highest level also may also 
not guarantee adequate provision of funds as these have to be ultimately 
provided by the Ministry of Finance.  Nevertheless, the Ministry would take 
up the matter as the suggested by the Hon‟ble Committee with the Ministry 
of Finance.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note that India‟s diplomatic efforts have led to global 
engagement at governmental level.  The Ministry‟s efforts are supplemented by 
Public Diplomacy, Press and Media Relations.  The Committee also  
acknowledge the  Ministry‟s digital presence in social media. The Committee 
are of the opinion that in the information age, the virtual social space has 
provided a unique platform to the Ministry to engage with the public an d 
particularly the young generation.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should adopt a holistic approach and coordinated efforts must be made 
in this direction.  The Committee, however, would like to emphasize and caution 
the Ministry that diplomatic paradigms and stringent digital safety standards are 
adhered to. The guidelines being prepared for safe use of social media should be 
finalized at the earliest and the Committee should be informed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a)   Public Diplomacy Division consults with other Divisions on 
regular basis. 
b) (i) The Department of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Ministry of  Information Technology had issued detailed 
guidelines for the use of Social  media by Government 

 63 
organizations (August 2012). These are comprehensive 
guidelines dealing with various aspects and use of Social media 
such as  account governance, content governance, 
information security governance,  responsiveness, impact 
analysis, etc.  
(ii) Public Diplomacy Divis ion had issued a circular to all the 
Missions containing  „Do‟s and Don‟t‟s‟ of Soc ial media 
in December 2011.   
c)   EG & IT Division is in process of finalizing another set of 
guidelines which deal    specifically with safety aspect of Social 
media.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
  Indian Missions/Posts form India‟s resident diplomatic presence in the 
host country.  In light of India‟s growing international profile and presence, 
during the meetings with the Committee, various foreign delegations visiting 
India have expressed their d esire to have Indian Mission/Post in their country 
and several such requests are pending in the Ministry.  But, the Committee have 
been informed that no new proposal has even reached at a stage of consideration 
of opening of new resident Mission.  In this context, the Committee have a view 
that such proposals should be extensively examined on priority basis and after 
due diplomatic and other considerations, the Ministry must come to a decision in 
each case and such efforts should not be stalled or delayed a t least due to 
financial constraints.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs will review all such cases once again 
in consultation with the concerned Territorial Divisions and take further 
action as necessary.  It is confirmed that no  proposal which is otherwise 
justified and meets the criteria for setting up a resident Mission at any station 
abroad, shall be allowed to be stalled because of financial constraints.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 The Committee  note that the Ministry is regularly and increasingly 
dealing with private parties particularly, in view of outsourcing of visa 
process/passport process and participation of private sector in various 
projects.  The Committee, however, observe that there is  neither any specific 
Standard Operating Procedure to be followed in that regard nor there is any 
separate Division to deal with issue of tenders, evaluation of bids, selection of 
service providers, deciding on terms and conditions and to ensure whether th e 
related terms and conditions are adhered to or not.  The Committee, therefore, 
are of the view that the Ministry must develop a mechanism or create a sub -

 64 
division to have a uniform and coordinated approach by creating standard 
operating procedures and to  look into the nitty -gritties of the entire process.  
The Ministry must ensure regular monitoring and evaluation of services in a 
due diligent manner.   The Committee further suggest that the Ministry should 
adhere to stringent norms and exercise transpare ncy in the process pertaining 
to tendering and outsourcing while giving paramouncy to the security 
concerns. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i) In regard to Standing Operating Procedures (SOP), Ministry‟s circular 
Egram of October 24, 2011 forwarding Guidelines from AS (CPV) is 
considered SOP. Further guidelines were issued vide Ministry‟s circular 
Egram March 7, 2013 detailing the procedures to be adopted for award of 
contract. These two circulars  form the instructions for SOP. However, as 
pointed out in the Recommendation No. 11 Ministry would issue a 
comprehensive SOP by compiling the information.  
 
ii) Regarding creation of a separate Cell, it may be mentioned that 
currently, the outsourcing of visa/passport/consular services have been 
implemented in 68 Indian Missions/Posts abroad. Besides two more 
Mission/Post would join the scheme soon while two Missi ons have limited 
outsourcing services. Thus the total number of Missions/Posts which have 
outsourced Visa/Passport/Consular Services would be 72. All legal issues are 
handled in consultation with Legal and Treaties Division of the Ministry. In 
rare cases, the opinion of Ministry of Law and Justice is also obtained. All 
important issues are cleared with the approval of Additional 
Secretary/Secretary and Foreign Secretary if required. Considering the 
volume of work and the mechanism to deal with the matter av ailable with 
Ministry, the concept for a separate cell for dealing with outsourcing matters 
was not considered earlier. However, keeping in view the suggestion by the 
Standing Committee, the matter is being considered separately from the 
administrative and  financial angles as the creation of a Cell would involve 
additional expenditure and additional staff.  
 
iii) In regard to monitoring and evaluation of services, it may be 
mentioned that CPV Division is closely monitoring the tender process being 
followed by Missions/Posts abroad. The system of outsourcing services is 
stabilising and CPV Division monitors the implementation of the tender 
process in Missions/Posts regularly as Missions/Posts have been advised to 
keep the Ministry informed of every stage of t he tender process namely 
uploading the tender documents, pre -bid conference, opening of the 
Technical Bids and Financial Bids and finally the signing of the Agreement. 
Ministry has circulated model tender documents and also issued a detailed 
proforma to ev aluate the Technical Bids to reduce subjectivity to the 
maximum possible levels. Ministry also takes note of complaints from 
different quarters and seeks clarification from the Missions/Posts concerned.  
 

 65 
iv) In regard to adherence to stringent norms and t ransparency, the tender 
documents are uploaded in the websites of the Mission and Ministry 
simultaneously. The Request for Proposal is a detailed document which gives 
information on various aspects of the tender process. The proceedings of the 
pre-bid conference in the form of Questions and Answers are circulated to all 
the participating companies. The Technical Bids and Financial Bids are 
opened in the presence of The Representatives of the participating companies 
and the members of the Outsourcing Committ ee. Missions have been 
instructed to give detailed reasons for disqualification to the disqualified 
companies. Further Ministry‟s guidelines are based on CVC guidelines and 
General Financial Rules (GFRs) and also the Orders of Hon‟ble Delhi High 
Court. Whe never, the bids are disqualified, the reasons for the same are 
informed to the companies concerned.  
 
v) In regard to security concerns, it is pointed out that only peripheral 
work relating to visa, passport, consular services are handled by the 
outsourcing companies. The policy matters and other security related work 
pertaining to issue of visas and passports are handled by authorised India -
based officers. Further as per the extant guidelines, only Indian/Indian origin 
companies are eligible to take part i n the tender process as the principal 
company with or without a local partner of Indian/foreign origin. Further 
local partner companies are cleared from security angle by the Ministry in 
consultation with authorities concerned.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
 The Committee in their deliberations and Reports over the years have 
expressed serious concern over the lower establishment strength of the 
Ministry but there is no satisfactory improvement.  The Committee once 
again observe  that there is a huge gap between the actual number of 
employees and approved strength in Group A & B services.  As against the 
total number of 7346 posts, 5761 employees are in position.  The Committee 
are not convinced with the reasons furnished by the M inistry for such gap.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that sincere efforts should be made by the 
Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of Personnel and Training to 
fill the vacant posts at the earliest. The Committee also take note of the 
„Medium Term Expansion Plan‟ and various methods for induction through 
different channels.  The Committee, however, are not convinced with such 
slow pace of expansion of service spanning over ten years. The Committee 
would like to suggest that the Ministry mus t approach the Ministry of 
Personnel and Training with fresh proposals for further expansion in the cadre 
of the Ministry in both Gazetted as well as Non -gazetted posts during a 
shorter period.  The Committee make a note of the lateral entry scheme to 
build in-house capacity within the Ministry and appreciate Ministry‟s efforts 
for recruitment of experts for Technical Cell in Projects Division as well as 

 66 
Development Partnership Administration (DPA).  The Committee, however, 
note that the present approach of  lateral induction and those with domain 
knowledge at various levels both in Headquarter and in Embassy is far too 
slow.  In Committee‟s view with such approach, shortage of personnel will 
continue to handicap the Ministry‟s work.   The Committee, therefor e, desire 
that lateral induction must be substantially accelerated at various levels 
through contractual or deputation so that in the course of the next three years, 
the current shortages are substantially overcome.  However, the Committee 
would like to ca ution the Ministry that while engaging the experts, through 
deputation or outsourcing consultants, the Ministry must give due 
consideration to the security and diplomatic aspects. The Committee suggest 
that Ministry should come up with innovative ways for attracting the desired 
expertise and specialists to conduct various activities in view of increased 
arenas of diplomatic engagement particularly in terms of emerging contours 
of economic and environmental diplomacy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs has undertaken an extensive exercise of 
Cadre Review to cover the shortages at staff level and an expansion plan to 
address the deficit at the officer level. MEA has submitted revised indents to 
the concerned recruitment agencies such as Uni on Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection Commission (SSC) to increase the 
intake to adequately address the gap in existing and required manpower.  
 Till the recruitment agencies are able to provide regular candidates 
against vacant posts, th e Ministry has been hiring consultants for specialized 
jobs in addition to filling routine secretarial vacancies through temporary 
engagement of outsourced staff.  
For the specific requirement of domain expertise in Development 
Partnership Administration, MEA has been regularly inviting 
nominations/applications from other specialized Cadres/Departments, with 
the result that the immediate needs of the DPA for ex -cadre expertise have 
been met. This is an ongoing process and as and when further expertise is 
required, the Ministry will take necessary steps.   
While selecting ex -cadre officers, the Ministry pays due attention to 
meeting the need for necessary diplomatic sk ills for the identified jobs 
besides adhering to the standard security precautions.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that there is no connectivity 
between the Central Passport Organization (CPO) and the Missions/Posts and 
the Missions/Posts have access to Passport Central Data (PRIDE) only to 
check data but passport related services ar e rendered by Mission/Post only 
through old system and that the process of data migration from old system to 
new system is done and the work is in progress for bringing Missions/Posts 
under the Passport Application System.   The Committee, therefore, stron gly 

 67 
recommend that the Ministry should prepare a  dedicated action plan  and 
implement  it with a fixed time frame for establishing connectivity between 
the Headquarters and Missions/Posts as well as with the Passport Seva 
Application.   
 The Committee are concerned that the Ministry is only in initial phase 
of the digital process in the project for „creation of image retrievable 
database‟ and the Ministry is yet to embark on the phase -II which includes 
capturing of data only of 34 Missions/Posts.  The Comm ittee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Ministry should expedite the process of 
digitization of data, across its establishments.  The Committee also desire that 
the Ministry must take necessary steps on urgent basis for data management 
in the Missions/Posts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that currently Missions/Posts are working as part of   
pre-PSP application while rendering the Passport related services and PRID E 
is used for checking duplication  and antecedents of the applicant. At pres ent, 
25 Missions/Posts are classified as large and 155 as small.  The   pre -PSP 
passport-service related data is migrated to PRIDE. In the large 
Missions/Posts, passport printing is done there itself like RPOs, whereas 
small Missions/Posts transmit the dat a digitally to Central Indian Passport 
Printing System (CIPPS) Unit.CPV Division, MEA for printing of passports 
which are then sent back to originating Mission/Post for handing over to 
applicants. 
Ministry proposes to commence „AS -IS‟ study by 15 th July 2013 for 
integration of Missions/Posts with   Passport Seva Application, including its 
mode of connectivity to PSP data centre. Two (2) Small and Two (2) Large 
Missions/Posts would be taken up as part of Pilot „AS -IS‟ study for 
preparation of detailed projec t report (DPR). In the DPR, the roadmap and 
timelines to integrate all the Missions/Posts (location -wise) with the Passport 
Seva application as part of centralised application/database (PRIDE) would 
be outlined. It may take 6 -8 months (after the DPR proces s is over) for 
establishing connectivity to the Missions/Posts including integration with 
PSP application. 
          As informed earlier, the digitization project commenced in June 2012 in 5 
Indian Missions viz. at London, San Francisco, Dubai, Abu Dhabi a nd Riyadh, 
having nearly 50% of the total anticipated volume of the consular documents to 
be digitized. The digitization job has  been completed in these Missions. In the 
IInd phase, the Ministry is undertaking the digitization project in another 34 
Indian Missions/Posts having another 40% of the balance consular documents to 
be digitized. Out of these 34 Indian Missions/Posts, the work orders for 5 
Missions have been issued to   the vendors, who have commenced their work. 
There was a slight delay in execut ion of project in these 34 Indian 
Missions/Posts on account of delay in payment to the vendors for the job 
undertaken earlier in the 5 Indian Missions/Posts due to budgetary problems. 
The project, as intimated earlier, is likely to be completed in 2014.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 

 68 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 The Committee have been pursuing the matter of establishment of 
Mini PSKs in North -Eastern States.  The Ministry had assured the 
Committee that Mini PSKs would be established in Aizwal  by 2010 and in 
other States of North -East by December, 2011.  However, the Committee 
note that Mini PSK has been established only in Aizwal after much delay in 
2012 and all the other PSKs in North East are yet to be established.  As per 
the information fu rnished to the Committee, the work is in progress at 
Passport Seva Laghu Kendra (PSLK) at Shillong, while at Gangtok and 
Agartala only the location has been identified.   The Ministry is  still silent 
on the establishment of PSLK or Mini -PSK in other States of North-Eastern 
Region and has also shown its inability in providing defined timelines for 
the establishment of these PSLKs. The Committee deplore such approach of 
the Ministry and strongly recommend that Ministry should expedite its 
efforts to ensure e stablishment of all the PSLKs/Mini -PSKs in North -
Eastern States at the earliest though active engagement with State 
Governments for overcoming the problems with creative solutions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee as regards 
speeding up setting up of mini -PSKs, especially in the North -East. It is, 
however, submitted that the Ministry would not like to indicate any artificial 
timeline. It is also submitted that it is essential for the Ministry to strictly 
comply with Financial Rules and Procedures in the matter of acquiring goods 
and services for setting up of mini-PSKs so as to avoid any audit objections. 
 
The Hon‟ble Committee is informed that out of 8 NE States, 
PSKs/PSLKs have been made operational in Gu wahati and Aizawl. PSLK in 
Shillong is likely to be made operational over the coming months. Similarly, 
site has been taken over in Sikkim. A site has been identified in Agartala and 
a team will be visiting soon to take the property on rent. The Ministry w ill be 
speeding up liasioning with the remaining State Governments i.e. Manipur, 
Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
 The Committee note that the three ongoing Hydro -power Projects in 
Bhutan have continu ously been facing a situation of paucity of funds.  The 
Committee are aware that India is committed to the Government of Bhutan 
for generation of 10000 MW of power by 2020 and for so the Ministry of 
External Affairs, along with the Government of Bhutan hav e identified few 
projects and are considering and working upon the modalities of new Hydro -
Power projects.  During the course of evidence, the Committee were informed 
that the Ministry is considering a new creative model through joint venture 

 69 
and formation of Special Purpose Vehicle.  The Committee are of the view 
that to avoid lack of continuous and timely budgetary support, the Ministry 
must explore alternative options and come up with innovative procedures to 
ensure that the ongoing as well as new projec ts do not come across budgetary 
constraints and continuous cash flow is available to them, so that 
implementation of project is ensured without any element of time overrun and 
cost escalation.  However, the Committee are also of the opinion that since, 
these projects are bilateral projects, the Ministry must dwell upon the 
diplomatic considerations  while giving due regard to the sensitivities of both 
the sides and Ministry must adopt a holistic view and consider all the aspects 
of alternative models for funding of the Hydro-Power Projects in Bhutan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India (GoI) and the Royal Government of Bhutan 
(RGoB) signed an umbrella agreement on cooperation in the hydropower 
sector under which India committed to import 10,000 MW hydropower from 
Bhutan by 2020. Ten HEPs with an estimated capacity of 11,576 MW were 
identified to meet the target. Of the ten projects, the following four projects 
have been identified for execution in the Joint Venture (JV) mode, 
1. Chamkharchhu-I (670 MW) 
2. Bunakha (180 MW) 
3. Kholongchhu (486 MW) 
4. Wangchhu (600 MW) 
During the 9 th EJG meeting held in Thimpu on 11 -12 June 2012, the 
EJG nominated the Secretary, MoEA from the RGoB side and JS (Hydro), 
MoP from the GoI side to lead the Sub Group of the E JG and finalize the JV 
Agreement by involving DGPC and the designated JV partner PSUs from 
India and resolve all outstanding issues without further delay.  
The sub Group met in New Delhi in July 4 -5, 2012 and discussed all 
outstanding issues with DGPC and Indian PSUs. The following issues were 
discussed:- 
(i)           Financing of the project 
(ii)          Royalty energy for the Royal Government of Bhutan 
(iii)        Management structure of the project 
(iv)         Reversion of the project 
(v)          Dividend policy 
(vi)         Power Purchase Agreement 
(vii)       Signing of IG MOU for the implementation of JV projects 
(viii)     Infrastructural facilities 
(ix)        Implementation of Sankosh and Amochhu Projects 
On the issue of financing the projects the following decisions were taken 
  The debt will be raised on the JV Company 
  Indian CPUs shall ensure the raising of loan as required for the project 
  The project assets shall be mortgaged 
  If required by bankers, PPA shall also be concluded; and 

 70 
  The shareholding pattern shall be that of equal partners with 50% basis 
each, subject to clearance by both Governments 
Decision was taken to implement the JV projects as equal partners 
with 50% stake each. M/o Finance has given its clearance for the formation 
of JV‟s with a 50% stake for Indian and Foreign entites. 
Royal Government of Bhutan has forwarded the draft 
intergovernmental agreements proposed to be signed between Royal 
Government of Bhutan and Government of India for the development of 
Joint Venture Hydropower Projects. It has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Power, Planning Commission and other agencies for thei r comments. 
Consultations with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Power, Planning 
Commission are therefore ongoing.  
The Ministry of External Affairs has also been in constant touch with 
the Project Implementing Authorities of the concerned projects in o rder to 
ascertain the exact fund requirements to ensure that sufficient funds are 
available for the implementation of the projects. As far as financial allocation 
for the HEPs in Bhutan, the Ministry takes necessary actions to get sufficient 
allocation. In inter-Ministerial meetings held in PMO to review progress of 
our cooperation agenda with Bhutan in the hydropower sector MEA has been 
drawing attention to the fact that allocation of Plan funds for HEPs in Bhutan 
had been consistently lower than projected requirements.  
Request for funds has been made in accordance with the requirements 
received from the Project Implementing Authorities, as given below: 
 
(In Crores) 
Project BE requested 
for 2102-13 
BE /RE 
Allocated 
Additional Funds  
over Allocated RE 
BE requested Allocated BE 
2013-14 
Punatsangchhu-I HEP 1050 500 198 1950 735 
Mandechhu HEP 315 160 101 896 885 
Punatsangchhu-II 680 478 101 880 900 
 2045 1138 400 3726 2520 
In addition, another Rs. 1 Crore each has been provided for the five 
projects on which work is expected to be started soon viz.Sankosh, 
Chamkharchu, Bunakha, Kholongchhu and Wangchu. The allocation has 
been made against a demand for 120 Crores, 84.50 Crore s, 36.00 Crores, 
45.10 Crores and 55.70 Crores respectively ie Rs. 5 Crores has been 
allocated against a demand of 341.3 crores. 
The efforts of the Ministry are directed towards the goal that the 
effective implementation of these projects does not suffer d ue to any 
inadequacy of funds. In the financial year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs. 1138 
crore was allocated at RE stage against projected requirement of Rs. 2045 
crore. There was no augmentation of funds at RE stage. However, in March 
2013, an amount of Rs. 400  crore was provided to the Ministry against the 
additional projected requirement of Rs. 907 crore. 
The Ministry from time to time is drawing the attention of the 
authorities concerned about the requirement of funds to three projects. EAM 
wrote to the Finance Minister on December 3rd, 2012 about the importance of 
providing necessary funds. Foreign Secretary also wrote to the Finance 

 71 
Secretary on 22 nd January, 2013 about the necessity of providing funds in an 
urgent manner to these projects. The issue was als o brought to the notice of 
the PMO by FS, through a letter addressed to PS to PM in February 2013. 
The Ministry thankfully acknowledges the appreciation of the Hon‟ble 
Committee for its efforts to reduce financial burden on Govt. of India vis -à-
vis the new Hydroelectric Power Projects (HEPs) to be taken up for 
implementation in Bhutan. Preliminary meeti ngs have already been held in 
the Ministry with the representatives of the EXIM Bank and some PSU banks 
to explore the possibility of raising funds from the Indian capital market for 
the HEPs proposed under the Joint Venture model. Further, the matter has 
been discussed in detail in a meeting of the Empowered Joint Group (EJG) of 
India and Bhutan held in Thimphu on April 4 2013.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No.24) 
 
 The Committee take note of the new “Connect Central Asia” policy of 
Government of India to deepen their engagement with Eurasian countries.  In 
context of the developmental engagement, the Committee would like to 
suggest the Ministry to expand areas of cooperation and come up with more 
proposals for projects in the region.  Th e Committee appreciate the 
Government„s proposal for Central Asian e -network project for Tele -
Education and Tele -Medicine and hope that India‟s experiences in Africa 
will be fully utilized for quicker and efficient implementation of the project.  
The Committee further hope that Project Manager cum Consultant (PMC) for 
implementation of the project is finalized soon so that the process for actual 
execution of the programme is initiated. 
 The Committee are concerned over the pace of Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline Project .  However, the 
Committee are happy to note that the countries have created alternative 
arrangement to finance the project.  The Committee hope that finalization of 
the modalities is reached upon so that further process  may be initiated. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to approach the Cabinet regarding India‟s 
contribution to the Special Purpose Vehicle at the earliest and the Committee 
may be kept apprised of India‟s effort for execution of the Project.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Through our reformulated Connect Central Asia Policy, publicly 
articulated in June 2012, we have a balanced strategy of engaging with 
Central Asia, based on political, strategic, economic, cultural and multilateral 
elements. The Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs is engaged in deepening its 
engagement with countries in Central Asia with its more pro -active policy. 
Some of the flagships projects that we are working on are setting up of a 
Central Asian University in Kyrgyzstan which will impart high le vel 
education in fields like IT, Management, languages, philosophy etc. We are 
also considering setting up a few multi -speciality hospitals in the region. A 

 72 
special package for Tajikistan is under implementation and this includes 
industrial projects like f ruit and vegetable processing, an entrepreneurship 
development centre, an IT centre for excellence, language laboratory for 
teaching English and Hindi and emergency medical centres. 
2. Another flagship project for connecting India with Central Asia 
through e-network for delivery of tele -education and tele -medicine has been 
announced. Bids have been called for Project Manager -cum-Consultant 
(PMC) for implementation of the project. The bids are presently under 
evaluation. 
3. The Government of India had alread y approved the formation of the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for the Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India (TAPI) Pipeline Project and to permit GAIL India Ltd. to join the SPV.  
4.  The SPV will take up the Feasibility Study and Design work of the 
TAPI pipeline to meet the agreed timelines for the project, as well as search 
for a consortium lead. 
5. The Committee will be kept apprised of India's effort for execution of 
the TAPI Project. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
  The Committee observe that South Asian University (SAU) Act was 
passed by the Parliament in 2008 and it was notified in January, 2009.  The 
first academic session commenced in August 2010 and during 2012 -13, the 
University work with 323 students and 57 fa culty members.  At present, the 
SAU is working from Akbar Bhawan.  It is very painful to observe that they 
are paying around Rs. 1.5 crores as rent every month.  They have 5.32 acres 
of land in possession since 2010.  But they have still not reached upto t he 
Master Layout Plan level.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that South Asian University (SAU) authorities must expedite the process of 
pre-construction activities and initiate the construction process, on the 
undisputed area, particularly i n view of higher rental liabilities.  The 
Committee note that out of the annual projection of Rs. 557.60 crores, only 
Rs. 43 crores have been allocated at BE stage which will not even be able to 
cover the operational costs of the projects.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that for SAU allocation should be enhanced during RE stage as per their 
actual annual budgetary projections so that it is able to fulfil its obligations.   
 
 The Committee also observe that SAU is not able to get desired 
number of experts /faculty to run the specific courses in the University.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that SAU should also find non -SAARC experts 
with expertise in South Asia so that the University could truly emerge as a 
pan South Asian Institution.   
 
 
 
 

 73 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee‟s recommendations pertaining to the South Asian University 
(SAU) have three components.  Action Taken Replies to these three 
recommendations are furnished below: 
 
III. With regard to the Committee‟s recommendation that South Asian 
University (SAU) authorities must expedite the process of pre -
construction activities and initiate the construction process, on the 
undisputed area,   the SAU has, on May 10, 2013, conveyed the  
following with regard to its construction  
project at Maidan Garhi: 
 
(i) The contour survey of the plot to establish topography, details 
of vegetation/trees have been prepared.  Also soil investigation 
has been done to facilitate foundation design of structures.  
(ii) Master Layout Plan of the project has been approved by the 
Building Works Committee of SAU and estimate framed on 
this plan has been submitted to MEA for approval and release 
of funds.  
(iii) Layout plan already submitted to the South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation for approval, after obtaining NOC from the DDA. 
(iv) Application for environmental clearance of the project filed 
with Delhi Pollution Control Committee which is under process 
of approval after examination by the State -level Expert 
Assessment Committee (SEAC). 
(v) A leading Project Management Consultancy fir m, namely M/s 
Tata Consulting Engineers Ltd. has already been engaged for 
project management activities of the construction project.  
 
SAU has also conveyed that it is ready to take up the construction activity as 
soon as statutory clearances are obtained and funds are made available to 
them.   
 
This Ministry got a communication from DDA on May 6, 2013 that it has 
allotted land measuring 17397.85 sqm in an isolated pocket adjacent to the 
SAU‟s plot including few pockets of Gram Sabha land in lieu of the lan d 
affected by proposed Master Plan/Zonal Plan Road with the approval of the 
Hon‟ble Lieutenant Governor of Delhi.  In order to proceed further on the 
construction of the campus at the land,  this Ministry has requested DDA 
vide its letter of May 9, 2013 to take urgent action on the following : 
 
(d)  Intimate the date on which MEA could take over the land from DDA         
formally, as has been done on the previous two occasions. 
(e)   Issue a revised NOC to enable SAU to obtain approval of the civic  
           bodies to its Master Layout Plan;  and 

 74 
 
(f)   Get the revised boundary physically marked on the ground to enable 
the SAU to construct the boundary wall.  
 
        A reminder letter to DDA has been issued.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
       
IV. With r egard to Committee‟s recommendation that allocation for 
SAU should be enhanced during RE stage as per their actual 
annual budgetary projections so that it is able to further its 
obligations, the Finance Division of this Ministry has conveyed 
that the initi al allocation at the BE stage for SAU is Rs. 43 crore.  
This was the allocation which could be made within the overall 
non-plan allocation of Rs. 8719 crore for BE 2013 -14.  The 
augmentation at RE stage would depend upon the RE 2013 -14 
ceiling, the augment ation in the Supplementary Demands for 
Grants, if acceded to by the Ministry of Finance and also any 
foreseen savings in any other head of account during the course of 
the FY.  The Ministry proposes to project the demand in the first 
Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants.       
 
III. Committee‟s recommendation that SAU should also find non -SAARC 
experts with expertise in South Asia is being conveyed appropriately 
to SAU.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 
 The Committee in their reports over the years have recommended to 
the Ministry to enhance budgetary allocation for Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) in view of emerging contours of cultural diplomacy. The 
Committee note that it is essential to expand the network of In dian Cultural 
Centres and establishment of chairs abroad, however, these endeavours will 
be requiring additional funds.  With the funds allocated to ICCR, they are not 
even able to manage the established Centres outside India, then how can they 
think about new centres?  The Committee observe that though the matter of 
enhanced allocation has been taken up even at PMO level, but not much 
headway is made. The Committee, therefore, once again strongly recommend 
that the Ministry should be allocated additional f unds to ICCR at RE stage in 
view of their proposed requirements and further expansion.  However, at the 
same time, the Committee suggest that ICCR must explore alternative ways 
to generate revenue for conduct of its regular activities. 
 
 
 
 

 75 
Reply of the Government 
 
For enhancement of budget allocation up to BE of Rs. 282.50 Cr for 
the CFY 2013-14, Finance Division of MEA is being requested to take up the 
matter at appropriate level and at appropriate stage i.e. at Ist Batch of 
Supplementary or at RE stage . FS is also being requested to approach the 
Finance Secretary in this regard.  
As far as generation of revenue is concerned, there is little scope of 
revenue generation for ICCR being an Indian Culture Promotion Agency 
propagating Indian Culture in abroad. However, the Indian Cultural Centres 
in abroad have been advised to charge reg istration fees and periodical 
nominal tuition fees from the foreign students while imparting training in 
various streams viz Yoga, Dances etc. But no substantial receipt is reported 
from any of the Centres fearing low turnout which defeats the very purpose  
of propagation of Indian Culture in abroad.  
The Council has also explored for ticketing of shows, Public – Private 
Partnership and Corporate sponsoring of events. 
Further, the Council has certain revenue generation areas as depicted 
below which contribute very meager income:  
6. Sale of Publications 
7. Summer Camp/Study tour Fee 
8. Sale of Africa Quarterly 
9. Admn expenses from British library 
10. Rental income from Auditorium/Art Gallery/Foyer 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/62/2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                       ANANTH KUMAR, 
23 August, 2013                                                                                         Chairman,  
Bhadrapada 01, 1935 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 76 
Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 14TH AUGUST, 2013  
   
 
The Committee sat on 14th August 2013 from 1510 hrs. to 16 00 hrs. in Committee 
Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Dr. Bhola Singh 
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla 
9. Dr. Karan Singh 
10. Shri D. P. Tripathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
  

 77 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft  Report on Action 
Taken by Government  on the recommendations contained in the 20th Report (15 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Exter nal 
Affairs for the year 201 3-14. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their 
suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested 
some minor modifications.  
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the suggestions made 
by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

 78 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                     29 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 26 and 
28.  
 Total-14 
Percentage:  48.28% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL. 
 
Total-00 
 Percentage: 00.00% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 13 and 25. 
Total- 02 
 Percentage: 6.90% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 17, 21, 24, 27 and 29 
                  Total-13 
Percentage: 44.83% 
 