 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Second Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2009-10] 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 06 
 

 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Second Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2009-10] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2010 
               Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2009-2010«««««««««           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION««««««««««««««««««««««««          (iv)  
 
Chapter I Report««««««««««««««««««««««.              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government««««««««««««...           30 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s Replies...«       54 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration««««««««««..«««««            56 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited«««««««           57 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                           72  
held on 5.5.2010«««««««««««««««««« 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                           
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Second  Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ««««.«««««««.       74   
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(2009-2010) 
Chairman 
Shri Yashwant Sinha* 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
11. Shri Digvijay Singh 
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
13. Smt. Supriya Sule 
14. Smt. Sushma Swaraj 
15. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
16. Shri Takam Sanjoy  
17. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
18. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
19. Dr. Shashi Tharoor# 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar@ 
23. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
24. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
25. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
26. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
27. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
29. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
30. Shri H.K. Dua $                                         
Secretariat 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Additional Director 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey  - Committee Officer 
5. Ms. Kiran Bhargava  - Executive Assistant 
* Shri Yashwant Sinha has been nominated as a Member and appointed as Chairman of 
the Committee w.e.f. 6.1. 2010 vice Smt. Sushma Swaraj resigned from the 
Chairpersonship of the Committee w.e.f. 1.1.2010. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 2.3.2010 vice Shri Shivraj V. Patil ceased to be the Member of the 
Committee due to his resignation w.e.f. 21.1.2010 
@ Shri Ashwani Kumar ce ased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9.4.2010  and re -nominated as Member of the 
Committee w.e.f. 26.4.2010 
# Dr. Shashi Tharoor has been nominated to this committee w.e.f. 30.04.2010  
 (iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (200 9-2010) having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 6th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 2 nd Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2009-10. 
 
2. The 2nd Report was presented on 3rd December, 2009. The Action Taken Replies 
of the Government on all the recommendati ons/observations contained in the Report 
were received on 8th March, 2010. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 5th May, 20 10. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been 
reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 2nd Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    YASHWANT SINHA, 
05 May,  2010                                                                       Chairman,                 
Vaisakha 15, 1932 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

 1 
         
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
their Second Report on Demands for Grants (200 9-10) of the Ministry of Exter nal 
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd 
December, 2009 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,5,6,7,8,11,12,13,14,18,20 
 Total-12 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  10 and 19 
Total-02 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Total- 01 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4,9,15,16,17 
Total-05 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for which only interim replies have been 
given by the government  should be furnished within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations. 

 2 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
5.  The Committee t ook serious note of the situation arising from the non -
availability of interpretation facility from Hindi language to foreign languages 
and vice versa . Our dignitaries are asked to speak in English instead of 
Hindi for only reason that the interpreter does not know Hindi.  The 
Committee were of the view that this wa s ludicrous situation.  They were 
given to understand that various proposals for interpretation from Hindi 
language to foreign languages and vice versa had been made but  nothing 
concrete had  been achieved so far.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that necessary steps should be taken to develop a cadre of 
interpreters for interpretation from Hindi language to foreign languages and 
vice versa without any further delay. 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs in th eir action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
“MEA has a small in -house cadre of Interpreters for the major UN 
languages, who are recruited through the UPSC.   These interpreters serve 
both at headquarters of the Ministry, as well as in some of the Missions  and 
Posts abroad.  It is true that MEA's interpreters are not formally trained for 
interpretation from Hindi to foreign languages or vice versa.   However, 
almost all of the internal interpreters of the Ministry have a working 
knowledge of  Hindi, and they can be used for interpretation between Hindi 
and the foreign language they have learnt.   Moreover, all Foreign Service 
officers are expected to learn a foreign language, and many of them retain 
sufficient fluency in their allotted language to be able to i nterpret for a 
dignitary in case of need.   During their training in the Foreign Service 
Institute, IFS probationers are imparted classes on the Official Language 
Policy of Government of India.  From this year, a capsule on Hindi language 
has also been started for IFS trainees. “ 
 
 
7. The Committee had recommended to develop a cadre of 
interpreters for interpretation from Hindi language to foreign 
languages and vice versa.  It was done in the light of the information 
available with the Committee about a major exercise undertaken in the 
year 2003 to assess the availability of interpreters from Hindi language 
to foreign languages.  In that context, the Territorial Divisions, Hindi 
Section and Missions abroad were asked to identity the availability of 

 3 
individuals who could be used for interpretation from Hind i to foreign 
languages but nothing concrete has been achieved so far .  The 
Committee are not sa tisfied at all with the Government ’s reply  and 
desire that the Ministry should carry forward th e earlier exercise to a 
logical conclusion. 
 The Committee are also informed that almost all of the internal 
interpreters of the Minis try have  a working knowledge of Hindi and 
they could be used for i nterpretation between Hind i and the foreign 
languages.  The Committee therefore, also  desire that an in-house 
capacity building should be undertaken in the Minist ry’s existing 
Interpreter cadre by imparting due training to the existing interpreters 
to enhance their skills for interpretation from Hindi language to foreign 
languages. 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
8. The Committee note d that the funds provided for International 
publicity to the Ministry and efforts made in this regard were not adequate 
and there wa s no match in the actual requirement and funds that were 
provided.  The Com mittee in their earlier Reports had also stressed upon 
the need for maximizing publicity efforts through Missions/Posts.  While 
emphasizing the importance of external publicity, the Committee reiterate d 
that adequate funds should be provided to the Ministr y for advertising and 
external publicity and holistic approach should be adopted with the use of 
traditional as well as modern media for projection of India to the world in a 
better way. 
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have  stated as 
under: 
“Details of Foreign Journalists hosted under External Publicity ( XP) 
Hospitality: 
 
 Hosted 6 member delegation from Radio Fana, Ethiopia in 
coordination with All India Radio- April 13-19, 2009 
 Hosted Vice President of Xinhua News Agency al ongwith two senior 
editors from Xinhua -19-23, April „09 

 4 
 Hosted 10 editors from Anglo phone countries viz Nigeria, Lesotho, 
Zambia, Ethiopia, Sudan, Namibia, Ghana and Uganda - April 18-28 
‟09 ( As a run up to the India Africa Forum Summit) 
 Hosted 19 journa lists from Anglophone countries viz Ethiopia, 
Gabarone, Ghana, Lesotho, Namibia, Nigeria, Sudan, Uganda, 
Seychelles, Zambia for training programme ( Print and TV journalism 
) with Jamia Millia - 18 May -5 June ‟09 ( As a run up to the India 
Africa Forum Summit) 
 Hosted 12 editors from Sri Lanka from June 6-13, „09 
 Hosted 12 senior editors from Arab countries viz Algeria, Egypt, 
Kuwait, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Syria & UAE- June 21-18, 09 
 Hosted 6 editors from Bangladesh from Aug 9-16 „09 
 Hosted one eminent photographer from Malaysia from 12-20 October 
„09 
 Hosted 8 journalists from Nepal–Dec 11-17 „09 
 Hosted 7 editors from China from Jan 14 -23 „10 
 Facilitated drawing up a program for seven member group of editors 
from Sri Lankan Parliamentary Journalists Association. 
Launch of India-Africa Connect Website: 
 
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna launched the „India -Africa 
Connect Website‟ on August 17, 2009 in New Delhi. The website was jointly 
developed by XP Division along with IANS and is devoted to promo ting 
relations with our African counterparts, and hosts news, features and 
essential information on India and African countries, with special emphasis 
on development cooperation. The website was launched with the aim of  
facilitating closer cooperation bet ween India and Africa The website can be 
accessed at http://www.indiaafricaconnect.in and a link is also available on 
MEA website home page.  
 
Training, Workshops, Conferences and Special Events: 
 
The External Publicity (XP) Division, on recommendations of the 
concerned Territorial Divisions, organized specialized training programmes 
and other events for media from neighbouring countries like Afghanistan. 19 
journalists (8 AV and 11 Print)  from 10 Anglo phone African countries were 
also invited, for a three week specially designed course, in consultation with 
Jamia Millia Islamia University. The division also hosted journalists from 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia and from Gulf countries during this pe riod. 
Meetings for them were organized with senior officials and academics, as 
well as visits to centres of excellence.  The Division also facilitated the 
placement of correspondents from IANS and PTI in select African countries 
to enhance mutual understanding and bridge the information gap. 
 
Booklet on General Elections:  
 
To disseminate accurate information about General Elections in April - May 
2009, which have been hailed as the world‟s largest democratic exercise, 
the Division published a compact and co lourful handbook, containing useful 
statistics and detailing the manner in which elections are conducted in India. 

 5 
This served as a handy reference for foreign readership and journalists in 
particular.  A web link to the booklet was also placed on the MEA website. 
 
Outreach Activities 
 
 The XP Division organized a number of outreach activities to 
highlight the various contours of India‟s foreign policy with a view to 
encourage discussion and debate and to benefit from the view of outside 
and independent experts.  These include:- 
 
(a) A Delegation visit of Friends of India Group of the UK 
Conservative party in July 2009.   Apart from meetings with Hon‟ble 
Speaker, Minister of Human Resource Development, Chairman of 
the Unique Identification Authority and MOS for Rural Development, 
the delegation was briefed by senior officials of MEA and the 
National Security Council Secretariat.  The delegation also visited 
Kochi where they had meetings with the State Government and 
visited the Naval establishment.    
 
(b) A delegation visit of Liberal Democratic Friends of India 
Group from UK in Sep 2009.   Apart from meetings with Hon‟ble 
Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha and Hon‟ble Minister for Road 
Transport & Highways, the delegation was briefed by  senior officials 
of MEA,  the National Human Rights Commission, the National 
Security Council Secretariat, Center for Policy Research, and 
business and industry representatives.  The delegation also visited 
National Defence Academy and Television Institute of India. 
 
(c) A delegat ion visit of Slovene Parliamentary Friendship 
Group from Slovenia in Nov 2009.  Apart from meeting with MOS 
(PK), MOIA and Mayor of Delhi, the delegation also interacted with 
FICCI and IBEF and visited few business organizations including a 
KPO, Evalueserve and a biopharma firm, Jubilant Organosys.  The 
delegation also witnessed the proceedings of Lok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha.     
 
(d) A visit by Prof. Sudarshan Iyengar , Vice Chancellor, Gujrat 
Vidyapeeth to Slovenia to deliver lectures on Mahatma Gandhi and 
his legacy.  He also participated in an International conference on 
Mahatma Gandhi, held in Slovenia. 
 
(e) Celebration of the International Day of Non Violence  by 
our Missions/Posts located in various countries.   The programmes 
included lectures, seminars, con ferences, photo exhibitions, film 
festivals, debates, competitions for school children, cultural shows, 
etc.  The events were organized mostly in association with the Indian 
Diaspora.   
 
(f) Ongoing research project on Indo-GCC relations  organized 
by Gulf Research Centre(GRC), Dubai. The research project involves 

 6 
experts from GRC and India and the first meeting was held in June 
2009 in Dubai and the second in Jan 2010 in Delhi. 
 
(g) A 26 -member delegation visit by PIO journalists  from 15 
countries was organ ized during PBD 2010 in January. In addition to 
participation in PBD the journalists were briefed by CII, IDSA and 
Planning commission on India‟s economy, our security scenario and 
efforts to fasten inclusive development and economic growth in India. 
The group also visited Mumbai Stock Exchange and Film City.  
 
(f) A 6- member delegation visit of Permanent Representatives 
of Pacific Small Island Developing States was organized on 23 -31 
Jan 2010. 
The delegation witnessed the Republic Day Parade, attended 
President‟s „At Home‟ and witnessed Beating Retreat in addition to 
meetings with EAM, Minister for Environment and Forests and a 
short briefing by CII on the economic scenario in India. The 
delegation also visited Kirloskar and Thermax in Pune and ISRO and 
Infosys in Bangalore and received a briefing from TCIL on the Pan 
African E Network Project and its relevance for the Pacific Island 
States. 
 
The XP Division also extended support to various organizations for 
conduct of seminars, conferences/bilateral dialog ues which 
included:-  
 
(a) The 8th India-Korea Dialogue  on 20 -21 May 2009 jointly 
organized by Indian Council for Research on Economic Relations 
and Seoul Forum of International Affairs.   
 
(b) International Seminar titled „Society, Culture and Politics‟ in 
Karakoram Himalayas on 23 -24 July, 2009 organized by Himalayan 
Research and Cultural Foundation.   
 
(c) International seminar on „Peace and Stability in Afghanistan: 
the Way Ahead‟ on 6 -7 October, 2009 organized by The United 
Service Institution of India.  
 
(d) 4th Sustainability Summit  organized by CII on 25 -26 Nov 
2009 wherein JS (PD) had addressed the session on Sustainable 
Business Opportunities in Emerging Countries. 
 
(e)  An international seminar  titled „Cooperative Development, 
Peace and Security in So uth and Central Asia‟ or ganized by CRRID 
on 1-2 March, 2009 in Chandigarh.   
 
Audio-Visual Publicity 
  
PD Division prepares documentary films aimed at projecting different 
facets of India.  Several documentaries were completed during the 
year including: - 

 7 
 
(a) Can You Hear Me (a film on Community Radio revolution) 
(b) Through Lens Clearly : Raghu Rai‟s India 
(c) Indian Elections-A Mammoth Democratic Exercise 
(d) Kashmir Elections 2008 
(e) Spirit of India 
(f) Religious Linkages Between Bhutan & Ladakh 
(g) Watering the Grassroots (a film on microfinance) 
(h) Negotiating Justice (a film on India‟s Position on Climate 
Change) 
(i) Cinema with a Purpose (a film on communication of values 
and 
 tradition through Cinema) 
(j) Mast Qalandar (a film on three Sufi saints) 
(k)   Partners in Progress : Indo-US Relations 
(l)   India in the Moon (Chandrayan 1) 
(m)   Soldiers of Peace (a film on engagement of men in uniform with 
   civilians in peace time) 
(n)    Fragments of History (a film on the life of Ms. Subhalakshmi) 
 
 Several documentaries produced by the division were 
 telecast/screened by foreign/Indian TV channels  and in film 
festivals. The details are as below:- 
 
(a) Documentaries “Timeless India” and  “The Jewel in the Lotus” 
were screened in Phnom Penh on 19.03.09 on ITEC Day. 
 
(b) Sri Lankan TV  channel screened do cumentary “India Wins 
Freedom” and “Quit India” on the occasion of India‟s Republic Day.  
In addition three other documentaries namely “Sufi traditions of 
India”, “Beating Retreat” and “Bismillah & Benaras” were also 
telecast in the month of August 09. 
 
(c) Documentaries namely “Indian Elections – A Mammoth 
Exercise”  and “Spirit of India” were telecast on Doordarshan in 
May/July 2009. 
 
(d) Mission in Bogotá has screened documentaries produced by 
PD Division at the Bogotá International Film Festival in Octo ber 
2009. 
 
(e) Documentaries namely “Commonwealth Games 2010”, “The 
Sky is not the Limit”,  “Dismantling the Digital Divide”; “Friends for 
evermore” and “Beyond Tradition” were telecast on Tanzanian TV  
channel „Smart‟ in Sep 2009. 
 
(f) Documentary “The Sto ry of Gitanjali” was screened at the 
recently concluded IIFC Goa 2009. 
 

 8 
(g) Our Missions/Posts in Accra, Ho Chi Minh City, Mexico City, 
Amman, Reykjavik, Tel Aviv, Minsk & Paris organized film 
festivals/screening with 35mm Hindi films sent by the division. 
 
India Perspectives 
 
 The monthly journal, India Perspectives  has been the flagship 
magazine of the Ministry and over the years, it has grown in popularity.  The 
journal focuses on a wide range of subjects varying from India‟s emergence 
as a fast growing economy, to its rich cultural heritage, its literature, diverse 
wildlife and its vibrant film industry, as also the country‟s prowess in the 
fields of information technology, healthcare and other related fields of 
human endeavor.   The journal published in  sixteen languages, is 
distributed to readers in all corners of the globe through the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad.  India Perspectives is also available in the electronic 
format in all its sixteen language editions on the Ministry‟s website.  The 
journal was distributed for the first time ever at the world‟s largest Book Fair 
in Frankfurt and also at the London Book Fair where India was the market 
focus country as well as at the Turin International Book Fair.  The journal 
was also sent for distribution at the film festivals held at Italy, Russia, 
Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay.        
    
Print Publicity 
 
Projecting India's image through books and publications is an integral part 
of the XP Division's publicity strategy abroad.  Books on Indian economy, 
foreign policy, art & culture, history & science and technology etc. were 
supplied to Missions abroad for presentation purpose and use in their 
libraries. Many of our Missions celebrated Mahatma Gandhi's birthday on 
2nd October, 2009 as the International Day of non -violence.  The division 
has supplied books on Mahatma Gandhi to these Missions for distribution 
on this occasion.  Various Journals & magazines were also dispatched to 
Missions/posts abroad.   
The following books/publications were printed by the division during the 
period:-  
 
(a) A Coffee table book titled ”Himalaya with Lens & Passion” 
capturing the beauty of Himalayan region by Mr. Ashok Dilwali.  
 
(b) Printing of booklet on Climate change “The Road to 
Copenhagen: India's position on Climate Change issues”. 
  
(b) Booklet on Prime Minister's visit to USA & France. 
     
The XP Division also extended financial support to our 
Missions/posts in Berlin, Slovenia, London, Sofia, Bogotá, and Minsk for 
bringing out publications such as “ The Story of My Experimen ts with 
Truth”, in Slovene language,  “Glimpses of World History ” in Bulgarian 
language etc.   
 

 9 
 Brief description of Publicity outreach activities of a few randomly 
selected Missions as per the general guidelines of the Ministry keeping in 
view the local requirements of their stations: 
 
1. Washington :  Disseminating positive, development related information 
on India; exhibiting promoting and exposing the rich and vast cultural 
heritage of India in the US. Through press releases interviews, background 
briefings, distributing India Perspective magazines, hosting visits of schools 
and college students to the embassy. Bringing out leather bound executive 
agenda carrying information on Indian history culture polity etc. Motivating 
various think tanks in writing op-ed articles.  The Mission also upgraded the 
official website. 
 
2. Kuala Lumpur :  The Mission promoted Indian education and also 
brought out handbook for  doing business with Indian companies.  The 
international seminar on the Buddhist heritage of Gujara t was suitably 
highlighted and helped reinforce Diaspora links to their roots. 
 
3. Colombo:    The Mission highlighted the development assistance 
provided, organized Kadirgamar memorial lecture, distributed India 
Perspective magazine, publicized the ITEC sc holarships, and issued press 
statements. 
 
4. London:  The Mission upgraded the website.  Media was encouraged to 
highlight India‟s achievements.  The inhouse fortnightly publication „India 
digest‟ was regularly brought out.   
 
5. Warsaw:   The Mission broug ht out special supplement on the visit of 
Polish PM to India.   Embassy‟s newsletter was regularly brought out and 
summer film festival was organized. 
 
6.  Phnom Penh: The Mission arranged  publication of Missions‟ quarterly 
magazine in Khmer language for f ree distribution as well as special 
supplements in local newspapers. It also presented  books to major 
universities. 
 
7.  Ottawa:  Photo exhibition „the Sikhs – faith tempered through fire‟ was 
organized.,  Indian classical dance performance was also organized.  Books 
were presented. 
 
8. Prague:  Activities included India Week celebrations, Indian film festival.  
It also established a  Bollywood film library with Czech sub -titles, 
presentation of books and CDs on music dance and films. 
 
9. Tokyo :  Festival of India in Japan was organized in 2007. Mission 
promoted  Indian IT companies, tea and culture.  The Mission also 
organized lectures and visits to schools in its outreach activities. 
 
10. Brasilia: The outreach activities included  publication of fortnight ly 
newsletter in Portuguese, printing booklet India Brazil relations in 

 10 
Portuguese and publication of Discover India kits.    Indian food festivals 
were also organized. 
 
11. The Hague : A month -long Festival of India -Amsterdam was held in the 
Netherlands in November 2008. The mega event was formally inaugurated 
by Princess Maxima (wife of Dutch Crown Prince) and Government of India 
was represented by President, ICCR. During the Festival, 127 India -related 
events were organized across 30 cultural foundations in and around 
Amsterdam. The events include Indian music concerts, classical and 
contemporary Indian dance performances, symposium, and seminars on 
the Indian culture, music, literature and dance. A special volume on India -
Netherlands relations titled “Cha nging Images: Lasting Visions” was 
published and publicity material were also distributed. The Festival was 
organized by Festival of India Foundation –Amsterdam (a conglomeration of 
30 premier cultural foundations) in partnership with ICCR. “ 
 
10. The Committee welcome the external publicity efforts made by 
the Government.  The Committee however, feel that the funds being 
provided for international publicity are not adequate and there is a 
vast gap between the actual requirement and the funds that are 
allocated.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that adequate funds 
should be provided to fill the gap between the actual requ irement and 
the funds available for advertising and external publicity. 
 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
11. Kaladan Multimo dal Transit Project in Myanmar wa s an ambitious 
project to assure better connectivity.  The Committee note d that the 
allocation for the same was substantially reduced during RE  2008-09 stage.  
The Committee we re not convinced with the reply of the Government that 
the reduction had to be effected due to delay in signing the agreement with  
the consultant. The Committee were of the opinion that had the Government 
taken care to sign the agreement earlier, then the need of making drastic 
cut at RE stage would not have arisen. The C ommittee had been informed 
that actual work would start by the end of the year 2009-10.  The Committee 
suggested that the timeframe should be followed scrupulously in respect of 
the project so that such situation does not recur.  
 
12. The Ministry of Exter nal Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“Kaladan project envisages connectivity between India ports on the eastern 
sea board and Sittwe Port in Myanmar and then through riverine transport 
and by road to Mizoram, thus providing an alte rnate route for North Eastern 
Indian for the transportation of goods.   
 

 11 
Progress made during the Year:  Inland Waterways Authority of India, the 
Project Development Consultant, has updated the DPR of the IWT 
component after joint visits to the sites along with Myanmar authorities. Due 
to nature of the terrain two of the bidders also visited the site before they 
participated in the pre-bid meeting.  
 
The pre -bid meeting was held on 24 th Nov, 2009. This was followed by 
submission of bids by the bidders to IWA I on 1 st February, 2010. The 
technical bids have been opened by IWAI and are being assessed and 
thereafter the financial bids would be opened. The actual construction work 
is expected to start after appointment of the main contractor done after 
selection of the bid.” 
 
13. The Committee are not satisfied with the pace of progress of 
Kaladan Multimodal Transit Project.  The Committee note that the 
technical bids are being assessed and thereafter the financial bids will 
be opened.  The Committee , therefore, desire the Ministry to expedite 
the process of completion of bidding process and appointment of 
contractor to ensure that the actual construction work can begin at the 
earliest.  The Committee would also like to reiterate that the timelines 
should be adhered  to strictly so that no surrenders take place at the 
end of the year and the possibility of cost and time overrun in the 
project is minimized.  
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
14. The Committee took  serious note of inordinate delay and repeated 
postponement of the launching of Pilot Phase of Passport Seva Project. The 
project was due for launching in July -August 2009 but revised to 1 st 
October, 2009.  The Government had assured that pilot phase would be 
launched on 13 th November, 2009 in two cities i.e. Bengaluru and 
Chandigarh.  But the Committee we re surprised to find that inspite of 
Government‟s categorical assurance, the project had  not been launched so 
far.  The Committee express ed their strong displeasure that despite 
assurance given to the  Committee, it had  not been done.  The Committee 
wanted that this project should be launched without further delay and after 
due testing and checking of the software and taking into account the 
feasibility and results, the Government might  implement this project on pan-
India basis.  The Committee further hope d that through this project, the 
Passport Issuance System in the country would  become simpler, speedier, 
public friendly and delivery oriented.  The Committee want ed that the 
Government should apprise the Committee in this regard. 
 

 12 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“The previous pilot launch dates of the project were based on the inputs 
received from the Service Provider (SP), M/s TCS Limited. However, the 
Ministry could not adhere to these dates as during testing of the Application 
Software, critical errors were found. The SP has paid Rs.32 lakhs to the 
Ministry for delays in terms of the Agreement. 
 
 As a passport is of security sensitive nature, the Ministry wanted to 
resolve all the critical and sensitive errors/issues before launching the 
Project. So far, four rounds of testing by the Third Party Audit Agency under 
the Department of Information Technology have been conducted. As of 
now, majority of the errors have bee n rectified by the SP. Further, a limited 
test on the Application Software is planned from February 2010, to 
reconfirm closure of defects. Also, Index checking, which is core of the 
issuance system, and PAC (Prior Approval Category) checking are 
thoroughly examined to ensure that checking is comprehensive. 
 
 After the above processes are completed, the Ministry would decide 
on the dates for pilot launch of the Project.” 
 
16. The Committee had taken note of Ministry’s commitment to 
resolve all the critical and sensitive errors/issues before launching the 
Passport Seva Project.  But the Ministry has failed in adhering to 
several proposed dates for launching the project and that process is 
still going on.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate that after due 
testing and checking of the software and considering the feasibility 
and results, the project should be launched at the earliest on pan India 
basis.  The Committee also desire that they may be apprised  in this 
regard from time to time. 
 
 
(Recommendation No.16) 
 
17. Issuance of e -passport wa s another ambitious project of the 
Government, which was launched as a Pilot Project In respect of official and 
diplomatic passports.  The Committee we re given to understand that this 
project would be rolled out in general category also by the end of 2009.  But 
the Committee we re surpri sed to find that e -passports wou ld not be 
mandatory for general publ ic.  The Committee we re of the view that owing 
to huge benefits of this service for checking the issuance of f ake passports 
the Government might  consider to extend this service to general category 
as well in a phased manner.  
 

 13 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
“It is envisaged that issue of e -passports will be extended to the ordinary 
category of passports subject of supply of the booklets by the India Security 
Press, Nashik. The tender process for procurement of the electronic chip, to 
be used in the e -booklets, by ISP is already underway. As soon as the 
booklets are available , e-passports will be rolled out for ordinary category 
also. Though all the non -e-passports will not be recalled, whoever applies 
after that would be issued only e-passport.” 
 
19.  The Committee are informed that the issuance of e -passports 
would be extend ed to the ordinary category of passports subject to 
supply of the booklets by India Security Press (ISP) Nasik  and 
availability of electronic chips through tender.  The tender process for 
procurement of the electronic chip s is underway.  The Committee had 
desired that e-passport service should be extended to general 
category in a phased manner.  The Committee, therefore , reiterate that 
all issues related to technical aspects should be taken care of so that 
issuance of e-passports for general category may start at the earliest 
and it may be extended to all ordinary category passport holders  in 
due course.  
(Recommendation No.17) 
 
20. Cultural diplomacy is an integral ingredient of Ministry‟s overall 
diplomatic endeavours.  Projection of India‟s extensive soft  power and 
civilizational str ength to the global audience wou ld help India to directly 
engage with the people and built up a positive image for India.  The 
Committee appreciated  the new initiatives undertaken by Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR ) such as holding Indology Conferences, 
establishment of Chairs and opening up of new Cultural Centres abroad etc. 
There wa s an urgent need to spread the arenas of cultural engagement 
particularly with the countries of Latin America, Africa and South East Asia.  
The Committee desired that more Cultural Centres should be set up globally 
besides diversifying the activities of the existing ones.  Concerted efforts 
should be made for promotion of Indian studies and India centric studies in 
various Universities abroad.  Holistic approach should be adopted while 
utilizing the additional allocation besides formulation of integrated and 
futuristic plan for effective propagation of India‟s soft power abroad. 
 
 
 
 

 14 
21. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action ta ken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
“Chairs Abroad 
  
 The Council invited proposals twice, from all over the world for 
establishment of Short -term Chair of Indian Studies in leading 
Universities/Institutions under its „Expansion Plan‟. 
 
  Initially, the Council  approved 23 Chairs (5 Long -Term + 18 Short -
Term) under its „Expansion Plan‟. Later on, the Council approved 19 
more Chairs (9 Long -Term + 6 Short -Term) under the plan. 
Therefore, a total of 42 Chairs are under currently under „Expansion 
Plan‟.  
 
 Under its  „Expansion Plan‟, the Council received a proposal from 
Mexico in Latin America; proposals from Ethiopia, Kenya, Mauritius 
and Nigeria in Africa; and proposals from Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia 
and Singapore in South East Asia.  
 
 Presently, the Council has si gned MoU with Lagos Business School, 
Abuja, Nigeria for establishment of Short -Term Chair at the institute. 
The Council has authorized Indian Missions in Singapore and 
Mauritius to sign an agreement on Council‟s behalf for establishment 
of Chair. Further, the Council had conveyed its, in principle, 
agreement alongwith the terms and conditions for establishment of 
Chairs in Mexico, Ethiopia, Kenya, Indonesia, Laos, and Malaysia. 
The host Universities in these countries had been asked to send an 
agreement bas ed on the terms and conditions forwarded. On 
finalization and signing of the agreement the Chairs will start 
functioning.  
 
 Besides the above, Missions in Croatia (UoZ), Denmark (CBS), 
Slovenia (UoL), Yerevan (YSLU), Greece (AUEB), USA (JMU), 
Germany (HU),  South Korea (HUFS), Canada (UoT), Japan (TU) 
have signed agreements on Council‟s behalf (Total 10). Out of these, 
7 Professors have been deputed/designated to Croatia, Denmark, 
Slovenia, Yerevan, Greece, USA), Germany. 
 
 Missions in Azerbaijan (AUL), Fiji (FIT), UK (KCL), Sri -Lanka (UoC) 
and Ireland (TCD) have been authorized to sign agreement on 
Council‟s behalf (Total 5). 
 
 MoUs received from Prague (CU), Netherlands (LU), Russia (PU) 
and Dhaka are  (Total 4) are being examined/ negotiated. 
 
 Proposals have  been approved in principle and MoU s are 
awaited/invited from Turkmenistan (Urdu), Iran, Kazakhstan (2), 
Russia (MGIMO), Netherlands (AU), Sweden, Mongolia, Austria, 
Portugal, Japan (RU), Bahrain, and New Zealand (Total 13). 

 15 
   
Outgoing Cultural Delegations 
  
            As part of its regular programme to strengthen relations with 
countries and promote Indian Culture all over the world through soft power, 
ICCR regularly sponsors various performing art groups abroad.  
  
            Festival Unit was establi shed in the ICCR in 2006 to look after 
exclusively major Indian manifestations in the form of Festivals of India 
abroad.  During the year, 2006 -07 the Council coordinated various events 
such as film festivals, food festival, exhibitions, seminar and perfor ming art 
etc. for the major Festivals of India in Brussels which took place from 7 
October, 2006 to 26 January, 2007.   
  
  After successful conclusion of the Festival of India in Belgium, ICCR 
organized several festivals such as Festival of India in Japan , Festival of 
India in Israel, mini festivals in Trinidad & Tobago, Argentina, Iran, Saudi 
Arabia and Indonesia. During the year 2009, the Council organized Year of 
India in Russia.  
  
The Council has planned the following festivals to be organized in the near 
future:  
  
1)         Spain   Planned for June, 2010. A few cultural programmes and an 
exhibition of Musical Instruments. 
 
2)        Iran     An Iranian Festival was organized in India in 2008.   Return 
Indian Festival in Iran was planned for last year  but could be held because 
of non receipt of clearance from the Iranian authorities in time.   Now 
planned for April/ May, 2010. 
 
3)        Saudi Arabia :  The MoU for holding reciprocal festivals in Saudi 
Arabia and India is ready and expected to be singed very soon.  We have 
tentatively scheduled this festival in 2010.  
 
4)        Qatar: As part of the Year long cultural celebrations scheduled in 
Doha to mark its nomination as the capital of the Arab Culture it has been 
decided to hold an “Indian Week” in Qatar in April, 2010.  
 
5)        Namibia  Planned for April/ May, 2010.   Decision on this was taken 
during Namibian President‟s visit to India last year.   We have proposed 
dance programme, an instrumental music, yoga demonstration cum lecture, 
a lecture on Mahatma Gandhi, a small film festival and a photo-exhibition for 
the Week of India.  
 
6)        Brazil  The Sangeet Natak Academy has already done necessary 
ground work and is coordinating the festival.   ICCR would be sending 
performing art groups after receiving the suggestions from SNA. 
 

 16 
7)        Mexico :  The Sangeet Natak Academy has already done necessary 
ground work and is coordinating the festival.   ICCR would be sending 
performing art groups after receiving the suggestions from SNA. 
 
8)        New Zealand:  A festival is planned in New Zealand in Second half 
of the year 2010 to promote awareness about Commonwealth Games.  
 
9)        Bangladesh     Proposal for mini festival in Bangladesh is at the 
exploration stage.  
 
10)      Australia:        Likely to be held in the later part of the year.  
 
11)      Tanzania:        A festival is proposed to be organized in Dar -es-
Salam in mid 2010 to create awareness and publicity for the forthcoming 
Commonwealth Games.  
  
Outgoing Visitors Programme  
  
            Sharing ideas and holding free discussions has been a part of 
India‟s Cultural tradition.    In keeping with this tradition and as part of its 
effort to foster and strengthen cultural relations and mutual understanding 
between India and other countries , the Council facilitate exchange of 
scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artistes under the Outgoing 
Visitors Programme.  
  
            Under the programme distinguished Indian intellectuals, scholars, 
academicians and artistes are funded and facilit ated to participate in 
seminars, symposia, study tours and conferences abroad.  
  
            During the period from April, 2009 to December, 2009, the Council 
sponsored the visit of 50 eminent scholars to the various parts of the world.  
  
Scholarship Division 
   
        One of the major activities of ICCR is to administer a large range of 
scholarship programmes, with a view to building bridges of understanding 
and developing better appreciation of India in countries around the world. 
By way of background information, it may be noted that in the current 
academic year, 2225 scholarship slots have been provided by ICCR under 
various schemes. While 675 of these were offered to Afghanistan alone, 
another 500 were granted to African countries. ICCR Scholarships are 
offered to students from around 90 countries wishing to pursue under -
graduate, post -graduate, doctoral, professional and fine arts education in 
India. 
  
          At present, there are over 3500 students in India under various 
scholarship programmes administered by ICCR on its own, or under agency 
work arrangement. Of these, 1654 are Afghan students. Other nationalities 
that have a substantial representation on ICCR Scholarship rolls include 
Nepal (245), Bangladesh (281), Sri Lanka (208), Iraq (83), Maldives 
  

 17 
 An inter -Ministerial Committee on the Welfare of Foreign Students 
was constituted in July 2008 under the Chairmanship of DG, ICCR, with the 
mandate to look into various aspects related to the welfare of foreign 
students and to recommend measures t o improve the conditions they 
encounter in India.  Having intensively interacted with all stakeholders, 
including the Universities and institutes concerned, the Committee 
submitted a comprehensive report to PMO later in the year.  After PMO‟s 
approval, the report was circulated to all concerned for the implementation 
of the recommendations, and ICCR was tasked with monitoring the 
progress on this front. 
  
            Welfare measures taken by ICCR Offices around the country include 
(i) the reception of fore ign students upon arrival and their exhaustive 
briefing on Indian customs, religions, culture and way of life through 
interactive orientation courses; (ii) the decentralization of scholarship 
payments so that the students do not have to wait for their stip ends to come 
from Delhi; (iii) revision of scholarship rates w.e.f. 1 st July 2009; (iv) 
assistance in opening of bank accounts to facilitate scholarship payments 
on a quarterly basis and their withdrawal through ATM; (v) assistance and 
advice for finding a ccommodation outside the college/university hostel in 
case of requirement; (vi) organization of language classes wherever 
possible; (vii) the appointment of International Students Advisors in 
Universities that host a substantial  number of foreign students ; (viii) 
Participation of foreign students in study tours  organized by the 
University/Institute concerned; (ix) organization by ICCR of free 
Summer/Winter Camps (the last in December 2009) in different parts of the 
country for foreign students – both ICCR Scholars as well as self -financing 
students - every year as a recreational and familiarization activity, under the 
supervision of a Liaison Officer from the Council; (x) the organization of an 
annual Festival for foreign students to celebrate the Internat ional  Students 
Day held on the birth anniversary of India‟s first Education Minister and the 
Founding President of ICCR, Maulana Azad, on November 11. (In 2009, our 
Missions in countries from which we receive a large number of students 
were provided grant s for the celebration of the International Students Day 
with the participation of India -educated alumni.); (xi) updating of the ICCR 
Alumni Data Bank with the help of our Regional Offices and our Missions 
abroad; (xii) financial assistance to needy self -financing students in case of 
emergency; the opening of several new ICCR Regional Offices in cities like 
Varanasi and  Cuttak, and their location on the campus of the concerned 
University, thus making it easier for foreign students to  obtain assistance 
and guidance; (xiii) the involvement of foreign students with cultural 
activities conducted by ICCR  HQs as well as by our Regional Offices (for 
example, foreign students are being regularly invied to the Horizon Series 
programmes organized in Delhi an elsewhe re by the Council) and (xiii) the 
provision of online information, through the ICCR website, on the various 
ICCR Scholarship Schemes on offer .  
  
Conferences & Seminars 
  
 As a part of Expansion Plan, it was proposed that ICCR would hold 
six Indology Conf erences.. This was planned that the conference would 

 18 
help to enhance networking between foreign Indologists and also bring new 
vision to Indological studies. The aim was to invite 20 -30 scholars at a 
reputed local university/education Institute in the capi tal town.  The aim was 
to identify 6 scholars each from India, host country and the region 
  
To achieve this goal, conferences were proposed at Sofia (Bulgaria), Almay 
(Kazakhstan), Moscow (Russia), Budapest (Hungary), Prague (Czech 
Republic), Dushanbe (Tajikistan), and Jakarta (Indonesia). 
  
So far, the Council has successfully organized 2 conferences - in Sofia, 
Bulgaria (24-26 Sept., 2009) and Almaty (Kazakhstan) (19 -20 Nov., 2009). 
Apart from India and the host country, scholars from neighboring countrie s 
also participated in these Conferences. Update on Indology Conference is 
enclosed.  
  
Apart from this the Council is also undertaking Buddhist Conferences at 
Thailand, Singapore, Vietnam, Laos and Bangladesh . 
  
In addition to this Council is also supporting Nav Nalanda Vihar Mahavihara, 
Bihar, Calicut Univeristy, Delhi University, JNU, New Delhi, Allahabad 
University, JMI, New Delhi, IIT etc. for organizing different 
Seminars/Conferences related to Indian Art and Culture.    
  
The proceedings are aimed to be published in English for better outreach. 
  
OPENING OF NEW CULTURAL CENTRES 
  
      Under the 7 point plan, ICCR is establishing a series of Indian Cultural 
Centres to expand the cultural reach and promote India‟s “soft power” 
abroad. Under its propos ed expansion plans, the Council is opening 
Cultural Centres in our immediate neighbourhood, the extended neighbours, 
P-5 capitals in Africa and Latin America. The following are the places where 
the Council has already established its Cultural Centres recently:- 
  
Indian Cultural Centre in Bangkok (Thailand): 
  
       Honourable President, ICCR inaugurated the newly established 
Cultural Centre at Jasmine City Building, Bangkok during his visit from 22 nd 
to 24 th September, 2009. A director and three India bas ed teachers in the 
stream of Bharatnatyam, Yoga and Sitar have been deputed to make the 
Cultural Centre operational. 
  
Indian Cultural Centre in Tokyo (Japan): 
  
      Honorable President, ICCR inaugurated the Cultural Centre in Tokyo on 
25th September, 2009. The Centre is a part of the new Chancery complex 
and is equipped with a modern multipurpose hall. Director of the Centre is 
on MEA strength and two India based teachers in the stream of Yoga and 
Classical Vocal cum Tabla have been deputed to make the C entre fully 
operational. Besides, two more local teachers are going to be appointed 

 19 
shortly by the Centre. Interior decoration of the Centre has already been 
done by installing equipment, official furniture and musical instruments. 
  
 Indian Cultural Centre in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia):  
  
      Property for the Cultural Centre in Kuala Lumpur has been leased from 
20th July, 2009 and the interior work has been completed. Three teachers in 
the stream of Tabla, Yoga and Carnatic Music are currently conducting 
classes in Kuala Lumpur. Moreover, an India -based Director has already 
taken charge of the Cultural Centre to look after the day -to-day activities of 
the Centre. 
  
Indian Cultural Centre, Abu Dhabi: 
  
      The Cultural Centre at Abu Dhabi was formally inau gurated by Vice -
President of ICCR, Prof. Syed Shahid Mehdi, on the 15 th of December, 
2009. The unused Consular block has been developed as the Cultural 
Centre. An India-based Director will be joining the Centre in April, 2010. 
 
 
Indian Cultural Centre, Dhaka (Bangladesh): 
  
      In Dhaka, ICCR has provided sanction for complete renovation of the 
premises at Dhanmodi and Gulshan as well as purchase of new office 
equipment, furniture and hiring of local staff. The multipurpose facility 
available with the Hig h Commission in Gulshan, Dhaka area, has been 
extensively upgraded. The Cultural Centre would be inaugurated by 
President, ICCR in March, 2010. 
  
       In addition, we have been working on proposals for establishing 
Cultural Centres in Lagos, Ho Chi Minh City, Washington, Sao Paulo, Paris, 
Yangon, Thimpu, Dar-e-Salaam, Budapest and Mexico. “ 
 
22. The Committee appreciat e the work undertaken by Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) in the recent past.  
Simultaneously, the Committee observe that much remains to be done 
in future within the ambit of the activities that can be initiated by ICCR.   
The Committee also note that the Government have not furnished any 
clear cut response to the Committee’s suggestion regarding adoption 
of holistic approach whi le utilizing the additional allocation besides 
formulation of integrated and futuristic plans for effective propagation 
of India’s soft power abroad.  The Committee would also like to 
reiterate that concerted efforts should be made for promotion of Indian 
studies and India centric studies  in various universities abroad 
including Africa and Latin America.  

 20 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
23. The Committee express ed serious concern over racial attacks on 
Indians in foreign countries particularly, on Indian students in Australia.  The 
Committee were given to understand that there were 2,40,000 Indians living 
in Australia out of which 90,000 we re students which account for nearly 17 
percent of the total International students in Australia.  The Committee were 
further in formed that Government of India we re planning to regulate the 
enrolment of agents and registration of students prior to departure to 
overseas countries.  The Ministry had  also stated that following the 
intervention of Prime Minister of India and Minister o f External Affair s, the 
Australian Government had taken up measures to diffuse the situation.  The 
Committee took serious note of this development and observed that had the 
Australian Government taken such steps in the beginning, the situation 
would not ha ve been wo rsened. However, the Committee we re relieved to 
learn that the situati on in Australia in this regard wa s improving.   The 
Committee recommended to the Government to persuade local community 
and local authorities to prevent such incidents in futur e.  Missions/Posts 
should also adopt pro -active approach and timely Consular Assistance be 
provided to the victims. 
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“According to the 2006 census in Australia, there we re 234,000 
persons of Indian descent in Australia , of which 147,000 were born in 
India and 87,000 have Indian ancestry. 
 
This number is estimated to have gone up to about 300,000 currently. India 
is the third largest source of immigrants after New Zealand and UK and the 
second largest source of skilled professionals for Australia after UK.    
Of these, a growing number of people from the Indian community is taking 
Australian citizenship. In 2008 -09, out of a total of 86,981 people from 
more than 185 countri es, 9,088 Indian nationals took Australian 
citizenship.  
 
In addition to the above, presently there are over 120,000 Indian students in 
Australia. The number of Indian students has been growing rapidly, 
especially over the last three years, as may be seen from the data given 
below : 
 
Indian students enrolments by sector, year to date November 2004-2009 
Sector 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 
Higher Education 17,681 22,045 24,895 26,129 27,318 27,820 
VET 1,608 3,791 10,091 26,403 51,087 79,173 
Schools 49 53 64 89 110 180 
ELICOS 1,027 1,213 2,834 8,552 15,346 12,474 
Other (Non-Award Courses, 
Enabling Courses) 
147 167 315 553 719 922 
Grand Total 20,512 27,269 38,199 61,726 94,580 120,569 
[Source: Deptt. of Education, Employment & Workplace Relations] 

 21 
 
Out of the total, the number of Indian students enrolled in Vocational 
Education and Training (VET) courses has increased by a staggering 
161% in 2007; 93% in 2008 and 55% in 2009.  The number stands at 
present at 79,173 or two thirds of the total number of Indian students.   
 
Almost half the total number of Indian students, with two thirds 
enrolled in VET courses,  are in Victoria, where most of the attacks 
have taken place in recent months. 
 
Of the rest, about 22,000 are in NSW ( Sydney etc.) 3000 in South Aust ralia 
(Adelaide) and the rest are in ACT (Canberra), Western Australia ( Perth), 
Queensland (Brisbane), Tasmania (Hobart) and Northern Territory (Darwin). 
 
INCIDENTS RELATING TO INDIAN NATIONALS 
 
The increase in frequency of assaults on Indians has coincide d with 
the enormous increase in the numbers of Indian students over the last 
few years. The attacks on Indian students have come to notice for over two 
years now. In 2007, some Gujarati students were assaulted in Sydney. In 
2008 and 2009 there were other i nstances of assaults on Indian students, 
including some working as taxi drivers in Melbourne and in Adelaide.   Each 
assault was taken up with the Australian authorities, at the state level by the 
Consulates General and at the state and federal levels by t he High 
Commission of India.   
 
On 23 May, 2009 , a young student studying in Melbourne, Sravan Kumar 
Theerthala was savagely attacked with a screw driver, resulting in serious 
injuries to his   head. This  incident was followed over the next few weeks 
by a spate of attacks on Indian students in Melbourne .  Some students 
in other cities, notably Sydney and Adelaide were also attacked.  Many of 
the attacks have been with the intent to rob the victims of cash, i -pods and 
laptops; some of the attacks were accompanied by racial abuse.   
 
These attacks received extensive coverage in the media in both countries 
and were followed by demonstrations both in Melbourne as well as Sydney.  
A state wise break-up of these reported cases is given below: 
 
 ACT(Canberra) - 1 
 Queensland  - 7 
 New South Wales  -       13 
 South Australia   - 4 
 Victoria  -      105 
 
There was also, on the night of 14 th January, 2010, an incident of arson in 
the Cranbourne Nanaksar Taath Gurudwara complex in Melbourne.  The 
arson was in a part o f the complex that is under construction. There was no 
structural damage. The police and fire services were quick to reach the spot 
and brought the fire under control; they have advised putting extra lighting 
and surveillance around the Gurudwara complex, which is in a remote and 

 22 
isolated area. The arsonists have not yet been traced and the investigations 
are continuing.  
 
The incidents relating to Indian students and nationals in Australia 
have involved one or more of the following elements: robbery, assau lt, 
violence fuelled by alcohol/drugs, racial abuse and juvenile crime. 
Other contributing factors have been: 
 
1. The nature of the part time work undertaken by the students, who 
generally work late hours (as taxi drivers, waiters and cooks in restaurants, 
shop attendants, and attendants in car washes, convenience stores and gas 
stations etc.)  
 
2. Many of the Indian students who have come to study in Australia are 
from low income families in India  and arrive without adequate funds. As 
a consequence, they a re often forced to take any jobs going  to pay for 
their education and day to day expenses; they generally tend to live in the 
cheapest accommodation available, which are in poor neighbourhoods 
and relatively unsafe areas,  far away from their colleges and p laces of 
work. They are also forced, in consequence to take late night public 
transport, which even local Australians avoid late at night owing to the 
high risk  of encountering potential assailants looking for solitary 
passengers to rob and attack. 
 
3. The infrastructure needed to take care of international students 
has been lagging behind the recent exponential increase in numbers that 
Australia has seen, especially in Melbourne. 
 
4. The substantial increase in number in Indian students has meant 
increased 'visibility', especially on the streets and in public transport,  
which brings them on to the radar of the economically less well off strata of 
local society, who have traditionally reacted violently and negatively to 
changes in the demographic profiles of their neighbourhoods.  
 
5. The increase in the number of attacks has also coincided with an 
increase in the level of violent street crimes in cities such as Melbourne, 
especially by juveniles under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
 
6. The attacks seem t o often happen on weekends  or holidays when 
there is excessive consumption of alcohol and taking of drugs by some 
Australian juveniles   
 
7. Relatively light sentences are being given to assailants who are 
under age regardless of the ethnicity of the victims. 
 
The profile of attackers  in most of these assaults are of youngsters in 
their teens and early 20s, largely under the influence of drugs or 
alcohol..  
 
Some of the attacks have been racial in nature.  
 

 23 
It must be noted that in Australia a 'racial' atta ck is defined by what the 
intention behind the attack is, rather than the race or ethnicity of the 
assailant or the victim.  In other words, the assailant attacked the victim 
because of his race; under this definition, assaults for the purpose of 
robbery or assaults not accompanied by any overtly racist action or abuse is 
classified as 'opportunistic' crime. An attack by a person of one race against 
a person of another race is not taken suo moto as a racist attack. 
 
RECENT CHANGES IN PATTERNS OF INDIAN IMMIG RANTS TO 
AUSTRALIA 
 
The older, more established Indian community in Australia consists 
largely of skilled professionals, such as doctors, accountants, engineers 
and academics. It has traditionally been seen as a model migrant 
community and lauded for its c ontribution to the Australian economy, 
having settled and integrated well, and highly regarded for their industry and 
skills. 
 
Until now, the larger Indian community in Australia has been 
reasonably free from attacks.  While originally, many of the incident s 
related to Indian students, recent months have also seen members of 
the Indian community being affected.  The Indian community has 
traditionally taken a low profile and prefers to stay out of media attention; 
the continuing focus by the media in both coun tries on the attacks has sent 
ripples of unease in the community, which does not welcome all the 
negative attention that it is receiving in consequence. 
 
There is a growing concern within the community that unless the situation 
is brought under control and  the media exercise some restraint in both 
countries, the larger community may be caught up in the backlash, also 
because the intense media focus and accusations of racism have drawn 
adverse reactions from sections of the Australian establishment as well a s 
the larger Australian community.    
 
RELATED PROBLEMS 
 
Besides the obvious law and order problem, the other issues which have 
come to the fore include the commercialisation of the Australian 
international education industry and laxity in monitoring/enfor cing 
compliance of the regulations by the Australian authorities . The 
increase in number of students in VET sector is linked to the immigration 
system of Australia which gave priority to applicants for PR in certain skills 
where there are significant short ages ( ranging from dentists, computing 
professionals, lift mechanics, tree surgeons, pastry chefs, cooks, 
carpenters, hair dressers and community welfare workers etc).      
 
While the rules are now undergoing changes, a large number of students 
have come to Australia through the student visa route aiming to obtain 
permanent residency (PR) here with dubious educational institutions in 
Australia and their dubious agents in India  aiding and abetting the 
process.  Most of the students have taken heavy loans  to pay for their 

 24 
tuition and living expenses.  The education agents in India have made 
false promises  to them reg. permitted work hours, availability of jobs, 
getting PR easily by doing some courses ( e.g. hair dressing, cookery, 
hospitality, community welfare  etc) for skills which are in demand for 
immigration to Australia.  These expectations of getting PR may not be met 
because of changes in the immigration laws. 
 
The Australian Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) has 
introduced measures to stre ngthen checks on student visa 
applications to stamp out fraud and ensure that students have the 
financial capacity to live and study in Australia.  
 
Besides this, the Victorian Government has announced a rapid audit into 
the operations of Victoria's intern ational education providers. As a 
consequence of these steps the number of Indian students enrolling in VET 
sector has fallen and so far 25 colleges (11 in Victoria, 7 in NSW, 4 in 
Queensland, 2 in South Australia, 1 in West Australia)  have closed 
down due  to either bankruptcy or rapid audit, affecting more than 
2,400 Indian students in Australia . The Australian authorities have made 
arrangements to reallocate the displaced students to alternate colleges. 
 
ACTION TAKEN: MEA 
 
At the Ministerial level, then E AM Shri Pranab Mukherjee  raised the 
issue with Foreign Minister Stephen Smith during his visit to Australia 
in June 2008  for the Framework Dialogue.  FM Smith informed that the 
federal Government had taken the initiative to send guidelines on the issue 
of safety and security of Indian students to the various state governments in 
Australia. FM Smith also wrote to the state governments to ensure the 
safety of students.  Three months earlier, then CIM Shri Kamal Nath also 
raised the issue with Trade Minister S imon Crean during the Joint 
Ministerial Commission in May 2008 . One of the outcomes was the 
establishment of a JWG on visa and consular matters to look into some of 
these issues. 
 
Foreign Minister Stephen Smith and Trade Minister Simon Crean also wrote 
a joint letter to the State Premiers in 2008 urging the State Governments 
to take measures to ensure the safety of Indian students. The State 
Governments agreed to take certain measures such as enhanced night 
patrolling, special investigative task forces, sec urity cameras and screens 
for taxi drivers, etc.   
 
Following the attack on 23 May on Sravan Kumar Theerthala in Melbourne 
and the other attacks that followed shortly thereafter, the matter of the 
growing number of assaults on Indian students was taken up in May-June, 
2009 at the highest level by Prime Minister, Shri Manmohan Singh with 
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd  and by EAM Shri S.M. Krishna, in with 
Foreign Minister Stephen Smith . Then NSA Shri M.K. Narayanan also 
voiced our concerns when Australian NSA Dun can Lewis visited Delhi 
in January 2009.  
 

 25 
EAM Mr. S.M. Krishna visited Australia in August 2009.   He conveyed 
our concerns to PM Kevin Rudd and FM Stephen Smith.  At the state level, 
EAM visited Sydney and held meetings with then Premier Nathan Rees of 
New South Wales, prominent Indians and Indian students.  EAM visited 
Melbourne on 8 -9 August, where, apart from his interactions with Indian 
community and students including the injured student Sravan Kumar 
Theerthala, he held meetings with Premier John Brumby of Victoria, and the 
Victorian Minister of Education, Jacinta Allan.  EAM also visited the 
Railway Station and surrounding areas of Footscraye and saw for 
himself the surveillance measures put in place by the local police. 
 
In the course of his visit, EAM announced that in order that all Indian 
students know that there is an open door for them to come and 
discuss their problems , the High Commission, the Consulates and the 
Honorary Consuls would be open on every Friday, from 11 am till 5 pm, 
for any India n student to walk in, without prior appointment, to meet 
the High Commissioner, Consuls General, the designated Student 
Welfare Officers and Honorary Consuls and discuss their problems 
and grievances.  
 
MEA and the High Commission  has also unveiled on 12 J une 2009, on 
their respective websites, Guidelines for Indian students wishing to 
study in Australia  with advice, dos and don'ts.  These Guidelines have 
been regularly updated. 
  
The matter regarding safety and security of Indian students in Australia has 
been repeatedly raised in our Parliament.  A Public Interest Litigation in 
the matter was filed in the Hon'ble Supreme Court in June, 2009 leading to 
an Order by the Supreme Court to MEA and the High Commission, 
which resulted in GOI issuing its first Guid elines for Indian students 
on June 12 outlining advice to students intending to study in Australia.  This 
was followed on January 5 by an Advisory for Indian students 
studying in Australia.    
 
Bilateral working groups  have discussed the issues of regulation of 
education agents, student welfare, vocational education and training,  
and quality assurance in Delhi on 6-7 October. 
 
The issue was again discussed at the last meeting of the Foreign 
Ministers' Framework Dialogue held in New Delhi on 13 October 2009. 
 
During the visit of Prime Minister of Australia Mr. Kevin Rudd to India on 
12 November 2009, our PM conveyed the high priority that Government 
of India attached to the safety, security and well -being of Indian 
community in Australia.   Mr Rudd reiterated the Australian Government's 
commitment to taking all possible measures to protect the safety and 
welfare of all international students including Indian students.  
 

 26 
ACTION TAKEN BY MISSION AND POSTS 
 
The High Commission and the Consulates have taken up th e incidents 
of assaults on students with the Australian authorities for over two 
years now.   The High Commissioner had written in mid -2008 to the 
concerned Ministers in the Government (The Hon. Julia Gillard, MP, Deputy 
Prime Minister; The Hon Robert McCle lland, MP, Attorney General and 
Senator the Hon. Christopher Evans, Minister for Immigration and 
Citizenship) to request their assistance in addressing the issue at the 
federal level and in preventing the recurrence of such events.     
 
The High Commission  in Australia and the Consulates General in 
Melbourne and Sydney  each have a Community Welfare and Student 
Liaison Officer  (CWSLO) who is on call 24 by 7 , and whose mobile 
number is on our website  as our emergency response number. Any 
problem involving an Indian student or member of the community, is 
handled by the CWSLO in coordination with the High 
Commissioner/Consuls General.  
 
The High Commissioner and the Consuls General in Sydney and Melbourne 
have visited several Universities and private colleges in  all the major 
cities and had discussions with students on the issues faced by them. The 
students are encouraged to report any incidents in order to enable the High 
Commission and Consulates to provide any assistance required. 
  
The High Commission and Con sulates are also in regular discussions 
with students, major education providers on their Orientation Programs for 
Indian students, as also with the Indian Community and Associations so that 
they too may be closely involved in the interactions with the stu dent 
community and in making them feel welcome.  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AT FEDERAL & 
STATE LEVELS 
 
A Task Force headed by National Security Advisor Duncan Lewis was set 
up in the office of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, to formul ate a 
'whole of government' approach to the issue and liaise with state 
governments on the action being taken by them. In Melbourne as well as in 
Sydney, the police increased patrolling where incidents had occurred. In 
Melbourne, police presence was steppe d up especially around train 
stations; the number of transit police, including in plain clothes on late night 
trains   taken by students, was increased; the Victoria State Government's 
Robbery Taskforce was doubled; several offenders were charged.  A  
Community Reference Group for Western Melbourne involving the police 
and members of the Indian community to facilitate communication on safety 
issues was established. A hotline was set up for Indian students. Free legal 
advice and referral for international st udents was made available at 
Melbourne.  The High Commission and the Consulates General in Sydney 
and Melbourne directed the State Government's attention to the need for 
providing more street lighting and CCTV cameras in areas that are prone to 
such attacks.  

 27 
 
 
Of the various reports and reviews commissioned by the Australian 
government to look into the several problems being faced by the students, 
at least two have submitted their reports: 
 
 Bruce Baird Review of ESOS Act 2000 :   In its  interim report, 
released on 7 Dec., 2009   the Baird Review has highlighted more effective 
consumer protection  and stronger, simpler regulation as two essential 
reforms needed to strengthen international ed ucation.  Key observations in 
the report include the need to toughen the gateway  for organisations to 
register    as international education providers(e.g. possibility of requiring 
education providers to undergo financial viability tests or to provide ban k 
guarantees to address the growing number of operators going broke and 
closing), support students' access to better information, improve students' 
tuition protection arrangements and enhance student complaints handling 
and support mechanisms.  The report has also discussed  the links 
between education and migration, and the long -term sustainability of the 
international education sector.   The final report of the Baird Review is likely 
to come out later this year.   
 The Senate Committee on Education, Empl oyment and 
Workplace Relations submitted an inquiry report  on welfare of 
international students in Australia in November, 2009, recommending, inter 
alia, that international students be provided up-to-date information; transport 
concessions for internationa l students be provided by all states, including 
Victoria and New South Wales and review of the appropriateness of 20-hour 
limit on working hours. 
There have been 8 ministerial level visits from Australia to India in 2009 : 
Senator Chris Evans, Minister for  Immigration & Citizenship (July 2009);  
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education, Employment and 
Workplace Relations Ms. Julia Gillard (August-September 2009);  Trade 
Minister Simon Crean (September 2009); Treasurer Wayne Swan  
(September 2009); Foreign Minister Stephen Smith  (October 2009), 
Victorian Premier John Brumby  (September 2009); Queensland Premier 
Anna Bligh (October 2009) and   Prime Minister Kevin Rudd (November, 
2009).  Many of these were focussed on addressing our growing concerns 
about the safety and well-being of our students. 
 
The Australian Government has recently set up a high -level Working Group 
under overall charge of FM Stephen Smith to deal with this issue on an 
urgent basis.  
 
The Victorian Government amended the Victorian Sentencing Act 1991  in 
December 2009 which requires a sentencing court to have regard to 
whether an offence was committed by hatred of, or prejudice against, a 
group of people with common characteristics with which the victim was 
associated or with which the of fender believed the victim was associated. 
Further, the Victorian Government has appointed a retired Supreme Court 
Judge, the Hon. Geoffrey Eames AM QC to review the adequacy of the 

 28 
criminal and civil justice system in addressing offences motivated by hatr ed 
or prejudice. The findings of the review will be submitted to the Attorney -
General in September 2010. 
 
The federal and state government authorities have been prompt in taking 
action in providing relief to Indian students affected due to the sudden 
closure of certain colleges, in making them aware of their rights and 
relocating them in other colleges. 
 
The South Australia government has set up a taxi council, in which the 
Consulate is a member, to hold regular discussions with taxi drivers, many 
of whom are students.  
 
On 28 January, the Victorian Government inaugurated a 24 hours 
International Students Care Service in Carlton Suburb close to the Central 
Business District of Melbourne, where many of the private colleges are 
located. The service has 24/7 ho tline staffed by trained persons, some of 
whom also speak Hindi. The Centre provides psychological counselling, 
legal assistance, assistance with any problem with educational institute, 
employer or landlord or any other authority. It also provides financia l 
assistance to students for temporary accommodation as well as assistance 
to take care of medical expenses/ funeral/ transportation of mortal remains.  
The budget announced for this is $ 500,000 plus $ 250,000 to provide legal 
assistance. 
 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS : JANUARY-FEBRUARY 2010 
 
The issue continues to be taken up very strongly with the Australian 
Government. 
 
EAM spoke to Australian FM Stephen Smith on 11 January and expressed 
his serious concern.  
 
EAM also met Australian FM Stephen Smith in London o n the margins of 
Conference on Afghanistan on 27 January 2010 and conveyed that these 
attacks are particularly worrisome as the individuals from the Indian 
community appeared to be singled out and it was increasingly difficult to 
accept these attacks as me re opportunistic crimes devoid of any racial 
motives.  He impressed upon the Australian FM that there has been no 
visible progress so far into most of the investigations into previous attacks 
including the fatal murder of Nitin Garg on 02 January 2010.  It  was the 
responsibility of the Australian authorities to bring the perpetrators of these 
crimes to book at the earliest and immediately put effective measures into 
practice, to prevent any further attacks. 
 
On 5 January, the Ministry has issued an advisory  for students coming to 
Australia.  
 
The High Commission of India in Canberra and Consulates General in 
Sydney and Melbourne are in close and constant touch with the Australian 
authorities - both at the federal as well as state level, including the 

 29 
Ministers, senior officers and the police authorities besides, the Australian 
Foreign Office, and impressed upon them that such attacks cannot be 
allowed to happen and the authorities should take stringent measures to 
stop these attacks.   
 
Following the arson at  the Gurudwara, the High Commissioner, 
accompanied by the Consul General visited the Blackburn Gurudwara in 
Melbourne on 17 January and addressed the Indian community. The High 
Commissioner and other officers have also visited Brisbane to meet the 
Queensland authorities and the Indian community in the wake of the 
incidents involving Indian taxi drivers there. She has also met the Governor 
General Mrs. Quentin Bryce to discuss the issue. There have been 
repeated interactions with the Australian Foreign Offic e, including with the 
Secretary, Dennis Richardson, with a view to seeing what further could be 
done. 
 
The Australian authorities are fully apprised of the gravity of the situation. 
Both at the state as well as the federal level, they have taken several 
measures as outlined above, to improve security and surveillance; it can be 
honestly said that they are making every effort to meet our concerns.”  
  
25. The Committee take note of  the initiatives undertaken by the 
Government of India and the Government of A ustralia in view of the 
attacks on Indians particularly the students in Australia. The 
Committee further reiterate that Missions/Posts in Australia should 
also adopt pro -active approach and provide timely Consular 
Assistance to the victims. 

 30 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
 The Committee note that projected BE of Ministry of External Affairs 
(MEA) for the year 2009 -10 was about Rs. 7400 crore, but Ministry has 
been allocated only Rs. 6293 crore.  The Committee are of the view that the 
allocation of funds to the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) are inadequate 
as in the era of globalization, along with the matters related to international 
affairs and diplomacy, the Ministry has to deal with issues related to 
political, cultural, economic and environmental affairs as well.  The funds 
provided to MEA should be in tune with the Ministry‟s multi -dimensional 
engagement with the world.  The Committee, therefore, suggest that 
sufficient funds for Ministry of External Affairs should be provided to match 
with India‟s regional and global aspirations in the era of new architecture of 
global power. However, at the same time, the Committee would also like to 
urge the Government for proper and ful l utilization of the already allocated 
funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Ministry appreciates the observations of the Standing 
Committee on the inadequacy of the funds allocated to Ministry of External 
Affairs and its recommendation for enhancement of  the same in 
consonance with the multi -dimensional activities of the Ministry. As regards 
proper and full utilization of the already allocated funds, it may be stated 
that it has been the Ministry‟s endeavour to implement its programmes and 
schemes in a manner so as to utilize the resources available in an optimum 
manner. During the current financial year, the utilization of the approved 
budget is 63.3% till December 2009, which is near to the prescribed norms. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
 The Committee in their 15 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of MEA on 
Demands for Grants (2007 -08) had commented upon the need to raise the 
manpower strength of the MEA to cope with the expanding role of the 
Ministry.  In their 20 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha)  of MEA on Demands for 
Grants (2008-09), the Committee further reiterated that there should be no 
further delay in the proposed expansion of the cadre strength.  The 
Committee are of the view that keeping in tune with increased arenas of 
engagements and expanding work-profile of the Ministry, Ministry‟s strength 
is inadequate and needs to be augmented at every level.  Further, the 
Committee are of the view that there is immense need to build capacity 
within the structure of Ministry to deal with evolving multi-dimensional nature 
of diplomacy and it is equally pertinent to diversify the expertise base and 

 31 
linguistic base of diplomats and officials with the Ministry.  As the Ministry 
has informed that Cabinet note has been obtained for expansion of 
services, t he Committee desire that the proposal to expand the IFS and 
related cadres should be implemented at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     In pursuance of the approval by the Union Cabinet in August 2008, 
for the Expansion of the MEA, the Ministry ha s taken the required steps to 
expand the cadre strength.   The Union Cabinet had approved an overall 
increase of 314 officer -level posts and 200 staff level posts in the MEA, to 
be staggered over a ten -year period.  The expansion in every year was to 
be aga in approved by the EAM, Finance Minister and Prime Minister.   
Consequently, the first tranche of 32 officer level posts and 21 staff level 
posts were created by the Ministry in 2009.   The requisite approval for the 
second tranche, comprising 30 posts of of ficers and 20 posts of support 
staff, has been taken in the current financial year.   Similar action would be 
taken in future years to ensure increase in the cadre strength of the 
Ministry. 
 
     In order to build capacity to deal with evolving multi -dimensional 
nature of diplomacy, the Ministry has placed increased emphasis on mid -
career training.   New norms on promotions to senior levels in the Indian 
Foreign Service have been brought into effect since 2008.   Under the new 
norms, mid -career training has be en made mandatory for promotions to 
Joint Secretary and Additional Secretary level in the Service. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
The Indian Chanceries, Embassies, Missions and Cultural Centres 
are the reflection of India to the outsid e world and to the Indian citizens in 
foreign countries.  The Committee are of the view that there is a need to 
diversify and increase the number of Embassies and Missions in various 
regions of the world.  More officials and funds should be provided to 
Missions and Embassies, not only in developed countries but also in 
countries of Latin America and Africa.  In view of the emerging global 
security scenario, modernization of security apparatus for the Indian 
establishments abroad is also pertinent.  The Comm ittee are of the view 
that Indian Missions and Embassies should reflect the 21 st century 
technology enabled India to the world, through the effective use of e -
governance and the officials be made more efficient, people friendly and 
delivery oriented. The C ommittee also desire that a dedicated Officer with 
adequate knowledge of law of the land should be appointed in each 
Chancery, Embassy and Mission to look after the matter related to Indian 
workers in that country so as to ensure timely redressal of their grievances. 
The Committee further recommend that MEA should issue directions to 
Missions/Posts to act in close coordination with Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for the welfare of Indian workers abroad and safeguarding the 
human rights of Indian Diaspora.  

 32 
Reply of the Government 
 
  MEA has been seized of the need to increase India's diplomatic 
presence in countries of Africa and Latin America.   In this context, India has 
opened new resident diplomatic Missions in Bamako (Mali), Niamey (Niger) 
and Guate mala City (Guatemala) in 2009, thus strengthening India's 
representation in both these continents.   MEA has also shifted some posts 
from Missions and Posts in Europe to Indian Missions in Africa, so as to 
augment India's diplomatic capacities in African countries. 
 
    MEA has taken a number of steps in recent years to integrate 
Information Technology in its working.   The entire system of issuance of 
Passports by various Indian Missions & Posts and by Passport Offices in 
India is integrated through the PISON network, which allows real-time check 
on fraudulent practices.   MEA's own accounting system is being 
progressively brought 'on line' through a specialised software developed by 
NIC, which allows Indian Embassies and Consulates all over the world to 
send periodic reports about their budgetary situation to the Ministry.   
Similarly, innovative technological solutions have been developed for 
ensuring quick and secure transmission of classified communications 
between headquarters and Missions/Posts.  
 
  Whenever officials of MEA are posted to Indian Missions/Posts, they 
are required to undergo special training courses in the Foreign Service 
Institute before they can proceed abroad.   The training capsules not only 
equip them to make use of the new technological innovations, but also 
emphasise the need to project an efficient, people -friendly and delivery -
oriented face of the Indian Mission/Post. 
 
  Indian Missions and Posts in countries having significant populations 
of PIO/NRI communities work in close collabora tion with the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) to ensure timely and courteous delivery of 
services to the Indian communities.  In three Indian Missions - in Abu Dhabi, 
Washington and Kuala Lumpur - special posts borne on the strength of 
MOIA have been created to cater to the needs of the Indian community.   In 
other countries too, welfare of PIO/NRI communities, especially vulnerable 
sections like Indian labourers, is an important part of the Indian Mission's 
mandate. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
The Committee are appreciative of the multifaceted diplomatic 
endeavors of the Ministry.  However, in view of the current global scenario 
and the new challenges in the immediate neighbourhood, it is essential to 
incorporate new ideas a nd approaches in conduct of Indian foreign policy.  
It is possible only when there is a change in the mindset of the persons 
manning the Ministry, Missions and Posts abroad.  A sense of dynamism, 
welfare and openness will have to be inculcated, while deali ng with the 
outside world.  The Committee suggest that to cope with the increased 
areas of engagement, it is pertinent to redefine the role of the Ministry. 

 33 
Reply of the Government 
 
 New approaches are being incorporated in the training programmes 
organized by the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) for persons manning the 
Ministry, Missions and Posts abroad. The details are given below: 
 
(i) The training programme of IFS Probationers is geared towards 
inculcating a sense of dynamism, welfare and openness. Lect ures for IFS 
Probationers are followed up with a question -answer and discussion 
session where the probationers are encouraged to question the established 
approaches and express their opinions openly. FSI has also introduced 
case studies in which Probatione rs discuss different approaches to specific 
problems. New modules/lectures on India‟s heritage, contemporary social 
development issues and minority rights have been introduced. The 
Probationers are given an opportunity to learn about grass -root 
administration and problems faced by rural communities as well as progress 
made in the field of rural development during their District training. New and 
upcoming global issues like environment, space, cyber crime and welfare 
have been included in their curriculum. 
 
(ii) Joint Secretary -level officers are now being imparted mid -career 
training since 2009 as part of which they have been sent to Indian School of 
Business, Hyderabad, where management module on Leadership, 
Managing Change and dealing with Complexity forms  an integral 
component of the programme. They are also exposed to economic and 
commercial modules with a view to equipping them with knowledge for 
meeting the challenges of economic diplomacy. The officers are also 
imparted training for developing skills to handle media. 
 
(iii) In 2009, FSI also organized a training programme for Defence 
Attaches prior to their postings abroad in order to prepare them for dealing 
with the outside world with dynamism. 
 
(iv) Section Officers/Assistants/UDCs/LDCs before their postings abroad 
are given specialized training on a regular basis whereby a spirit of 
dynamism and welfare is sought to be inculcated, particularly from the 
viewpoint of promoting the welfare of Indian communities abroad. 
 
(v) A course on Right to Informat ion was organized for the Ministry of 
External Affairs officers on January 20, 2010, in order to not only acquaint 
them with the provisions of the Right to Information Act but, more 
importantly, to encourage a change in their mindset so that they furnish 
information to citizens unless specifically prohibited under the Right to 
Information Act.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
Under the Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme India‟s 
developmental partnership and cooperation is manife sted through aid and 
loans to the developing countries.  The developing world is witness to 
various competing influences. The Committee are given to understand that 

 34 
many projects are selected inter -alia on the basis of value addition they 
bring to the comm unity in the aid receiving countries. The Committee also 
find that aid disbursal to recipient countries is often entangled into 
bureaucratic hassles and get delayed inordinately.  Thus the very purpose 
of aid is defeated.    The Committee are of the view t hat in this backdrop, it 
is necessary to adopt a holistic approach and evolve a comprehensive Aid 
Policy to achieve long term strategic objectives of India‟s Foreign Policy. 
The Committee also suggest that the disbursal of aid should be quick 
enough so as to reach the recipient country at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 TC/DP Division‟s budget allocation under the Technical and 
Economic Cooperation Programme, India‟s developmental partnership and 
cooperation is Rs. 151.65 crores which contribute to  ITEC, SCAAP 
Programmes, Aid for developing countries and Aid for Disaster Relief.  
  
 Under „Technical and Economic Cooperation with other countries‟, 
TC Division administers two programmes called (i) “Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Prog ramme and (ii) Special Commonwealth 
Assistance for Africa Programme(SCAAP).  The budget provided for these 
two programmes in the CFY is to the tune of Rs. 85 crores and 9 crores 
respectively.  
  
 The ITEC and SCAAP are today  major  instruments and flag sh ip 
programmes of the Government of India for extending our  technical 
cooperation and assistance to developing countries. These programmes are 
demand-driven and response oriented.  Since its inception, in 1964, ITEC 
has expanded manifold and today covers 1 58 partner countries spread 
across Asia and the Pacific, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, 
Eastern Europe and CIS countries.   
  
 The ITEC programme focuses on vocational training in a variety of 
fields such as IT; English language; science and tech nology; finance, 
accounts, audit and banking; planning administration, management and 
governance; crime records;environment;rural  development and SMEs.  As 
part of the ITEC programme, India allocates and funds over 5000 training 
slots every year in more t han 200 short, medium and long term courses at 
42 institutes of eminence, considered to be the leading facilities in their area 
of specialization, located in various States, both in the public and private 
sector.  
   
India is not a „donor‟ in the conventio nal sense and our technical assistance 
is not „aid‟ in the North-South or donor-recipient framework.  Indian technical 
assistance is extended as part of our effort to share our expertise and 
experience with 158 ITEC partner countries in the spirit of South -South 
Cooperation.  
  
 ITEC has a very wide coverage and has acquired a brand image 
across the developing  world. It is our constant effort to make ITEC 
programme more user -friendly and to earn the goodwill of developing 

 35 
countries.  Among some of the rece nt steps taken in this regard are (i) 
sending/receipt of applications among Indian Missions, TC Division of 
Ministry and the Training Institutes is done on -line which puts the selection 
process on fast track; (ii) improve living conditions for participants  during 
their stay in India (iii) upgradation of  training facilities and (iv) redesigning of 
ITEC website. As a result of all these steps, the Ministry has received very 
positive feedback from the participants on their return to their countries.  
  
 In the light of the Committee‟s recommendations/observations, every 
effort is being made to ensure timely disbursal of aid/assistance in terms of 
the prescribed rules and procedures.  Aid disbursal, including through cash 
donations, has improved to reach the recipient countries much faster.  
  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.8 
 
The Ministry has stated that the bulk of its outlays are on projects 
and programme which are to be implemented in foreign countries.  The BE 
and RE are framed on the basis  of the various commitments made at the 
political level.   It is often found that political and security developments in 
the recipient State influence the progress of the proposed projects.  It has 
also been stated that the Ministry has to deal with sovere ign governments 
and operate in foreign environment where Government of India‟s effective 
control is limited.  The Committee are not satisfied with this reply of the 
Ministry.  The Committee suggest that Ministry should evaluate all aspects 
before allocating funds for any particular project since they understand that 
the preparation of conducive atmosphere for the project is the responsibility 
of the aid receiving countries which is generally done.   Accordingly, time 
bound action plan should be put in place  for its early and efficient execution 
of the project.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestion of the Standing Committee for evaluation of all 
aspects, such as political and security environment in the recipient foreign 
country, before allocating funds  for any particular project/programme, has 
been noted by the Ministry for compliance so as to ensure time bound and 
efficient execution of the projects. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
The Committee take serious note of the fact that a steep rise in 
expenditure is anticipated during the current financial year in various 
projects in Nepal.  The Committee understand that the political situation in 
Nepal is mainly responsible for this situation. The Committee suggest that 
Government should hold negotiations with the Government of Nepal with a 
view to redraw the timelines for completion of the projects.  The Committee 
want that these timelines are strictly followed and efforts should be made to 
ensure that there is no further cost and time ov erruns in implementation of 
these projects. 

 36 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A major reason for enhancement of expenditure is the expansion of 
bilateral cooperation programmes to strengthen our economic relations with 
Nepal. 
 
The Ministry has noted the suggestion of the Standing Committee.  
 
The efforts of the Ministry and our Embassy in Kathmandu are to 
ensure timely implementation of projects. In interactions with the 
Government of Nepal, the need for timely implementation of projects to 
avoid cost and time over runs has been regularly emphasised. The need for 
adherence to timelines for implementation of projects is also taken up in the 
bilateral institutional mechanisms between India and Nepal. 
 
As Nepal is undergoing a political transition, the situation in the country 
is complex and fluid, and despite best efforts, sometimes it has not been 
found possible to adhere to the timelines.    
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.12 
 
The Committee appreciate India‟s efforts in construction of 
Parliament Building in Afghanistan. The Committee consider it a prestigious 
project which could go a long way in cementing the ties between the two 
countries besides building a better image of India.  However, the Committee 
are deeply concerned to find that this project i s facing huge cost and time 
overrun.  They are of the view that this could have been avoided if 
Government had taken timely measures.  The Committee desire that in 
order to avoid such a situation in future, the Government should evolve a 
mechanism which co uld ensure the completion of the project in a time 
bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The following steps have been taken to ensure the completion of the 
project within the stipulated time of 36 months; 
 
(a)  Full-fledged team of CPWD comprising tech nical and supervisory 
officers and staff has been stationed at Kabul to ensure speedy completion 
of the project; 
 
(b) Funds are released promptly to CPWD so that there are no delays in 
the execution of the project; and 
 
(c)  A  Project Review and Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship 
of Joint Secretary(PAI) has been constituted. The Committee quarterly 
reviews the project to ensure timely completion of the project as per already 
fixed targets. The Committee convenes review and coordination meetings 
as and when required to expedite physical progress of the project and give 
directions for resolving related issues as well as problems, if any, causing 
hindrance to the physical progress of works.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 

 37 
Recommendation No.13 
 
The Committee are of the view that India‟s presence in Afghanistan 
is significant particularly, in context of the emerging geo -political situation in 
Pakistan and Afghanistan.  The Committee appreciate India‟s continued 
engagement and commitment towards rebuilding of Afghanistan.  However, 
the Committee are gravely concerned about the security scenario and 
safety of Indian citizens and personnel working on Indian/India sponsored 
projects in Afghanistan.  The Committee are of the view that security 
concerns hamper th e efficiency of workforce immensely.  Therefore, the 
Committee urge upon the Government to strengthen its security apparatus 
and ensure safety of personnel working on Indian projects not only in 
Afghanistan but also on other projects in various countries as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   The deterioration in the security situation in Afghanistan has 
adversely affected the security environment for Indians working in that 
country. Government of India (GoI) is in regular touch with the Government 
of Afghan istan (GoA), which has assured that it will take all the steps 
necessary to provide security to Indians in Afghanistan. GoA has provided 
local security for our major projects. Indian nationals registered with our 
Embassy in Kabul are being regularly advise d about the prevailing security 
scenario in the country through security advisories. These advisories outline 
the precautions that need to be taken for their own safety and security 
during their movements within the country for work related activities.  In  
addition, the executing agencies of various projects in Afghanistan are 
providing security arrangements at project sites.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
SAARC Development Fund (SDF) is pivotal in transforming SAARC 
from declaratory to implementation and emerge as a facilitator.  The 
Committee note with satisfaction that SDF has become operational.  Two 
ambitious projects are under implementation and the third one is to be 
finalized very shortly.  They are given to understand that SAA RC would see 
a slew of new and vibrant regional institutions taking shape.  Hence, the 
Committee hope that SAARC would provide ample opportunities to the 
countries of the region to become stake holders in each other‟s 
development.  The Committee further desire that SDF projects are executed 
in a time bound and efficient manner so that it becomes a vehicle of 
development within the SAARC. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
                  The project on establishment of Trade facilitation Centers for 
home based garment workers in SAARC countries is being implemented in 
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Pakistan. SEWA is negotiating 
premises/land for setting up the Trade Facilitation Centers -- 'SABAH'- in 

 38 
each of these countries. The project is worth USD 13.59 milli on. The 
Maternal and Child Health Care Project being implemented with Hindustan 
Latex Limited will cost USD 12.65 million. India has also proposed a new 
project for providing biomass cooking stoves and solar lanterns for rural 
households in SAARC countries. The concept paper for this new project has 
been given 'in principle approval' by the Seventh Meeting of the SDF Board 
held in Kathmandu on February 1-2, 2010.  At this Meeting, Member States, 
including India, confirmed their support for the nominee of th e Government 
of Bhutan as the first CEO of the SAARC Development Fund. The 
permanent Secretariat of the SDF is expected to be inaugurated at the 16th 
SAARC Summit in Bhutan on 28-29 April 2010. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.18 
 
The Commit tee are of the view that in the era of global integration 
and evolving nature of geo -politics, there is immediate need for India to 
diversify its engagement with the world at various levels.  The importance of 
active engagement with the individual countrie s through bilateral relations 
and on various multilateral forums and regional groupings cannot be 
undermined.  There is an urgent need to build international coalitions to 
engage with the countries on the issues of common concerns. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The role of SAARC in the next five years is set to expand 
substantially. With the active engagement of the Government of India in 
strengthening institutions within SAARC and funding its various activities, 
the organization will see a slew of new and vib rant regional institutions 
taking shape – the South Asian University in New Delhi, the SAARC 
Museum of Textiles and Handicrafts in New Delhi, the SAARC Regional 
Standards Organisation in Dhaka, SAARC Arbitration Council in Pakistan, 
the SAARC Development F und Secretariat in Thimpu, SAARC Cultural 
Centre in Sri Lanka etc. This process of building new regional institutions 
and strengthening the already existing ones will no doubt have an impact on 
the future of the organization. This is also going to be coupl ed with more 
regional and sub-regional projects funded and implemented under the aegis 
of the SAARC Development Fund. With most countries in the region having 
weak economies, SAARC will attain the contours of the premier regional 
organization committed to economic betterment of the people in the South 
Asian region. 
 
  India's multilateral economic engagement has continued to expand 
and deepen at all levels. On peace and global security, development, 
economic and financial crisis, food and energy security, c limate change and 
other important issues, India was engaged in consultations with other 
countries through multilateral fora such as India -ASEAN Dialogue, ASEAN 
Regional Forum, East Asia Summit, IBSA, BRIC, BIMSTEC, ASEM, IOR -
ARC, and G8-G5 Outreach among others. 
  

 39 
 Multilateral engagement at Prime Minster level included the G8 – 
Outreach Summit; the first formal Summit of the Leaders of Brazil, Russia, 
India and China [BRIC] in Russia; India -ASEAN Summit and East Asia 
Summit.  
 
  India also participated in various Ministerial meetings in the run-up to 
the G8-G5 Outreach Summit including the Meeting on Afghanistan, Meeting 
of Labour Ministers, Agriculture Ministers, Environment Ministers, and 
Energy Ministers. Conference of G8 and Outreach Ministers on 
Destabilizing Factors and Trans-national Threats was also attended by India 
at Secretary-level.   
 
Other major Ministerial level meetings attended by India include 
those under the format of BRIC, G5 [Brazil, China, India, Mexico and South 
Africa], IBSA, ACD (Asi a Cooperation Dialogue), ASEM (Asia Europe 
Meeting), BIMSTEC [Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -sectoral Technical 
and Economic Cooperation] and IOR-ARC [Indian Ocean Rim – Association 
for Regional Cooperation].  
 
  In the context of global economic and f inancial crisis, apart from 
G20, India is also actively participating in the meetings of BRIC Finance 
Ministers to coordinate positions with Russia, China and Brazil on this 
important global issue.  
 
 As an attempt to give a determined push to the multilat eral trade 
negotiations under WTO, India hosted the WTO Ministerial Conference, in 
September 2009, bringing together groups from across the spectrum of 
interests and positions in the Doha negotiations.  The signing of India -
ASEAN Trade-in-Goods Agreement was another milestone achieved during 
the current financial year. The next step is for conclusion of negotiations on 
Trade-in-Services and Trade -in-Investment Agreements in near future, to 
complete the India-ASEAN FTA. 
 
  India having vital stakes in peace and stability in the ASEAN region, 
including ensuring the security of the sea -lines of the Indian Ocean for 
smooth flow of raw materials, merchandise and energy supplies, India has 
been an active participant in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). The 
BIMSTEC Convention on Cooperation in Combating International Terrorism, 
Trans National Organized Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking was signed at 
the BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting in December 2009. 
 
  India has been an active member of the G -20.  Prime Minister of 
India has participated in all the three G -20 Summits held to -date, i.e. 
Washington DC, USA (November 2008); London, UK (April 2009) and 
Pittsburgh, USA (September 2009).  India has also been participating in 
other G -20 meetings at the level of Finance Minist ers, Central Bank 
Governors and senior officials.  India has also been informally coordinating 
its position on specific issues with like -minded countries in the G -20 
framework. 
 

 40 
 India looks forward to continue working closely with its partners, 
including in the G -20, to address international economic issues including 
those concerning the international financial and economic crisis. 
 
  India has an Observer status in the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organisation (SCO) and has participated in all Heads of State and Heads of 
Government Meetings since attaining the Observer status in 2005. Further, 
Prime Minister attended the SCO Summit held in Yekaterinburg, Russia in 
June 2009.  Invitations to Ministerial level meetings (on Culture, Trade, 
Disaster Management and Tra nsport) have also been received and 
appropriate representations sent at the Meetings. We have sought 
constructive engagement with the SCO member states in  areas of mutual 
interest and will continue to actively participate in SCO activities open to 
Observer states.  
 
Climate Change 
 
  On the issue of climate change, India has been actively engaged 
with the international community through extensive multilateral, regional and 
bilateral interactions. India has been among the original signatories to the 
United N ations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
signed in 1992 and its Kyoto Protocol (1997).  India has been actively 
participating in the annual Conference of Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC, the 
most recent being the 15th COP at Copenhagen in Decembe r 2009. The 
high-level segment of the Copenhagen Conference was attended by Prime 
Minister on December 18, 2009. 
 
 Earlier on September 22, 2009, India was represented by External 
Affairs Minister at a High Level Event on Climate Change, billed as “Summit 
on Climate Change”, at the sidelines of the UN General Assembly in New 
York.  The objective of the meeting was to mobilize the political will and 
vision needed to reach an ambitious agreed outcome of the on -going 
multilateral negotiations under the UNFCCC. 
   
 In addition, there are a number of major international forums with 
focus on climate change and related issues, where India has been a 
member and actively participating in the deliberations. Notable among these 
are the Major Economies Forum on Energy a nd Climate (MEF) – 
comprising 17 major economies of the world; the G -8+5 outreach meetings 
– consisting of group of eight most industrialized countries and five major 
developing economies, the G -20 – group of twenty important industrialised 
and emerging -market countries, the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean 
Development and Climate (APP)  – partnership of seven Asia -Pacific 
countries for development and deployment of clean energy technologies; 
and the Greenland Dialogue – an informal meeting of ministers/sen ior 
officials from select countries for discussion on future climate change action. 
In addition, there are other multilateral fora such as Commonwealth Heads 
of Governments Meeting (CHOGM), East Asia Summit (EAS), Summit of 
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) etc.,  which have recently engaged in 
substantive discussions on climate change and its impact, and where India 
has been represented at the highest political level.  

 41 
 
 Bilaterally, India has maintained close dialogue with major countries 
of the world, including the US, the European Union, China, Japan and 
others, on the issue of climate change.  These interactions are in the nature 
of both, conveying India‟s position on the issue of climate change and the 
on-going UNFCCC negotiations, as well as to explore possib ilities of 
mutually beneficial cooperation in such areas as knowledge sharing, 
collaborative research and development etc. for clean and renewable 
energy, climate -friendly technologies and sustainable development. India 
has recently signed Memoranda of Und erstanding on  cooperation in 
addressing climate change and related matters with the US, China, 
Denmark, Italy and Germany. The issue of climate change has also 
prominently figured in discussions held with EU, Russia, UK, Australia, 
Canada, and other countries, during recent high-level exchanges.  
 
 India has maintained close contact with three other major developing 
economies – China, Brazil and South Africa – which have a similarity of 
approach and interests vis -à-vis the issue of climate change, in order to 
coordinate positions and perspectives at various stages of the UNFCCC 
negotiations in the run up to and during the Copenhagen climate conference 
in December 2009. Together, these four countries, now known as the 
BASIC group, have emerged as our main coa lition in climate change 
negotiations. As a follow-up measure, India hosted a BASIC Ministerial-level 
consultation in New Delhi on January 24, 2010 to take stock of the 
Copenhagen outcome and the direction of future negotiations under 
UNFCCC.  Given the co llective negotiating advantage that the group offers, 
we will continue to maintain close coordination within BASIC in the post -
Copenhagen phase. 
   
 India has also been playing a leading role within the G -77 (group of 
130 developing countries) in the clima te change negotiations with a view to 
safeguarding and promoting the interests of developing countries in the 
emerging climate change regime.  
 
 India is constructively engaged and constantly enhancing its 
engagement with neighbours in South Asia to collec tively deal with the 
challenge of climate change. Today, climate change has emerged as an 
important element of cooperation in our region, particularly within the 
framework of SAARC.  A SAARC Ministerial Meeting on Climate Change 
was held in Dhaka in July 2 008, which adopted the SAARC Action Plan on 
Climate Change identifying specific areas of possible actions by the SAARC 
countries. Current chair of SAARC, Sri Lanka, presented on behalf of 
SAARC a statement outlining a common SAARC position on climate 
change during COP -15 at Copenhagen in December 2009. The 16 th 
SARRC Summit to be held in Thimphu in April 2009 is proposed to focus on 
climate change as its central theme. India is providing all possible support to 
the Bhutanese side in organizing the Summit. I n addition, India has also 
been extending assistance to South Asian neighbours in capacity building to 
deal with climate change.  
 

 42 
 India has taken initiative in facilitating international dialogue and 
discussion on critical climate change issues that are important for 
developing countries. In this context, in the area of technology transfer, 
India hosted a high -level global conference on "Climate Change: 
Technology Development and Transfer" on October 22 -23, 2009 in New 
Delhi in collaboration with the United Nations. 
   
 Climate change is an important element of India‟s diplomatic 
engagement with the international community. India will remain closely 
engaged with the global community through multilateral, regional and 
bilateral interactions and  make all pos sible efforts towards the 
establishment of a global, rule -based, transparent, and above all, an 
equitable climate change regime that safeguards the interests of the 
developing countries and supports their endeavour for poverty alleviation 
and sustainable economic development.  
 
UNSC membership:  
 
India along with Brazil, South Africa, Japan and Germany (called the 
G-4) has been pressing for expansion of the Security Council in both the 
permanent and non -permanent categories and for the G -4 countries to 
become permanent members. 
 
The formal process for an expansion of the Security Council is for a 
resolution to be adopted by at least 2/3rd majority in the UN General 
Assembly of the 192 Member-states approving such an expansion. This has 
to be followed by an a mendment of the UN Charter which also needs to be 
ratified by at least 2/3rd of the member states of the UN including all the five 
permanent members of the Security Council i.e. UK, USA, France, Russia 
and China, by their national ratification processes. 
 
In the UN, the question of expansion of the UN Security Council has 
been under discussions for the last fifteen years or so in an Open Ended 
Working Group (OEWG) of the UN General Assembly (GA) without any 
tangible results. In September 2008, India and oth er G -4 members along 
with other like -minded countries were able to ensure adoption by the UN 
General Assembly of a landmark decision (62/557) to commence 
intergovernmental negotiations on the subject of UNSC reform and 
expansion in informal plenary of the UN General Assembly  following which 
the negotiations started in March 2009. Three rounds of negotiations took 
place during March – September 2009 in during the 63rd UNGA session. 
During these negotiations, the most delegations clearly expressed their 
preference for an expansion in both the permanent and non -permanent 
categories.  
At the end of the 63rd UNGA session, India, in concert with other G -4 
countries (Brazil, Germany and Japan) and other like -minded African, 
Asian, Caribbean and Pacific Island stat es, successfully worked for 
adoption by the UNGA of a resolution that called for immediate resumption 
of the negotiations in the 64th UNGA, building on progress achieved in the 
63rd Session.  
 

 43 
The fourth round of negotiations in the UNGA has started in 
December 2009 with the first exchange held on 8 -9 Dec 2009 and the 
Second exchange on 19 January 2010. During December 2009, India and 
other G-4 countries along with South Africa mobilized 138 countries to sign 
a petition to the Chair of the negotiations, req uesting him to present a text 
on which negotiations could proceed.  
 
In addition to the intergovernmental negotiations at the UN, India 
continues to be bilaterally engaged with other member states and many 
countries have assured India of their support for permanent membership of 
the UN Security Council. However, as described above, the formal process 
would be through adoption of a  resolution in the General Assembly and an 
amendment to the UN Charter.  India continues to press its efforts in this 
regard. 
 
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) 
 
 A number of international conventions and protocols dealing with 
different types of terrorist acts exist. However, these are sectoral in nature 
and there is yet no overarching international legal f ramework to counter 
terrorism. To address this gap, India had introduced a draft proposal for a 
„Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism‟ (CCIT) in the UN 
General Assembly in 1996.  Since then, extensive discussions have taken 
place on the CCIT  draft in the UNGA‟s Sixth Committee and in its Working 
Group and in an Ad -hoc Committee specifically created to discuss the 
CCIT.  
 
Since 2002 there has broad agreement on most provisions of the 
draft except on two substantive issues, i.e. exclusion of se curity forces from 
the ambit of Convention and the Convention‟s relation to liberation 
movements.  The US and the OIC and Arab countries have opposing 
positions on these issues. Several proposals have been considered for find 
a middle ground but none of th e proposals has been able to generate 
consensus.  
 
In September 2009, India has invited Dr. Rohan Perera of Sri Lanka, 
who holds the Chair of the Ad -hoc Working Group of UNGA‟s Sixth 
Committee which is discussing the draft of the Convention for consultatio ns 
on ways to move forward. In the last meetings of the Adhoc Committee held 
on 9 and 15 October 2009, India strongly called for conclusion of 
negotiations and adoption of the convention. The next meeting of the Adhoc 
Committee is expected to be held at UN  headquarters in April 2010 where 
the draft CCIT will be discussed. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09 
 
 
 Recommendation No.20 
 
The Committee express serious concern over racial attacks on 
Indians in foreign countries particularly, on Indian students in Australia.  The 
Committee are given to understand that there are 2,40,000 Indians living in 

 44 
Australia out of which 90,000 are students which account for nearly 17 
percent of the total International students in Australia.  The Committee are 
further informed that Gov ernment of India are planning to regulate the 
enrolment of agents and registration of students prior to departure to 
overseas countries.  The Ministry has also stated that following the 
intervention of Prime Minister of India and Minister of External Affai rs, the 
Australian Government has taken up measures to diffuse the situation.  The 
Committee take serious note of this development and observe that had the 
Australian Government taken such steps in the beginning, the situation 
would not have been worsened.  However, the Committee are relieved to 
learn that the situation in Australia in this regard is improving.   The 
Committee recommend to the Government to persuade local community 
and local authorities to prevent such incidents in future.  Missions/Posts 
should also adopt pro -active approach and timely Consular Assistance be 
provided to the victims.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
According to the 2006 census in Australia, there were 234,000 persons 
of Indian descent in Australia , of which 147,000 were born in In dia and 
87,000 have Indian ancestry. 
 
This number is estimated to have gone up to about 300,000 currently. India 
is the third largest source of immigrants after New Zealand and UK and the 
second largest source of skilled professionals for Australia after UK.    
Of these, a growing number of people from the Indian community is taking 
Australian citizenship. In 2008 -09, out of a total of 86,981 people from 
more than 185 countries, 9,088 Indian nationals took Australian 
citizenship.  
 
In addition to the above, presently there are over 120,000 Indian students in 
Australia. The number of Indian students has been growing rapidly, 
especially over the last three years, as may be seen from the data given 
below : 
 
Indian students enrolments by sector, year to date November 2004-2009 
Sector 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 
Higher Education 17,681 22,045 24,895 26,129 27,318 27,820 
VET 1,608 3,791 10,091 26,403 51,087 79,173 
Schools 49 53 64 89 110 180 
ELICOS 1,027 1,213 2,834 8,552 15,346 12,474 
Other (Non-Award Courses, 
Enabling Courses) 
147 167 315 553 719 922 
Grand Total 20,512 27,269 38,199 61,726 94,580 120,569 
[Source: Deptt. of Education, Employment & Workplace Relations] 
 
Out of the total, the number of Indian students enrolled in Vocational 
Education and Tr aining (VET) courses has increased by a staggering 
161% in 2007; 93% in 2008 and 55% in 2009.  The number stands at 
present at 79,173 or two thirds of the total number of Indian students.   
 

 45 
Almost half the total number of Indian students, with two thirds 
enrolled in VET courses,  are in Victoria, where most of the attacks 
have taken place in recent months. 
 
Of the rest, about 22,000 are in NSW ( Sydney etc.) 3000 in South Australia 
(Adelaide) and the rest are in ACT (Canberra), Western Australia ( Perth), 
Queensland (Brisbane), Tasmania (Hobart) and Northern Territory (Darwin). 
 
INCIDENTS RELATING TO INDIAN NATIONALS 
 
The increase in frequency of assaults on Indians has coincided with 
the enormous increase in the numbers of Indian students over the last 
few years. The attacks on Indian students have come to notice for over two 
years now. In 2007, some Gujarati students were assaulted in Sydney. In 
2008 and 2009 there were other instances of assaults on Indian students, 
including some working as taxi drivers in Melbourne and in Adelaide.   Each 
assault was taken up with the Australian authorities, at the state level by the 
Consulates General and at the state and federal levels by the High 
Commission of India.   
 
On 23 May, 2009 , a young student studying in Melbou rne, Sravan Kumar 
Theerthala was savagely attacked with a screw driver, resulting in serious 
injuries to his   head. This  incident was followed over the next few weeks 
by a spate of attacks on Indian students in Melbourne .  Some students 
in other cities, notably Sydney and Adelaide were also attacked.  Many of 
the attacks have been with the intent to rob the victims of cash, i -pods and 
laptops; some of the attacks were accompanied by racial abuse.   
 
These attacks received extensive coverage in the media i n both countries 
and were followed by demonstrations both in Melbourne as well as Sydney.  
A state wise break-up of these reported cases is given below: 
 
 ACT(Canberra) - 1 
 Queensland  - 7 
 New South Wales  -       13 
 South Australia   - 4 
 Victoria  -      105 
 
There was also, on the night of 14 th January, 2010, an incident of arson in 
the Cranbourne Nanaksar Taath Gurudwara complex in Melbourne.  The 
arson was in a part of the complex that is under construction. There was no 
structural damage. The police and fire services were quick to reach the spot 
and brought the fire under control; they have advised putting extra lighting 
and surveillance around the Gurudwara complex, which is in a remote and 
isolated area. The arsonists have not yet been traced and the investigations 
are continuing.  
 
The incidents relating to Indian students and nationals in Australia 
have involved one or more of the following elements: robbery, assault, 
violence fuelled by alcohol/drugs, racial abuse and juvenile crime. 
Other contributing factors have been: 

 46 
 
1. The nature of the part time work undertaken by the students, who 
generally work late hours (as taxi drivers, waiters and cooks in restaurants, 
shop attendants, and attendants in car washes, convenience stores and gas 
stations etc.)  
 
2. Many of the Indian students who have come to study in Australia are 
from low income families in India and arrive without adequate funds. As a 
consequence, they are often forced to take any jobs going to pay for their 
education and day to day ex penses; they generally tend to live in the 
cheapest accommodation available, which are in poor neighbourhoods 
and relatively unsafe areas,  far away from their colleges and places of 
work. They are also forced, in consequence to take late night public 
transport, which even local Australians avoid late at night owing to the high 
risk of encountering potential assailants looking for solitary passengers to 
rob and attack. 
 
3. The infrastructure needed to take care of international students 
has been lagging behi nd the recent exponential increase in numbers that 
Australia has seen, especially in Melbourne. 
 
4. The substantial increase in number in Indian students has meant 
increased 'visibility', especially on the streets and in public transport,  
which brings them on to the radar of the economically less well off strata of 
local society, who have traditionally reacted violently and negatively to 
changes in the demographic profiles of their neighbourhoods.  
 
5. The increase in the number of attacks has also coincide d with an 
increase in the level of violent street crime s in cities such as Melbourne, 
especially by juveniles under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
 
6. The attacks seem to often happen on weekends  or holidays when 
there is excessive consumption of alcoh ol and taking of drugs by some 
Australian juveniles   
 
7. Relatively light sentences are being given to assailants who are 
under age regardless of the ethnicity of the victims. 
 
The profile of attackers  in most of these assaults are of youngsters in 
their teens and early 20s, largely under the influence of drugs or 
alcohol..  
 
Some of the attacks have been racial in nature.  
 
It must be noted that in Australia a 'racial' attack is defined by what the 
intention behind the attack is, rather than the race or e thnicity of the 
assailant or the victim.  In other words, the assailant attacked the victim 
because of his race; under this definition, assaults for the purpose of 
robbery or assaults not accompanied by any overtly racist action or abuse is 
classified as 'opportunistic' crime. An attack by a person of one race against 
a person of another race is not taken suo moto as a racist attack. 

 47 
 
RECENT CHANGES IN PATTERNS OF INDIAN IMMIGRANTS TO 
AUSTRALIA 
 
The older, more established Indian community in Australia consi sts 
largely of skilled professionals, such as doctors, accountants, engineers 
and academics. It has traditionally been seen as a model migrant 
community and lauded for its contribution to the Australian economy, 
having settled and integrated well, and highly regarded for their industry and 
skills. 
 
Until now, the larger Indian community in Australia has been 
reasonably free from attacks.  While originally, many of the incidents 
related to Indian students, recent months have also seen members of 
the Indian co mmunity being affected.  The Indian community has 
traditionally taken a low profile and prefers to stay out of media attention; 
the continuing focus by the media in both countries on the attacks has sent 
ripples of unease in the community, which does not we lcome all the 
negative attention that it is receiving in consequence. 
 
There is a growing concern within the community that unless the situation 
is brought under control and the media exercise some restraint in both 
countries, the larger community may be c aught up in the backlash, also 
because the intense media focus and accusations of racism have drawn 
adverse reactions from sections of the Australian establishment as well as 
the larger Australian community.    
 
RELATED PROBLEMS 
 
Besides the obvious law an d order problem, the other issues which have 
come to the fore include the commercialisation of the Australian 
international education industry and laxity in monitoring/enforcing 
compliance of the regulations by the Australian authorities . The 
increase in n umber of students in VET sector is linked to the immigration 
system of Australia which gave priority to applicants for PR in certain skills 
where there are significant shortages ( ranging from dentists, computing 
professionals, lift mechanics, tree surgeons , pastry chefs, cooks, 
carpenters, hair dressers and community welfare workers etc).      
 
While the rules are now undergoing changes, a large number of students 
have come to Australia through the student visa route aiming to obtain 
permanent residency (PR) here with dubious educational institutions in 
Australia and their dubious agents in India  aiding and abetting the 
process.  Most of the students have taken heavy loans  to pay for their 
tuition and living expenses.  The education agents in India have made  
false promises  to them reg. permitted work hours, availability of jobs, 
getting PR easily by doing some courses ( e.g. hair dressing, cookery, 
hospitality, community welfare etc ) for skills which are in demand for 
immigration to Australia.  These expectati ons of getting PR may not be met 
because of changes in the immigration laws. 
 

 48 
The Australian Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) has 
introduced measures to strengthen checks on student visa 
applications to stamp out fraud and ensure that stude nts have the 
financial capacity to live and study in Australia.  
 
Besides this, the Victorian Government has announced a rapid audit into 
the operations of Victoria's international education providers. As a 
consequence of these steps the number of Indian s tudents enrolling in VET 
sector has fallen and so far 25 colleges (11 in Victoria, 7 in NSW, 4 in 
Queensland, 2 in South Australia, 1 in West Australia)  have closed 
down due to either bankruptcy or rapid audit, affecting more than 
2,400 Indian students in Australia. The Australian authorities have made 
arrangements to reallocate the displaced students to alternate colleges. 
 
ACTION TAKEN: MEA 
 
At the Ministerial level, then EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee  raised the 
issue with Foreign Minister Stephen Smith durin g his visit to Australia 
in June 2008  for the Framework Dialogue.  FM Smith informed that the 
federal Government had taken the initiative to send guidelines on the issue 
of safety and security of Indian students to the various state governments in 
Australia. FM Smith also wrote to the state governments to ensure the 
safety of students.  Three months earlier, then CIM Shri Kamal Nath also 
raised the issue with Trade Minister Simon Crean during the Joint 
Ministerial Commission in May 2008 . One of the outcomes  was the 
establishment of a JWG on visa and consular matters to look into some of 
these issues. 
 
Foreign Minister Stephen Smith and Trade Minister Simon Crean also wrote 
a joint letter to the State Premiers in 2008 urging the State Governments 
to take meas ures to ensure the safety of Indian students. The State 
Governments agreed to take certain measures such as enhanced night 
patrolling, special investigative task forces, security cameras and screens 
for taxi drivers, etc.   
 
Following the attack on 23 May on Sravan Kumar Theerthala in Melbourne 
and the other attacks that followed shortly thereafter, the matter of the 
growing number of assaults on Indian students was taken up in May-June, 
2009 at the highest level by Prime Minister, Shri Manmohan Singh with 
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd  and by EAM Shri S.M. Krishna, in with 
Foreign Minister Stephen Smith . Then NSA Shri M.K. Narayanan also 
voiced our concerns when Australian NSA Duncan Lewis visited Delhi 
in January 2009.  
 
EAM Mr. S.M. Krishna visited Australia i n August 2009.   He conveyed 
our concerns to PM Kevin Rudd and FM Stephen Smith.  At the state level, 
EAM visited Sydney and held meetings with then Premier Nathan Rees of 
New South Wales, prominent Indians and Indian students.  EAM visited 
Melbourne on 8 -9 August, where, apart from his interactions with Indian 
community and students including the injured student Sravan Kumar 
Theerthala, he held meetings with Premier John Brumby of Victoria, and the 

 49 
Victorian Minister of Education, Jacinta Allan.  EAM also v isited the 
Railway Station and surrounding areas of Footscraye and saw for 
himself the surveillance measures put in place by the local police. 
 
In the course of his visit, EAM announced that in order that all Indian 
students know that there is an open door  for them to come and 
discuss their problems , the High Commission, the Consulates and the 
Honorary Consuls would be open on every Friday, from 11 am till 5 pm, 
for any Indian student to walk in, without prior appointment, to meet 
the High Commissioner, Con suls General, the designated Student 
Welfare Officers and Honorary Consuls and discuss their problems 
and grievances.  
 
MEA and the High Commission  has also unveiled on 12 June 2009, on 
their respective websites, Guidelines for Indian students wishing to 
study in Australia  with advice, dos and don'ts.  These Guidelines have 
been regularly updated. 
  
The matter regarding safety and security of Indian students in Australia has 
been repeatedly raised in our Parliament.  A Public Interest Litigation in 
the matter was filed in the Hon'ble Supreme Court in June, 2009 leading to 
an Order by the Supreme Court to MEA and the High Commission, 
which resulted in GOI issuing its first Guidelines for Indian students 
on June 12 outlining advice to students intending to study in Australia.  This 
was followed on January 5 by an Advisory for Indian students 
studying in Australia.    
 
Bilateral working groups  have discussed the issues of regulation of 
education agents, student welfare, vocational education and training,  
and quality assurance in Delhi on 6-7 October. 
 
The issue was again discussed at the last meeting of the Foreign 
Ministers' Framework Dialogue held in New Delhi on 13 October 2009. 
 
During the visit of Prime Minister of Australia Mr. Kevin Rudd to India on 
12 November 2009, our PM conveyed the high priority that Government 
of India attached to the safety, security and well -being of Indian 
community in Australia.   Mr Rudd reiterated the Australian Government's 
commitment to taking all possible measures to protect the safety and 
welfare of all international students including Indian students.  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY MISSION AND POSTS 
 
The High Commission and the Consulates have taken up the incidents 
of assaults on students with the Australian authorities for over two 
years now.   The High Commissioner had written in mid -2008 to the 
concerned Ministers in the Government (The Hon. Julia Gillard, MP, Deputy 
Prime Minister; The Hon Robert McClelland, MP, Attorney General and 
Senator the Hon. Christopher Evans, Minister for Imm igration and 

 50 
Citizenship) to request their assistance in addressing the issue at the 
federal level and in preventing the recurrence of such events.     
 
The High Commission in Australia and the Consulates General in 
Melbourne and Sydney  each have a Communi ty Welfare and Student 
Liaison Officer  (CWSLO) who is on call 24 by 7 , and whose mobile 
number is on our website  as our emergency response number. Any 
problem involving an Indian student or member of the community, is 
handled by the CWSLO in coordination w ith the High 
Commissioner/Consuls General.  
 
The High Commissioner and the Consuls General in Sydney and Melbourne 
have visited several Universities and private colleges in all the major 
cities and had discussions with students on the issues faced by them.  The 
students are encouraged to report any incidents in order to enable the High 
Commission and Consulates to provide any assistance required. 
  
The High Commission and Consulates are also in regular discussions 
with students, major education providers on their Orientation Programs for 
Indian students, as also with the Indian Community and Associations so that 
they too may be closely involved in the interactions with the student 
community and in making them feel welcome.  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOV ERNMENT AT FEDERAL & 
STATE LEVELS 
 
A Task Force headed by National Security Advisor Duncan Lewis was set 
up in the office of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, to formulate a 
'whole of government' approach to the issue and liaise with state 
governments on the action being taken by them. In Melbourne as well as in 
Sydney, the police increased patrolling where incidents had occurred. In 
Melbourne, police presence was stepped up especially around train 
stations; the number of transit police, including in pl ain clothes on late night 
trains   taken by students, was increased; the Victoria State Government's 
Robbery Taskforce was doubled; several offenders were charged.  A  
Community Reference Group for Western Melbourne involving the police 
and members of the Indian community to facilitate communication on safety 
issues was established. A hotline was set up for Indian students. Free legal 
advice and referral for international students was made available at 
Melbourne.  The High Commission and the Consulates Gene ral in Sydney 
and Melbourne directed the State Government's attention to the need for 
providing more street lighting and CCTV cameras in areas that are prone to 
such attacks.  
 
Of the various reports and reviews commissioned by the Australian 
government to look into the several problems being faced by the students, 
at least two have submitted their reports: 
 
 Bruce Baird Review of ESOS Act 2000 :   In its  interim report, 
released on 7 Dec., 2009   the Baird Review has highlighted more effective 
consumer pr otection  and stronger, simpler regulation as two essential 

 51 
reforms needed to strengthen international education.  Key observations in 
the report include the need to toughen the gateway  for organisations to 
register    as international education providers (e.g. possibility of requiring 
education providers to undergo financial viability tests or to provide bank 
guarantees to address the growing number of operators going broke and 
closing), support students' access to better information, improve students' 
tuition protection arrangements and enhance student complaints handling 
and support mechanisms.  The report has also discussed  the links 
between education and migration, and the long -term sustainability of the 
international education sector.   The final report of the Baird Review is likely 
to come out later this year.   
 The Senate Committee on Education, Employment and 
Workplace Relations submitted an inquiry report  on welfare of 
international students in Australia in November, 2009, recommending, inter 
alia, that international students be provided up-to-date information; transport 
concessions for international students be provided by all states, including 
Victoria and New South Wales and review of the appropriateness of 20-hour 
limit on working hours. 
There have been 8 ministerial level visits from Australia to India in  2009 : 
Senator Chris Evans, Minister for Immigration & Citizenship (July 2009);  
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education, Employment and 
Workplace Relations Ms. Julia Gillard (August-September 2009);  Trade 
Minister Simon Crean (September 2009); Treasurer Wayne Swan  
(September 2009); Foreign Minister Stephen Smith  (October 2009), 
Victorian Premier John Brumby  (September 2009); Queensland Premier 
Anna Bligh (October 2009) and   Prime Minister Kevin Rudd (November, 
2009).  Many of these were focussed on addressing our growing concerns 
about the safety and well-being of our students. 
 
The Australian Government has recently set up a high -level Working Group 
under overall charge of FM Stephen Smith to deal with this issue on an 
urgent basis.  
 
The Victori an Government amended the Victorian Sentencing Act 1991  in 
December 2009 which requires a sentencing court to have regard to 
whether an offence was committed by hatred of, or prejudice against, a 
group of people with common characteristics with which the v ictim was 
associated or with which the offender believed the victim was associated. 
Further, the Victorian Government has appointed a retired Supreme Court 
Judge, the Hon. Geoffrey Eames AM QC to review the adequacy of the 
criminal and civil justice system  in addressing offences motivated by hatred 
or prejudice. The findings of the review will be submitted to the Attorney -
General in September 2010. 
 
The federal and state government authorities have been prompt in taking 
action in providing relief to Indian students affected due to the sudden 
closure of certain colleges, in making them aware of their rights and 
relocating them in other colleges. 
 

 52 
The South Australia government has set up a taxi council, in which the 
Consulate is a member, to hold regular disc ussions with taxi drivers, many 
of whom are students.  
 
On 28 January, the Victorian Government inaugurated a 24 hours 
International Students Care Service in Carlton Suburb close to the Central 
Business District of Melbourne, where many of the private coll eges are 
located. The service has 24/7 hotline staffed by trained persons, some of 
whom also speak Hindi. The Centre provides psychological counselling, 
legal assistance, assistance with any problem with educational institute, 
employer or landlord or any o ther authority. It also provides financial 
assistance to students for temporary accommodation as well as assistance 
to take care of medical expenses/ funeral/ transportation of mortal remains.  
The budget announced for this is $ 500,000 plus $ 250,000 to p rovide legal 
assistance. 
 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS : JANUARY-FEBRUARY 2010 
 
The issue continues to be taken up very strongly with the Australian 
Government. 
 
EAM spoke to Australian FM Stephen Smith on 11 January and expressed 
his serious concern.  
 
EAM also me t Australian FM Stephen Smith in London on the margins of 
Conference on Afghanistan on 27 January 2010 and conveyed that these 
attacks are particularly worrisome as the individuals from the Indian 
community appeared to be singled out and it was increasingl y difficult to 
accept these attacks as mere opportunistic crimes devoid of any racial 
motives.  He impressed upon the Australian FM that there has been no 
visible progress so far into most of the investigations into previous attacks 
including the fatal mur der of Nitin Garg on 02 January 2010.  It was the 
responsibility of the Australian authorities to bring the perpetrators of these 
crimes to book at the earliest and immediately put effective measures into 
practice, to prevent any further attacks. 
 
On 5 Jan uary, the Ministry has issued an advisory for students coming to 
Australia.  
 
The High Commission of India in Canberra and Consulates General in 
Sydney and Melbourne are in close and constant touch with the Australian 
authorities - both at the federal as w ell as state level, including the 
Ministers, senior officers and the police authorities besides, the Australian 
Foreign Office, and impressed upon them that such attacks cannot be 
allowed to happen and the authorities should take stringent measures to 
stop these attacks.   
 
Following the arson at the Gurudwara, the High Commissioner, 
accompanied by the Consul General visited the Blackburn Gurudwara in 
Melbourne on 17 January and addressed the Indian community. The High 
Commissioner and other officers have a lso visited Brisbane to meet the 

 53 
Queensland authorities and the Indian community in the wake of the 
incidents involving Indian taxi drivers there. She has also met the Governor 
General Mrs. Quentin Bryce to discuss the issue. There have been 
repeated inter actions with the Australian Foreign Office, including with the 
Secretary, Dennis Richardson, with a view to seeing what further could be 
done. 
 
The Australian authorities are fully apprised of the gravity of the situation. 
Both at the state as well as the federal level, they have taken several 
measures as outlined above, to improve security and surveillance; it can be 
honestly said that they are making every effort to meet our concerns.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 

 54 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
 
Government of India has extended humanitarian assistance to Sri 
Lanka through various aid and rehabilitation packages.  The Committee 
expect that the aid will be utilized fully and reaches the targeted population.  
The Committee are of the view that this is possible only if there is proper 
monitoring. The Committee urge the Government to take measures to 
devise appropriate monitoring mechanism which will not only enable the 
proper distribution of the aid but also ensure rehabilitation and wellbeing of 
the Internally Displaced People in Sri Lanka. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Monitoring and Supervision of Assistance Projects in Sri Lanka 
 
1. There are set p rocedures and norms of Government of India for 
Monitoring and supervising the projects taken up by various 
Ministries and Departments. The Ministry follows these 
procedures and norms scrupulously.  
 
2. The projects are carefully chosen to have maximum impact on 
rehabilitation and well being of Internally Displaced People in Sri 
Lanka.   
 
3. Upon receiving the detailed project proposals, the Ministry 
scrutinizes and as per prevailing norms approves the proposals. 
Internal Finance Division scrutinizes the cost esti mates in detail 
and conveys its concurrence. 
 
4. The overall supervision of each proposal is with High Commission 
of India (HCI), Colombo on the ground. To monitor the project a 
committee is set up comprising of senior officers of the HCI under 
overall superv ision of High Commissioner. HCI in consultation 
with Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) monitors the project. Funds 
are released after monitoring the progress of the project and as 
required.  
 
5. To implement the project credible implementing agencies are 
employed. All possible mechanisms are put in place to ensure 
that the targeted population is benefited.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
 
 

 55 
Recommendation No.19 
 
In the era of increased international flow of professionals and work 
force, protecting economic interest  of its citizens is important for any 
country.  The Committee welcome India‟s entering into Agreement on Social 
Security with Belgium.  The Committee are of the view that this will secure 
long term economic interest of Indian citizens.  The Committee furth er take 
note of Government‟s efforts for proposed Social Security Agreement with 
various countries and hope that this endeavour is expedited and India 
should be able to enter into such agreements with other countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  This recom mendation/observation regarding Social Security 
Agreement with various countries is a matter which falls within the purview 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. Vide this Ministry Office 
Memorandum No.AA/PARL/125/80/09 dated 15 th January 2010, the L ok 
Sabha Secretariat was requested to transmit this 
Recommendation/Observation to that Ministry for necessary action. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 56 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
  The Committee take serious note of the situation arising from the 
non-availability of interpretation facility from Hindi language to foreign 
languages and vice versa. Our dignitaries are asked to speak in English 
instead of Hindi for only reason that the interpreter does not know Hindi.  
The Committee are of the view that this is ludicrous situation.  They are 
given to understand that various proposals for interp retation from Hindi 
language to foreign languages and vice versa have been made but  nothing 
concrete has been achieved so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that necessary steps should be taken to develop a cadre of interpreters for 
interpretation f rom Hindi language to foreign languages and vice versa 
without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     MEA has a small in -house cadre of Interpreters for the major UN 
languages, who are recruited through the UPSC.   These interpreters serve 
both at headquarters of the Ministry, as well as in some of the Missions and 
Posts abroad.  It is true that MEA's interpreters are not formally trained for 
interpretation from Hindi to foreign languages or vice versa.   However, 
almost all of the internal interpr eters of the Ministry have a working 
knowledge of  Hindi, and they can be used for interpretation between Hindi 
and the foreign language they have learnt.   Moreover, all Foreign Service 
officers are expected to learn a foreign language, and many of them re tain 
sufficient fluency in their allotted language to be able to interpret for a 
dignitary in case of need.   During their training in the Foreign Service 
Institute, IFS probationers are imparted classes on the Official Language 
Policy of Government of India.  From this year, a capsule on Hindi language 
has also been started for IFS trainees.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
 

 57 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
The Committee note that the funds provided for International publicity 
to the Ministry and efforts made in this regard are not adequate and there is 
no match in the actual requirement and funds that are provided.  The 
Committee in their earlier Reports h ad also stressed upon the need for 
maximizing publicity efforts through Missions/Posts.  While emphasizing the 
importance of external publicity, the Committee reiterate that adequate 
funds should be provided to the Ministry for advertising and external 
publicity and holistic approach should be adopted with the use of traditional 
as well as modern media for projection of India to the world in a better way. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Details of Foreign Journalists hosted under External Publicity ( XP) 
Hospitality: 
 
 Hosted 6 member delegation from Radio Fana, Ethiopia in 
coordination with All India Radio- April 13-19, 2009 
 Hosted Vice President of Xinhua News Agency alongwith two senior 
editors from Xinhua -19-23, April „09 
 Hosted 10 editors from Anglo phone coun tries viz Nigeria, Lesotho, 
Zambia, Ethiopia, Sudan, Namibia, Ghana and Uganda - April 18-28 
‟09 ( As a run up to the India Africa Forum Summit) 
 Hosted 19 journalists from Anglophone countries viz Ethiopia, 
Gabarone, Ghana, Lesotho, Namibia, Nigeria, Sudan,  Uganda, 
Seychelles, Zambia for training programme ( Print and TV journalism 
) with Jamia Millia - 18 May -5 June ‟09 ( As a run up to the India 
Africa Forum Summit) 
 Hosted 12 editors from Sri Lanka from June 6-13, „09 
 Hosted 12 senior editors from Arab coun tries viz Algeria, Egypt, 
Kuwait, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Syria & UAE- June 21-18, 09 
 Hosted 6 editors from Bangladesh from Aug 9-16 „09 
 Hosted one eminent photographer from Malaysia from 12-20 October 
„09 
 Hosted 8 journalists from Nepal–Dec 11-17 „09 
 Hosted 7 editors from China from Jan 14 -23 „10 
 Facilitated drawing up a program for seven member group of editors 
from Sri Lankan Parliamentary Journalists Association. 
 
Launch of India-Africa Connect Website: 
 
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna laun ched the „India -Africa 
Connect Website‟ on August 17, 2009 in New Delhi. The website was jointly 

 58 
developed by XP Division along with IANS and is devoted to promoting 
relations with our African counterparts, and hosts news, features and 
essential information on India and African countries, with special emphasis 
on development cooperation. The website was launched with the aim of  
facilitating closer cooperation between India and Africa The website can be 
accessed at http://www.indiaafricaconnect.in and a link is also available on 
MEA website home page.  
 
Training, Workshops, Conferences and Special Events: 
 
The External Publicity (XP) Division, on recommendations of the 
concerned Territorial Divisions, organized specialized training programmes 
and other events for media from neighbouring countries like Afghanistan. 19 
journalists (8 AV and 11 Print)  from 10 Anglo phone African countries were 
also invited, for a three week specially designed course, in co nsultation with 
Jamia Millia Islamia University. The division also hosted journalists from 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia and from Gulf countries during this period. 
Meetings for them were organized with senior officials and academics, as 
well as visits t o centres of excellence.  The Division also facilitated the 
placement of correspondents from IANS and PTI in select African countries 
to enhance mutual understanding and bridge the information gap. 
 
Booklet on General Elections:  
 
To disseminate accurate i nformation about General Elections in April - May 
2009, which have been hailed as the world‟s largest democratic exercise, 
the Division published a compact and colourful handbook, containing useful 
statistics and detailing the manner in which elections are conducted in India. 
This served as a handy reference for foreign readership and journalists in 
particular.  A web link to the booklet was also placed on the MEA website. 
 
Outreach Activities 
 
 The XP Division organized a number of outreach activities to 
highlight the various contours of India‟s foreign policy with a view to 
encourage discussion and debate and to benefit from the view of outside 
and independent experts.  These include:- 
 
(a) A Delegation visit of Friends of India Group of the UK 
Conservative party in July 2009.   Apart from meetings with Hon‟ble 
Speaker, Minister of Human Resource Development, Chairman of 
the Unique Identification Authority and MOS for Rural Development, 
the delegation was briefed by senior officials of MEA and the 
National S ecurity Council Secretariat.  The delegation also visited 
Kochi where they had meetings with the State Government and 
visited the Naval establishment.    
 
(b) A delegation visit of Liberal Democratic Friends of India 
Group from UK in Sep 2009.   Apart from  meetings with Hon‟ble 
Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha and Hon‟ble Minister for Road 
Transport & Highways, the delegation was briefed by  senior officials 

 59 
of MEA, the National Human Rights Commission, the National 
Security Council Secretariat, Center for Po licy Research, and 
business and industry representatives.  The delegation also visited 
National Defence Academy and Television Institute of India. 
 
(c) A delegation visit of Slovene Parliamentary Friendship 
Group from Slovenia in Nov 2009.  Apart from meet ing with MOS 
(PK), MOIA and Mayor of Delhi, the delegation also interacted with 
FICCI and IBEF and visited few business organizations including a 
KPO, Evalueserve and a biopharma firm, Jubilant Organosys.  The 
delegation also witnessed the proceedings of L ok Sabha and Rajya 
Sabha.     
 
(d) A visit by Prof. Sudarshan Iyengar , Vice Chancellor, Gujrat 
Vidyapeeth to Slovenia to deliver lectures on Mahatma Gandhi and 
his legacy.  He also participated in an International conference on 
Mahatma Gandhi, held in Slovenia. 
 
(e) Celebration of the International Day of Non Violence  by 
our Missions/Posts located in various countries.   The programmes 
included lectures, seminars, conferences, photo exhibitions, film 
festivals, debates, competitions for school children, cul tural shows, 
etc.  The events were organized mostly in association with the 
Indian Diaspora.   
 
(f) Ongoing research project on Indo-GCC relations  organized 
by Gulf Research Centre(GRC), Dubai. The research project involves 
experts from GRC and India and t he first meeting was held in June 
2009 in Dubai and the second in Jan 2010 in Delhi. 
 
(g) A 26 -member delegation visit by PIO journalists  from 15 
countries was organized during PBD 2010 in January. In addition to 
participation in PBD the journalists were b riefed by CII, IDSA and 
Planning commission on India‟s economy, our security scenario and 
efforts to fasten inclusive development and economic growth in India. 
The group also visited Mumbai Stock Exchange and Film City.  
 
(f) A 6- member delegation visit o f Permanent Representatives 
of Pacific Small Island Developing States was organized on 23 -31 
Jan 2010. 
 
The delegation witnessed the Republic Day Parade, attended 
President‟s „At Home‟ and witnessed Beating Retreat in addition to 
meetings with EAM, Ministe r for Environment and Forests and a 
short briefing by CII on the economic scenario in India. The 
delegation also visited Kirloskar and Thermax in Pune and ISRO and 
Infosys in Bangalore and received a briefing from TCIL on the Pan 
African E Network Project and its relevance for the Pacific Island 
States. 
 

 60 
The XP Division also extended support to various organizations for 
conduct of seminars, conferences/bilateral dialogues which 
included:-  
 
(a) The 8th India-Korea Dialogue  on 20 -21 May 2009 jointly 
organized by Indian Council for Research on Economic Relations 
and Seoul Forum of International Affairs.   
 
(b) International Seminar titled „Society, Culture and Politics‟ in 
Karakoram Himalayas on 23 -24 July, 2009 organized by Himalayan 
Research and Cultural Foundation.   
 
(c) International seminar on „Peace and Stability in Afghanistan: 
the Way Ahead‟ on 6 -7 October, 2009 organized by The United 
Service Institution of India.  
 
(d) 4th Sustainability Summit  organized by CII on 25 -26 Nov 
2009 wherein JS (PD) had a ddressed the session on Sustainable 
Business Opportunities in Emerging Countries. 
 
(e)  An international seminar  titled „Cooperative Development, 
Peace and Security in South and Central Asia‟ organ ized by CRRID 
on 1-2 March, 2009 in Chandigarh.   
 
Audio-Visual Publicity 
  
PD Division prepares documentary films aimed at projecting different 
facets of India.  Several documentaries were completed during the 
year including: - 
 
(a) Can You Hear Me (a film on Community Radio revolution) 
(b) Through Lens Clearly : Raghu Rai‟s India 
(c) Indian Elections-A Mammoth Democratic Exercise 
(d) Kashmir Elections 2008 
(e) Spirit of India 
(f) Religious Linkages Between Bhutan & Ladakh 
(g) Watering the Grassroots (a film on microfinance) 
(h) Negotiating Justice (a film on India‟s Position on Climate 
Change) 
(i) Cinema with a Purpose (a film on communication of values 
and tradition through Cinema) 
(j) Mast Qalandar (a film on three Sufi saints) 
(k) Partners in Progress : Indo-US Relations 
(l) India in the Moon (Chandrayan 1) 
(m) Soldiers of Peace (a film on engagement  of men in u niform 
with civilians in peace time) 
(n) Fragments of History (a film on the life of Ms. Subhalakshmi) 
 
 Several documentaries produced by the division were 
telecast/screened by foreign/Indian TV channels  and in film 
festivals. The details are as below:- 

 61 
 
(a) Documentaries “Timeless India” and  “The Jewel in the Lotus” 
were screened in Phnom Penh on 19.03.09 on ITEC Day. 
 
(b) Sri Lankan TV  channel screened documentary “India Wins 
Freedom” and “Quit India” on the occasion of India‟s Republic Day.  
In addition th ree other documentaries namely “Sufi traditions of 
India”, “Beating Retreat” and “Bismillah & Benaras” were also 
telecast in the month of August 09. 
 
(c) Documentaries namely “Indian Elections – A Mammoth 
Exercise”  and “Spirit of India” were telecast on Doordarshan in 
May/July 2009. 
 
(d) Mission in Bogotá has screened documentaries produced by 
PD Division at the Bogotá International Film Festival in October 
2009. 
 
(e) Documentaries namely “Commonwealth Games 2010”, “The 
Sky is not the Limit”,  “Dismantling  the Digital Divide”; “Friends for 
evermore” and “Beyond Tradition” were telecast on Tanzanian TV  
channel „Smart‟ in Sep 2009. 
 
(f) Documentary “The Story of Gitanjali” was screened at the 
recently concluded IIFC Goa 2009. 
 
(g) Our Missions/Posts in Accra, Ho Chi Minh City, Mexico City, 
Amman, Reykjavik, Tel Aviv, Minsk & Paris organized film 
festivals/screening with 35mm Hindi films sent by the division. 
 
India Perspectives 
 
 The monthly journal, India Perspectives  has been the flagship 
magazine of the Ministry and over the years, it has grown in popularity.  The 
journal focuses on a wide range of subjects varying from India‟s emergence 
as a fast growing economy, to its rich cultural heritage, its literature, diverse 
wildlife and its vibrant film industry, as also the country‟s prowess in the 
fields of information technology, healthcare and other related fields of 
human endeavor.  The journal published in sixteen languages, is distributed 
to readers in all corners of the globe through the Indian Missions/Pos ts 
abroad.  India Perspectives is also available in the electronic format in all its 
sixteen language editions on the Ministry‟s website.  The journal was 
distributed for the first time ever at the world‟s largest Book Fair in Frankfurt 
and also at the London Book Fair where India was the market focus country 
as well as at the Turin International Book Fair.  The journal was also sent for 
distribution at the film festivals held at Italy, Russia, Argentina, Paraguay 
and Uruguay.        
   
 
  

 62 
Print Publicity 
 
Projecting India's image through books and publications is an integral part 
of the XP Division's publicity strategy abroad.  Books on Indian economy, 
foreign policy, art & culture, history & science and technology etc. were 
supplied to Missions abroad for presentation purpose and use in their 
libraries. Many of our Missions celebrated Mahatma Gandhi's birthday on 
2nd October, 2009 as the International Day of non -violence.  The division 
has supplied books on Mahatma Gandhi to these Missions for distribution 
on this occasion.  Various Journals & magazines were also dispatched to 
Missions/posts abroad.   
 
The following books/publications were printed by the division during the 
period:-  
 
(a) A Coffee table book titled ”Himalaya with Lens & Passion” 
capturing the beauty of Himalayan region by Mr. Ashok Dilwali.  
 
(b) Printing of booklet on Climate change “The Road to 
Copenhagen: India's position on Climate Change issues”. 
  
(c) Booklet on Prime Minister's visit to USA & France. 
     
The XP Division also extended fina ncial support to our 
Missions/posts in Berlin, Slovenia, London, Sofia, Bogotá, and Minsk for 
bringing out publications such as “ The Story of My Experiments with 
Truth”, in Slovene language, “Glimpses of World History ” in Bulgarian 
language etc.   
 
 Brief description of Publicity outreach activities of a few randomly 
selected Missions as per the general guidelines of the Ministry keeping in 
view the local requirements of their stations: 
 
1. Washington :  Disseminating positive, development related informatio n 
on India; exhibiting promoting and exposing the rich and vast cultural 
heritage of India in the US. Through press releases interviews, background 
briefings, distributing India Perspective magazines, hosting visits of schools 
and college students to the e mbassy. Bringing out leather bound executive 
agenda carrying information on Indian history culture polity etc. Motivating 
various think tanks in writing op -ed articles.  The Mission also upgraded the 
official website. 
 
2. Kuala Lumpur :  The Mission promote d Indian education and also 
brought out handbook for  doing business with Indian companies.  The 
international seminar on the Buddhist heritage of Gujarat was suitably 
highlighted and helped reinforce Diaspora links to their roots. 
 
3. Colombo:    The Missi on highlighted the development assistance 
provided, organized Kadirgamar memorial lecture, distributed India 
Perspective magazine, publicized the ITEC scholarships, and issued press 
statements. 

 63 
 
4. London:  The Mission upgraded the website.  Media was enco uraged to 
highlight India‟s achievements.  The inhouse fortnightly publication „India 
digest‟ was regularly brought out.   
 
5. Warsaw:   The Mission brought out special supplement on the visit of 
Polish PM to India.   Embassy‟s newsletter was regularly brou ght out and 
summer film festival was organized. 
 
6.  Phnom Penh: The Mission arranged  publication of Missions‟ quarterly 
magazine in Khmer language for free distribution as well as special 
supplements in local newspapers. It also presented  books to major 
universities. 
 
7.  Ottawa:  Photo exhibition „the Sikhs – faith tempered through fire‟ was 
organized.,  Indian classical dance performance was also organized.  Books 
were presented. 
 
8. Prague:  Activities included India Week celebrations, Indian film fest ival.  
It also established a  Bollywood film library with Czech sub -titles, 
presentation of books and CDs on music dance and films. 
 
9. Tokyo :  Festival of India in Japan was organized in 2007. Mission 
promoted  Indian IT companies, tea and culture.  The M ission also 
organized lectures and visits to schools in its outreach activities. 
 
10. Brasilia: The outreach activities included  publication of fortnightly 
newsletter in Portuguese, printing booklet India Brazil relations in 
Portuguese and publication of D iscover India kits.    Indian food festivals 
were also organized. 
 
11. The Hague : A month -long Festival of India -Amsterdam was held in the 
Netherlands in November 2008. The mega event was formally inaugurated 
by Princess Maxima (wife of Dutch Crown Prince)  and Government of India 
was represented by President, ICCR. During the Festival, 127 India -related 
events were organized across 30 cultural foundations in and around 
Amsterdam. The events include Indian music concerts, classical and 
contemporary Indian da nce performances, symposium, and seminars on 
the Indian culture, music, literature and dance. A special volume on India -
Netherlands relations titled “Changing Images: Lasting Visions” was 
published and publicity material were also distributed. The Festival  was 
organized by Festival of India Foundation –Amsterdam (a conglomeration of 
30 premier cultural foundations) in partnership with ICCR.  
 
(File No.AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
Kaladan Multimodal Transit Project in Myanmar is an ambitious 
project to assure better connectivity.  The Committee note that the 
allocation for the same was substantially reduced during RE 2008 -09 stage.  

 64 
The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government that the 
reduction had to be effected due to delay i n signing the agreement with the 
consultant. The Committee are of the opinion that had the Government 
taken care to sign the agreement earlier, then the need of making drastic 
cut at RE stage would not have arisen. The Committee have been informed 
that actual work will start by the end of the year 2009 -10.  The Committee 
suggest that the timeframe should be followed scrupulously in respect of the 
project so that such situation does not recur.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Kaladan project envisages connectivity  between India ports on the eastern 
sea board and Sittwe Port in Myanmar and then through riverine transport 
and by road to Mizoram, thus providing an alternate route for North Eastern 
Indian for the transportation of goods.   
 
Progress made during the Yea r: Inland Waterways Authority of India, the 
Project Development Consultant, has updated the DPR of the IWT 
component after joint visits to the sites along with Myanmar authorities. Due 
to nature of the terrain two of the bidders also visited the site befor e they 
participated in the pre-bid meeting.  
 
The pre -bid meeting was held on 24 th Nov, 2009. This was followed by 
submission of bids by the bidders to IWAI on 1 st February, 2010. The 
technical bids have been opened by IWAI and are being assessed and 
thereafter the financial bids would be opened. The actual construction work 
is expected to start after appointment of the main contractor done after 
selection of the bid. 
(File No.AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.15 
 
The Committee take serious note of inor dinate delay and repeated 
postponement of the launching of Pilot Phase of Passport Seva Project. The 
project was due for launching in July -August 2009 but revised to 1 st 
October, 2009.  The Government had assured that pilot phase would be 
launched on 13 th November, 2009 in two cities i.e. Bengaluru and 
Chandigarh.  But the Committee are surprised to find that inspite of 
Government‟s categorical assurance, the project has not been launched so 
far.  The Committee express their strong displeasure that despite assurance 
given to the Committee, it has not been done.  The Committee want that 
this project should be launched without further delay and after due testing 
and checking of the software and taking into account the feasibility and 
results, the Government ma y implement this project on pan -India basis.  
The Committee further hope that through this project, the Passport Issuance 
System in the country will become simpler, speedier, public friendly and 
delivery oriented.  The Committee want that the Government sh ould apprise 
the Committee in this regard. 
 
 
 

 65 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The previous pilot launch dates of the project were based on the 
inputs received from the Service Provider (SP), M/s TCS Limited. However, 
the Ministry could not adhere to these dates as during testing of the 
Application Software, critical errors were found. The SP has paid Rs.32 
lakhs to the Ministry for delays in terms of the Agreement. 
 
 As a passport is of security sensitive nature, the Ministry wanted to 
resolve all the critical an d sensitive errors/issues before launching the 
Project. So far, four rounds of testing by the Third Party Audit Agency under 
the Department of Information Technology have been conducted. As of 
now, majority of the errors have been rectified by the SP. Furt her, a limited 
test on the Application Software is planned from February 2010, to 
reconfirm closure of defects. Also, Index checking, which is core of the 
issuance system, and PAC (Prior Approval Category) checking are 
thoroughly examined to ensure that checking is comprehensive. 
 
 After the above processes are completed, the Ministry would decide 
on the dates for pilot launch of the Project. 
(File No.AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.16 
 
Issuance of e -passport is another ambitious project of the 
Government, which is currently launched as a Pilot Project In respect of 
official and diplomatic passports.  The Committee are given to understand 
that this project will be rolled out in general category also by the end of 
2009.  But the Committee are surprised to find that e -passports will not be 
mandatory for general public.  The Committee are of the view that owing to 
huge benefits of this service for checking the issuance of fake passports the 
Government may consider to extend this service to general category  as well 
in a phased manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is envisaged that issue of e -passports will be extended to the 
ordinary category of passports subject of supply of the booklets by the India 
Security Press, Nashik. The tender process for procurem ent of the 
electronic chip, to be used in the e-booklets, by ISP is already underway. As 
soon as the booklets are available, e-passports will be rolled out for ordinary 
category also. Though all the non -e-passports will not be recalled, whoever 
applies after that would be issued only e-passport. 
 
(File No.AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
Recommendation No.17 
 
Cultural diplomacy is an integral ingredient of Ministry‟s overall 
diplomatic endeavours.  Projection of India‟s extensive soft power and 
civilizational strength t o the global audience will help India to directly 

 66 
engage with the people and built up a positive image for India.  The 
Committee appreciate the new initiatives undertaken by Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR) such as holding Indology Conferences,  
establishment of Chairs and opening up of new Cultural Centres abroad etc. 
There is an urgent need to spread the arenas of cultural engagement 
particularly with the countries of Latin America, Africa and South East Asia.  
The Committee desire that more Cu ltural Centres should be set up globally 
besides diversifying the activities of the existing ones.  Concerted efforts 
should be made for promotion of Indian studies and India centric studies in 
various Universities abroad.  Holistic approach should be adop ted while 
utilizing the additional allocation besides formulation of integrated and 
futuristic plan for effective propagation of India‟s soft power abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Chairs Abroad 
  
 The Council invited proposals twice, from all over the wor ld for 
establishment of Short -term Chair of Indian Studies in leading 
Universities/Institutions under its „Expansion Plan‟. 
 
  Initially, the Council approved 23 Chairs (5 Long -Term + 18 Short -
Term) under its „Expansion Plan‟. Later on, the Council approved  19 
more Chairs (9 Long -Term + 6 Short -Term) under the plan. 
Therefore, a total of 42 Chairs are under currently under „Expansion 
Plan‟.  
 
 Under its „Expansion Plan‟, the Council received a proposal from 
Mexico in Latin America; proposals from Ethiopia, Ke nya, Mauritius 
and Nigeria in Africa; and proposals from Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia 
and Singapore in South East Asia.  
 
 Presently, the Council has signed MoU with Lagos Business School, 
Abuja, Nigeria for establishment of Short -Term Chair at the institute. 
The Council has authorized Indian Missions in Singapore and 
Mauritius to sign an agreement on Council‟s behalf for establishment 
of Chair. Further, the Council had conveyed its, in principle, 
agreement alongwith the terms and conditions for establishment o f 
Chairs in Mexico, Ethiopia, Kenya, Indonesia, Laos, and Malaysia. 
The host Universities in these countries had been asked to send an 
agreement based on the terms and conditions forwarded. On 
finalization and signing of the agreement the Chairs will start  
functioning.  
 
 Besides the above, Missions in Croatia (UoZ), Denmark (CBS), 
Slovenia (UoL), Yerevan (YSLU), Greece (AUEB), USA (JMU), 
Germany (HU), South Korea (HUFS), Canada (UoT), Japan (TU) 
have signed agreements on Council‟s behalf (Total 10). Out of these, 
7 Professors have been deputed/designated to Croatia, Denmark, 
Slovenia, Yerevan, Greece, USA), Germany. 
 

 67 
 Missions in Azerbaijan (AUL), Fiji (FIT), UK (KCL), Sri -Lanka (UoC) 
and Ireland (TCD) have been authorized to sign agreement on 
Council‟s behalf (Total 5). 
 
 MoUs received from Prague (CU), Netherlands (LU), Russia (PU) 
and Dhaka are  (Total 4) are being examined/ negotiated. 
 
 Proposals have bee n approved in principle and MoU s are 
awaited/invited from Turkmenistan (Urdu), Iran, Kazakhstan (2), 
Russia (MGIMO), Netherlands (AU), Sweden, Mongolia, Austria, 
Portugal, Japan (RU), Bahrain, and New Zealand (Total 13). 
   
Outgoing Cultural Delegations 
  
            As part of its regular programme to strengthen relations with 
countries and promote Indian C ulture all over the world through soft power, 
ICCR regularly sponsors various performing art groups abroad.  
  
            Festival Unit was established in the ICCR in 2006 to look after 
exclusively major Indian manifestations in the form of Festivals of I ndia 
abroad.  During the year, 2006 -07 the Council coordinated various events 
such as film festivals, food festival, exhibitions, seminar and performing art 
etc. for the major Festivals of India in Brussels which took place from 7 
October, 2006 to 26 January, 2007.   
  
  After successful conclusion of the Festival of India in Belgium, ICCR 
organized several festivals such as Festival of India in Japan, Festival of 
India in Israel, mini festivals in Trinidad & Tobago, Argentina, Iran, Saudi 
Arabia and Indonesia. During the year 2009, the Council organized Year of 
India in Russia.  
  
The Council has planned the following festivals to be organized in the near 
future:  
  
1)         Spain   Planned for June, 2010. A few cultural programmes and an 
exhibition of Musical Instruments. 
 
2)        Iran     An Iranian Festival was organized in India in 2008.   Return 
Indian Festival in Iran was planned for last year but could be held because 
of non receipt of clearance from the Iranian authorities in time.   Now 
planned for April/ May, 2010. 
 
3)        Saudi Arabia :  The MoU for holding reciprocal festivals in Saudi 
Arabia and India is ready and expected to be singed very soon.   We have 
tentatively scheduled this festival in 2010.  
 
4)        Qatar: As part of the Year long  cultural celebrations scheduled in 
Doha to mark its nomination as the capital of the Arab Culture it has been 
decided to hold an “Indian Week” in Qatar in April, 2010.  
 

 68 
5)        Namibia  Planned for April/ May, 2010.   Decision on this was taken 
during N amibian President‟s visit to India last year.   We have proposed 
dance programme, an instrumental music, yoga demonstration cum lecture, 
a lecture on Mahatma Gandhi, a small film festival and a photo-exhibition for 
the Week of India.  
 
6)        Brazil  The Sangeet Natak Academy has already done necessary 
ground work and is coordinating the festival.   ICCR would be sending 
performing art groups after receiving the suggestions from SNA. 
 
7)        Mexico :  The Sangeet Natak Academy has already done necessary  
ground work and is coordinating the festival.   ICCR would be sending 
performing art groups after receiving the suggestions from SNA. 
 
8)        New Zealand:  A festival is planned in New Zealand in Second half 
of the year 2010 to promote awareness about Commonwealth Games.  
 
9)        Bangladesh     Proposal for mini festival in Bangladesh is at the 
exploration stage.  
 
10)      Australia:        Likely to be held in the later part of the year.  
 
11)      Tanzania:        A festival is proposed to be organ ized in Dar -es-
Salam in mid 2010 to create awareness and publicity for the forthcoming 
Commonwealth Games.  
  
Outgoing Visitors Programme  
  
            Sharing ideas and holding free discussions has been a part of 
India‟s Cultural tradition.    In keeping with this tradition and as part of its 
effort to foster and strengthen cultural relations and mutual understanding 
between India and other countries, the Council facilitate exchange of 
scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artistes under the Outgoing 
Visitors Programme.  
  
            Under the programme distinguished Indian intellectuals, scholars, 
academicians and artistes are funded and facilitated to participate in 
seminars, symposia, study tours and conferences abroad.  
  
            During the per iod from April, 2009 to December, 2009, the Council 
sponsored the visit of 50 eminent scholars to the various parts of the world.  
  
Scholarship Division 
   
        One of the major activities of ICCR is to administer a large range of 
scholarship programme s, with a view to building bridges of understanding 
and developing better appreciation of India in countries around the world. 
By way of background information, it may be noted that in the current 
academic year, 2225 scholarship slots have been provided by  ICCR under 
various schemes. While 675 of these were offered to Afghanistan alone, 
another 500 were granted to African countries. ICCR Scholarships are 

 69 
offered to students from around 90 countries wishing to pursue under -
graduate, post -graduate, doctoral, professional and fine arts education in 
India. 
  
          At present, there are over 3500 students in India under various 
scholarship programmes administered by ICCR on its own, or under agency 
work arrangement. Of these, 1654 are Afghan students. Other n ationalities 
that have a substantial representation on ICCR Scholarship rolls include 
Nepal (245), Bangladesh (281), Sri Lanka (208), Iraq (83), Maldives 
  
 An inter -Ministerial Committee on the Welfare of Foreign Students 
was constituted in July 2008 unde r the Chairmanship of DG, ICCR, with the 
mandate to look into various aspects related to the welfare of foreign 
students and to recommend measures to improve the conditions they 
encounter in India.  Having intensively interacted with all stakeholders, 
including the Universities and institutes concerned, the Committee 
submitted a comprehensive report to PMO later in the year.  After PMO‟s 
approval, the report was circulated to all concerned for the implementation 
of the recommendations, and ICCR was tasked w ith monitoring the 
progress on this front. 
  
            Welfare measures taken by ICCR Offices around the country include 
(i) the reception of foreign students upon arrival and their exhaustive 
briefing on Indian customs, religions, culture and way of lif e through 
interactive orientation courses; (ii) the decentralization of scholarship 
payments so that the students do not have to wait for their stipends to come 
from Delhi; (iii) revision of scholarship rates w.e.f. 1 st July 2009; (iv) 
assistance in openin g of bank accounts to facilitate scholarship payments 
on a quarterly basis and their withdrawal through ATM; (v) assistance and 
advice for finding accommodation outside the college/university hostel in 
case of requirement; (vi) organization of language cla sses wherever 
possible; (vii) the appointment of International Students Advisors in 
Universities that host a substantial  number of foreign students; (viii) 
Participation of foreign students in study tours  organized by the 
University/Institute concerned; (ix) organization by ICCR of free 
Summer/Winter Camps (the last in December 2009) in different parts of the 
country for foreign students – both ICCR Scholars as well as self -financing 
students - every year as a recreational and familiarization activity, un der the 
supervision of a Liaison Officer from the Council; (x) the organization of an 
annual Festival for foreign students to celebrate the International  Students 
Day held on the birth anniversary of India‟s first Education Minister and the 
Founding President of ICCR, Maulana Azad, on November 11. (In 2009, our 
Missions in countries from which we receive a large number of students 
were provided grants for the celebration of the International Students Day 
with the participation of India -educated alumni.); ( xi) updating of the ICCR 
Alumni Data Bank with the help of our Regional Offices and our Missions 
abroad; (xii) financial assistance to needy self -financing students in case of 
emergency; the opening of several new ICCR Regional Offices in cities like 
Varanasi and  Cuttak, and their location on the campus of the concerned 
University, thus making it easier for foreign students to  obtain assistance 
and guidance; (xiii) the involvement of foreign students with cultural 

 70 
activities conducted by ICCR  HQs as well  as by our Regional Offices (for 
example, foreign students are being regularly invied to the Horizon Series 
programmes organized in Delhi an elsewhere by the Council) and (xiii) the 
provision of online information, through the ICCR website, on the various 
ICCR Scholarship Schemes on offer .  
  
Conferences & Seminars 
  
 As a part of Expansion Plan, it was proposed that ICCR would hold 
six Indology Conferences.. This was planned that the conference would 
help to enhance networking between foreign Indologists and also bring new 
vision to Indological studies. The aim was to invite 20 -30 scholars at a 
reputed local university/education Institute in the capital town.  The aim was 
to identify 6 scholars each from India, host country and the region 
  
To achieve this goal, conferences were proposed at Sofia (Bulgaria), Almay 
(Kazakhstan), Moscow (Russia), Budapest (Hungary), Prague (Czech 
Republic), Dushanbe (Tajikistan), and Jakarta (Indonesia). 
  
So far, the Council has successfully organized 2 conferences - in Sofia , 
Bulgaria (24-26 Sept., 2009) and Almaty (Kazakhstan) (19 -20 Nov., 2009). 
Apart from India and the host country, scholars from neighboring countries 
also participated in these Conferences. Update on Indology Conference is 
enclosed.  
  
Apart from this the Council is also undertaking Buddhist Conferences at 
Thailand, Singapore, Vietnam, Laos and Bangladesh . 
  
In addition to this Council is also supporting Nav Nalanda Vihar Mahavihara, 
Bihar, Calicut Univeristy, Delhi University, JNU, New Delhi, Allahabad 
University, JMI, New Delhi, IIT etc. for organizing different 
Seminars/Conferences related to Indian Art and Culture.    
  
The proceedings are aimed to be published in English for better outreach. 
  
OPENING OF NEW CULTURAL CENTRES 
  
      Under the 7 point p lan, ICCR is establishing a series of Indian Cultural 
Centres to expand the cultural reach and promote India‟s “soft power” 
abroad. Under its proposed expansion plans, the Council is opening 
Cultural Centres in our immediate neighbourhood, the extended neighbours, 
P-5 capitals in Africa and Latin America. The following are the places where 
the Council has already established its Cultural Centres recently:- 
  
Indian Cultural Centre in Bangkok (Thailand): 
  
       Honourable President, ICCR inaugurated the ne wly established 
Cultural Centre at Jasmine City Building, Bangkok during his visit from 22 nd 
to 24 th September, 2009. A director and three India based teachers in the 
stream of Bharatnatyam, Yoga and Sitar have been deputed to make the 
Cultural Centre operational. 

 71 
  
Indian Cultural Centre in Tokyo (Japan): 
  
      Honorable President, ICCR inaugurated the Cultural Centre in Tokyo on 
25th September, 2009. The Centre is a part of the new Chancery complex 
and is equipped with a modern multipurpose hall. Direct or of the Centre is 
on MEA strength and two India based teachers in the stream of Yoga and 
Classical Vocal cum Tabla have been deputed to make the Centre fully 
operational. Besides, two more local teachers are going to be appointed 
shortly by the Centre. I nterior decoration of the Centre has already been 
done by installing equipment, official furniture and musical instruments. 
  
 Indian Cultural Centre in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia):  
  
      Property for the Cultural Centre in Kuala Lumpur has been leased from  
20th July, 2009 and the interior work has been completed. Three teachers in 
the stream of Tabla, Yoga and Carnatic Music are currently conducting 
classes in Kuala Lumpur. Moreover, an India -based Director has already 
taken charge of the Cultural Centre to  look after the day -to-day activities of 
the Centre. 
  
Indian Cultural Centre, Abu Dhabi: 
  
      The Cultural Centre at Abu Dhabi was formally inaugurated by Vice -
President of ICCR, Prof. Syed Shahid Mehdi, on the 15 th of December, 
2009. The unused Consul ar block has been developed as the Cultural 
Centre. An India-based Director will be joining the Centre in April, 2010. 
 
 
 
Indian Cultural Centre, Dhaka (Bangladesh): 
  
      In Dhaka, ICCR has provided sanction for complete renovation of the 
premises at Dh anmodi and Gulshan as well as purchase of new office 
equipment, furniture and hiring of local staff. The multipurpose facility 
available with the High Commission in Gulshan, Dhaka area, has been 
extensively upgraded. The Cultural Centre would be inaugurate d by 
President, ICCR in March, 2010. 
  
  
      In addition, we have been working on proposals for establishing Cultural 
Centres in Lagos, Ho Chi Minh City, Washington, Sao Paulo, Paris, 
Yangon, Thimpu, Dar-e-Salaam, Budapest and Mexico.  
 (File No.AA/PARL/125/80/09) 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                        YASHWANT SINHA, 
5th May, 2010                                                              Chairman,  
Vaisakha 15, 1932 (Saka)          Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 72 
Appendix-I 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 5TH MAY, 2010  
   
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
4. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
6. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
7. Smt. Supriya Sule 
8. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
9. Shri Shashi Tharoor 
RAJYA SABHA 
10.  Dr. Karan Singh 
11. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
14. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
15. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
16. Shri H.K. Dua 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 

 73 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting 
of the Committee.  
 
3. xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx  
 
4.  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 
Report on Action Taken by Govt. on the recommendations  contained 
in the 2nd Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants  of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2009-2010. The 
Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. Th e Members suggested some 
minor modifications.   
 
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and  authorized 
the Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________ 
XXX Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 

 74 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                       20 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,5,6,7,8,11,12,13,14,18,20 
 Total-12 
 
Percentage:  60% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  10 and 19 
Total-02 
 
Percentage: 10% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Total- 01 
 
 Percentage: 5% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4,9,15,16,17 
Total-05  
 
Percentage: 25% 
 
 
  