 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
                             FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
13 
 

 
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 By LOK SABHA SECRTARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth 
Edition) and Printed by _______________ 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
                  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012)…………………….    (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………     (iv) 
 
REPORT 
 
I. Background Analysis 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RRECOMENDATIONS COSNTAINED    1 
IN THE 9TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) ON  
DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2011-12) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
II.        Introductory          2 
 
III.      Overall Analysis of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2012-2013       4 
 
A. Overall Budgetary proposals and allocation       4 
B. Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK)      12 
C. Protector of Emigrants (POEs)      15 
          
IV.       Assessment of Schemes/Programmes of the  
      Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs      22 
 
P. Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) Scheme  & Census of Indians  28 
Q. Know Indian Programme (KIP)      33 
R. Scholarship programme for Diaspora Children (SDPC)   38 
S.   Indian Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF-OI)  42 
T. Pension Life Insurance Fund (PLIF)      47 
           
 
V.       Miscellaneous          
X. Staff strength         52 
Y. Libyan Crisis         53 
Z. NRI Investment        54 
 
 
   
APPENDICES 
 
I.        Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 3 April, 2012             57  
II.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 04.05. 2012             59 
 
 
 
(i)

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-2012) 
 
 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
27.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
30.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
31. Vacant#  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
4. Shri A. Sivanandam - Under Secretary 
___________________________________________________________ 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 
25.11.2011. 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of term of Dr. Karan 
Singh, Member Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 27.01.12 and re -nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
02.02.2012. 
# Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of term of Shri 
Shreegopal Vyas, Member Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 02.04.12 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
          I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on External Affairs (2011-2012) on Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. 
 
2. The Committee heard  the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs at the sitting held on 3rd  April, 2012. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks t o the officers of the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs and others for placing before them the material and information that the 
Committee desired and also appearing before the Committee for placing their considered views 
before them in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants (2012-13).   
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Comm ittee at their sitting held on 4 May, 
2012. 
 
5. The Minutes of the sitt ings of the Committee held on 3 April, 2012 and 4 May, 2012 are 
given in Appendix-I and II to the Report. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI                                                     ANANTH KUMAR, 
04 May, 2012                                                           Chairman,  
14 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RRECOMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 9 TH 
REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2011 -12) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
The 9 th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 
2011-12 was presented to the Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2011 and laid in the 
Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The Report contained 15 
recommendations/observations. 
 
1.2 In compliance of the Direction 73-A of the Directions by the Speaker, the 
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs has to make a statement in the Lok Sabha 
giving the status of implementation of the Recommendations/observations 
made by the Committee in their 9 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) within six months 
from the date of presentation of the Report. 
 
1.3 The Action Taken Replies on the Recommendations contained in the 9 th 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) have been received from the Ministry and the Action 
Taken Report on the same has been prepared. 
 
1.4 On the basis of Action Taken Replies received from the Ministry of 
overseas Indian Affairs on the 9 th Report, the Committee presented their 12 th 
Report (Action Taken Report) to the  Parliament on  24th April 2012.  The 
Committee in  its 12 th report has commented on the action taken replies 
furnished by the Ministry in respect of recommendations Nos. 
3,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13 and 15 contained in the 9 th Report.  The final replies as 
and when received from the Ministry will be laid in Parliament. 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER - II 
INTORDUCTORY 
The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs was established in 2004 to build 
closer and wide ranging ties between India and it‟s Overseas Indian 
community. The symbiotic connection of India and the Diaspora works in both 
directions – the Diaspora‟s engagement with India as well as India‟s 
engagement with the Diaspora. The role played by the Overseas Indian 
Community in the country‟s development process is crucial and full of 
possibilities. The Overseas Indian Community con stitutes the second largest 
Diaspora in the world. Numbering around 25 million and spread over 189 
countries, the Overseas Indian Community comprises Persons of Indian Origin 
(PIOs) and Non-Residents Indians (NRIs). 
2.2 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs comprises the erstwhile 
Emigration Division of the Ministry of Labour & Employment and the NRI 
Division of the Ministry of External Affairs, which now functions as the 
Diaspora Division. Two Divisions namely,  Financial Services and Emigration 
Policy Division were established later. A new Economic Division has been 
created in the Ministry in September, 2011. The objective behind establishing 
the Ministry was to create a focal point of interface for Overseas India ns 
including Persons of Indian Origin and to give them mainstream attention.  
 The objectives of the Ministry are as under:- 
1. To facilitate sustained interaction of Overseas Indians with 
India and offer them a wide variety of services in economic, 
social and cultural matters. 

3 
 
2. To extend institutional support for individual initiatives and 
community action to harness the knowledge, skills and 
investible resources of Overseas Indians to supplement the 
national development efforts. 
3. To strengthen the bond between India and its Diaspora by 
recognizing and celebrating its success and achievements. 
4. To transform management of emigration through appropriate 
domestic interventions and international cooperation. 
 
2.3 To promote and nurture a mutually beneficial and dynamic relationship 
between India and the Overseas Indians, the Ministry is driven by  following 
four key policy imperatives:  
a. Offer customized solutions to address the varied 
expectations of the diverse Overseas Indian community. 
b. Lend a strategic dimension to India‟s engagement with its 
overseas    community. 
c. Tap the investible diasporic community in terms of 
knowledge and resources. 
d.     Anchor diasporic initiatives in the States. 
  

4 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
REPORT 
 
OVERALL ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF 
OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS FOR THE YEAR    2012-2013 
 
A. Overall Budgetary proposal and allocation 
 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs was established in September 2004.  
The Demand for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2012-13 were laid on the table 
on the March 28, 2012.   
The Budget of the Ministry has traditionally been on the non-plan side.  The BE 
for the year 2012 -13 is  Rs.114.77 crores which is Rs. 33.77 crores higher vis-a- 
vis RE 2011-12.  The actual allocation made at BE 2012-13 as against each Head 
is as under:- 
2052   - Secretariat General   38.10 crores 
2061   - External Affairs    56.67 crores 
4059   - Capital Outlay on Public Works 20.00 crores 
    Total                             114.77 crores 
3.2 The demands vis-à-vis allocation of funds made and its actual utilization 
by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has been discussed in details in 
succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 

5 
 
3.3 The following table shows  the overall budgetary Allocation made for the 
MOIA during the last f ive years alongwith RE  for the respective years and actual 
and percentage of utilization of RE:-  
     (Rs. In Crores) 
 2007-08 
 
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
BE 50 65 80 81 81 
RE 40 45 60 73  81* 
Actual 35.4 45 56.23 67.87  81* 
% of RE 88.50 99.00 93.71 92.97  100%* 
* Expected expenditure Actual upto January 31, 2012 was Rs. 41.23 
The quarter-wise utilization is given below:- 
 
Year 2011-12 Utilisation (Rs. in crore) 
1st quarter 10.42 
2nd quarter 18.28 
3rd quarter 10.89 
4th quarter 41.41 (Anticipated) 
 
3.4 It may be observed from the above table that during all these years 
except during 2008 -09, every year , BE was revised downwards and actual 
utilization was even lower than RE.  When asked about the reasons for that 
type of utilization trend, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“This year at the time of budget discussion in the Ministry of 
Finance, it was poin ted out that the utilization of funds upto 
September was more than in comparison of last years. Hence, in 

6 
 
the year 2011 -12, BE figures of allocation were retained as RE 
figures of Rs.81 Crore.  
 
The flagship event of the Ministry viz Pravasi Bharatiya Diva s is 
organized in the last quarter of every year. The expenditure is 
booked after the event. The bills for the activities which are 
outsourced are received late. Booking of expenditure incurred by 
the Ministry of External Affairs is also received late. Hen ce, in the 
initial months the Utilization of Budget is less.” 
 
3.5 The Committee were not satisfied with the justification given by the 
Ministry that bill settlement of PBD as the reason for such huge  last 
quarter expenditure and wanted to know the further 
justification/clarification for anticipated expenditure of Rs. 41.41 crores in 
the last quarter of the Financial year 2011 -12 when allocation for PBD was 
6.00 crores only.  The reafter, the Ministry submitted following expenditure 
details:- 
 
“The other major expenditure which has been booked (apart from 
PBD) in the last quarter of FY 2011-12 are 
 
1) Media Awareness Campaign  - Rs. 7.14 crore 
2) OIFC      - Rs. 4.5 crore 
3) Grants in Aid     - Rs. 1.62 crore 
4) ICOE      - Rs. 2 crore 
5) IDF-OI      - Rs. 1.15 crore 
6) Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra   - Rs. 6.4 crore 
7) Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children- Rs. 1.99 crore 
8) Know India Programme   -  Rs. 0.67 crore” 
    
3.6 The Ministry further explain ed the reason s and also stated the 
following initiatives being taken by the Ministry during 2012 -13 to improve 
the position:- 
 

7 
 
“The continuous trend of expenditure in the last quarter for last 
several years is due to the nature of MOIA‟s mandate.  However, 
steps are being taken to start the media awareness campaign during 
the first half of 2012 -13.  Regarding OIFC, ICOE, IDF -OI and 
Grants-in-Aid, amounts are released only after audited statement of 
expenditure alongwith utilization certificates are made available by 
these bodies.  The processing and release of funds based on 
utilization certificates also takes some times.   
Apart from above, the expenditure on Overseas Indian Centres Legal 
Assistance to women facing NRI marriages is booked by the Ministry 
of External Affairs (MEA).   The expenditure incurred in foreign 
countries on foreign travel of the MOIA officers is also booked by the 
MEA.  Similarly, expenditure towards Overseas Indian Centres and 
printing of OCI tickets/ECR stickers is also received late.  The 
booking of expend iture is generally received late from the 
MEA/respective Missions/India Security Press, Nasik.” 
 
3.7 On being asked why the Ministry lags behind in the utilization of funds in 
the last quarter, the Secretary, MOIA clarified during the evidence as under:-  
“While against the RE, we are going to mention that we have spent 
about 92.46 per cent but we internally know that as far as FE is 
concerned, it is almost 100 per cent.” 
3.8 When asked about the strategy of the Ministry to ensure full and 
appropriate utili zation of Budget ear marked for the year 2012 -13, MOIA  
assured as under:- 
“The Ministry will aim for a full and appropriate utilization of 
budget earmarked for the year 2012 -13 by closely monitoring the 
progress of the schemes and incurring due expenditures.” 
 
3.9 Secretary, MOIA further clarified the position about the steps to be 
taken to ensure better utilization as under :- 
 

8 
 
“Review briefings will be conducted regularly to oversee the 
financial progress/scheme – wise to avoid accumulation of 
expenditure at the fag end of the year as much as possible.” 
 
3.10 On  being asked to furnish the details of demands made by MOIA during 
Budget meetings 2012-13 with the Ministry of Finance and the head -wise actual 
allocation of funds made by them, the Ministry furnished the following details:- 
Budget Allocation: 2012-13    (Rs. in crore) 
Revenue Section 
 BE (Proposed to 
MoF) 
Allocated 
Major Head - 
2052 
49.79 38.10 
-  2061 68.00 56.67 
Capital Section 
Major Head - 
4059 
45.20 20.00 
Total 162.99 114.77 
 
3.11 In response to the observation of the Committee that for the first time the 
Ministry has  got a Budget above Rs.100 crore s (114.77 crores) the Secretary 
MOIA clarified during the evidence as under:- 
“It seems that we have got a very big jump from Rs. 81 crore to Rs. 114 
crores.  But actually, we have gone down as you had mentioned in 
your introductory remarks and the hon. Mem bers have observed by 
going into the fine print.  We have gone down actually because the big 

9 
 
jump is on account of just two major items, the Pravasi Bhartiya 
Kendra and the E-migrate project.” 
3.12 On being further enquired about the reasons for rise in the Budgetary 
allocation for the year 2012 -13 from Rs. 81.00 crores in BE 2011 -12 to Rs. 
114.77 crores in BE 2012-13 the MOIA stated that:- 
“The main reasons for increase were  due to making provision of Rs. 
22.00 crore for e-Migrate Project in BE 2012 -13 and enhancement of 
the budget provision for Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra from Rs. 9.00 crore 
to Rs. 20.00 crore.  The details of the various schemes are given in 
the Detailed Demands for Grants.” 
 
3.13 When the Committee desire d to know whether the propos ed Outlay of Rs. 
114.77 crores earmarked  for the year 2012 -13 would be sufficient for achieving 
the goal set for the Ministry, the MOIA stated in a written reply as under:- 
 “The outlay of Rs.114.77 crore made in the current financial year does 
not appear to be adequate.  Additional funds will be sought based on 
the trend of expenditure on the various schemes.”   
3.14 On being asked about the ongoing/new programmes or schemes that are 
likely to suffer due to insufficient budget allocation for the year 2012 -13, th e 
Ministry in a written reply has stated that the following programmes are likely to 
be affected due to less allocation during the year 2012-13:- 
 
“1.Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children 
2. Overseas Indian Centres 
3. Indian Council of Overseas Employment 
4. Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra.” 
 
 
 

10 
 
3.15 The Committee note that the Budget Allocation of MOIA for the year 2012 -
13 is Rs. 114.77 crores comprising Revenue Section as Rs. 94.77 crores and Rs. 
20.00 crores as Capital Section.  The Budget Estimates for the year 2011-12 was 
Rs. 81.00 crores which was kept at the same level at Revised Estimates (RE) 
stage and Rs. 41.23 crores only were spent up to January 31 st 2012.  Amidst the 
trend of lower expenditure even than Revised Estimate s during the last several 
years,  it is very pleasing to learn that for the first time the Ministry would perhaps 
be able to spend hundred percent of BE and RE during the year 2011 -12.  But the 
Committee are still not satisfied with the trend of expenditure being made in each 
quarter of the Financial Year.  The Committee observe that during the last quarter 
of the year 2011-12, 41.41 crores were to be spent out of the total BE/RE of Rs. 81 
crores.  The Committee is also not convinced at all with the reasons given by the 
Ministry stating that due to mandate of the Ministry, the maximum expenditure is 
being made in the last quarter of the financial year .  Since all  the other 
activities/schemes of the Ministry excep t PBD are continuous activities, the 
expenditure and settlement should also be evenly distributed as far as possible 
during each quarter of the year.  The Committee , therefore, desire that by regular 
monitoring of the progress of the schemes/programmes, the Ministry should 
ensure that there is no accumulation of expenditure at the  fag end of the financial 
year.  The Committee also desire that as far as possible, the media awareness 
programmes should be scheduled equally during each quarter of the year with 
regular settlement of Bills.  The Committee further desire that expenditure booked 
by Ministry of External Affairs/Missions/Posts and other agencies should also be 
obtained on regular basis for an early settlement during each quarter.  The 
Committee hope that by these measures the issue of unevenly spread 

11 
 
expenditure of the Minist ry during each quarter of the year may be resolved 
appropriately.    
(Recommendation No. 1) 
3.16 The Committee note that as against the demand of Rs. 162.99 crores during 
2012-13, only Rs. 114.77 crores has been allocated at BE stage.   The Committee 
also observe a visible jump in BE is on account of just two major items i.e. 
Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra and e -Migrate Project.  But actually , the Ministry has 
been allocated less funds an d as such it has gone down.  The Committee further 
observe that this curtailment in allocation for many important flagship schemes 
and projects of the Ministry like Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children, 
Overseas Indian Centres, Indian Council of Overse as Employment and even the 
lower allocation than the desired for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra will 
hamper the activities of the Ministry.  The Ministry ha s to observe more realistic 
Budgetary projections, ensure judicious quarterly  utilization of funds well within 
the BE allocation and thereafter take up the matter with Finance Ministry from 
beginning to obtain the required funds at RE stage.  In the absence of this 
strategy programmes/projects will suffer  due to downward revision and that will 
ultimately deprive the beneficiaries of the intended benefits. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
B. Revenue and Capital Section  
 
 
3.17 The details of the Budget Allocation made under Revenue and Capital 
Section in BE 2011-12, RE 2011-12 and BE 2012-13 are as under:- 
                            
                                                            Rs. (In Crores) 
 BE 2011-12 RE 2011-12 BE 2012-13 
Revenue Section 71.80 67.30 94.77 
Capital Section 9.20 13.70 20.00 
Total 81.00 81.00 114.77 
 
 
3.18 The allocation under the Revenue Section has been made to meet the 
expenditure to be incurred on Secretariat General Services and External Affairs.  
Similarly, the allocation under the Capital Section has been made on account of 
construction of the Pravasi  Bhartiya Kendra (PBK), which would be a cent re to 
commemorate the achievements of the Indian Diaspora, and for 
construction/purchase of new office premises for the offices of Protector of 
Emigrations located in different States.  
When asked about the justification for upward revision in BE 2012 -13 
under the Revenue and Capital Section, the Ministry in its reply has stated:- 
 
“The increase was due to more requirements of funds under the head 
office expenses, rent , rates &  taxes, advertising and publicit y, 
information technology, office expenses. The need for requirement of 
more office expenses has been due to renovation of some of the rooms 
and incurring expenditure on the evacuees of Libyan crises. The 
revised estimates of rent , rates &  taxes are based on the actual 
requirement for payment. As regards requirement for more expenses 

13 
 
under the information technology (office expenses) it is because of 
incurring expenditure on e -migrate project and purchase of stickers 
etc by the POE offices.  
The increase in  the Administrative cost  is due to provision of Rs. 
22.00 crores out of Rs. 38.10 crores for Information Technology (office 
expenses) which is meant for e -migrate project. The requirement of 
project has been projected based on the contract signed with Tata  
Consultancy Services for payment to them. Incidentally it is stated 
that expenditure in other Object heads has been kept at the same 
level or lower which may not be adequate to meet the expenditure and 
additional funds may be required.” 
3.19 When asked ab out the justification for keeping the expenditure on other 
object heads a t the same level or lower level, the MOIA submitted the following 
explanation in a written reply:- 
“Provision of Rs. 49.79 crore was proposed for the year 2012 -13.  The 
Ministry of Finance agreed to a provision of Rs. 38.10 crore only. As 
for the e -Migrate pr oject, the provision of Rs. 22.0 0 crore has been 
earmarked for Information Technology in the current FY, the balance 
provision has been bifurcated for other object heads, which i s less 
than the BE & RE figures of the last year in many object heads.  As 
such, the lower allocation has been made for other activities which 
would not be adequate to meet the expenditure.” 
 
3.20 The Ministry is implementing a comprehensive e -governance p roject on 
Migration.  The e-migrate project aims to transform e -migration into simple and 
humane economic process.  The Ministry has stated that the major increase under 
the Revenue Head is because an additional allocation of Rs. 22.00 crores has been 
made for e-Migrate project and an increased allocation of Rs. 20.00 crores under 
the capital head is made for the construct ion of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK).  

14 
 
While giving further details of the e -Migrate project and the steps being taken for 
implementation of the Project, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“A Master Service Agreement (MSA) has been signed between the 
Government of India and the Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), the 
implementation agency of the project on 30.12.2011.  Project is 
scheduled for completion within 58 weeks from the date of signing of 
the contract.  The total cost of the project is Rs.92.67 crores. In BE 
2011-12 a provision of Rs.38 lakhs was made to meet out the initial 
expenses.  Since the project is in the process of being implemented 
in the financial year 2012 -13, it is necessar y that sufficient funds 
are earmarked for this purpose. That is the reason why Rs.2 2 crores 
has been earmarked in the outcome budget in the year 2012 -13.  
The fund will be fully utilised. The Master Service Agreement (MSA) 
has been signed between the Gover nment of India and the Tata 
Consultancy Services (TCS), the implementation agency of the 
project on 30.12.2011.  In addition to signing the Master Service 
Agreement (MSA) with the Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), the 
Ministry has set up Project Management Unit (PMU) headed by a 
Director level officer to the Government of India. A Steering 
Committee headed by Secretary, MOIA has also been constituted for 
monitoring the progress of the project. The Ministry is making all 
out efforts to implement the project in time.” 
 
3.21 The Committee observe that in BE 2012 -13, as against th e proposed 
provision of Rs. 49.7 9 crores under Revenue Head the Ministry of Finance has 
agreed to an allocation of    Rs. 38.10 crores only. As a consequ ence, out of the 
total cost of E -Migrate project of Rs. 92.67 crores, only Rs. 20 .00 crores have 
been earmarked for the year 2012 -13, which does not seem sufficient for timely 
implementation  of the project.  The Ministry has accepted that while distributing 

15 
 
the balance provision, the Bud get Expenditure in many object Heads has been 
kept at the same or lower level even than the last year making it inadequate to 
meet the expenditure on the items under these heads.  The Committee note that a 
Master Service Agreement (MSA) has been signed bet ween the Government of 
India and the implementing agency of the project in December, 2011 and the e -
Migrate project is scheduled to be completed within 58 weeks from the date of 
signing the agreement.  The Committee are happy to note the Ministry has set u p 
Project Management Unit (PMU) headed by a Director level officer to the 
Government of India and a Steering Committee headed by Secretary, MOIA has 
also been constituted for monitoring the progress of the project.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recom mend that MOIA should make all possible efforts to 
obtain the balance amount vital for implementation of the e -Migrate project by 
presenting the case based on actual progress and realistic projections at the RE 
stage so that implementation of this importan t project does not suffer due to 
paucity of funds.   Similarly, all possible  efforts should be made to obtain the 
required funds for other Object Heads at RE stage. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
C. Capital Section 
3.22 At BE stag e during 2011 -12 the capital outlay on Public works was Rs. 
9.20 crores which was revised to Rs. 13.70 crores at RE stage and BE for 2012-
13 is Rs. 20.00 Crores.  This includes the allocation of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra 
and construction of new office premises  for PoE.  Whole amount of Rs. 20.00 
crores has been allocated for PBK and Nil allocation has been made for 
construction/purchase of building of PGE/PoE offices. 

16 
 
 
(a). Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK) 
3.23 Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra would be a centre to commemorate the 
achievements of the  Indian Diaspora.  The construction work of PBK has 
reportedly been started from 1st May 2011 and the project is likely to be completed 
within 24 months.  It took too much time in getting the approval of PBK building 
plan.  When asked about the efforts made by the Ministry in obtaining approval of 
PBK building plan from the concerned local authorities, the Ministry has stated in 
a written reply as under:- 
“Concerted efforts were made to get the approval of PBK  
building plans by the local authorities namely  - NDMC, Delhi Fire 
Service (DFS) and Delhi Urban Arts Commission (DUAC). Briefly, the 
efforts made, inter-alia, include - getting the change in land use of 
the plots from "Residential (foreign Mission) " to "Public & Semi 
Public (Socio cultural)". The change of land use being the pre -
requisite put by the NDMC, the Ministry made sustained efforts by 
protracted communications/discussions with the authorities 
concerned in the DDA and Ministry of Urban Development . The 
notification changing the land use was  issued on 19.2 .2009 by the 
M/o UD. Thereafter , follow up action was taken with the NDMC for 
vetting/approval of the drawings by writing d.o. letters/ reminders 
to the highest authorities; personal discussions with the Chairman , 
NDMC. NDMC vetted the plans on 10.11.2009 and forwarded to DFS 
and DUAC for comments/approval . Besides chasing the proposal 
with DFS and DUAC , the Ministry ensured timely submission of 
replies by the Architect NBCC to the objections raised by the 
authorities.” 
 

17 
 
3.24 While giving further details of  the nature of the objection/queries  raised by 
the local authorities for approval to PBK building plan and the time taken to 
resolve the objections, the Ministry stated as under:- 
“There are three local authorities (NDMC, D FS and DUAC) involved 
in expediting the approvals. The objections raised by the agencies 
were broadly technical in nature . First, the plans were vetted by the 
NDMC. Thereafter , NDMC forwarded the plans to DFS . DFS, after 
approval the plans sent back to the NDMC, which in turn, sent them 
to the DUAC. As such, the objections were raised by the agencies at 
different points of time. The Ministry followed up with each authority 
concerned with replies to their objections and submission of revised 
drawings as and when required. The objections raised by the 
authorities are briefly given below:  
Briefly, the NDMC sought i) Gazette notification for change  of land 
use from residential to public -semi public; ii) estimated cost of the 
project for calculation of the cess ; iii) NOC from CFO , Airport 
Authority of India (AAI) and DUAC; iv) detailed area calculation of 
basement, ground and upper floors ; v) provisions for handicapped  
persons in plans such as gents to ilet, camp, railing, parking et; vi) 
space structure proposed  above third floor needs to be counted in 
FAR; vii) plans need corrections with reference to area chart , 
colouring, section, scale of plotting , dimensions, light & ventilation 
on all floors for toilets, research etc. 
 
a) The objections/observations made by DFS include - marking 
of fire -fighting arrangements ; marking of fire contro l room; 
compartmentalization of basement and upper floors ; ventilation 
scheme with calculation and sprinkle scheme with design 
calculation is required, sta ircase shall be of 1 .5m instead of 1 .3m. 
etc. 
 

18 
 
b) The points raised by DUAC include : the architectural 
expressions of the building required changes to reflect the purpose ; 
glass area to be reduced by 50% ; internal arrangements of spaces 
and entry - exits to be re -organized;  
main en try to be re -structured; vehicular circulation be re -defined  
etc. 
 
 It is worthwhile mentioning that on receipt of 
objections/observations by the local authorities at different points of 
time, efforts were made to remove the objections/clarifying the 
position and wherever necessary, the drawings were revised and 
submitted. Further, after submission of the replies/revised 
drawings, constant follow up by the NBCC Architect was ensured. 
The objections/observations were resolved/complied with within 
reasonable time.” 
 
3.25 On being asked to give the details of the contractor firm and rates on which 
the contract along with any terms and conditions of construction has been given 
to the contractor firm, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“The contracting firm whom the construction work has been 
awarded by the NBCC is - M/s. Marg Limited, Pusa Road, New 
Delhi.  The total awarded value of the contract is Rs.60.88 crore.  
The broad terms and conditions stipulated by the NBCC, inter -
alia, briefly include – 
1.  Contract Price:  The total contract price is Rs. 60.88 crore. The 
price is inclusive of all taxes, duties and levies etc., including 
Sales Tax on works/turn over tax/Value Added Tax  (VAT).  It has 
been stipulated that the final agreed rates are firm till the 
completion of the project/till the works are taken over by the 

19 
 
clients. No revision of rate or any escalation shall be allowed on 
account of any increase.  It has also been stipulated that the 
quantities of Non -Delhi Schedule of Rates (DSR) items shall not 
exceed the quantities.    
2.   Sales Tax on works contract and turnover tax : The award of 
work under the Contract is on “Works Contract Basis”.  It has  
been stipulated that the contracting firm shall be responsi ble for 
payment of any tax levied on the transfer of property in goods 
involved in “Works Contract” Delhi Government Sales Tax Act 
and the rules made there-under including amendments, if any.  
3. Time schedule: All the works shall be completed in 20 (twenty) 
months.   
4. Mobilization Advance: Mobilization advance (10% of the contract 
value) shall be paid as per the relevant General  Conditions  of  
Contract  (GCC) clause  on the simple interest of 12% per 
annum.  
5. Compensation for delay :  The Contracting firm shal l ensure 
work progress during execution of work strictly in accordance 
with the agreed work schedule.  It has been stipulated that the 
contracting shall be liable to pay the penalty for delay of work as 
per the contract.   
6. Quality Assurance :  The Contracti ng firm shall comply with 
Quality Assurance and Inspection requirements.  The work shall 
be carried out as per approved Quality Assurance Plan   decided 
by NBCC. “  
3.26 When asked about the status of construction of work of the PBK the 
Ministry submitted the following details:- 
“The construction work of the PBK has been started from 1 st May, 
2011.  As per the NBCC, 45% Reinforcement Cement Concrete (RCC) 
work of PBK has been completed. It is submitted that as against 
revised estimates of Rs.13.50 crore for  PBK, an amount of Rs.13.49 
crore has been released during 2011-12. 

20 
 
The competent authority has approved the construction of PBK at an 
estimated cost of Rs.79.19 crore.  The target date for completion of 
PBK is 24 months.  It is expected that the Project will be completed by 
Apri, 2013.  As the work has been awarded to the contractor on firm 
rates (i.e. no escalation will be payable) and as such, there will no cost 
over run.  Further, t o monitor the progress of the Project in terms of 
physical & financial achievements, a Committee headed by Joint 
Secretary (FS) inter -alia comprising representatives of NBCC and 
Integrated Finance Division already exists.  The Committee reviews 
the progress at the building site at least onc e in every month.  
Secretary, MO IA a lso visits the Project site to oversee the progress 
every fortnight.” 
3.27  On being further asked about the progress made so far in the direction of 
setting Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans in the States , the objectives of setting up of 
such Bhawans and the natur e of participation to be made by the Central 
Government in those projects.  The MOIA stated in a written reply as under:- 
“The States have been advised to convey their comments on Pravasi 
Bhartiya Bhawan (PBB) to this Ministry.  Comments from states are 
awaited. The Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawan in the States would provide 
under one roof, Migrate Resources Centres, Protector of Emigrants 
(POEs) offices counseling and predeparture orientation and space for 
state level Pravasi Associations.” 
3.28 The Committee ob serve that the approval of building plan of Pravasi 
Bhartiya Kendra (PBK) was delayed on one or the other pretext for a very 
long period and only after a repeated persuasion the construction work of 
PBK has now been awarded to the contractor on firm rates.  The progress of 
the project, both physical and in financial terms is reviewed by a Committee 

21 
 
at least once in every month at the project site. The Committee now can 
expect that the work relating to PBK would be completed within the fixed 
time fra me of 24 months.  The Committee  desire to be updated on the 
progress made in this regard on a regular basis.  
The Committee are however, not satisfied with the efforts made by the 
Ministry regarding establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBB) in 
states.  The Mi nistry has simply written to the States and awaiting replies.  
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry should play pro -
active role and make concerted efforts in consultation with the State 
Governments at the high  level so that the scheme to c onstruct PBBs in the 
States takes a shape at the earliest.  
(Recommendation No. 4) 
(b) Protector of Emigrants (PoEs) Office 
3.29 Operational matters relating to emigration, the provision of emigration 
services to emigrants and the enforcement of emigr ation Act, 1983 come under 
the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE).  The PGE is the statutory Authority 
under the Emigration Act responsible for the welfare and protect ion of 
emigrants workers.  He also oversees the nine field offices of the Protector of 
Emigrants situated at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Thiruva nthapuram, Cochin, 
Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Kolkata and Jaipur. 
3.30 When asked about progress made by the Ministry to  purchase/construct 
new offices for PoEs in  different states, Ministry submitted the following 
details:- 
“It is stated that Ministry has made efforts to get office space for eight 
POE offices in government owned buildings.   The ninth POE office at 
Jaipur has been inaugurated on 07.01.2012, which is  in a building 

22 
 
owned by the State Government.   On 31.08.2011, the POE, 
Trivandrum also got office space in a newly constructed building of 
the Department of NORKA, Government of Kerala. 
 It is stated that the POE offices at Chennai, Hyderabad and 
Jaipur ar e already in State Government owned buildings taken on 
rent.  Only the POE offices at Mumbai and Cochin are located in 
private buildings.     It is stated that in December, 2011 the matter 
was taken up by the Hon‟ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs with  
the Chief Ministers of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and 
Kerala for providing place for purpose of own office building  at 
Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Cochin.” 
 
3.31  The process of emigration clearance is currently being done through 
Protectors of Emigrants (PoEs) and all these Offices are functioning from  rented 
premises.  When asked about the justification for the approach being adopted by 
the Ministry on such an important issue of purchasing land and getting space for 
old as well as new PoE office without any budget, the Ministry submitted a vague 
reply as under:- 
“Generally for opening of a new POE office in a State, the 
accommodation etc.  are made available by the State Govt. The matter 
has been taken up with the State Govt.” 
3.32 When the Committee asked about the efforts made so far by the Ministry to 
purchase land/construct buildings for the new PoE Offices to avoid huge rental 
outgo, the Ministry in its reply has stated as under:- 
“The new office at Jaipur has already been opened an d started 
functioning. As regards, POE offices in Rae Bareli and 
Guwahati, letters have been sent to the State Govts. Based on 
their reply, the opening of new offices will be pursued.” 

23 
 
3.33   On being further enquired about the estimated cost for establish ing these 
new offices and whether sufficient budget allocation has been made for this 
purpose, the Ministry in its written reply stated:- 
“For establishing new POE office, recurring cost will be around 
Rs. 40 lakh per annum apart from one time cost of Rs. 20 
lakh for purchase of computers etc.  No specific budget 
allocation has been made.  Additional allocation will be sought 
at the time of RE.”   
3.34 When asked about the staff requirement and availability of staff in 
new PoE offices, the MOIA submitted as under:- 
“The following posts have been sanctioned for the new POE offices: 
1. Jaipur – POE (US level)-1, Assistant-1, UDC-1 
2. Rae Bareli - POE (US level)-1, Assistant-1, UDC-1  
3. Guwahati - POE (SO level)- 1, Assistant-1 
The posts will be filled up by calling applications from the 
Ministries/Departments.  A circular has already been issued.” 
 
3.35 When asked about the details of the sanctioned staff strength, present 
strength in existing PoE offices the Ministry submitted the following details:- 
Vacancy Position 
Staff Sanctioned 
Strength 
Present 
Staff 
Strength  
Post 
Vacant 
POE, Mumbai 
POE 
(Director) 
1 1 0 
POE-II 3 1 2 

24 
 
Assistant 3 1 2 
UDC 7 5 2 
LDC 8 2 6 
Group D 9 9 0 
Total  31 19 12 
POE, Delhi 
POE (DS) 1 1 0 
POE-II 
(SO) 
1 1 0 
Assistant 2 1 1 
UDC 2 1 1 
Group D 5 4 1 
Total  11 8 3 
POE, Chennai 
POE (DS) 1 1 0 
POE-II 
(SO) 
1 0 1 
Assistant 1 0 1 
UDC 3 0 3 
LDC 2 0 2 
Group D 2 2 0 
Total  10 3 7 
POE, Hyderabad 
POE-I 
(US) 
1 1 0 
Assistant 1 1 0 

25 
 
UDC 1 1 0 
Total  3 3 0 
 
POE, Trivandrum 
POE-I(US) 1                                    1     0 
Assistant 1 1 0 
UDC 1 0 1 
LDC 2 0 2 
Group D 3 3 0 
Total  8 5 3 
POE, Cochin 
POE-II(SO) 1 1 0 
Assistant 1 1 0 
UDC 2 2 0 
LDC 2 0 2 
Group D 3 3 0 
Total  9 7 2 
POE, Kolkata 
POE-II(SO) 1 1 0 
LDC 1 0 1 
Group D 1 1 0 
Total  3 2 1 
POE, Chandigarh 
POE-II(SO) 1 1 0 
Assistant 1 0 1 
LDC 1 0 1 

26 
 
Total  3 1 2 
POE, Jaipur 
POE(US) 1 0 1 
Assistant 1 1 0 
Group D 1 0 1 
Total  3 1 2 
 
 
3.36 The Committee observe that the Ministry has made some efforts to get land 
or office space for existing PoE offices in Government owned buildings.  PoE 
offices at Chennai, Hyderabad and Jaipur are rented in a building owned by the 
State Governments. PoE off ices at Mumbai and Cochin are still working in private 
buildings. The Committee are , however, pained to learn that even after a lapse of 
several months, the Ministry ha s not received any proper response from State 
Governments or Urban Development Ministry  except in one case where for PoE 
office at Thiruvanantapuram , they have succeeded in getting office 
accommodation.  In this context, the Committee would also like to remind the 
Ministry about the suggestion g iven by them during on -the-spot visit of PoE 
Offices, wherein the Ministry was asked to explore the possibilities to shift/place 
the PoE offices either in the Airport premises or any nearby places to the Airport 
for the benefit of emigrant workers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
matter should not be delayed further and should be taken up sincerely at the level 
of Minister of Civil Aviation/Urban Development Minister or concerned Chief 
Ministers to finalize the proposal of land or space to accommodate the remaining  
PoE Offices on priority basis. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 

27 
 
 
3.37. The Committee express their concern over the lack of seriousness shown 
by the Ministry by not making any allocation of even single rupee for 
construction/purchase of buildings of PoE offices during the year 2012 -13.  
Surprisingly, no fund has been kept to establish the three new PoE offices at 
Jaipur, Rai Barieli and Guwahati.   The Committee take a serious view to note that 
on one side , the Ministry has stated that they are making all possible efforts to 
purchase space or accommodate existing PoE offices in Government buildings 
and they are also committed to establish three new  PoE offices during the 
current year itself  but on the othe r side, there is no Budgetary provision for that 
purpose.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should make all sincere efforts 
to show their commitment to complete the work relating to establish ment of the 
PoE offices at the earliest and provide suffici ent fund for that purpose at RE 
stage.  
The Committee also observe that a significant number of Posts are vacant 
in all the existing  eight PoE offices and the three new PoE offices also require 
staff. Though, applications have been called from Ministries t hrough circulars but 
it seems that there is very poor response.  The Committee, therefore, desire that if 
there is no proper response from the employees of other Ministries in joining PoE 
offices, the Ministry should try other options to fill up the vacancies in PoEs in the 
shortest possible time so that the emigrant workers do not face more difficulty.  
The Committee also desire that the new PoE offices should also be provided with 
the staff required to handle work load and smooth functioning of these offices and 
the Ministry should explore the possibilities of opening new PoE Offices at places 
like Dehradun to cater to the needs of the people residing at difficult hilly areas. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 

28 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 ASSESSMENT OF SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE MINISTRY OF 
OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
Besides, dealing with all matters relating to PIOs and NRIs, the Ministry is 
engaged in several initiatives with Overseas Indians in the promotion of trade 
and investment, emigration, education , culture, health, and science & 
technology, among other areas. Given the region and country specific ethos 
and expectations of the Diaspora, the Ministry has policies, programmes and 
schemes that seek to meet the varied expectations and needs of the diver se 
Overseas Indian community.   
P.  Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) Scheme  and census of Overseas 
Indians 
4.2  Keeping in view the Government‟s deep commitment in engaging 
PIOs with the land of their ancestors in a mutually beneficial relationship, the  
OCI Scheme was launched in August 2005 by amending the Citizenship Act, 
1955. The OCI Scheme is operated by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The 
Scheme provides for registration of all PIOs as „Overseas Citizens of India‟, 
provided they were citizens of Indi a on or after January 26, 1950 or were 
eligible to become citizens of India on January 26, 1950 and who are citizens of 
other countries, except Pakistan and Bangladesh.  The Scheme provides for the 
issue of OCI documents, consisting of an OCI registration certificate and a 
Universal Visa Sticker to PIOs. The Scheme has been operational since 

29 
 
January 2006 and as of February 14, 2012, a total number of 10,29,131 PIOs 
have been registered as OCIs.  A registered Overseas Citizen of India is granted 
multiple entry, multi-purpose, life-long visa for visiting India, and is exempted 
from registration with the Foreigners Regional Registration Office (FRRO) for 
any length of stay in India. 
Similarly, PIO cards are also being issued to the persons of Indian origin 
(PIOs).  A person of Indian origin is one who at any time held an Indian 
passport or he or either of his parents or grand parents were born in or was 
permanently resident in India as defined in the Government of Indian Act, 
1935 and other territories that become part of India thereafter provided neither 
was at any time a citizen of Afghanistan, Bhutan, China, Nepal, Pakistan, and 
Sri Lanka or who is a spouse of citizen of India or a person  of Indian origin as 
mentioned above.  PIOs have an exemption of registration for his/her stay on a 
single visit in India does not exceed 180 days.  There is a proposal to merge 
OCI card scheme and PIO card scheme to provide all PIOs the same benefits 
that are given to OCIs. 
4.3 An allocation of Rs. 1.45 crores has been made in BE 2012 -13 of OCI 
scheme as compared to Rs. 1.00 crore in BE 2011-12. 
4.4  On being asked whether the amount would be sufficient for which it has 
been allocated, the Ministry in its written reply has stated that:- 
“The allocation of Rs. 1.45 crore is insufficient to handle the increased 
demand of OCI applications.  Additional funds will be asked by the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs at RE stage under this Head.”   
 

30 
 
4.5 On being further enquired about status of Bill of merger of OCI and PIO 
cards.  The Ministry in its written reply has stated as under:- 
“The Ministry of Home Affairs moved the bill for merger of PIO and 
OCI cards.  The bill was considered by the Standing Committee of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs who have made recommendations to MHA.  
MHA is in the process of incorporating those recommendations and 
also incorporate an amendment for grant of OCI card to the foreign 
spouse of an OCI card holder.”   
 
4.6 In the same con text, when the Committee wanted to know the exact 
number of Diaspora it was roughly said as 25 million in around one eighty 
nine countries.  On the issue of census of Indian Diaspora, t he Secretary, 
MOIA clarified the position in the following words:- 
 
“There cannot be a census. But we have got four figures right now. We 
tried to get figures through our Embassies two years ago, when we got 
a figure of 21.6 million. The Ministry is taking a figure of 25 million. 
The GOPIO which is a global organisation yeste rday told me that they 
are claiming it to be 40 million or four crore. We have read one 
international report which says it is 30 million. So, 25 million is the 
conservative figure.” 
4.7 During the evidence , when  the Committee wanted to know the 
initiatives taken by the Ministry and the  methodology used to estimate the 
number of Diaspora, Secretary MOIA submitted as under:- 
 
“As I have submitted, we have made an attempt in 2010 through our 
Embassies to survey country-wise. As my colleague was about to say, 
in some countries our population will come out. For instance, in 
Australia, it will come out. I believe, even in US census,  this probably 
will come out because they are going back one generation. In every 

31 
 
country, it might not come. But we will study the methodology used 
by China and we will come back on this. But one attempt has been 
made.” 
4.8 On the issue of base year consi dered for counting Indians, Secretary 
MOIA clarified the position as under:- 
“The break up of 25 million figure might not be with us. But the break 
up of the 30 million figure is, 1 8 million people are PIOs, that is, 
people who went from 19 th century onwards and 1 2 million are OCIs 
and NRIs. Actually, we have had  this definition from the Indian 
Citizenship Act of 1935 and before and 1950 and after that. So, 18 
million is before 1935 and 12 million is after 1950.” 
4.9 The Committee note that as a result of different waves of migration driven by 
mercantilism, colo nialism and n ow, globalization  over 25 million Overseas Indians 
reside in around 189 countries of the world which is claimed to be the second largest 
Diaspora in the world.  But , unlike countries like China, USA, etc. India has not been 
able to estimate the exact number of Indian Diaspora residing outside India.  In 
Committee’s view for better functioning and appropriate policy framing of the newly 
created Ministry for Indian Diaspora , the first and f oremost work is to take initiatives 
to estimate the actual number to Indians living outside India and preparation of a 
database in this regard .  It is unfortunate to observe that the Ministry created for 
handling all the matter s relating to Overseas Indian  has no authentic data of its own 
and they have to depend upon the estimate s projected in International documents.  
The Committee have been regularly asking the Ministry to take necessary initiatives 
in this regard but till date the Ministry has not come o ut with any concrete solution.  
The Committee are not convinced with the problems/difficulties shown by the 
Ministry based on the responses from Embassies/Missions/Posts or the hurdles of 

32 
 
rules of some countries.  As recommended earlier, the work should be  undertaken on 
priority basis appointing a task force or selecting the agencies having expertise in 
this field.  The Committee also strongly recommend that necessary fund for this 
purpose should be obtained from the Finance Ministry at RE stage in view of 
importance and urgency of the matter. 
(Recommendation No.7) 
4.10. The Committee note that 10,29,131 number of OCI cards have been issued to 
the people of Indian origin by February, 2012.  During the year 2011 -12 there was a 
proposal of issuing 2.45 lakh OCI cards whereas, during the year  2012-13 only 
2,30,000 more cards are proposed to be issued with a Budget of Rs. 1.45 crore.   The 
Committee, therefore, desire that when there is every possibility of more demand of 
these cards after the proposed merger o f OCI card and PIO card schemes,  the target 
and outlay should be revised appropriately at RE stage so that maximum number of 
people can get the benefit during the year 2012-13.   The Committee also find that  
there is a proposal to merge OCI card and POI c ard schemes.  The Bill moved by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs in this regard has already been examined by the Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs and Report has also been submitted.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that MOIA should take up the matter with t he  Ministry of Home 
Affairs so that suitably amended Bill incorporating the suggestions of the Committee 
on Home Affairs is brought  before the Parliament at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 

33 
 
Q. Know India Programme (KIP) 
 
 
4.11 The objective of the Ministry‟s “Know India Programme ” is to help 
familiarize Indian Diaspora youth, in the age group of 18 -26 years, with 
developments and achievements made by the country and bringing them closer 
to the land of their ancestors. KIP provid es a unique forum for students and 
young professionals of Indian origin to visit India, share their views, 
expectations and experiences and to develop closer bonds with the 
contemporary India. The Ministry has conducted 19 KIPs so far and a total of 
591 Overseas Indian youth have participated in these programmes. The 19th 
KIP was held in partnership with the State of Rajasthan, from December 21, 
2011 to January 10, 2012 in which 37 participants from 11 countries 
participated. The Allocation for Know India P rogramme has been raised from 
Rs. 1.60 crores to Rs. 5.00 crores in BE 2012 -13.  When asked about the 
upward revision, the MOIA stated in written reply as under:- 
 
“The budgetary allocation for BE 2011 -12 was Rs. 160 lakh whereas 
the budgetary allocation for 2012-13 is 5 crores. This is on account of 
two reasons. Firstly, the frequency of KIP is to be increased from the 
existing thrice a year to more. Secondly, Study India Programme (SIP) 
is to be launched during the current year and it will be held twice a 
year with the enhanced budgetary provision under budgetary head of 
KIP. The duration of SIP will be four weeks in comparison to three 
weeks durations of KIP.”  
 
 
 

34 
 
4.12 When asked about   the achievement s of the programme, the 
Committee submitted the following details:- 
“Nearly 600 overseas youths from nearly 40 countries have 
participated in this programme so far. After successful completion of 
Know India Programme, individual participants become Ambassad ors 
of the culture, history, heritage and traditions of India in their 
country. It has helped the younger generation of oversea s Indians to 
understand India better. It also has provided a forum for students and 
young professionals of Indian origin to share their views, expectations, 
experience and bond with contemporary India with immense 
possibilities.”  
4.13 In response to the specific query of the Committee about steps being 
taken by the Government to make KIP more useful in spreading the India‟s 
impressive image on the global level, the Ministry of Overseas Inian Affairs 
submitted the following details:- 
“Know India Progamme is a highly successful programme run by this 
Ministry and nineteen editions of KIP have attracted nearly 600 
overseas participants of Indian origin. Various steps have been taken 
to make this programme more useful by giving wide publicity to this 
programme through Indian Missions/Posts abroad as well as through 
local media in the foreign countries to enable overseas Indian youths 
to apply for the same. KIP participants after successful completion of 
the programme are encouraged to inform other overseas youths of 
their country to participate in this programme. Recently Overseas 
India Youth Club (OIYC) have been launched in few countries  like six 
Missions / Posts of HCI, Colombo, Sri Lanka, CGI, Melbourne, 
Australia, HCI, Port of Spain, Trinidad & Tobago, HCI, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, CGI, Durban, South Africa and HCI, Singapore with aim to 
network and bring all the overseas youths on one platform. “ 
 

35 
 
4.14 When asked about the need for launching  another similar  programme 
called „Study India programme (SIP)‟ in addition of existing Know India 
Programme, the Ministry stated in its written reply as under: - 
“The SIP as envisaged is to be launched and implemented in 
partnership with select Indian Universities/Institutions etc. of 
repute. The Study India Programme is planned to be held twice a 
year i.e. during summer and winter vacations and it will have 
strength of 30 participants per SIP. The SIP is four weeks programme 
whereas Know India Programme (KIP) is of three week durations. The 
course with academic focus would include. 
 
(a) Academic content: - which would facilitate understanding of 
contemporary India and its development, political and financial systems, 
economic, social and administrative structures; 
 
(b) Cultural content : - which would help the participants to 
understand the Indian experience with exposure to Indian mythology, 
history, arts, handicrafts, dance, music, cuisine, languages and by 
interaction with Indian students. 
(c) Visits: - which will be organized to different institutions and 
industries of importance as also rural visit to allow the participants to 
gain first hand exposure to India.” 
4.15  On being further aske d about the other benefits  of conducting such big 
programmes the Ministry further clarified as under:- 
“Such programmes provide a forum for students and young 
professionals of Indian origin to bond with contemporary India in real 
terms and also share their  views, expectations, and experiences in the 
land of their ancestral country with contemporary India. Visit to 
different states give them opportunity of watching an experiencing 
regional and folk art culture, music and different expressions of the 

36 
 
glorious heritage of India. It will help the younger generation of 
overseas Indians to understand India batter and to see different 
dimensions of Indian life and the progress made by the country in 
various fields e.g. economic, industrial, education, science & 
technology, communication & information technology and culture.  
Individual participants will become Ambassador of the culture, history, 
heritage and traditions of India in their country. The long term benefit 
is to link India with their Indian Youth Diaspora  through this 
programme.” 
4.16 When asked whether Ministry conducts or pursue any follow up action 
after conducting Know India Programme (KIP) , the MOIA submitted following 
details:- 
“Recently, Ministry conducted a study report on „Impact Assessment 
Study on Know India Programme‟ through Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII). This study has taken support of analysis statistical data 
and feedback in order to gauge how the KIP programme has evolv ed 
over the years and exploring the possibilities to improve the quality of 
the programme. The recommendation for improvement is focused on 
five areas like (a) pre -arrival (b) registration (c) arrival and departure 
assistance (d) programme scheduling (e) i nfrastructure and services 
and (f) programme content. The Ministry has accepted the above study 
and is taking due care of the suggested recommendations.” 
4.17 The Committee  are happy to note that the Ministry is organizing ‘Know 
India Programme’ (KIP) with the aim of creating awareness about the phenomenal 
transformation taking place in India and the country’s progress from just a 
destination for culture, herit age and art to an emerging powerhouse in the global 
economic system.  The Committee also observe that the Ministry propose to 
launch another programme called ‘Study India Programme’ (SIP) in addition to 
‘Know India Programme’ (KIP).   SIP will be held twic e a year with the enhanced 

37 
 
Budgetary provision under the budgetary head of know India Programme (KIP).  
The duration of SIP will be four weeks in comparison to three weeks of KIP.  No 
doubt, these programmes provide a forum for students and young professio nals 
of Indian origin to bond with contemporary India in real terms and also share their 
views, expectations and experiences in their ancestral country.  The Committee 
also feel that the participants of the KIP and SIP, apart from the vi sit programme 
and study modules, may be entrusted with and educated about all the schemes 
and programmes of the Ministry and the initiatives taken by the Ministry with 
respect to Overseas Indians , PIOs and NRIs for a multiplying effect on he 
Overseas Indians in the International scenario.   
(Recommendation No. 9) 
4.18. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has conducted a study 
report on ‘Impact Study on Know India Programme ’ through CII for analysis of 
performance of the programme and is exploring the possibiliti es to improve the 
quality of the programme.  The Committee observe that recommendations of this 
study suggests an improvement in all the areas of the programmes viz pre-arrival, 
registration, arrival and departure assistance, programme scheduling, 
infrastructure and services and programme content also.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that these suggestions should be implemented from the next 
programme itself.  The Committee also desire that the participants should not be 
restricted with the visit of only one participating State associated with a particular 
programme rather, they should be given an opportunity to take a view of diverse 
and heterogeneous Indian community representing different regions languages, 
cultures and faiths of present India. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 

38 
 
R. Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) 
4.19 A scheme called „Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC)‟ 
was launched in the academic year 2006 -07. Under the scheme, 100 
scholarships worth up to US$5,000 per annum are granted to PIO and NRI 
students for undergraduate courses in Engineering/ Technology, 
Humanities/Liberal Arts, Commerce, Management, Journalism, Hotel 
Management, Agriculture/ Animal Husbandry etc. The scheme is implemented 
by Educational Consult ants India Limited (Ed.CIL), a Government of India 
enterprise under the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD). The 
scheme is open to NRIs/PIOs/OCIs from 40 countries with a substantial Indian 
Diaspora population. A total number of 468 candidates hav e availed of the 
scholarship since its inception. Following a review of the SPDC scheme, it has 
been decided to do away with the Common Entrance Test (CET) for selecting 
PIO/OCI and NRI students for the scholarships. Applications from students 
who meet the  eligibility criteria are evaluated and shortlisted by a committee 
consisting of officers from the Ministry of HRD, Ed.CIL and MOIA. 
Submitting the reasons of lower allocation of Rs. 5.00 crores in BE 2012-13 the 
justification for doing away with the Commo n Entrance Test for selection of 
students alongwith the criteria for this selection for the scholarship.  The 
Ministry has replied as under:- 
“The Selection process is stated below: 
A Merit List is drawn up on the basis of marks obtained by all the 
eligible candidates  in +2 (or equivalent) exam in the following 
manner: 
 The Merit/Priority of candidates is based on the aggregate marks 
obtained in all the subjects of qualifying exam (+2 or equivalent).  
 In the case of 2 or more candidates getting the same aggregate % 
of marks, the Merit/Priority will be decided by considering their 
marks in English. 

39 
 
 A student scoring higher marks on the above criteria have higher 
priority as compared to one scoring less marks.  
 In rare cases, where two or more applicants have a tie on the 
basis of above criteria, the Merit/Priority is decided on the basis of 
date of birth [As per Christian Era] of the student. The senior student 
is preferred to the younger. 
 In case of any further tie, EdCIL recommend the criteria as 
appropriate to the situation.  
 In case, a candidate has passed from an Examining Body which 
award only Grades and does not disclose marks obtained by them, 
the candidate is required to submit the Range of the Grades adopted 
by the concerned Board/Examining Body and t he Merit/Priority in 
such cases, would be decided on the basis of average/mean of the 
Range of the Grade scored by the candidate in each subject. 
(b)  The candidate must have secured a minimum of 60% aggregate 
marks or equivalent grades in aggregate of all  the subjects in the 
qualifying examination.  
(c) The Registration is done on Receipt of APPLICATION FORM 
(Downloadable from EdCIL‟s websites) along with the required 
documents latest by 10th June of the year of admission at EdCIL.  
(d) Short-listing and selection process is done on the performance of 
the candidate in the qualifying examination which decides the 
eligibility to apply for the Scholarship Scheme. The candidates 
selected, on the basis of (i) their performance in the qualifying 
examination and (ii) fulfillment of the eligibility criterion are admitted 
to the scholarship scheme and shall thereupon be eligible for 
assistance as per the scheme. 
With the result the review of SPDC scheme, it was decided to do away 
with the “Common Entrance Test (CET)”  for selecting PIO and NRI 
students for the award of scholarship. It was very difficult to conduct 

40 
 
“Common Entrance Test (CET)” examination at a time in 40 different 
select countries due to time difference.  
The BE 2010 -11 for SPDC was Rs. 538 lakhs in com parison to Rs. 
544 lakhs for the BE 2011 -12. It was reduced on account of lack of 
timely submission of bills by EdCIL. During the current year, all the 
allocated fund of Rs. 5 crores has been utilized fully.” 
4.20. When specifically asked whether the objective of scheme viz to deepen 
the relationship with Indian Diaspora and providing an opportunity for the 
youth among the Overseas Indians has been realized , the MOIA replied in 
written as under:- 
“Through SPDC scheme , the relation between Non Resident Indians 
(NRIs) and Person of Indian Origin (PIOs) and their ancestral country 
India is becoming strengthened through the channel of quality education 
in India. This is also spreading the image branding of the academic 
repute of the educational institutions of India in different parts of the 
world. Under this scheme, over 468 PIO/NRI students have benefited 
since inception & 100 students have been selected in the current batch.” 
 About the number of applications received, the Ministry submitted following 
details: 
“After proactive promotion of SPDC schemes in identified 40 
countries, we have received 168 applications for the 2011 -2012 
and 175 applications for the year 2010-2011 batch.” 
4.21 In response to the specific query to know the reasons for not selecting more 
students and keeping the number at  100 for the last several years, the MOIA 
submitted the following facts in a written reply:- 
“The budgetary allocation for SPDC is the guiding factor for giving 
the scholarship to  100 students only. In recent years on account 
hike in fees of different courses, even the present budgetary 
allocation for SPDC is not being felt adequate.” 

41 
 
 
 
4.22.  The Committee note that with an objective to make higher education in 
India accessible to the children of overseas Indians and publicize India as an 
education hub,  the Ministry under the ‘Scholarship Programme for Diaspora 
Children (SPDC)’ has been provid ing 100 scholarships every year for 
undergraduate courses.  The Committee also note that the Ministry has recently 
increased the scholarship amount from US $ 3600 per student per annum to US $ 
5000 but has kept the number of scholarships at the level of 10 0 for the last 
several years.  The Committee are more surprised to note that the allocation for 
this scheme under BE 2012 -13 has been reduced to Rs. 5 crores from the 
allocation of Rs. 5.44 crores in BE 2011-12. The scholarship amount has thus been 
increased but the allocation has been reduced to a lower level.  This year 168 
students have submitted applications for the year 2011 -12 and 175 applications 
have been received for 2010 -11 batch. This shows that more students have been 
showing their interest in g etting education in India and than the number of 
scholarships being offered after the revision in scholarship amount the number of 
aspirants  will certainly increase.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Ministry should appropriately increase the number of scholarships as well 
as the allocation at RE stage  so that the interested students may be provided with 
maximum number of scholarships to study in India under the Scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 

42 
 
S. Indian Development Foundation of Overseas Indians  (IDF-OI). 
4.23  The India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF -OI) is 
a not-for-profit trust established by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to 
provide the vast Overseas Indian community a credible institutional avenue to 
engage in philanthropy and socia l entrepreneurship to help advance India‟s 
social development. The Foundation has a Board of Governors, comprising 
eminent Indians and distinguished Overseas Indians.   
4.24 When asked as to how IDF-OI would channelize Overseas Indian 
philanthropic reasons  into social sector and  how would the Foundation 
establish and maintain a social capital and Philanthropy Network alongwith 
the benefits to the Overseas Community from the IDF-OI. 
“India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF -OI) is a not-
for-profit trust established by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, 
Government of India, to provide the vast Overseas Indian community 
a credible institutional avenue to engage in philanthropy and social 
entrepreneurship towards India‟s social development. 
IDF-OI is not just about money. It aims to provide a transparent 
and effective platform for volunteering, sharing of knowledge, skills, 
expertise and social entrepreneurship along with contributions.  
IDF-OI is being registered as a not -for-profit charity i n the US, 
Canada, Europe (UK and Germany), Gulf and APAC region (Australia 
and New Zealand) which will be organically linked to IDF -OI, India. 
IDF proposes to kick start its Outreach programmes in US, Canada, 
Australia & Gulf by mid 2012. 

43 
 
At the backend, I DF-OI will partner will international, national and 
state level NGOs as well as government institutions like Panchayati 
Raj for effective implementation. 
IDF-OI is centered on the theme of ‘Causes, Champions, Change’.  
 Identifying challenges in India 
 Talking about IDF-OI and its work  
 Showcasing „Champions‟ - Inspirational/motivational stories of 
Diaspora philanthropists in India 
 Knowledge partner (NGO) showcasing 
The approach is to highlight gap areas across different regions/states 
where there is a need f or engagement with the global Indians to act 
via both funds and knowledge transfer, while enthusing confidence in 
IDF as an organization that selects trusted partners in the area of 
“engaged philanthropy”. Since, Diaspora engagement with India has 
emotional overtures with regional focus, we propose focusing on 
diverse challenges that are being faced by different regions, across 
various states in India.  This will serve as an educative literature for 
most users in the preliminary stages of research who are s couting for 
a good cause back home. 
Profile champions and their success stories/their struggles/how they 
overcame odds/their impact, sharing experiences to serve as an 
inspiration for others. This will lend credibility to IDF -OI and inspire 
prospective pledge makers. At the onset, we will cover the broad areas 
and growth trends in philanthropy in India, India‟s philanthropy eco -
system, new models, interesting work by different foundations/trusts 
& their social impact, key philanthropic events etc. 
IDF-OI wi ll also ensure credibility by closely reporting its activities 
and partnership with its associates. 

44 
 
The main benefits that the Overseas Community will avail from IDF -
OI are as follows: 
 Overseas Indians will not have to file for FCRA as IDF -OI is 
exempt from the provisions of the Foreign Contributions 
Regulation Act (FCRA) under Section 31 of the Act. 
 Every rupee of donor contribution will go towards the specific 
project/cause. The trust will not charge any 
administrative/execution cost from contributions.   
 IDF-OI will facilitate transfer of funds either directly to the 
NGO/ project/ cause of choice located within India or route it 
through IDF -OI to projects in specific areas of interest. The 
Trust provides flexibility of cause, geography and the manner o f 
engagement. 
 IDF-OI encourages retail contributions. So, the majority of 
„small‟ donors will have a credible, FCRA exempt avenue to 
engage in philanthropy.” 
4.25 The Committee observed that the foundation will function through NGOs 
and wanted to know about the preventive measures being taken in selection of 
honest and effective NGOs and monitoring the implementation using those 
funds.  MOIA submitted the following written reply:- 
“IDF-OI is in the process of short listing recognized and credible 
International, national and state -level NGO‟s with an established 
track record of implementing philanthropic projects in Health 
Care, Education, Self Help Groups for women and sustainable 
lively hood. An Open Call for Proposal from such NGO‟s has been 
finalised. The short listing will be done on the basis of a Credibility 
Assessment Framework. The Norms stated are basic standards of 
governance that all voluntary organizations should follow. It is 
mandatory for all backend partners of IDF -OI to comply with the 
Norms. They include the following elements: -  

45 
 
 Identity 
 Vision, Aims / Objectives and Achievements 
 Governance 
 Operations 
 Accountability and Transparency 
            Further to the initial credibility assessment, there will be field trips by 
IDF-OI official to the actual project sites for physical verification. 
            For monitoring of investment/programmes organized through IDF -OI 
funds, the following are the norms: 
 Reporting 
 Regular reports on progress, use of funds including stories of 
beneficiaries, impact etc. 
 Donors‟ feedback ratings on the reports 
 Donor management tools and analytics information will be provided to 
NGOs to help them understand stakeholder expectations, improve 
reporting and overall communication 
 Submit a Fund Utilization Certificat e for funds received in the financial 
year, through IDF-OI, by December of each year.  
  
Accountability 
 Signed audited statements are available (at least for the last financial 
year): balance sheet, income and expenditure statement, receipts and 
payments a ccount, schedules to these, notes on accounts and the 
statutory auditor‟s report. 
 Statement of accounts indicates whether constructed on a cash basis 
(account for expenses and income at the time of actual payment and 
receipt) or accrual basis (at the time of earning or incurring). 
 There are no serious adverse notes on any material point.  
 There are no material transactions involving conflict of interest between a 
Board or staff member and the organisation.  
 
Transparency 
 The organisation‟s Annual Report is distributed and communicated to 
the community and others and is made available on request every year, 
within eight months of the end of the organisation‟s financial year. 
 The Annual Report contains information on the Board members' names, 
position in the B oard, remuneration or reimbursement, objectives and 
description of main activities of the organisation, a review of the progress 
and results achieved in the year and should contain brief financial 
details.” 
 

46 
 
Project info: Programmatic efforts and impact 
 Detailed project descriptions and logic models 
 Monthly and/or quarterly updates and project reports  
 Monitoring and evaluation studies and reports 
 Impact Report showing that all funds routed through IDF -OI pages for 
your organization have been utilized only towards the case it was 
donated for. 
 
 
4.26 When Asked about the type of participation of contributions in the 
implementation process, MOIA replied as under:- 
“Overseas Indians who are interested in engaging in philanthropic work 
in India can choose the sector, geography and the project that they 
would like to contribute to. IDF -OI will provide the facilitation. Besides 
contributing funding support, overseas Ind ians can also contribute by 
volunteering, sharing of knowledge, skills, expertise and social 
entrepreneurship.  
 
In case the funds are being routed to various projects, the donor will be a 
part of the project through regular reports and updates to him. Rig orous 
back-reporting system is going to be a core focus area for IDF-OI. Besides 
this, based on the donor‟s convenience, he/she will also be taken for site 
visits to the project site. 
 
In case of social entrepreneurship, contributors will transfer 
knowledge/skills related to innovative models that can be implemented 
at the community level for sustainability, in the key focus sectors for 
IDF-OI.”  
 
4.27 The Committee observe that the India Development Foundation of 
Overseas Indians (IDF -OI), a not -for-profit scheme Chaired by the Minister of 
MOIA has been established to serve as a credible single window to lead Overseas 
Indian Philanthropy into India’s social development efforts and aims to provide a 
transparent and effective platform for volunteering, sharin g knowledge, skills, 
expertise and social entrepreneurship alongwith contributions. It i s being 

47 
 
registered as a not -for–profit charity in US, Canada, Europe (UK and Germany), 
Gulf and APAC region (Australia and New Zealand) that will be organically linked 
to IDF-OI India.  The trust will partner with international, national and State level 
NGOs as well as Panchayati Raj institutions. The  Committee observe that IDF -OI 
is in the process of short listing NGOs.  The Committee, therefore, specifically 
caution that the NGOs only with an established track record of being genuine in  
implementing various  schemes/projects fu nded by the Government o f India  
should be selected for the purpose of implementation of the projects in a selfless 
manner in specific area of expertise.   The selection of NGOs with credible and 
excellent track record only can  inspire the faith and attract the contributors.  The 
Committee are aware that a large number of Overseas Indians are interested to 
invest in social sector but they usually hesitate in doing so looking the ground 
reality and prevalent work culture in India.  Therefore, there is a need to 
channelize Diaspora p hilanthropy.  The Committee also desire that through wide 
publicity, the Trust should first convince and then persuade the prospects with 
an assurance of safe and genuine handling of their contributions in the country of 
their origin. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
T. Pension Life Insurance Fund (PLIF) 
 
4.28 On January 4, 2012, the Government approved a new scheme for Overseas 
Indian workers with ECR passports and who have emigrated overseas on a 
temporary employment/contract visa. The proposed scheme aims to encourage, 
enable and assist the Overseas Indian mi grant workforce to voluntarily save for 
their return and resettlement (R&R) and for their old age. The scheme will also 

48 
 
provide a low-cost life insurance cover against natural death to target beneficiaries. 
The salient features of the scheme include: l Provision of a co -contribution benefit 
of Rs.1,000 per year for a period of five years by the Government on the lines of 
„Swavalamban‟ to all Overseas Indian workers who voluntarily save in NPS -Lite; l 
Provision of a special additional pension co -contribution benefit of Rs.1,000 per 
year for a period of five years by the Government on the lines of Swavalamban to 
all Overseas Indian women workers who voluntarily save in the NPS -Lite; l 
Provision of an R&R co -contribution of up to Rs.1,000 per year for a period of five 
years by the Government to encourage Overseas Indian workers to voluntarily 
accumulate savings for their return and resettlement in India. 
During the course of evidence while referring to the above mention Scheme the 
Secretary, MOIA has informed the Committee as under:- 
“Pension and Life Insurance Fund should be demand driven.  So, we 
did a demand survey of Indian workers, outside and other stake 
holders.  We realised that they require three things.  One is that they 
require some amount of pension w hen they are no longer in workable 
age.  They also require some amount of money when they come back 
to India.  There is some gap in employment and so, they need some 
money to tide over or to start a new business.  They also need some 
insurance cover.  So, Pension and Life Insurance Fund is a scheme 
which provides three things.  It provides pension to the unskilled and 
semi-skilled workers.  It provides return and resettlement relief to 
them and also insurance cover.   It is based on the new pension 
scheme, the swavalamban model and a certain co -contribution is also 
given.  We have proposed that if any Indian male worker saves from 
Rs. 1000 to Rs.12,000 in a year, the Government will give Rs.1000  for 
men and for women, it will be Rs.2000 because they work typically for 
a lower working duration.  Similarly, for resettlement, if the worker 

49 
 
saves Rs. 4000, we will give Rs. 1000.  This scheme applies for five 
years. We hope that by the time he comes back, he will get somewhere 
around Rs. 28,000 to RS. 30,000 to start with and once he is 60 
years, he or she will get a pension.  It is a function of how early and at 
what age you start contributing.  I will supply the figures to you.  This 
is a new scheme which we are going to launch.” 
4.29 When asked further, as to, what were the objectives  for launching the 
above mentioned scheme and , how does it differ from the existing insurance 
scheme, the Ministry, in its reply as stated:- 
“The PLIF Scheme has the following objectives:  
The objective of the PLIF Scheme is  to encourage and enable overseas 
Indian workers to voluntarily save for their return and resettlement, 
save for their old age and obtain a life insurance cover.  
Under the Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), the insurance 
coverage is limited to a minimum period of 2 years or the actual period 
of employment whichever is longer and does not provide any life 
coverage to the workers.  The insurance coverage is limited  to payment 
in the event of accidental death or permanent disability leading to loss 
of employment while in employment abroad whereas the proposed 
PLIF Scheme has an insurance component which will give life 
insurance coverage to the overseas Indian workers   during the period 
of insurance so that the workers and their families will have social 
security cover in case of death of the wage earner.  PBBY is a 
mandatory scheme whereas PLIF is a voluntary scheme.    
The PLIF Scheme is proposed to be launched on pi lot basis in mid 
2012.  Scheme is proposed to be launched in all states and in all ECR 
countries later in 2012. It is estimated that around 10,000 workers 
will join the scheme during 2012 -13. The expenses include co -
contribution for pension and R&R, creati ng awareness and publicity, 
operation of Project Management Unit  (PMU), training and 
consultation, etc. The amount will be fully utilized.” 

50 
 
4.30 When enquired,  as to,  how would the Ministry propose to encourage the 
migrant workers to save for their old a ge return and resettlement through this 
fund and what are the implementation plan for operationalsing the new 
pension system, alongwith the benefits attached to the scheme,  the Ministry in 
their reply has stated as under:- 
“The Ministry encourages the migrant workers to save for their old age 
return and resettlement through this fund by making co -contribution in 
the following manner: 
 
 A Government co -contribution of Rs.1000 per annum in line with 
Swavalamban platform forall PLIF subscribers who save between 
Rs.1000 and RSs.12000 per year in NPS-Lite;  
 A special additional co -contribution of Rs.1000 per annum by 
MOIA for overseas Indian women workers who save between 
Rs.1000 and Rs.12000 per annum in NPS-Lite; and 
 A special Return and Resettlement co -contribution of Rs.1000 by 
MOIA to overseas Indian workers who save Rs.4000 per annum 
towards Return and Resettlement. 
 
A simple, integrated enrolment process is being established for PLIF that, 
complies with Security Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Pension Fund 
Regulatory Development Authority(PFRDA) and Insurance Regulatory 
Development Authority(IRDA) “Know Your Customer” norms.  A PFRDA 
regulated „Aggregator‟ and Points of Presence (POPs) will be appointed by 
MOIA for subscriber education and enrolment and to deliver the 
proposed PLIF to overseas Indian workers.  Workers will be able to open 
a PLIF account at an Enrolment Help -desk at all Pr otector of Emigrants 
(POE) offices in relevant States or at similar help -desks located at Indian 
Mission offices in each Emigration Check Required (ECR) country.  

51 
 
The following benefits are overseas Indian workers will get by enrolling 
under PLIF: 
 Pension in old age through the PFRDA regulated NPS-Lite. 
 Savings for Return and Resettlement (R&R) through a SEBI 
regulated mutual fund.  
 A term life insurance cover of Rs.1,00,000 per year against natural 
death through an IRDA regulated life insurance company.” 
 
4.31 The Committee are pleased to note that the Government has approved the 
proposal of setting up of a Pension and Life Insurance Fund (PLIF) for Overseas 
Indian Migrant workers in the ECR countries.  The Scheme has been recently 
launched.  Under the scheme, the Ministry encourages the migrant workers with 
limited work years abroad to save for their old age, return and resettle through 
this scheme by making voluntary co-contribution.  The Committee, however, have 
an apprehension th at under the provision of voluntary  contribution unskilled or 
semi-skilled workers may refrain from contributing to this scheme of Government 
of India without being convinced with the modalities/procedures of reaching or 
getting back the matur ing amount. Therefore, the Committee recommend that all 
the arrangements sh ould be made for wide publicity.  Awareness material 
containing information, frequently asked question (FAQ) in English, Hindi and in 
major Regional Languages relating to this scheme should be prepared and made 
available to the workers at the stage of emigration clearance with immediate 
effect.  Simultaneously, our missions/posts abroad should be provided with the 
same material for spreading awareness amongst the workers already working 
Overseas.   The Committee also desire that possibilities should be explored to 
make the contribution mandatory so that the objectives of the scheme are 
achieved in a better way and every worker’s life becomes happy and secure on 
return to India. 
Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 

52 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
X. Staff strength 
A total staff strength of 195 employees has been sanctioned for the Ministry 
which include 118 staff in the Ministry and 77 staff in PoE offices but only 131 
number of employees are holding actual positions. 
When asked about the steps being taken to fill the vacant post in Ministry and 
PoE, MOIA submitted the following reply:- 
“There is shortage of staff in the Ministry because the manpower has 
to be provided by the Cadre Authority i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs 
upto Section Officer, who are also facing a shortage of staff. The 
shortage of staff has affected the functioning of the Ministry/POE 
offices to some extent. However, against the vacant posts in the 
MOIA and the POEs, the staff   has been appointed  by outsourcing 
through a private agency against the vacant posts. To fill up the 
vacant posts in the Ministry the matter has been discussed with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Cadre Authority and they have provided 3 
Assistants. The posts in POE offices ar e filled up by calling 
nominations from the different Ministries/Departments. Adequate 
numbers of application are not being received. As such there is also 
shortage of staff. As regards the filling of vacant posts in the POE 
offices, posts have again been circulated by calling nominations.” 
5.2 The Committee are surprised to note that even after the repeated  
recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry has not been able to fill up 
the vacant posts in the Ministry and PoE offices.  The Committee express 
their concern to note that since eight years of the establishment, the Ministry 
is still struggling to get its sanctioned strength of staff and functioning 
without its own cadre. The Ministry is also not able to get proper response 

53 
 
through the circular in other Ministries to fill the vacancies of PoE offices.  In 
such situation, the vacancies in the existing PoEs and new PoE  offices may 
not be filled up.  The Committee once again reiterate that the matter relating 
to staff should be continuously pursued with the Minister of Home Affairs 
and Minister of DOPT so that the issue of filling up the vacancies in the 
Ministry and PoE offices and creation of  separate cadre is resolved at the 
earliest. The Ministry should also apprise the Committee about the steps 
being taken to obtain the additional staff for the proposed new PoE offices at 
Jaipur, Guwahati and Rai Bareily. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Y. Libyan crisis  
5.3 During the examination of Demands for Grants 2012 -13 the Committee 
enquired the course of action adopted by the Ministry in times of any calamity, 
distress or political turmoil to rescue Overseas Indians with special reference to 
evacuation of Indians form Libya the Ministry during the course of evidence the 
Secretary,  MOIA has replied as under:- 
“The MEA gets into action on all those things that you mentioned. 
There are budget heads available for meeting those expenses. But 
there are certain areas where b oth of us need to work in tandem, for 
example, last year, we had the Libyan evacuation. It was decided that 
all the matters relating to things being done outside the country 
would be handled by MEA, including bringing them back to India. But 
once they are brought here, then, it will be taken over by MOIA for 
further action.”  
5.4 When further enquired about the expenditure incurred on evacuation 
of Indians from Libya the Ministry in  its written reply has stated as under:- 
“For evacuation of Indians from Libya during the Libyan crisis, around 
Rs. 0.43 crore have been incurred.  Additional allocation had been 

54 
 
sought to handle that emergent situation  under the relevant object 
head.” 
5.5 The Committee has been regularly discuss ing on several occasions about 
the coordination between MOIA and MEA.  This becomes very important 
particularly in the emergencies like global natural calamities/political crisis etc. 
where Indian nationals are stranded and immediate and deliberate rescue and 
relief is required in such emergent situation.  The Committee is aware that the 
MEA, comes into action through Missions/Posts and takes care of such immediate 
and emergent situations in the country where the crisis arises. But the Committee 
observe that almost nothing is left to be done by the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs after bringing the Indian citizens in India as happened in the case of 
evacuation from Libya.  The Ministry of Overseas Affairs is the nodal Ministry in 
the matters relating to NRIs and PIOs.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
MOIA must work in close association with MEA while dealing with such situations. 
Since, evacuation like situation or need for assistance to people of Indian origin 
may arise in several other countries facing political crisis, some budget allocation 
for handling such situation should be kept with MOIA.  
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Z. NRI Investment 
5.6 The Financial Services Division of the MOIA is focusing on many facets to 
improve and facilitate innovative investment practice and policy initiative for 
engaging 27 million strong Indian Diaspora for investing in India. 
Explaining the achievement of Financial Services Division the Ministry in its 
written reply has stated as under:- 

55 
 
“Financial Services Division has set up Overseas Indian Facilitation 
Centre a not for profit trust in partnership with Confederation of 
Indian Industry, India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians – 
a not for profit trust to provide a credible window for Overseas Indian 
philanthropy, Global Indian Network of Knowledge - an electronic 
platform that will connect people of Indian origin from a variety of 
disciplines, recognized as leaders in their respective fields, not j ust in  
their country of residence but globally as well, with knowledge users 
at the national and sub -national levels in India and Prime Minister‟s 
Global Advisory Council of Overseas Indians to draw upon the 
experience and knowledge of eminent people of I ndian origin in 
diverse fields from across the world.  The FS Division is also 
responsible for running awareness cum publicity campaign to create 
wider awareness among the general public about the processes of 
legal immigration, cautioning people about ill egal practices followed 
by fraudulent Recruiting Agencies, and, to provide information to 
emigrants/intending emigrants to ensure legal, safe and orderly 
migration.” 
 
5.7 Furnishing the facilitating the advisory Services provided by the 
Financial Services Division the Ministry has its written reply stated as under 
“The details of the facilitation services provided by FS Division are as 
under: 
Information which supports NRIs/PIOs in their investment decision 
making; 
 
Query addressal in areas of foreign investment consulting, regulatory 
approvals, market research, joint venture partner identification, 
project financing,  accounting, taxation, legal, portfolio investments, 
NRI Banking and more; 
 
Free connect with credible knowledge experts in India. However , the 
experts may charge from NRIs and PIOs for any handholding services 
involving an in- depth analysis of the query, intensive traveling etc.  

56 
 
Free registrations of NRIs/PIOs the OIFC business networking portal; 
and, Free participation in OIFC Diaspora E ngagement Meets, Road 
Shows and Business Forums. “  
 
5.8 The Committee observe that during August 1991 to Dec 2010 the NRI 
investment accounted for Rs. 29,347 crores.  Keeping in mind the large Diaspora 
and sustainable growth of Indian economy despite the Global financial meltdown, 
the Committee look forward to a higher rate of healthy investments by NRIs in 
India.  The Committee recommend that Financial Services Division of the Ministry 
must work on some targets on yearly basis to attract NRI investme nt in India 
using all opportunities including PBDs.  For this purpose, MOIA should also 
consult and deliberate with all the concerned Ministries/Departments/Agencies  
particularly with the Ministry of Commerce to chalk out a comprehensive plan to 
attract mo re and more investment s in the fields where FDI is allowed by the 
Government.  The Committee also desire that some more special incentives, tax 
benefits and exemptions, early start up of business and single window 
documentation facility should be provided to attract higher NRI investments. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             ANANTH KUMAR, 
04 May, 2012         Chairman, 
14 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)     Standing Committee on External Affairs 
  

57 
 
Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 3RD APRIL, 2012 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room G-074, Parliament 
Library, New Delhi. 
Present 
 Shri Ananth Kumar  -   Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 2. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
 3. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
 4.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
 5.  Dr. Bhola Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 6.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard,  
 7.  Shri. H.K. Dua 
 8. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
 9. Dr. Bharatkumar B. Raut 
 10. Dr. Karan Singh 
 11.  Shri Tarun Vijay 
Secretariat 
      1. Shri K.D.Muley          -  Director 
       2.      Dr. Ram Raj Rai          -  Additional Director 
 
Representative of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
Sl. No. Name & Designation 
 
1.  Shri Parvez Dewan   - Secretary (MOIA) 
2.  Shri K.N. Shrivastava  - AS(FA) 
3.  Shri Atul Kumar Tiwari - JS (FS) 
4.  Shri Vinay Sahni  - JS (DS) 
5.  Shri Roulkhumlien Buhril - PGE  
6.  Ms. Ranjana Kale   - Economic Advisor 
7.  Shri Manish Prabhat - Director (Finance), MEA 
8.  Shri Shiv Ratan  - Director (EP) 
9.  Shri K.C. Badhok  - Director (ES) 
10.  Shri Yogeshwar Sangwan - Director (DS) 

58 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to the sitting of the Committee.  
The Chairman then drew attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(1) of the Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
3.        Thereafter, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs in connection with examination of the Deman ds for Grants of 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2012 -13 and discussed some 
important points in detail, arising therefrom in detail.  The Committee desired that the 
Ministry may furnish written replies within 7 days to the supplementary List of Points and 
also to all the points raised by the Members during oral evidence before the Committee.  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken 
by Govt. on the recommendations contained in the 9 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the 
year 2011-12. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the Chairman to 
finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the suggestions made by the Members 
and present the same to Parliament.  
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
            The Committee then adjourned 
  

59 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 4TH MAY, 2012  
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1635 hrs. in Committee Room G -
074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
3. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
4. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
5. Dr. Bhola Singh 
6. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
RAJYA SABHA 
7.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya   
8. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10. Dr. Karan Singh 
11. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
12. Shri Tarun Vijay  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
 

60 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2012-13. The Chairman invited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The 
Members suggested some minor modifications.  The Committee adopted the draft 
Report with minor modifications. 
4.  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
5.  The Committee then au thorized the Chairman to finalize the Report  
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 