 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2010-11] 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2011/Magha, 1932 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2010-2011) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 08 
 

 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2010-11] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24th February, 2011 
 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th February, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2011/Magha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2010-2011………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (iv)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           43 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s Replies...…       93 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            95 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………             100 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                               102  
held on 14.02.2011……………………………………………… 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                           
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Fourth  Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….       107   
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2010-2011) 
 
 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
11. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
12. Shri Takam Sanjoy  
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
14. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
15. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
16. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
17. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
18. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
19. Vacant# 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya* 
23. Shri H.K. Dua* 
24. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
25. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut* 
26. Dr. Karan Singh 
27. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
28. Shri Tarun Vijay 
29. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
30. Vacant$ 
31. Vacant@ 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena      –   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain            –            Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai        –  Additional Director 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey       –  Committee Officer 
  
____________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 21.9.2010. 
$ Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta nominated w.e.f. 21.9.10 and vacancy raised due to his sad 
demise w.e.f. 26.9.10 
# Dr. Manda Jagann ath has been ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  
04.10.2010 conseqent upon his nomination to Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
@         Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon appointment of Shri Ashwani 
Kumar as Minister of State w.e.f. 19.01.2011. 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 10-2011) having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 8th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 4th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Gra nts 
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2010-11. 
 
2. The 4th Report was presented on 20th April, 2010 . The updated Action Taken 
Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report were received on 11th January, 2011. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 14th February, 20 11. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been 
given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Gove rnment on the recommendations 
contained in the 4th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
14 February,  2011                                                                       Chairman,                 
Magha 25, 1932 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

 1 
       
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (20 10-11) of the Ministry of Externa l 
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th April, 
2010. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the 26 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  
These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2, 4,5,6,7, 9,10,11,13,15,16,17,19,20, 22, 
25 & 26. 
 Total-18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  3 and 18 
Total-02 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 12, 14, 23 & 24. 
Total- 04 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 8 and 21. 
Total-02 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for which only interim repli es have been 
given by the government should be furnished within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 

 2 
4. The Committee will now deal with  some of the replies received from the  
Government, which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
5.   The Committee had noted that in the actual expenditure pattern, maximum 
amount was spent during the last quarter of the financial year.  The M inistry in 
their justification had stated that the Cash Accounts from all the Missions/Posts 
were not received at the time of preparation of monthly assessment; therefore, 
the same were incorporated and accounted at the end of the financial year.  The 
Committee were not satisfied with the justif ication given by the Ministry.  At that 
time, the Integrated Mission Accounting System (I -MAS) was functional in more 
than fifty Missions/Posts abroad for accounting purposes. The Committee had, 
therefore, desire d that remaining Missions/Posts should be connected wi th the 
software at the earliest so as to make ac tual assessment of expenditure in terms 
of real time basis.  The Committee had also desired that MEA should regularly 
update their  website particularly, the section related to MEA Acco unts.  
Moreover, the Committee we re amaze d to know that a country which was 
helping in building up e -network in other countries ha d failed to connect all their  
Missions/Posts through the e -network. The Committee  had, therefore, desire d 
that the Ministry should ensure establishment of e -network in all the 
Missions/Posts without delay.   
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“Ministry has already undertaken a pro -active approach to ask all our 
Missions to implement the IMAS software for use by 1 st April 2010. 
This has sensitized th e Missions towards speedy implementation of 
IMAS software. As of December 2010, 121 Missions/Posts have 
implemented IMAS.   The implementation of this software in rest of 
the Missions/Posts has been delayed  
due to technical reasons. This is being actively p ursued with the 
concerned 
Missions/Posts and also with the development team. 
 As for e -networking of our Missions abroad, it may be noted 
that e-networking is also in existence for some specific services, for 
example, Centralized Passport Printing System, on-line Passport 
Verification System, Mail Service, ITEC Programmes. Management 
Information System (MIS) also provides for real time updation of data 
in the budget module as well as the Administration module. Another 
aspect of e-networking will be added wh en the Ministry moves to the 
new building where provision for e -networking of our Missions 
through the voice over IP Protocol has already been incorporated for 
implementation. 
 It may be noted that communications over internet and e -
networking depend heavi ly on public infrastructure available in the 
host country of our Missions abroad. This varies widely from place to 
place and ensuring security of such channels requires to be fool -
proof for functioning. As and when applications, which may require 

 3 
use of de dicated secure networks, Ministry would be implementing 
the same. 
 As per the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Standing 
Committee, XP Division has taken suitable action to spread 
familiarization visits equally over the year. A list of the visits that were 
arranged, and plans for the next three months in the current financial 
year, is enclosed. 
 On the expenditure front, the Division has already spent 
61.8% of the sanctioned budget till date. Further expenditure will be 
incurred for the activities scheduled for  the remaining period in the 
current financial year. 
 The MEA website is being updated on real-time basis. Ministry 
will coordinate with various Divisions for updating the website of 
required material that is helpful to the Missions.” 
 
Tentative schedule of media delegations/ Events  
for XP Division for 2010 & till April 2011 
 
Month Delegation/Event 
April  Hosted A delegation of women journalists from SAARC 
countries  
May  18 – 25 April Hosted media delegates from ASEAN 
countries 
June  20-23 June: Hosted Mr. Haroon Siddiqui, Editor Emeritus, 
Toronto Star 
 30 June- 7 July- A delegation of Journalist Delegation from 
Pakistan 
July  19-24 July : MEA Beat Media Course at FSI 
August  14 - 20 August : Hosted a delegation of Journalists 
from Nepal 
21-27 August :  Hosted a delegation of journalists from 
CIS countries  
September 12-18 September: Hosted a delegation of Journalists from 
China  
25 Sep- 3 October: A delegation of Journalists from Japan 
and South Korea  
17 Sep – 2 October: A tailored made Training programme 
was organized at IIMC for 26 journalists from Myanmar 
October  3-10 October: Hosted a delegation of journalists from 
Bangladesh  
10-17 October: Hosted a delegation from the  Anglophone 
African countries (Egypt, Botswana, Ghana, Namibia, 
South Africa, Sudan, Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, 
Malawi, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Ghana )  
November  19-26 November:  Hosted Mr.  Adrian Michael  Editor in 
Chief of the Telegraph London 
December   1st Dec: Interaction for European Chiefs of Bureaus based 
in New Delhi  
 4-12 December: Hosted a delegation of journalists from Sri 
Lanka. 

 4 
January 
2011 
 8-15 January: Visit of 14 Journalists from Eastern Europe 
(Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Czech,  Slovakia, Romania , 
Slovenia and Croatia-10/11 Jan- DS XPS 
 12-20 January: Would be hosting 12-14 Economic/Financial 
Editors from BRIC/IBSA  
 16-23 January/ : 11 Editors from Bhutan  
 16-28 January: 30 Afghan journalists training (IIMC) 
 23-30 January:  Delegation from Pakistan ( 24 and 27 Jan) 
 Hosting journalists from Taiwan 
February 
2011 
 From Saudi Arabia 
 12-17 February: From Iran 
 From Pakistan 
March 2011  West Asia ( Jordan, Syria, Israel, Palestine and Lebanon) 
April  India Africa Summit in May in Ethiopia (Anglophone African 
countries (Group II: North  & Central African Countries -
awaited) 
 
7. The Committee h ad expressed their concern over expenditure 
pattern of the Ministry and pointed out that maximum amount was spent 
during the last quarter of the financial year . The purpose  of the 
recommendation made by the Committee was that expenditure pattern 
of the who le Ministry should be streamlined and fund allocated should 
be utilized evenly in each quarter of the financial year .  But the Ministry 
has not responded in true letter and spirit and nowhere mentioned about 
actual assessment of expenditure of the Ministry  in terms of real time 
basis.  The Committee had observed that the non -connectivity of all the 
Missions/Posts through e -network was one of the reasons for not 
making actual assessment of expenditure in terms of real time basis and 
had desired that all the Missions/Posts should be connected at the 
earliest. But, t he Committee note that all the Missions/Posts have not 
yet implemented the IMAS software even after a lapse of eight months 
beyond the target date of April, 2010.     
 
 The Committee, therefore, observe that there is an earnest need of 
overhauling the expenditure pattern in the Ministry. In order to avoid the 
rush of expenditure in  the last quarter of  financial year, every  
necessary step should be taken  including implementation of IMAS 
software e-networking in  each Mission/Post at the earliest.  The 

 5 
Committee also desire that website of the Ministry particularly, the 
section related to MEA account should invariably  be updated  by each 
Division on real time basis. 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
8. The Commit tee had noted that there ha d been  vast gap between the 
Proposed Outlays and the Actual Allocation in the Annual Plans over the years.  
The Approved Plan Outlay for the Ministry of External Affairs for 11 th Five Year 
Plan wa s Rs. 2488.41 crores.  Moreover, at the mid -term review stage, the 
Ministry had  sought an allocation worth Rs. 452 2.24 crores and the allocation 
was still awaited. The Committee were of the view that the Ministry should make 
efforts for quicker allocation so that the pace of execution of the current projects 
and the projects in pipeline were not advers ely affected.   The Ministry had  
accepted the fact that the fund allocation by Planning Commission might have 
been based on the past utilization of budget by the Ministry.  The Committee had 
taken very serious note of Ministry‟s casual approach in the matter and hold them 
responsible for continuous poor utilization of funds allocated to the Ministry.  The 
Committee had also note d that inspite of red uced allocation, surrenders had  
taken place a t the end of the year.  Hence, the Committee had suggested that 
the Ministry should make more realistic assessment for Proposed Outlays in 
consonance with Ministry‟s capacity to spend.    
  
9. The Ministry of External Affairs  in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“The Committee‟s suggestion is noted. The Ministry would take all 
necessary steps to ensure a realistic projection of its budgetary 
requirements and efficient utilization of the allocated funds so as to 
avoid any surrender at the close of the financial year.” 
 
10. The Committee regret to note that inspite of the clear instructions 
that replies to the recommendations  of the Committee  should be 
comprehensive and not inconclusive or co uched in general terms like 
noted or accepted etc., the Ministry have replied in the same manner.  The 
Committee do not expect such kind of reply and hope that the Ministry will 
take care of these instructions in future while furnishing replies to the 
recommendations of the Committee.   They have also not given any details 
about the efforts made by them to obtain more allocation of funds during 
the current Five Year Plan.  The Committee regret to note that the Ministry 
have continued with a similar casual approach ignoring the serious note of 
the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should 
ensure a realistic projection of its budgetary requirements and efficient 

 6 
utilization of the allocated funds so as to avoid any surrender at the close 
of financial year  and also inform the  Committee about the initiatives  taken 
by the Ministry to implement the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
11. The Committee had taken a note of very small number of interpreters in 
position at Headquarters and Missions. The Committee had  also noted that as 
and when required the services of interpreters from outside the cadre of Ministry 
were also availed of. But the Ministry wa s not able to provide information about 
the payments made to them during the last three years.  The Committee had felt 
that the compilation of  complete data regarding availing of services of 
interpreters from outside at Headquarters and Missions and payment made to 
them would facilitate the Ministry to make realistic assessment and requirements 
of the interpreters languag e wise.   The Committee were not in favour of the 
presence of outside interpreters in the important and politically sensitive 
international meetings. The Committee  had, therefore, reiterate d that adequate 
study should be undertaken and the Ministry should build and strengthen its 
interpreter cadre having sufficient number of interpreters in all major languages 
particularly in Non-UN languages.  
 
 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have  stated as 
under: 
 
“All the Territorial Div isions have been working on and sharing 
information about hiring of interpreters at Headquarters.  As regards 
the need to expand the Interpreters‟ Cadre of the Ministry, it may be 
noted that all Indian Foreign Service Officers are required to learn a 
„Compulsory Foreign Language‟ before they are confirmed in 
Service. Therefore, a fair degree of foreign language expertise is 
available within MEA even apart from the specialized Interpreters 
Cadre. At present the languages spoken by IFS officers cover Arabic, 
Chinese, French, Spanish, Russian, German, Italian, Persian, 
Korean, Japanese, Portuguese, Nepalese, Kiswahili, Bahasa Malay, 
Thai, Turkish, Bahasa Indonesia, Sinhalese, Vietnamese, Burmese, 
Dutch and Serbo -Croatian. Indian Missions and Posts abroad also 
have posts of local interpreters and hence they do not need to hire 
interpreters in the normal course. Only in exceptional circumstances 
and during VVIP visits, do they hire additional interpreters to meet 
the short -term requirement. Since English is spoken  in the Foreign 
Offices of most of the countries in the world, the present number of 
specialized Interpreters, coupled with the foreign language expertise 
of IFS officers, and the services of the local hired interpreters in 
Missions/Posts is felt to be ade quate to meet day -to-day needs. 
Increasing the strength of the specialized Interpreters‟ Cadre in MEA 
is also constrained by the fact that members of this Cadre are 
recruited by UPSC on the basis of their existing academic 
qualifications and work experienc e in the concerned language. As 

 7 
such, there are very limited facilities available in Indian academic 
institutions for teaching of non -UN or single -country foreign 
languages. Hence, widening of the Interpreters‟ Cadre to include 
more languages is likely to pose considerable difficulty at the 
recruitment stage.” 
 
13.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry have not been 
able to provide complete  data regarding availing of services of interpret ers 
from outside at Headquarters/Missions and  actual payments made to them  
even after repeated directions  of the Committee.  The Ministry have  
informed that Indian Missions/Posts have posts of local interpreters and 
they do not hire interpreters in normal course.  Actually, the Committee had 
expressed dissatisfaction over small number of interpreters in position at 
Headquarters & Missions and had desired to know the number of hired 
interpreters and payment made to them. They have also not responded to 
the concern of the Committee about the presence of outside interpreters in 
the important and politically sensitive international meetings.  It seems that 
Ministry have ignored all the focal points relating to the issue of hiring of 
interpreters from outside and have been furnishing inconclusive reply.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that desired information should be 
compiled and furnished without any further delay and concrete efforts 
should be made to strengthen interpreter cadre instead of hiring 
interpreters from outside cadre  without making any effort to convince the 
Committee through one or the other reasons. The Committee also want that 
services of Hindi interpreters should invariably be made available in all the 
Missions abroad. 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
14. The Committee had taken note of Ministry‟s effort to provide Aid and Loan 
to neighbouring countries and developing countries under various heads.  Apart 
from building very few mega -projects in neighbouring countries, the Ministry wa s 
engaged in Small Development Projects (SDPs) in those countries.  However, for 
all other countr ies the main focus of Ministry wa s to provide technical a id which 
was mainly focused on IT sector and capacity building of the personnel under 
International Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC 
Programme). The Commi ttee were of the opinion that Ministry should evaluate 
the entire gamut of projects under „Aid and Loans‟ and come out with the 
comprehensive review and a realistic, targeted blueprint with clearly stated aims 
and objectives encompassing developing countri es of  African and Latin 
American and Caribbean Countries as well as neighbouring countries.  

 8 
 
The Committee were also of the view that the Ministry should also focus 
on investment in projects for creating permanent assets particularly in the area of 
infrastructure. The Committee  had, therefore, desire d that the Ministry should 
identify such projects that increase India‟s presence on a long term basis and 
citizens of a friendly country might  feel India‟s presence as a friend in need.  
While making the inves tments, the attitude and affection of the people of that 
particular country should also be considered. The Committee had also desired 
that alongwith the public sector, the Government of India should encourage, 
facilitate and channelize the energy of Indian  private sector to increase India‟s 
presence in the African and Latin American regions.  The Committee had 
reiterated that India should pay more attention towards those countries, in view of 
various competing influences operating in the region. 
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“Developing Countries, including those in Caribbean, Latin America 
and Africa are being paid due attention by the Ministry as far as grant 
of assistance to these countries is conc erned. The main focus is to 
set up IT Training Centres under Development Partnership. In the 
last few years, IT Training Centres have been set up in Cuba, El -
Salvador, Honduras, Jamaica and Nicaragua.  Establishment of new 
IT Training Centres is under imple mentation in Syria and Grenada. 
Proposals for setting up similar IT Training Centres in Vietnam, 
Ecuador and Dominican Republic are under active consideration of 
the Ministry. 
 
 Infrastructure projects have not been neglected.  Apart from 
the projects ment ioned above, a Vocational Training Centre for 
construction sector is being set up in Aceh, Indonesia. The 
Government of Montenegro has approached us for conducting a 
feasibility study on setting up of a communication network centre in 
Podgorica (Montenegro) which will link that Country‟s Missions with 
its Headquarter. Development of two wind farms in Syria is also 
being considered.  In Maldives, an 8 -storey India -Maldives 
Friendship Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism Studies Centre is being 
constructed.  
 
 Ministry has given due consideration to the role of the private 
sector also.  IT Centre projects in Cuba, El -Salvador, Honduras, 
Jamaica and Nicaragua were all awarded to the private sector, as 
was the civil, plumbing, fire -fighting and electrical works pa rt of the 
project in Maldives. 
 
 Besides the above, Ministry has undertaken restoration works 
of the Ta Prohm Temple complex in Cambodia and Wat Phou 
Temple complex in Laos through the Archaeological Survey of India 
(ASI) to help preserve the cultural heritage of these two nations. 
  
 

 9 
 
 Africa 
 
 In Africa, the Indo-Zimbabwe Project for Development of Small 
and Medium Enterprises Sector is under completion.  In Tanzania, 
feasibility study for mining coal for production of sponge iron and 
steel through Minist ry of Coal is under consideration of the Ministry.  
Proposals for setting up of IT Centres in Burundi, Uganda, 
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Congo, and 
Liberia are also under Ministry‟s consideration. 
 
 This Ministry has been assisting va rious countries of Africa for 
development through a mix of loan and grant. Major infrastructure 
projects on the request of host countries have been undertaken 
through Line of Credit (LOC) route whereas smaller projects are 
considered under GOI grant as well. Year 2008 had been a landmark 
year in India Africa relations as after the India -Africa Forum Summit 
(IAFS) of April, 2008, the priorities of African continent were identified 
and the programme was chalked out for meeting those priorities. 
During the IAF S, our PM announced US$ 5 billion credit to various 
African countries over a period of 5 years and grant amounting to 
US$ 500 million for implementation of various projects. In the Plan of 
Action, various programmes for capacity building in Africa through 
regular academic courses and training courses under agriculture, 
doubling of ICCR scholarships, enhancement of ITEC scholarships, 
etc. were offered to African countries.  
 
 A commitment has also been made to set up the following 
institutions in Africa:- 
 
i. India-Africa Institute of Information Technology; 
ii. India-Africa Diamond Institute; 
iii. India-Africa Institute of Planning and Administration; 
iv. 10 Vocational Training Centres in Africa and;  
v. Human Settlement Centres.  
 
Discussions are continuing with the AU for id entification of locations 
of the above institutes/centres. 
 
 The above list is only indicative and to get a complete picture, 
a copy of the Plan of Action of the Framework for Cooperation of the 
IAFS launched with the African Union (AU) Delegation in March  2010 
is enclosed. In addition, the Africa Divisions in the MEA are 
implementing projects under grant bilaterally as well.  
 
 The decision of the IAFS focus on some of the ideas by 
elaborating capacity building programmes and working on creation of 
regional institutions. Extensive consultations with the African 
countries, Regional Communities and African Union are held so that 
the requirement of African countries is fully met.   
 

 10 
 Periodic review is conducted of our policy and programmes in 
order to safegua rd India‟s interests in Africa. The energy of the 
private sector is also channelised to increase India‟s presence in 
Africa. To achieve this end, we have supported the CII -Exim Bank 
Conclave for 6 years in which India‟s private sector and public sector 
meet and match their objectives with their African counterparts.   
 
 So far, Lines of Credit(LOCs) worth US$1446.20 million 
have been extended to the 25 countries in West Africa.  These 
have been done on a bilateral basis as also through regional 
organizations/initiatives.  LOCs have been mostly for infrastructure 
projects.  Our focus is for supply of projects which will have a 
lasting impression of India's contribution to the respective country's 
economic and social development, e.g., we have recently 
announced LOCs for two hydro power projects in DR Congo which 
will benefit a vast number of people.   
 
 During the year 2010 -11, so far, the following LOC‟s have 
been approved for the countries of East & Southern Africa: 
 
S.N. Country 
Amount in 
US $ mn 
Purpose 
1 Ethiopia 213.31 Development of sugar industry 
2 Kenya 61.60 Power transmission lines 
3 Malawi 
 
 
50.00 
Cotton processing facilities, 
green belt initiative, one village 
one product project 
4 Mauritius 
 
48.50 
For purchase of Off shore Patrol 
Vessel 
5 Mozambique 25.00 Rural electrification project 
6 Mozambique 
 
 
20.00 
Enhancing productivity of rice-
wheat-maize cultivation (US$ 20 
million) 
 
 
 Revised set of guidelines for disposal of LOC applications 
have been approved by External Affairs Minister and is now awaiting 
the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 The projects undertaken by the East and Southern Africa 
Division are invariably undertaken on the request of the host 
countries. Recommendations of our Heads of Missions are taken into 
consideration before submiting any proposal for approval. The 
following important projects have been completed/ are under process 
in the countries of East & Southern Africa under GOI grant: 
 
1. Setting up of India -Tanzania Centre of Information 
Technology, in Dar-es-Salaam (Already implemented) 
2. Setting up of Centre of Excellence in Information Technology 
in Lesotho (In advance stages of implementation) 

 11 
3. Setting up of India -Seychelles Centre of Excellence in 
Information Technology (In advance stages of implementation) 
 
 These Centres have been set up at the request of the host 
Governments and apart from providing support for networking in 
medical/educational fields would also impart training to the citizens of 
respective countries in the field of Information Techno logy. The 
Centres would no doubt meet the expectations of the Committee as 
citizens of Tanzania, Lesotho and Seychelles would feel India‟s 
presence as a friend in need. 
 
Under the Pan -African e -Network Project, Government of India is 
helping in setting up a fibre -optic network to provide satellite 
connectivity, tele -medicine and tele -education in African countries.  
M/s. Telecommunication Consultants India Limited, a Government of 
India undertaking, is implementing the project on behalf of 
Government of Ind ia.  Project aims to create significant linkages for 
tele-education and tele -medicine, internet, video -conferencing and 
VoIP services making available the facilities and expertise of some of 
the best universities and super -specialty hospitals in India to t he 
people of Africa.  47 of the 53 African countries have signed the 
agreement with TCIL for implementation of this project, whcih has 
already been implemented in 39 countries and implementation is 
likely to be completed in the remaining countries shortly. 
 
 The Government has been encouraging participation of 
private sector in investment related projects.  With this view in mind, 
regional conclaves/workshops have been organized not only in India 
but also in several African capitals to attract investment by  private 
sector organisations.  Recent examples are acquisition of 
telecommunication services by Bharti Mittal Group, joint venture 
projects by TATAs/Mahindra & Mahindra in Nigeria, Angola etc.  
 
 Eurasia 
 
 Under our programme, Aid to Eurasian Countries, a number 
of projects in varying sectors of the economy have been funded or 
are being funded in some of the countries in the region.  These 
include some mega projects like renovation of Varzob -I project in 
Tajikistan at a cost of Rs. 74.20 crores, setting up  of a Potato 
Processing Plant in Talas region of the Kyrgyzstan (cost Rs. 10.80 
crores) and some smaller projects like setting up of  
Entrepreneurship Centre in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan in addition to 
various I.T. Centres in Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and 
Turkmenistan.  Such unique capacity building and training projects in 
the entrepreneurship development sector and particularly in the I.T. 
field, help establish a strong Indian brand of excellence in these 
areas.  This will promote goodwill for India and also create conditions 
for promoting IT –related exports in the future.  These projects are 
identified taking into consideration the requirements and aspirations 
of the people of the recipient countries and India‟s expertise and 

 12 
reputation in  that field.  Some of these projects funded with our 
financial support have become self -sustained and showcase India‟s 
developmental experience in the particular field.  Our budget for the 
year 2010 -11 has been increased to Rs. 40 crores in keeping with 
India‟s strategy to increase our presence in Eurasian countries in our 
extended neighbourhood.  
 
 Possibility of setting up certain new projects in the region like 
Eurasia e-Centre and establishment of a hospital with Indian financial 
and technical assistanc e are being explored.  These are likely to 
further boost India‟s image in the Eurasia region. 
 
Latin America and Caribbean 
  
 India desires to build a multi -faceted relationship with Latin 
America & Caribbean region which is increasingly assuming strategic  
importance for India.  India has a Strategic Partnership with Brazil, a 
Privileged Partnership with Mexico and with Argentina we are 
working towards a Strategic Partnership. India wishes to nurture 
historical and cultural ties with the Caribbean region th at has 
substantial presence of Indian Diaspora. Our engagement with the 
region in general has increased manifold both bilaterally and 
multilaterally in recent times.   There have been several exchanges 
of visits at the Head of Government/State, Ministerial , official and 
people to people contacts. This year Prime Minister visited Brazil for 
the Bilateral, IBSA and BRIC Summits on 15 th April 2010.  Earlier 
former MOS Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Colombia, Peru, Dominican 
Republic and Haiti in January 2010.  MOS  Ms Praneet Kaur visited 
Brazil and Argentina in May 2010.   
 India‟s trade with the region in 2009 was over US$ 16 billion 
and our investments so far in the region are over US$ 11 billion 
mostly in hydrocarbons. The potential is vast and we will continue to 
pursue our strategic interests in the region pertaining to energy 
security, food security, source minerals for our growing industry and 
facilitate market access for our exports.  As part of our commitment 
to South -South Cooperation, we will continue to assist countries in 
the region in their capacity building initiatives.  Trade promotion 
activities and business conclaves will be supported to bring greater 
awareness about the potential that exists between India and Latin 
America & Caribbean.   
 Our IT ce ntres set up in Cuba, El Salvador, Honduras, 
Jamaica and Nicaragua are all working satisfactorily.  These IT 
centres are very well appreciated in the countries that have been set 
up especially since they are assisting countries in their capacity 
building initiatives and creation of employment.  On the request of the 
Governments of Nicaragua, Honduras and El Salvador we have 
extended to run the centres for one more year. The proposal for an 
IT centre in Grenada is in an advance stage of consideration.  Similar 
proposals for Ecuador, Dominican Republic, Uruguay and Paraguay 
are being processed.  The proposal of Costa Rica is awaiting internal 
clearances of its Government.  Through our Indian Technical and 

 13 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) we impart specialized train ing in 
varied sectors at our premier Institutions of India.  We also send our 
experts to these countries under this programme.  For LAC countries 
we provide over 500 ITEC slots every year.  The Government Lines 
of Credit (LoC) extended to LAC countries are  primarily meant for 
infrastructure creation.  In the last quarter, proposals received from 
Cuba, Belize and Nicaragua are being examined. 
 
 In order to sustain our long term strategic interests in the 
region we will consider opening of new missions on a c ase by case 
basis.  We have opened a new mission in Guatemala in December, 
2009. 
 
Nepal 
 
 Our economic cooperation with Nepal under “Aid to Nepal” is 
broad based with specific focus at the grass -root level. A number of 
projects have been implemented in the  areas of infrastructure, 
health, water resources, rural and community development and 
education. The economic assistance extended to the GoN durin g 
2008-09 under „Aid-to-Nepal‟ budget was over Rs. 120 crores; and in 
FY 2009-2010, Rs. 161 crores. 
 
The Smal l Development Projects (SDPs) programme, which 
covers projects with an outlay of less than NRs 5 crore (approx I Rs. 
3.125 crores), focuses on the critical sectors of health, education and 
community development has been implemented in Nepal  under an 
MoU signed with the Government of Nepal in 2003. So far , over 150 
projects have been completed and over 200 are under various 
stages of implementation in all 75 districts of Nepal. The SDP MoU 
has been further extended for a period of three years in July 2008. 
There are a number of medium to large projects under various 
stages of implementation in Nepal.  
 
 We have  been working towards development and 
upgradation of border infrastructure including (i) Integrated Check 
Posts (ICPs), (ii) Road and (iii) Rail Linkag es along the India -Nepal 
border. The development of the border infrastructure will increase 
connectivity with the Terai region and will further strengthen the 
economic linkages and people -to-people contacts between the two 
countries. 
 
Bhutan 
 
 As recommended by the Committee, in Bhutan, Ministry have 
focused on investment in projects for creating permanent assets, 
particularly in the area of infrastructure, and on projects that increase 
India‟s presence on a long-term basis.  
 India is Bhutan‟s largest development partner and the principal 
donor for its economic development. GOI assistance encompasses a 
wide range of sectors of infrastructural development such as 

 14 
hydropower, transport, health, civil aviation, education, industry, 
information technology and communications.  
 
 GOI has assisted in the establishment of the Paro airport.  
 
 GOI is providing assistance for the establishment of a one million 
tonne capacity cement plant (Dungsum Cement Plant or DCP) in 
Bhutan, which will provide local employment and ex ploit Bhutan‟s 
only viable mineral resource in the area, limestone. India is also 
assisting Bhutan in the establishment of required infrastructure for 
the smooth functioning of DCP, such as roads, transmission line 
for the power supply for the plant, elect ric sub-station and railway 
siding.  
 
 Border Roads Organisation‟s Project DANTAK has been 
undertaking works exclusively in Bhutan and has implemented 
several prestigious infrastructural projects such as development 
of highways and roads, telecommunication networks, airfields, 
helipads, housing complexes, hydel sub -stations etc. Till date. 
DANTAK has completed 1615 kms of black -topped roads, 115 
kms of tracks and 4830 mts. of bridges in Bhutan. Other projects 
include four major highways, that is, Phuentsholi ng-Thimpu (179 
kms), Gelephu -Trongsa (248 kms), Darranga -Trashigang (180 
kms), and Simtokha -Trongsa-Trashigang (548 kms); Paro and 
Yangphula airfields, Bhutan Broadcasting Station, India House 
complex,  Chukha hydel project housing complex, SAARC 
Convention Centre (now used as offices of Bhutan’s Prime 
Minister and Foreign Minister, enhancing the visibility of India’s 
assistance), Sherubtse College, Bank of Bhutan building and a 
hospital in Depthang.  
 
 Development of water resources, particularly hydroelect ric power 
projects (HEPs) has been an important, mutually beneficial and 
highly successful element in India‟s assistance programme for 
Bhutan. Three major HEPs have been built with GOI assistance 
in Bhutan: 336 MW Chukha HEP, 60 MW Kurichhu HEP and 
1020 Ta la HEP. India has committed to develop 10,000 MW of 
hydropower in Bhutan for export to India by 2020. Ten new HEPs 
have been identified for development to achieve this target. Of 
these, work on three has started – 720 MW Mangdechhu HEP, 
1200 MW Punatsangchhu-I HEP and 1000 MW Punatsangchhu-II 
HEP. Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for the remaining projects 
are being prepared.  
 
 India is assisting in the establishment of a Medical College in 
Thimpu, for which a Joint Project Implementation Authority has 
been set up. Some other major projects under Indian assistance 
include Electricity Distribution System for Thimpu and Paro, Indo -
Bhutan Microwave Link and „Total Solutions Project‟, an IT and e -
governance project that aims to make half of Bhutan‟s population 
computer literate.  

 15 
 
 Under the SDP programme in Bhutan, the Royal Government of 
Bhutan (RGoB) has identified projects that are crucial to socio -
economic development including drinking water schemes, 
irrigation channels, farm roads, etc. So far, 1259 project s have 
been identified  in two phases, for which 90% funds have been 
released for the 440  projects in phase one . Being at the 
grassroot level, these projects impart high visibility to India and 
help build goodwill amongst the people of Bhutan towards India. 
 
 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Maldives 
 
 The bilateral aid projects in Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Myanmar 
and Maldives are identified mutually by India and the concerned 
countries keeping in view the needs of the people and in 
synchronization with the development of the countries where they are 
implemented.  Projects are chosen with a view to enhance India‟s 
profile, strengthen relations and create goodwill. As a close and 
friendly neighbour, India has also been providing humanitarian aid 
and assistance to Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Myanmar and Maldives on 
times of natural disasters and calamities. 
 
 India is undertaking projects in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar 
and Maldives.  Many of these are focused on creating permanent 
assets, particularly in the area of  infrastructure.  These projects 
would increase India‟s presence on a long term basis and enhance 
our affinity with the citizens of that country. Where possible, we are 
also involving private sector through the tendering process.   
 
 Several projects in all four countries have been completed and 
are at various stages of planning and implementation.  In this context, 
following are the major projects: 
 
Bangladesh:  
 
i. Construction of Kala Bhaban Project for the Department of 
Theatre and Music Faculty at the University of Dhaka;  
ii. Construction of core shelters in 11 cyclone affected villages in 
Bangladesh 
 In Bangladesh, projects like Kala Bhaban and construction of 
core shelters will create assets on the ground. 
 
Sri Lanka: 
 
i. Rehabilitation of Kankesanthurai Port in Northern Sri Lanka; 
ii. Restoration of railway lines in Northern Sri Lanka; 
iii. Construction of Cultural Centre and restoration of stadium in 
Jaffna; 
iv. Assistance in the construction of houses for the Internally 
Displaced People (IDPs) in Northern Sri Lanka; 

 16 
v. Construction of Vocational Training Centres in Northern, 
Eastern and Central Provinces of Sri Lanka; 
vi. Various other projects in the areas of cultural cooperation, 
infrastructure in health and education. 
 
 During the visit of EAM between November 25 -28, 2010, EAM  
participated in the ground breaking ceremony for the railway project 
in Northern Sri Lanka being taken up under an Indian line of credit as 
well as the ground breaking ceremony for construction of a pilot 
project of 1000 houses for Internally Displaced Pe rsons (IDPs) of 
Northern Sri Lanka.  Work on the Kankesanthurai Port is also going 
on schedule.  Other projects including the restoration of a stadium in 
Jaffna, vocational training centres, etc. are at various stages of 
planning and processing.  EAM also handed over tractors and 
agricultural implements to revive the livelihood of the IDPs.  While 
deciding on the projects, the sentiments of the people is kept in mind, 
as well as consultations undertaken with various stakeholders. 
 
Myanmar: 
 
i. Kaladan Multi-model Transit Transport Project for connectivity 
to the North-East;  
ii. Rhi-Tiddim Road; 
iii. Tamu-Kalewa-Kalmeyo (TKK Road); and 
iv. Various other projects for railways, transmission lines and 
capacity building  
 
 The work on the Kaladan Multi -Model Transit Transport 
Project is proceeding on schedule and lines of credit have been 
extended to Myanmar of US$ 60 millions for railway equipment and 
US$ 64 millions for transmission lines. 
 
Maldives: 
 
i. Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism Studies, Male (Hotel 
Management Training Institute). 
 
II. The various projects in Maldives are also being monitored at 
various stages of approval. 
 
Mongolia 
 
 Two highly visible projects on capacity building and human 
resource development in Mongolia have been set up with our 
assistance.  These are  
 
(i) Rajiv Gandhi Vocational Training Centre (RGVTC) : The Centre 
was inaugurated by Vice -President K.R.Narayanan in September 
1996. It has training facilities eight different fields such as Auto 
Mechanic, electrician, Gem Stone Cutting/polishing, e tc. The Centre 
is now called Rajiv Gandhi Art and Production School (RGAPS).   

 17 
 
(ii) Atal Bihari Vajpayee Centre for Excellence In Information & 
Communication Technology [ABVCE] :   The Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
Centre for Excellence in Information & Communicati on Technology 
was set up in October 2002 with a grant of US dollar one Million by 
Government of India. The ABVCE has  facilities such as 
Videoconferencing, Data Networking Lab, Software Lab, Lecture Hall 
etc. The Video Conferencing facility at the Centre is  now connected 
to 18 Aimag (provincial) capitals. 
 In Mongolia, the Government has decided to send two experts 
from National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) to Ulaanbaatar to 
inspect the existing facilities at the Rajiv Gandhi Art and Production 
School (RGAPS) and recommend upgrading of existing facilities and 
introduction of new facilities, if required, after consultations with 
Director of RGAPS. The above work is being undertaken by the 
Technical Cooperation Division of this Ministry. 
 
Afghanistan 
 India‟s assistance programme in Afghanistan, being 
implemented in close coordination with the Afghan government, has 
been in key areas of infrastructure generation and rehabilitation, 
health, human resource development, education etc and is virtually 
spread over the whole of Afghanistan. India‟s assistance programme 
places particular emphasis on capacity building and human resource 
development. Despite daunting logistical and security challenges, 
two major GOI -funded infrastructure projects have been complete d– 
construction of 218 km road from Zaranj to Delaram in Nimroz 
province in Southern Afghanistan and the construction of 220 KV 
Transmission Line from Pul-e-Khumri to Kabul (202 km) together with 
a 220/110/20 kV sub -station in Chimtala. Construction of 
Afghanistan's new Parliament Building, a symbol of the common 
commitment of both countries to pluralism and democracy, 
commenced recently and is scheduled for completion within 36 
months. Another ongoing infrastructure project being built with GOI 
assistance involves the construction of Salma Dam in Herat 
Province. India‟s assistance programme in Afghanistan has been 
substantially enhanced from 2009 -10 by a 35% increase in 
scholarships for students and others coming to India, underlining our 
commitment to assisting Afghanistan in capacity building and human 
resource development. We also have a number of Small 
Development Projects under implementation – quick gestation 
projects that that have a direct and visible impact on local 
communities. 
 India‟s assistance programme in Afghanistan has earned it 
tremendous goodwill among the ordinary people there, cutting across 
the ethnic and geographic divides. This has been borne out most 
recently by opinion surveys conducted by reputed international 
organizations such as Gallup and BBC/ABC/ARD which found that 
India topped the list of countries viewed favourably by the Afghan 
people, and that too by a large margin, far ahead of US, Germany, 
Iran, Britain, Pakistan  and other countries or organizations.  

 18 
PLAN OF ACTION OF THE  
FRAMEWORK FOR COOPERATION OF THE  
INDIA-AFRICA FORUM SUMMIT 
 
Introduction 
 
In order to deepen the India -Africa strategic partnership to 
promote sustainable development, and to implement the outcomes of 
the First India -Africa Forum Summit, the two sides  have jointly 
developed this Plan of Action, with a view to implementing the 
thematic areas that are contained in the Framework for Cooperation. 
The Plan of Action is established for a period of 4 years and will be 
subjected to review, adaptation and enhan cement during and after 
that period. 
 
 
1. ECONOMIC COOPERATION 
 
i. Agriculture 
 
 To enhance agricultural education, science and research, 
India will provide 25 PhD and 50 Masters‟ scholarships per annum 
for four years to African students in agriculture in Indian 
Universities/Institutions.  The scholarships will cover different 
disciplines in agriculture. In order to ensure equitable distribution, the 
AU Commission will coordinate the process of selecting the 
prospective candidates in conjunction with the  G overnment of India 
and its embassies in Africa. 
 
India will also provide:  
 
 Customized short -term trainings related to transferable skills 
focusing on training of trainers who will transfer expertise to 
stakeholders at national level; 
 Targeted visits of Indian professionals for field demonstrations 
based on mutually agreed objectives and mission with 
beneficiary stakeholders; 
 On-the-spot consultations and in-country trainings; 
 Provision of essential hardware and software in field 
demonstrations; and 
 Exchange of literature, seed, and planting materials, as well 
as sharing of best practices in agriculture. 
 
The areas to be covered under this programme will endeavour to 
include management of livestock and fisheries; management of 
commodity boards; irrigation an d water conservation; and capacity 
building in the area of agro-processing. 
 
 
 
 

 19 
ii. Trade, Industry and Investment 
 
 The two sides recognize the need to expand two -way trade, 
greater market access and investment facilitation and agree to the 
following: 
 
 India will establish an India -Africa Institute of Foreign Trade 
based on the model of the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade.  
The institute will provide professional education in the field of 
International trade and management including studies 
pertaining to  the public and private sectors in Africa. In 
addition, the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) will 
provide customized capacity building programmes on 
international trade and business over a four -year period 
through the existing bilateral arrangement s. This will provide 
capacity building as the process for the establishment of an 
India-Africa Institute of Foreign Trade is pursued.  
 India will also establish an India -Africa Diamond Institute on 
the model of the Indian Diamond Institute in an African 
country. The Institute will help to develop African capacities 
and skills in processing, polishing, and grading raw diamonds. 
 India‟s Duty -Free and Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for 
Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in Africa, which has been 
widely welcomed  and which allows access for African goods 
and services to the growing Indian market, will be continued.  
Information sharing on the DFTP scheme has been carried out 
through various fora and will be enhanced under this Plan of 
Action.    
 To enhance private  sector interaction and building of 
entrepreneurship and business -to-business linkages, the 
following initiatives will be undertaken:   
   
 Preparation of an India -Africa Business Guide to highlight 
opportunities on both sides for trade and investment, thro ugh 
the Chambers of Commerce of the two sides;   
 Organization of Business Councils or meetings  at the 
Regional level between Indian and African economic 
operators, in order to examine business opportunities offered 
by both economies; and  
 Upgrading indust rial supply -side capacities and enhancing 
competitiveness; and exchange of best practices between 
African and Indian Investment Promotion Agencies.   
 
iii. Small and Medium- Scale Enterprises (SMEs) 
 
Small and Medium -Scale Enterprises are at the core of ec onomic 
development through the private sectors of Africa and India.  They 
contribute to exports, transfer of technology, employment generation, 
development of regional trade and entrepreneurship. In this respect 
and to promote the development of capacities and support transfer of 
technology, the following actions will be undertaken: 

 20 
 
 India will establish ten (10) vocational training centers in Africa 
through the National Small Industries Corporation.  Thereafter, 
it will support existing vocational training institutions in Africa. 
 India will offer generous Lines of Credit on concessional terms 
to a large number of African countries; undertake programmes 
for development of capacity building in Africa and support the 
Chambers of Commerce in India to hold India -Africa Annual 
Conclave and other similar initiatives. 
 Programmes to provide enabling infrastructure and conducive 
operating environment for SMEs and Small and Medium-Scale 
Industries (SMIs) in Africa will be created as well as joint 
ventures between Afric an and Indian SMEs including the 
development of business guides for the establishment of 
SMEs in Africa and India as a means of youth employment.  
 
iv.  Finance 
 
 Recognizing that finance is critical to the implementation of the 
Plan of Action, India announ ced at IAFS 2008 that it will 
provide about 5.4 billion United States Dollars in Lines of 
Credit to African countries and institutions over the 5 -year 
period.  A separate provision of 500 million USD to develop 
capacities in Africa, of which nearly half is  committed to this 
continental level Joint Plan of Action is envisaged.. 
 These financial provisions will support the integration of Africa 
through: 
 
o Provision of regional infrastructure among other programmes; 
o Provision of support for capacity building and  development of 
a Pan-African Stock Exchanges; 
o Consultations between African Ministers of Finance and 
Economic Development and their Indian counterparts to share 
experiences; and 
o Sharing of experiences on the mobilization of domestic 
savings and the streng thening of Micro -Finance institutions in 
Africa. 
 
v.  Regional Integration 
 
 Regional integration is an important objective for Africa and 
various efforts to harmonize the Regional Economic 
Communities (RECs) through the promotion of integrated 
projects are ongoing. India  has subsisting engagements with 
many of the RECs and has developed an implementation 
process for this purpose. Consequently, India agrees to 
consider financial support to mutually agreed integration 
programmes carried out by the African Un ion and the RECs, 
especially those of inter -regional and continental importance.  
India will provide a line of credit of USD 300 million to support 
regional integrational infrastructure projects through the AU.   

 21 
  
2. POLITICAL COOPERATION 
 
 Bearing in mind t hat peace, security and development are 
inter-linked, the two sides agree to: 
 
 i. Peace and Security 
 
 Enhance the capacity of African Governments, institutions and 
various stakeholders in the implementation of UN Resolution 
1325 on women‟s role in the peace process; 
 Cooperate in efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking and abuse, 
as well as small arms and light weapons; and  
 Cooperate in developing and implementing training of trainers 
towards enhancing the civilian component of peacekeeping 
operations. 
 
 ii. Civil Society and Good Governance 
  
 Strengthen the African Court on Human and People‟s Rights 
through sharing best practices, capacity building of the court 
and provision of equipment and the mobilization of resources 
for the activities of the court; 
 Promote the interaction of legal experts/lawyers through the 
Bar Associations, and cooperation in legal research 
methodology and on emerging international legal issues and 
regulatory framework that support outsourcing; and 
 Exchange experiences on best practices, research and human 
resources within the framework of decentralization and local 
governance alongside the conference of Ministers of Public 
Services and Administration and ECOSSOC.   
 
 
3. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
i. Science and Technology 
 Conscious of the fact that science, technology, research and 
development are fundamentals and major catalysts for socio -
economic activities, the two sides agree to the following:  
 
 Proposals for enhancement of research, development and 
scientific exchanges involving programmes and events to 
discuss issues of policy transfer of technology mechanisms 
through the institutional strengthening of three institutions and 
capacity building will be undertaken;   
 India-Africa Science and Technology Confer ence will be 
organized to plan an agenda;  
 India will support institutional strengthening in areas of mutual 
interest; 
 India will provide training in areas like HIV, TB and Malaria; 

 22 
 India will support Africa for its research and development 
efforts through  specific fellowships named after CV Raman 
which will be implemented bilaterally.  These will cover 
medium term and long term support for researchers and post 
doctoral fellows; and 
 Consideration will be given to the proposal for the training of 
journalists in scientific journalism. 
   
ii. Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  
  
 Recognizing the contribution made by Information Technology 
to the economic development of Africa and India: 
 
 Both sides welcome the establishment of the Pan -African e -
network project which supports the developmental goals of 
African countries in the education, health and communication 
sectors.  Both sides agree to the early completion and 
implementation of this important project. 
 India will establish an India -Africa Instit ute of Information 
Technology which would bridge the gap between academia 
and industry, and serve as a think -tank for the professional 
development of IT and provide capacity building and 
education for the growth of IT in Africa.  
 India will support the Afr ican Union‟s initiative in this sector 
and support capacity building to this end through the ITEC 
programme.  Africa‟s desire to have India participate in the 
implementation of the inter connection of all African capital 
cities with broadband network by 20 12 and work with Africa to 
build continental and national e -strategies including the 
development of all e -applications would be jointly developed 
by both sides.  
 
4. COOPERATION IN SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
CAPACITY BUILDING  
 
 Recognizing the importance of hu man capacity enhancement 
in the attainment of socio -development objectives, the two sides 
agree to the following: 
 
i. Education 
  
 India will establish an India -Africa Institute of Education 
Planning and Administration, which will provide academic and 
professional guidance to agencies and institutions engaged in 
educational planning and administration in Africa. 
 India will consider collaborative development of high quality 
open source Overseas Development Learning training 
materials for teachers and various categories of school 
managers.   
 

 23 
 India will develop training workshops on local and low cost 
production of educational materials;  
 India will assist in the development of TVET programmes 
aligned with labor market demands for both formal and 
informal economies, and global economic trends.  
 
ii.  Health 
  
 India will organize an India -Africa workshop on traditional 
medicine to highlight the commonalities in approach and 
sharing of experience.   
 Both sides will strengthen public and private sectors 
collaboration in the areas of  pharmaceutical production and 
procurement in Africa and India in the framework of 
pharmaceutical manufacturing plan for Africa;  
 Both sides will support collaboration in research and 
development in traditional medicine and practices in Africa 
and India;  
 Both sides agree to share experiences, specialized expertise 
and best practices in healthcare systems development and 
community health programmes;  
 India will collaborate with Africa in training and continuing 
education for health profes sionals; the Pan -African e-network 
tele-medicine component supports CME and the training of 
health professionals in various sectors already part of ongoing 
bilateral and regional programmes. 
 
iii.  Water and Sanitation 
  
 India will organize seven training programmes in specialized 
areas by reputed training/research/academic institutions in 
India. Up to 50 participants per course will be invited through 
the African Union. 
 India will also support African institutions and initiatives in the 
field of integrated water management through proposals to be 
mutually decided.  
 India will fully support Africa in attaining the MDGs in the 
areas of water and sanitation.   
  
iv. Culture and Sports  
  
 Africa and India will endeavor to jointly: 
 
(i) Promote film and TV cultural programme exchanges;   
(ii) Organize joint international training for trainers in the field of 
cultural goods protection and cultural industries;   
(iii)  Jointly study the establishment of regional laboratories for 
doping control in Africa and India;     
(iv)  Organize joint international trainings of trainers in the field of 
sports management and development, including sports 
medical care; and 

 24 
(v) Organize youth cultural and sports festivals through events 
like Africa -India Week and by tapping the tal ent of the large 
African student presence in India through the Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations.    
 
v. Poverty Eradication  
  
 Support for the goal of poverty eradication through the 
following specific programmes will be undertaken: 
 
o Organization of s eminars/exhibitions across Africa, including 
through public/private partnerships;  
o Construction of prototype low -cost houses in 5 African 
countries, one per region   
o Exchange of cost -sharing experiences in the construction of 
demonstration houses in 5 African countries, one per region.  
 
 Both sides agree to share best practices in the development of 
credit unions, especially in rural settings;   
 
 Promotion of micro-finance projects in Africa.  
 
 5. TOURISM 
  
Recognizing that tourism provides economic benefi ts and promotes 
friendship and socio -economic understanding among nations, the 
two sides agree as follows: 
 
 India will sponsor a study towards the harmonization of 
policies and norms in the tourism sector in cooperation with 
relevant institutions in Africa;   
 
 Both sides will strengthen partnership with the private sector 
especially travel agencies, hotels, airlines and other tourism 
related establishments, as well as the media, with a view to 
advancing tourism development between the two regions; and  
 
 Both sides will promote general tourism and offering joint 
tourism packages, including eco -tourism, to utilize the 
geographical diversity of the two sides.   
 
6. INFRASTRUCTURE, ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT 
   
Recognizing that infrastructure, energy and environment  are 
fundamental to the economic growth of developing countries, the two 
sides agree as follows: 
 
 Training programmes for up to 50 African participants 
(annually) at the National Institute for Training of Highway 
Engineers (NITHE) will be provided by India. 
  

 25 
i. Energy 
 Note that India has actively engaged with Africa through the 
India Africa Hydrocarbon Conferences and welcomes India‟s 
commitment to work with Africa to process its resources 
including by establishing refineries in ome countries. 
 Define together with the RECs, the regional power pools and 
national governments concrete projects in the field of 
hydropower, wind and  bio -energy in African countries, which 
have high potential; and 
 Cooperation to explore renewable sources of energy in Africa.  
 
ii. Transport  
a. Maritime Transport  
 Develop and promote mutual assistance and cooperation in 
the area of maritime safety and security, prevention and 
protection of the main environment and port users;  
 Work for the creation of regional coast guard networks (North, 
West, Central, East and South) and surveillance facilities;  
 Develop Africa's training in the area of maritime and harbor 
administration; and  
 Collaborate and exchange information in the area of maritime 
transport, harbor management, safety, security and 
preventing, controlling and combating pollution, particularly 
through training, exchange of skills and knowledge 
programmes;  
 
 In all these areas more specific proposals will be developed by 
experts from the two sides.  
 
b. Air Transport  
 Coordination of the re spective external air transport policies; 
and  
 Identification and· development of hubs for air bridge to 
support airlines operations between the two regions and 
beyond. 
   
 The African side will provide a concept note on these in order 
to create a dialogue between African and Indian authorities.   
 
c. Land Transport 
 Status Quo Assessment of the Trans African Highway (TAH) 
Network; and 
 Development of a road safety strategy for the African 
continent.   
 The African side will develop and provide India with concep t 
notes on both projects.   
 
iii. Environment 
 Elaboration of' specific programs to combat desertification and 
climate change which constitute major challenges for the 
international community; and  

 26 
 Sharing of experiences on projects for carbon development 
mechanisms.  
 
 TERI‟s MOU with ECA and support to the Africa Climate 
Policy Centre  is also recognised. The Indian initiative to have an 
African section at the Delhi Sustainable Development Summit 
annually organized by TERI in February in New Delhi initiated sin ce 
2009 will be utilized to foster closer engagement among the 
environmentl policy makers in India and Africa. 
 
7.  MEDIA AND COMMUNICATION 
   
 Bearing in mind that closer linkage in the field of media and 
communication will generate greater synergy in the ir relationship, the 
two sides agree to: 
 
 Cooperate in human resource training in the area of modern 
corporate communications using modern technology (ICT) and 
the development of language skills; and  
 Provide assistance in the production of documentary vid eos, 
which are effective in disseminating information on specific 
missions or interventions.  
 
Other programmes in this area could be undertaken through existing 
ITEC programmes and through the Public Diplomacy Division in 
India. These would be discussed b etween the African Union 
Commission and the Permanent Mission of India to the AU. 
Similarly, an exchange of media delegations, editors‟ conferences 
and training of media persons will form part of the initiatives that India 
is taking in Africa.  These will be undertaken regionally and 
bilaterally. 
 
8. With respect to the institutions to be established in Africa, 
namely, India-Africa Institute of Foreign Trade; India -Africa Diamond 
Institute; India-Africa Institute of Information Technology; India -Africa 
Institute of Education Planning and Administration; Pan-African Stock 
Exchange and India -Africa Vocational Training Centers, the host 
countries undertake to facilitate their establishment and sustenance 
including: 
 
 Land for the Institutions; 
 Building infrastructure; 
 Budgetary provision for recurring costs;  
 Governance structures for administration and running of the 
Institutions; and 
 Business plan for future development and sustainability. 
 
On its part India will establish and equip the institutions and maintai n 
them for a period of three years.   
 
 

 27 
As on 24/02/2011 
 
Summary of  LOCs extended to West African Countries                     
(Figures in US $ Million) 
Country  ECOWAS TEAM 
9   
NEPAD BILATERAL  
TOTAL  
Angola - - - 85.00 85.00 
Benin 18.80 - -         15.00 33.80 
Burkina Faso 15.14 55.97 -          5.00 71.11 
Cameroon  - - 37.66 37.66 
Cape Verde  - - - @@ - 
Central 
African 
Republic 
- - - 29.50 29.50 
Chad - 50.00 - @ 50.00 
Congo 
(DRC) 
- - 33.50        25.00 58.50 
Congo(ROC) - - - - - 
Cote’d Ivoire - 52.30 -       114.00 166.30 
Equatorial 
Guinea 
- 15.00 - - 15.00 
Gabon - - - 14.50 14.50 
Gambia 20.00 - 16.70 - 36.70 
Ghana 45.01 85.00 - 63.72 193.73 
Guinea 28.51 - - - 28.51 
Guinea 
Bissau  
- 25.00# - - 25.00 
Liberia      
Mali 30.00 102.00* 20.62 51.00 203.62 
Mauritania^ - - - - - 
Niger - 20.00 17.00 - 37.00 
Nigeria  - - - 100.00## 100.00 
Sao 
Tome & 
Principe 
- - - @@@ - 
Senegal 29.83 73.00 7.08 37.87 142.78 
Sierra Leone 29.45 - - 45.00 74.50 
Togo  33.04 - - - 33.00 
Grand Total 249.78 478.27 94.90       623.25  1446.20 
 
@During the DRC FM‟s visit on 29.10.2009, US$263mn worth fresh LOCs announced.  
@@During Cape Verde FM's visit on 20.11.2009, US$5mn LOC was announced.  
@@@During STP FM's visit on 1.12.2009, US$5mn LOC was announced. 
 

 28 
 
# The response of the new Guinea Bissau government and specific 
recommendations of our Ambassador in Dakar are awaited. LOCs for US$ 
15million have been earmarked and for balance US$ 10 million fresh requests to be 
processed. 
* Out of US$102 mn, US$20 mn is for utilization on the Cote d’Ivoire side for the 
Electricity Transmission Line. 
^ The data does not include figures for Mauritania as the LOC has been withheld 
following the coup. 
 
##In Dec.2009, Nigeria said that it would use this LOC for 4 power generation 
projects. DPRs received in Feb.2010. Under process. 
   The above list does not include approval of US$100 million to ECOWAS 
Bank(EBID) (5/2010) 
 
16. The Committee appreciate the efforts made  by the Government  
towards providing ai d and projects undertaken under  the Head „Aid and 
Loans‟ to developing African, Latin American  and Caribbean Countries  as 
well as neighbouring countries.  The Committee, however, feel that there is 
still ample scope for making investment in projects for cr eating permanent 
assets particularly in the area of infrastructure  in all those countries .  The 
Committee, therefore, re iterate that a ce aseless effort should be made  to 
strengthen our relations with the se countries to achieve our anticipated 
objectives in view of various competing influences operating in the region. 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
17. The Committee was informed that Tala Hydroel ectric Project (HEP) in 
Bhutan wa s the only Plan proj ect that had  recently been completed.  The 
Detailed Project Report Cost of Tala HEP was Rs. 1048 crores as per 1993 price 
level, which was revised to Rs. 3580 crores in September 2002.  However, the 
final completion cost of the project was Rs. 4125.84 crores in 2007.  The 
Committee did not agree with Ministry‟s view that the Tala HEP was completed 
successfully in the best possible cost and timeframe and had expressed anguish 
over such huge cost overrun in the project.   The Committee had strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should devote sufficient time for conducting 
adequate survey and investigation so as to frame more realistic estimates at the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) stage so that such cost and time overrun m ight 
not recur.  
 The Committee had drawn  the attention of the Ministry towards the low 
Plant Load Factor since the Tala Hydroelectric Project (HEP) started working and 
suggested to undertake technical review and appraisal before identification of 
any other Hydroelectric Project in the region. The Committee had advised the 
Ministry to seek the views of the expe rts in the field of HEP and consultants 
about the feasibility, long term sustainability and economic returns from the 
Hydroelectric projects in the region.  

 29 
 The Committee had noted that in the light of India‟s ambitious plan to 
double the target of hydro-power development in Bhutan to 10,000 MW for export 
in India by 2020 many more projects were expected to begin shortly. The 
Committee had recommended that proper technical and feasibility studies 
including Environmental Impact and Risk Assessment, post -facto review and 
audit of the project should be undertaken and the entire process from 
identification to completion of the project should be evaluated vigorously. 
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“India e xtends technical and financial assistance to the Royal 
Government of Bhutan (RGoB) in implementing hydroelectric power 
projects (HEPs) which belong to RGoB. In the case of the Tala HEP, 
the Detailed Project Report (DPR) cost was based on 1993 price 
levels, while the project was commissioned in 2006. Therefore, the 
cost escalation was mainly due to inflation in the intervening thirteen 
years. There were also some unavoidable design changes during the 
construction stage of the project due to geo -technical fin dings 
(inlcuding surprise geological findings) and further optimization of 
project components , which could not have been envisaged in the 
DPR stage. The construction was also hit by unforseen situations 
such as the unprecedented flood in the year 2000, that escalated the 
cost.  
 In the DPR, the Plant Load Factor (PLF) is indicated as 
54.46% on average year generation and 44.34% on 90% dependable 
year energy generation. The PLF has been exceeded in 2008 and 
2009 ( 51.60% and 49.20% respectively based on actua l energy 
generation). Lower PLF in 2006 and 2007 was due to partial 
commissioning of machines and initial teething problems. The power 
plant is generating to its optimum as per the river flow condition 
without spillage from the dam.  
 Care has been taken to ensure that adequate technical review 
and appraisal is undertaken before identifying/commissioning new 
HEPs in Bhutan. Views of experts in the field and of specialized 
consultants have been solicited and incorporated in the preparation 
of DPRs for the ne w HEPs with regard to feasibility, long -term 
sustainability and economic returns. Some DPRs such as for 
Sankosh, Wangchhu and Bunakha HEPs have been updated to take 
into account current and projected timelines and cost estimates. 
There are adequate mechani sms in place to review and monitor the 
progress and working of the HEPs during and after implementation 
such as the Empowered Joint Group and th e Project Monitoring 
Committee.”  
 

 30 
19.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that 
care has been taken to ensure that adequate technical review and appraisal 
is undertaken in identifyin g/commissioning new Hydro-electric P ower 
Project (HEP)  in Bhutan and there are adequate mechanism in place to 
review and monitor the progress and working of projects during and after 
implementation.  It is beyond the comprehension of t he Committee that 
inspite of  due care being taken and existence  of monitoring mechanism, 
very high cost and time overrun has become a regular feature  in every 
project.  It means the present system is not effective and it requires a 
indepth review.  The Committee had not expected a routine reply from the 
Ministry in the matter rather they had asked the Ministry to review the 
entire process from the identification to completion of t he new hydropower 
projects through proper technical and feasibility studies with a view to 
develop a more  effective mechanism to avoid such frequent cost 
escalations and time overrun in case of each and every project 
undertaken/going to be undertaken by th e Government.   The Committee 
expect that the Government will seriously consider the views of the 
Committee, implement them and apprise the Committee about the outcome 
within forty five days. 
      
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
20. Government of India ha d made va rious commitments to provide  aid for 
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction of war affected people and areas i n Sri 
Lanka.  The Committee had  noted that as against the announcement of 
assistance of Rs. 500  crores, only Rs. 90 crores had  been budgeted an d Rs. 
63.49 crores utilized.  The Committee had found that many of the projects we re 
at the level of planning.  The Committee were of the view that Government 
should identify  and approve the project carefully keeping in mind the sentiments 
of people of Sr i Lanka and initiate its execution in an efficient manner in 
consultation with various stakeholders so as to avoid cost and time overruns.   
 
 
21. The Ministry of External Affairs  in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“India is assisting Sri La nka in resettlement and reconstruction of 
war-affected Northern and Eastern Provinces.  Of the allocated 
amount of Rs.500 crores during financial year 2009 -10, the final 
utilization for the FY 2009 -10 is Rs. 68.96 crores.  Initially our focus 
had been pure ly humanitarian considering the large number of IDPs 

 31 
emerging out of the conflict zone.  We followed this up with 
assistance for their resettlement which included deploying seven 
Indian demining teams in Northern Sri Lanka; supplying 7800 MT of 
shelter material and 95,000 of agricultural implements packs for the 
returning IDPs; conducting a month long artificial limb fitment camp 
by a reputed Indian NGO in Northern Sri Lanka; supplying 4 lakh 
cement bags to help repair their damaged house; supplying seeds 
and 500 tractors and other agricultural implements for revival of 
livelihood activities of farmers in Northern Sri Lanka.   
 
 In the rehabilitation and reconstruction phase, several other 
projects are being taken up.  During the visit of EAM between 
November 25 -28, 2010, EAM participated in the ground breaking 
ceremony for the railway project in Northern Sri Lanka being taken 
up under an Indian line of credit as well as the ground breaking 
ceremony for construction of a pilot project of 1000 houses for 
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) of Northern Sri Lanka.  Work on 
the Kankesanthurai Port is also going on schedule.  Other projects 
including the restoration of a stadium in Jaffna, vocational training 
centres, etc. are at various stages of planning and proc essing.  EAM 
also handed over tractors and agricultural implements to revive the 
livelihood of the IDPs.  While deciding on the projects, the sentiments 
of the people is kept in mind, as well as consultations undertaken 
with various stakeholders.” 
 
 
22. The Committee note that the projects for resettlement and 
reconstruction in Sri Lanka have been planned in consultation with Sri 
Lankan authorities, provincial Gov ernment, local bodies and people of 
northern and eastern province.  The projects have been identified based on 
the immediate requirements and the prevailing situation on the ground but 
nothing noticeable has been done so far.  It is very discouraging that out of 
Rs.500 crores, only Rs 68.96 crores could be utilized during financial Year 
2009-2010. The Committee express their concern over this  situation and 
would like to have an explanation as to why such a situation has arisen and 
what steps are being taken to remedy the matter . The Committee hope that 
funds allocated for projects of resettlement and reconstruction in Sri Lanka 
will be utilized utterly through more committed efforts  because the war-
affected people need timely help and delay in providing assistance will 
defeat the objective of such a noble commitment .  The Committee may be 
apprised of the situation and development s taking place in Sri Lanka on 
regular basis. 
 

 32 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
23. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of External Affairs had treated  
the „Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme‟ as a flagship 
programme of Government of India reflecting the true spirit of South -South 
Cooperation.  But the enhancement in expenditure from Rs. 70 crores at BE 
2009-10 to Rs. 85 crores at RE 2009-10 stage and BE 2010-11 at Rs. 100 crores 
was mainly due to revision in pro cedural expenditures.  That  showed that very 
little addition in projects/programmes being organized in those countries. The 
Committee were of the view that under the programme, Government must look 
beyond the IT sector to diversify and propel the programme to the next phase.  In 
ITEC programmes India should capitalize on its expertise in other emerging 
sectors like phar ma, biotechnology etc. that would  also help in the capacity 
building in the recipient countries.  The Committee had also desire d that the 
requests from tho se countries should get preference and if required fund 
allocation should be augmented at RE stage. 
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“In order to ensure that the ITEC participants carry with them an 
overall positive impression about the ITEC programme and the 
latter has the right impact, Ministry took measures with regard to (a) 
improvement of living conditions for participants during their stay in 
India and (b) upgradation of training fa cilities.  Apart from these 
factors, increased utilization of ITEC slots during 2009 -10 as 
compared to previous year and organisation of specialized courses 
in the fields of (i) Wind Turbine Technology, (ii) Mineral Exploration, 
(iii) Geographic Information System, (iv) Leadership Programme for 
Postmasters and Managers and (v) Solar Energy Technology 
contributed in the enhancement of budget from Rs. 70 crores at BE 
2009-10 to Rs. 85 crores at RE 2009-10.  It may be mentioned here 
that due to India‟s advance ment in IT sector, developing countries 
look towards India for training facilities in this field.  Therefore, the 
share of IT slots in the ITEC is higher as compared to slots in other 
sectors. 
2. Under ITEC, Ministry conducts 200 short, medium and long 
term courses in a variety of fields such as IT, Linguistics, Finance, 
Accounts, Audit and Banking, Planning and Administration, 
Management and Governance, Crime Records, Rural Development 
and Parliamentary Studies.  As regards courses in pharma and 
biotechnology are concerned, the Ministry conducts a course each 
on drugs and pharmaceuticals every year through National Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mohali and on 
biotechnology through The Energy and Research Institute (TERI) 
respectively.  
3. For the year 2010 -11, Ministry has decided to increase the 
number of courses to be organized to 232 courses as opposed to 
about 200 courses organized during 2009 -10.  Similarly, number of 
ITEC slots has also been increased during 2010-11. 

 33 
 
4. ITEC is a demand-driven, response -oriented and fully -
funded programme of Government of India.  Since its inception in 
1964, ITEC has expand ed manifold and today covers 159  partner 
countries spread across Asia and the Pacific, Africa, Latin America 
and the Carribean,  Eastern Europe and CIS countries.  As and 
when a request is received from any of our ITEC partner countries 
seeking training in a particular field, it is considered favourably.” 
 
25. The Committee are hap py to note that the Ministry have  decided to 
increase the number of courses and number of Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation Programme ( ITEC) slots for the year 2010 -11.  The 
Ministry ha ve also informed that as and when a request is received from 
any ITEC partner country seeking training in particul ar field, it is 
considered favourably.  The Committee hope that Government will provide 
all kind of support for ITEC Programme  and that it will certainly strengthen 
our position among partner countries . The Committee enquire as to 
whether all requests from  partner countries have been honoured and 
whether there are areas of need which we have been unable to meet e.g. 
scholarships for medical education.   The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should sec ure optimal utilization of slots available on offer and  
funds allocated to ITEC Programme.  The Committee recommend that 
Government should take all  necessary initiatives to ensure that paucity of 
funds does not hamper these programmes at any level.   
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
26. Issuance of e -passport also called  biometric passport wa s an ambitious 
project initiated by the Ministry in June 2008.  The Ministry in Annual Report 
2008-09 had stated that based on the experience gained from the Pilot Project, it 
was proposed to start issuance of e -passports of ordinary category by the end of 
2009.  The Committee we re given to understand that the inordinate delay in the  
launch of project was on account of non-procurement of e-booklets from Security 
Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL) due to technica l 
reasons.  The Committee had been  further informed that the Technical 
Committee headed by Director General , NIC wa s in the process of freezing the 
technical specifications of inlays.  The Committee  had, therefore, recommend 
that Ministry should coordinate  with Technical Committee for an early finalization 
of technical specifications in the project followed by initiation of global tendering 
process so that the project could become  feasible and could be implemented on 
pan-India basis at the earliest possibl e opportunity.  The Committee had 
expressed that they should be apprised of the progress made at regular intervals 
in this regard. 
 
 

 34 
27. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
“The technical bids of e -passport in lays were opened as per 
established procedure on the scheduled date on July 26, 2010. 
Following this, the Tender Committee decided that the financial bids 
would be opened only after receiving fresh clearance from the 
Technical Committee and a fresh security clearance from the Ministry 
of Home Affairs for the firm, M/s GEMALTO (a French company) 
against whom a communication was received from the Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) that this company is also supplying the 
same chip to the Government of Pakistan . The final decision on the 
award of contract will be taken only after the receipt of technical and 
security clearance from Ministry of Home Affairs. The matter is being 
followed up.” 
 
28. The Committee note that after considerable persuasion, finally the 
technical bids of e -passport inlays were opened in July, 2010.  However, 
opening of the financial bids is still awaiting the fresh clearance from 
Technical Committee and fresh security clearance from the Ministry of 
Home Affairs for the firm engaged for supplying the chips.  The Committee 
hope that the matter will be followed up vigorously and after getting the 
necessary clearances,  the final decision on the award of cont ract will be 
taken without any further delay .  In Committee‟s view the report of Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) should be seriously considered from security 
point of view before  awarding the contract to the selected company  for 
supplying chips for e -passports.  The Committee further  expect that the 
project “e-passport” will see the light of day at the earliest.  The Committee 
may be apprised of further developments in this regard. 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
29. The Committee had  repeatedly suggested that MEA should chalk out a 
comprehensive plan to either acquire suitable properties or to take up the matter 
with the respective State Governments for early allotment of suitable land for the 
construction of Passport offices as well as the residential complexes on priority 
basis.  The Committee were deeply concerned to note that out of total of  37 
Passport Offices, 19 Passport Offices were still functioning from rented buildings.  
Though 8 Passport Offices had  already purchased land, the construct ion of their 
own building was yet to start.  The Committee had desired that due care should 
be taken  in formulation of building designs and structure, based on futuristic 
projection of Passport Seva Kendras/e -passport and the increase in number of 
Passport Seekers and others availing of the services of Passport Offices. The 

 35 
Committee had also reiterated that efforts should be made to acquire land for the 
rest of the Passport Offices at the earliest.  
 
The Committee had taken a  note of the fact that various projects 
undertaken by the Ministry were not completed within schedule which results in 
huge cost an d time overruns.  The Committee  had, therefore, desired that MEA 
should prepare stipulated timeframe to ensure quick execution and timely 
completion of projects.  Stringent monitoring mechanism should also be put in 
place to avoid cost and time overruns an d for ensuring optimum utilization of 
resources.   
30. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have  stated as 
under: 
“There are set procedures and norms of Government of India for 
monitoring and supervising the projects taken up by var ious 
Ministries and Departments.   
i The Ministry follows these procedures and norms 
scrupulously. 
Upon receiving the detailed project proposals, the Ministry 
scrutinizes and as per prevailing norms approves the proposals.  
Internal Finance Division scrutinizes the cost estimates in detail and 
conveys its concurrence. 
ii The overall supervision is done in consultation with the 
concerned Indian Mission on the ground.  Projects have provisions 
for Project Monitoring Committees which include representatives of  
the Ministry, concerned Mission and stake-holders. 
 To implement the project credible implementing agencies 
are employed.  All possible mechanisms are put in place for 
feedback, evaluation and to ensure that the targeted population is 
benefited. 
 
Passport Offices 
 
 It is submitted that in the last 2 -3 years, MEA has 
constructed passport office  buildings/residences at Bangalore, 
Jaipur, Lucknow and Bhuvneshwar. At present, there are 37 
Passport Offices, out of which 19 are functioning from GOI/MEA -
owned bu ildings. The remaining 18 are functioning in rented 
buildings.  However, Ministry has already purchased land for the 
following 8 Passport offices. The process of construction is 
regularly monitored and the latest position is as under: 
1. Guwahati: CPWD has been asked to revise drawings due 
to change in the requirement of space in passport Office building in 
the wake of opening of Mini Passport Seva Kendras. 
2. Jalandhar: CPWD has submitted a Preliminary Estimate 
amounting to Rs.13.33 crore and is being scru tinized by the 
Ministry. Drawings are still awaited from CPWD. 
3. Srinagar: MEA has approved the Concept Drawings and 
CPWD has been asked to submit Preliminary Estimate. Work for 
construction of access rod is in progress at site. The speed of 
construction is hampered by law and order problems in J&K. 

 36 
4. Surat : Preliminary Estimate amounting to Rs,18.19 
crore has been approved by MEA and NBCC has submitted 
drawings to Surat Municipal Corporation for approval. 
5. Mumbai: The basement has already been constru cted 
and financial bids are being opened by CPWD for construction of 
superstructure. Ministry has released Rs.9.05 crore for the 
construction of PO Building. 
6. Vizag: The construction of Passport Office building is 
complete and Passport Officer is asked t o shift to new premises at 
the earliest. 
7. Amritsar: The land has been purchased and NBCC has 
been awarded the work of construction of Passport Office building. 
However, due to change in zoning plans of the area, the requisite 
Floor Area for construction of building is not available. Hence, 
Principal Secretary, Local Bodies, Government of Punjab, has been 
requested by the Ministry to restore the original building bye-laws. 
8. Pune: Transfer of land from PMC to Passport Office is 
underway. Draft lease deed has been finalized by the Ministry and 
PO is asked to register the land in the name of Ministry. 
 
 Of the remaining 10 Passport Offices, a plot of land admeasuring 
2594 sqm has been allotted by the Uttrakhand Government at a 
cost of Rs.57.08 lakh and payme nt is being made by the Controller 
of Accounts to acquire the plot after approval of Foreign Secretary. 
A plot of land admeasuring 22000 sq.ft. has been reserved by State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh and has asked its Revenue 
Department to allot the land f or construction of Passport Office 
building. Efforts are on to acquire land at all the remaining 
locations. 
 
As regards purchase of l and for the remaining Pas sport 
Offices, State Government of Kerala has  offered plot  of land to 
MEA at T hiruvananthapuram which is under consideration of the 
Ministry. The Ministry through its respective Passport Offices have 
been actively pursuing the case of allotment of land with respective 
State Governments. The recommendations of the Committee 
regarding the purchase of land and futuristic design of the Passport 
Offices will be kept in mind. 
 
China 
 
 The Projects Division is undertaking a number of projects in 
China like construction of new Chancery Building in Beijing and 
purchase of plot for Consulate General of Guangzhou.  The East 
Asia Division has limited role in these projects. However, the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee will be borne in mind 
while implementing these projects.  
 
 
 
 

 37 
Nepal and Bhutan 
 
 All efforts are made to  ensure that spending by the Ministry 
and Embassies in Kathmandu and Thimpu adhere to the allocated 
budget. However, often due to reasons beyond the control of the 
Division/Missions, payment schedule and the project 
implementation timelines do not adhere to the schedule of 
anticipated expenditure. This results from uncertainty arising out of 
stopping of work , bandhs, etc. in Nepal , which is undergoing a  
political transition . In addition, problems related to law and order  
hinder implementation of the project and result in delays and 
consequent cost overruns. Furthermore, some projects as agreed 
between India and Nepal/Bhutan are implemented by the 
respective institutions in those countries. Sometimes there are 
delays in implementation that are not anticipated. More importantly, 
political imperatives also dictate implementation of the expenditure 
in order to secure our interests. 
 There are adequate mechanisms in place to review and 
monitor the progress of projects being undertaken in Bhutan by 
GOI such as the Empowered Joint Group (EJG) and the P roject 
Monitoring Committee (PMC). All efforts are made to ensure that 
there are no time and cost overruns during their implementation 
and that resources are utilized optimally. Funds are released for 
projects only upon the receipt and scrutiny of utilizat ion certificates 
of earlier released funds to ensure that timelines and expenditure 
schedules are strictly adhered to. The EJG and PMC meet twice a 
year and extraordinary meetings may be called as required.  
 
Eurasian Countries 
 
 A number of projects are b eing funded under the “Aid to 
Eurasian Countries” budget head of the Ministry.  There have been 
no cost or time overruns in the implementation of Eurasia Division 
projects.  Some delays have occurred in the initiation of the 
implementation stage due to var ious reasons, including tardy 
procedures on the part of recipient countries.  Necessary clauses 
are included in the agreements signed with the Indian implementing 
agencies to clearly specify the time schedule of the project.  Project 
monitoring committees are constituted so as to ensure quick 
execution and timely completion of projects.  Meetings of Project 
Monitoring Committees are held at regular interva ls to monitor 
completion of projects in the stipulated time schedule and with 
optimum utilization of the funds sanctioned. 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 India has undertaken projects in all parts of Afghanistan, in a 
wide range of sectors, including hydro -electricity, power 
transmission lines, road construction, industry, telecommunications, 
information and broadcasting, and capacity building, which have 
been identified by the Afghan Government as priority areas for 

 38 
reconstruction and development. At present two mega projects 
namely construction of Afghan Parliament Building in Kabul and 
Salma Dam in Herat Province are being undertaken in Afghanistan.  
 
  As regards the construction of Afghan Parliament 
Building the wide difference between estimated costs and the 
actual bids received and approved are on account of the peculiar 
and extraordinary conditions in Afghanistan and  different threat 
perceptions of the tendering parties. A Project Review and 
Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary 
(PAI) has been constituted. The Committee quarterly reviews the 
project to ensure timely completion of the project a s per already 
fixed targets. The Committee convenes review and coordination 
meetings as and when required to expedite physical progress of the 
project and give directions for resolving related issues as well as 
problems, if any, causing hindrance to the ph ysical progress of 
works.  
 
 The main reasons for delay in the construction of Salma 
Dam are non -availability of riverbed materials, non -availability of 
explosives, frequent security threats, occurrence of sudden flood in 
April, 2007 and extremely cold wea ther conditions in dam site area 
during January and February, 2008. As regards cost escalation the 
reasons which contributed are increase in cost of labour, fuel, 
cement , civil and electro -mechaincal works due to instable 
economic and security situation i n Afghanistan, Non -availability of 
dam fill(shell) material(meant to be sourced originally from the river 
bed), leading to the need for explosives material for rock -blasting, 
additional security costs and damage caused by flash flood in April, 
2007 and further increase in the cost of imports.   In order to ensure 
timely completion and costs overruns a Project Review and 
Technical Advisory Committee for the reconstruction and 
completion of Salma Dam Project in Afghanistan has been 
constituted. The Committee reviews the utilization of funds, 
technical aspects, progress of works and special technical 
problems, if any. The Committee also quarterly review the project to 
ensure timely completion of the project as per already fixed targets.    
 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Maldives 
 
 While executing projects in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar and 
Maldives, we take utmost care while approving projects and 
monitoring to ensure timely completion of the project so that the 
resources are optimally utilized. This is an on-going process.” 
 
31. The Committee regret that the Ministry have not taken the 
recommendation made by the Committee in true spirit and they have 
submitted a routine reply about al l projects.  The recommendation  was 
specifically related to delay and c ost/time overrun in construction of 

 39 
Passport Offices in various parts of the country and not about delays in all 
projects.  However, most of the projects being implemented by the Ministry 
including construction of Passport Offices are running late  resulting into 
huge cost escalation and time overrun.  Instead of accepting the facts and 
finding the solution , the Ministry has developed a habit of furnishing 
stereotype replies  on the issue . The C ommittee specifically observe that 
there have been administrative  delays at every stage starting from 
acquisition/purchase of land to construction of buildings of Passport 
Offices in various parts of the country .  There are delays in approvals, 
frequent revisions of drawings/plans, award of  contract and other 
formalities and due to such delays several Passport Offices like Guw ahati 
RPO are being run from  rental building even after the completion of the 
process of land acquisition several years back  resulting into undue cost 
and time overruns.  The Committee, therefore, r eiterate that the 
construction work should start at the earliest t o construct 8 Passport 
Offices for which the land has already been purchased /acquired in a time 
bound manner.  Simultaneously, sincere efforts should be made to 
purchase/acquire land for rem aining Passport Offices and shift all of them 
into their own buildings without any further delay. 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
32. The Committee had noted that the idea of establishment of South Asian 
University was mooted in the year 2005 with huge expectatio ns and was 
visualized as a major initiative to build upon the civilizational and historical 
linkages and the past shared experiences that would enable the countries of the 
region to rediscover and rebuild connectivity with the people of the region and 
reflect upon the commonalities of the region.  The Committee had noted that the 
academic activities were expected to begin from August 2010 and the anticipated 
timeframe for the construction of University was 2014-15.   
 
 The Committee were, however, not satis fied with the progress made 
during the last five years. During this period, only land ha d been acquired for the 
University.  For the namesake there was a proposal to start academic activities in 
August/September 2010 in rented premises.  Draft Statute, Reg ulations, 
Academic Structure and Business plan had  not been approved so far.  The 
Committee had expected that the University should emerge as a center of 
excellence which cater to academic as well as intellectual pursuits. The 
curriculum should range from the study of deeper and serious issues of 
Philosophy and Cultural Studies to the study of contemporary Social Science 
disciplines, Humanities, Management and Technical Studies. The Committee 
had desired that a well thought out realistic blueprint based on clear intent, aims 

 40 
and objectives for establishing the university and carrying out academic activities 
should be formulated before initiating any course randomly.  The Committee had 
also wanted to be informed of the progress at regular intervals. 
 
 
33. The Ministry of External Affairs  in their action taken reply ha ve stated as 
under: 
 “While the idea of establishing a South Asian University was mooted 
in 2005, the formal Agreement between SAARC Member States to 
establish the South Asian University (SAU) was signed only on 4 
April 2007 during the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi.  
 The SAARC Inter -Governmental Steering Committee was convened 
in May 2007 to conceptualize the academic contours of the 
University. The Steering Committee, at its 6 th meeting in March 2010, 
finalised the University‟s Statutes, Regulations, Academic Structure 
and Business Plan. The Sixteenth SAARC Summit (April 2010) took 
note of the work of the Steering Committee and appreciated the 
progress being made towards establishing the University.  
 The SAU Project Office was established on May 7, 2008. The SAU 
Bill received the approval of both houses of Parliament on 23 
December 2008. After receiving the assent of the President of India 
on 11 January 2009, the South Asian University Act was notif ied in 
the Gazette of India on 13 January 2009. The Headquarters 
Agreement for establishment of the South Asian University in New 
Delhi was signed between the Government of India and the SAARC 
Secretariat on 1 December 2008.  
 The Academic Structure of the SAU envisages the creation of 
Faculties for the study of philosophy, history, culture, languages, 
religion, social sciences and humanities, as well as scientific and 
technological disciplines such as engineering, life sciences and bio -
technology, earth system sciences, physics, chemistry, mathematics, 
ICT and medicine. 
 The courses and research that will be pursued at the SAU are based 
on the aims, objectives and intent for establishing such a University. 
The mandate of the SAU has been spelt out in the Inte r-
Governmental Agreement of 4 April 2007, which envisages the (i) 
building of a culture of understanding and regional consciousness; (ii) 
nurturing a new class of liberal, bright and quality leadership; and (iii) 
building of the capacity of the region in science, technology and other 
disciplines considered vital for improving the quality of life of the 
people. 
 As the South Asian University‟s state -of-the-art campus on its 
permanent premises is expected to take a few years to complete, 
academic activities have commenced on 26 August 2010 from rented 
premises. 50 students from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, 
Pakistan and Sri Lanka are already studying at the University. 
 The selection of the two courses that were initiated at SAU in August 
2010 namely, MA in Development Economics and the Master of 
Computer Applications, was a well considered decision, having been 
deliberated upon by the Inter -Governmental Steering Committee and 

 41 
unanimously approved by all SAARC Member States. The courses 
were considered as cov ering vital areas for the SAARC region and 
designed to fully meet the stated objectives of the University.” 
  
34. The Committee are not satisfied with the pace of progress made so 
far in establishing the South Asian University.  The Committee observe that 
this idea for establishment of the University was mooted in 2005 but 
academic activities could commence only  recently on 26 th August, 2010 
from a rented building  with 50 students .  The Committee feel that this 
Project has already got delayed inordinately and further delays would  
cause huge cost escalation . The Committee would , therefore, desire  that 
establishment of South Asian University  should be taken as  a matter of  
national pride and all initiatives should be taken to complete the work in 
the shortest p ossible time  to showcase India‟s strength.  Further, the 
Committee may be informed regularly about the progress of work and 
activities relating to establishment of South Asian University. 
 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
 
35. The Committee had observed that during BE 2009-10, Rs. 50 crores were 
allocated for Nalanda University which was reduced in RE 2009 -10 to Rs. 1.00 
crore.  The Committee was informed that allocation was sought on the 
assumption that the proposed Bill would be passed but it could not happen due 
to postponement of East Asian Summit (EAS).  The Committee had expressed 
their hope that the proposed Bill would be tabled soon and all efforts would made 
to pass the Bill to put in place the proper legislative framework.  Th e Committee 
were of the view th at the project was very  prestigious one and an important 
constituent in India‟s engagement with the East.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommend that the project should not get delayed on account of any procedural 
reasons.  The Committee  had desired that once the proposal for setting up of 
University is finalized by Nalanda Mentor Group, there should be quick and time -
bound implementation of the same in an efficient manner. 
 
36. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken  reply have stated as 
under: 
“Nalanda University is an East Asian Summit (EAS) initiative. During 
BE 2009-10, Rs.50 crores were allocated for the Nalanda University, 
which was reduced in RE 2009 -10 to Rs.1 crore. It is proposed to 
seek an allocation of Rs. 100 crores in BE 2011 -12 now that all the 
legal formalities have been completed for the establishment of the 
University 
 

 42 
 The Nalanda University Act 2010 was passed in the Monsoon 
session of the Parliament (August -September 2010) and received 
President‟s assent on 21 September 2010. A Gazette Notification 
was issued on 19 November 2010 for bringing the Act into force and 
for the establishment of the Nalanda University w.e.f. 25 November 
2010. Meanwhile, the Vice Chancellor –designate has assumed 
charge w.e.f. 8 October 2010 and h as commenced operations from 
the Project Office in New Delhi. 
 The Government of Bihar ha s already agreed to transfer  the 
land acquired for establishing the University once the University is 
established. The Vice Chancellor -designate has initiated the proc ess 
with the Government of Bihar for transferring the land to the Nalanda 
University. A meeting of the Nalanda Mentor Group, which is now the 
Interim Governing Board of the University, is being held in February 
2011 to discuss various administrative issues  connected with the 
establishment of the University, including framing of  Statutes, 
Financial Rules etc.” 
 
 
37. The Committee are happy to note that Nalanda University Act, 2010 
has come into force w.e.f. 25 th November, 2010, the Vice Chancellor 
designate has assumed charge and has commenced operations from the 
project Office in New Delhi.  The committee hope that all formalities and 
administrative issues connected with establishment of Nalanda University, 
including framing of statutes, financial rules etc.  will be completed and 
resolved at the earliest. The Committee, however,  desire that since the 
project has already been delayed a lot, all other steps should be taken to 
complete the project in a time -bound manner and they may be apprised of 
the developments regarding establishment of Nalanda University from time 
to time.  The Committee would also like to re iterate that the new institution 
should evolve as a centre of excellence and tool of engagement within the 
region of East Asia matching the historical s ignificance of its name 
„Nalanda‟. 

 43 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
 The Committee note that in the actual expenditure pattern, maximum 
amount is spent during the last quarter of  the financial year.  The Ministry in its 
justification has stated that the Cash Accounts from all the Missions/Posts are 
not received at the time of preparation of monthly assessment, therefore the 
same are incorporated and accounted at the end of the fin ancial year.  The 
Committee are not satisfied with the justification given by the Ministry. The 
Committee are aware that the Integrated Mission Accounting System (I -MAS) is 
functional in more than fifty Missions/Posts abroad for accounting purposes. The 
Committee therefore, desire that remaining Missions/Posts should be connected 
with the software at the earliest, so as to make actual assessment of expenditure 
in terms of real time basis.  The Committee also desire that MEA should regularly 
update its websi te particularly, the section related to MEA Accounts.  Moreover, 
the Committee are amazed to know that a country which is helping in building up 
e-network in other countries has failed to connect all its Missions/Posts through 
the e-network. The Committee,  therefore, desire that the Ministry should ensure 
establishment of e-network in all the Missions/Posts without delay.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has already undertaken a pro -active approach to ask all our 
Missions to implement the IMAS software  for use by 1 st April 2010. This has 
sensitized the Missions towards speedy implementation of IMAS software. As of 
December 2010, 121 Missions/Posts have implemented IMAS.   The 
implementation of this softwar e in rest of the Missions/Posts has been delayed 
due to technical reasons. This is being actively pursued with the concerned  
Missions/Posts and also with the development team. 
 
 As for e -networking of our Missions abroad, it may be noted that e -
networking is also in existence for some specific services, for example, 
Centralized Passport Printing System, on -line Passport Verification System, Mail 
Service, ITEC Programmes. Management Information System (MIS) also 
provides for real time updation of data in the budget module as well as the 
Administration module. Another aspect of e -networking will be added when the 
Ministry moves to the new building where provision for e -networking of our 
Missions through the voice over IP Protocol has already been incorporated for 
implementation. 
 
 It may be noted that commun ications over internet and e -networking 
depend heavily on public infrastructure available in the host country of our 
Missions abroad. This varies widely from place to place and ensuring security of 
such channels requires to be fool -proof for functioning. A s and when 
applications, which may require use of dedicated secure networks, Ministry 
would be implementing the same. 
 

 44 
 As per the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Standing Committee, XP 
Division has taken suitable action to spread familiarization visits equa lly over the 
year. A list of the visits that were arranged, and plans for the next three months in 
the current financial year, is enclosed. 
 
 On the expenditure front, the Division has already spent 61.8% of the 
sanctioned budget till date. Further expendi ture will be incurred for the activities 
scheduled for the remaining period in the current financial year. 
 
 The MEA website is being updated on real -time basis. Ministry will 
coordinate with various Divisions for updating the website of required material 
that is helpful to the Missions. 
 
 
Tentative schedule of media delegations/ Events  
for XP Division for 2010 & till April 2011 
 
Month Delegation/Event 
April  Hosted A delegation of women journalists from 
SAARC countries  
May  18 – 25 April Hosted media delegates from ASEAN 
countries 
 
June  20-23 June: Hosted Mr. Haroon Siddiqui, Editor 
Emeritus, Toronto Star 
 30 June- 7 July- A delegation of Journalist Delegation 
from Pakistan 
 
July  19-24 July : MEA Beat Media Course at FSI 
 
August  14 - 20 August : Hosted a delegation of Journalists 
from Nepal 
21-27 August :  Hosted a delegation of journalists 
from CIS countries  
September 12-19 September: Hosted a delegation of Journalists 
from China  
25 Sep- 3 October: A delegation of Journalists from 
Japan and South Korea  
17 Sep – 2 October: A tailored made Training 
programme was organized at IIMC for 26 journalists from 
Myanmar 
 
October  3-10 October: Hosted a delegation of journalists from 
Bangladesh  
10-18 October: Hosted a delegation from the  
Anglophone African countries (Egypt, Botswana, 
Ghana, Namibia, South Africa, Sudan, Kenya, 
Tanzania, Mozambique, Malawi, Ethiopia, Nigeria, 
Ghana )  
 

 45 
November  19-26 November:  Hosted Mr.  Adrian Michael  Editor 
in Chief of the Telegraph London 
 
December   1st Dec: Interaction for European Chiefs of Bureaus 
based in New Delhi  
 4-12 December: Hosted a delegation of journalists 
from Sri Lanka. 
 
January 
2011 
 8-15 January: Visit of 14 Journalists from Eastern 
Europe (Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Czech,  Slovakia, 
Romania , Slovenia and Croatia-10/11 Jan- DS XPS 
 
 12-20 January: Would be hosting 12-14 
Economic/Financial Editors from BRIC/IBSA  
 16-23 January/ : 11 Editors from Bhutan  
 16-28 January: 30 Afghan journalists training (IIMC) 
 23-30 January:  Delegation from Pakistan ( 24 and 
27 Jan) 
 Hosting journalists from Taiwan 
February 
2011 
 From Saudi Arabia 
 12-17 February: From Iran 
 From Pakistan 
 
March 2011  West Asia ( Jordan, Syria, Israel, Palestine and 
Lebanon) 
April  India Africa Summit in May in Ethiopia (Anglophone 
African countries  (Group II:  North & Central African 
Countries-awaited) 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
 The Committee note that there has vast gap between the Proposed 
Outlays and the Actual Allocation in the Annual Plans over the years.  The 
Approved Plan Outlay for the Ministry of External Affairs for 11th Five Year Plan is 
Rs. 2488.41 crores.  Moreover, at the mid -term review stage, the Ministry has 
sought an allocation worth Rs. 4522.24 crores and the allocation is still awaited. 
The Committee are of the view  that the Ministry should make efforts for quicker 
allocation so that the pace of execution of the current projects and the projects in 
pipeline are not adversely affected.   The Ministry has accepted the fact that the 
fund allocation by Planning Commissio n might have been based on the past 
utilization of budget by the Ministry.  The Committee take very serious note of 
Ministry‟s casual approach in the matter and hold it responsible for continuous 
poor utilization of funds allocated to the Ministry.  The Co mmittee also note that 
inspite of reduced allocation, surrenders have taken place at the end of the year.  
Hence, the Committee would like to suggest that the Ministry should make more 
realistic assessment for Proposed Outlays in consonance with Ministry‟s  capacity 
to spend.    
 

 46 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee‟s suggestion is noted. The Ministry would take all 
necessary steps to ensure a realistic projection of its budgetary requirements 
and efficient utilization of the allocated funds so as to avoi d any surrender at the 
close of the financial year. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
 The Ministry has informed that one of the reasons for under -utilization of 
funds during the past years was that Indian contractors often quoted for 
execution of projects abroad without taking into account all the factors particularly 
internal problems, political and security development in the beneficiary countries 
for the projects to be carried out under „Technical and Economic Programme‟. 
The Committee are not convinced with the justification furnished by the Ministry 
shifting the responsibility on contractors and are appalled to note that the Ministry 
is still in jeopardy inspite of the fact that Ministry is undertaking such projects for 
a long time.  T he Committee, therefore, are of the view that there is an urgent 
need to overhaul the tendering process for the projects.  The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry should consider factors like prior experience in a 
particular region and prior performanc e of the agencies participating in tendering 
process, alongwith quoted price while granting contracts.  The contractors whose 
projects have element of cost and time overrun repeatedly should be 
discouraged.  The appraisal and third party audit of the proje ct should also be 
conducted.  The Committee are of the opinion that it is the responsibility of 
Government to sensitize contractors about security and political factors before 
awarding contracts and help them in adverse conditions arising in emergency.  
Keeping in view the past performance of the Ministry, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should review the project planning/ monitoring  process with a 
view to ensure proper utilization of funds as also achieving the physical targets 
set for various projects.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has adopted several procedures in tendering process for smooth 
execution of its projects. Ministry follows the GFR guidelines for tendering 
process particularly for the projects on infrastructure. While prepari ng tender 
documents, pre-qualification and technical conditions defining annual turnover of 
the firm during the last three years and its past experience in the respective field 
of the project being undertaken, are determined. These pre -conditions prevent 
the inexperienced firms to bid for the project. Before awarding the contract, the 
implementing agencies/contractors are also suitably sensitized about the political 
importance of projects and are advised to complete the projects in the given 
timeframe without any cost escalation.  Those contractors which have in the past 
had time overrun with reference to the projects awarded to them, are invariably 
discouraged to bid. It may be mentioned that even if a contractor may be familiar 
with the political and secur ity situation of a particular Country, where the project 
is to be executed, there are always unpredictable situations which can cause 
delay in the completion of the project.  Notwithstanding the situations on the 
ground in individual countries, all efforts  are being made to implement projects in 

 47 
a time-bound manner to avoid time and cost over -runs, including by impressing 
on the contractors the special stakes involved in projects being undertaking 
abroad on behalf of the Ministry. 
 
Performance of the implem enting agency is monitored by a project -
specific monitoring committee formed in the Ministry for implementation of the 
projects.  Annual third -party audit of the Ministry is carried out by the office of 
Directorate of Audit, New Delhi.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee have noted that the Ministry has temporarily got engaged 
some outsourced staff to deal with the shortage of staff at the headquarters.  The 
Committee are not in favour of such a move to outsource staff in a M inistry of 
such sensitive nature and suggest that the move for outsourcing of work of 
sensitive nature should be avoided.  The Committee recommend that instead of 
outsourcing the staff, the Ministry should take steps to call staff on deputation 
basis from other Ministries and Departments for the time being. The Committee 
also recommend that Government should take all initiatives to persuade the Staff 
Selection Commission for filling up vacancies at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is con scious of the sensitive nature of tasks assigned to it. 
Accordingly, the outsourced staff are not deployed in any sensitive Division. Also, 
the following norms are followed in deployment of the outsourced staff: 
 
(i) Character and antecedents (C&A) verification will be carried out in case of 
all outsourced staff. 
(ii) All outsourced staff will be required to give an oath that they will not violate 
security norms, nor carry any document outside their office and not reveal 
any information whatsoever. 
(iii) All the Heads of Offices, where outsourced staff are deployed, will have to 
give a certificate to the effect that these staff will not have access to 
classified and sensitive information. 
(iv) No outsourced staff will have the custody of any official documen t. This 
custody will remain with the regular employees of the Ministry. This will be 
ensured by not letting any office be fully manned by outsourced staff only. 
 
  The outsourcing of staff will be discontinued as soon as the existing 
shortages are met by t he normal recruitment/promotion methods.  Following the 
declaration of results of 2008 exams, the nominated candidates are joining the 
Ministry gradually. The process for selection of candidates based on 2010 
exams, including vacancies for both 2009 and 2010, is underway. The indents for 
these exams have been placed by the Ministry with the Staff Selection 
Commission.  
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
 

 48 
Recommendation No.6 
 
 The Committee observe that the Government is facing acute shortage of 
Indian Foreign S ervice Officers.  Though, Ministry has made efforts in this 
direction and 62 posts of IFS officers and 41 posts of IFS -B have been created 
under expansion plan, but due to likely difficulty in cadre management, 
incremental approach is being followed in fil ling the direct recruitment posts.  
However, the Committee is of the opinion that an in -house Organization and 
Management Study is required to be conducted on the current set up of the 
organization, allocation of work within Division and job profile of its  existing 
officers.  Furthermore, the Committee note with deep concern that the Indian 
Foreign Service is no longer the most preferred career choice for the high 
ranking meritorious candidates selected through the Civil Services Examination. 
The Committee,  therefore, advise the Ministry to undertake a holistic study to 
look into the reasons behind such a shift in priority of the younger generation and 
take remedial measures to attract more and more young and talented persons for 
joining Indian Foreign Service.  The Committee advise that Ministry should be its 
own brand ambassador and should project itself before the youth and students in 
a better  and planned way while interacting with universities, academics and 
intellectuals through various seminars, conferences etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Minist ry has already commenced the ex ercise of Cadre Review, 
which will pave the way for an extensive Work Measurement Study of the 
Ministry in order to make optimal use of the available resources. 
 
 As regards th e Ministry functioning as its own brand Ambassador and 
projecting itself before the youth and students in a better and planned way, the 
Public Diplomacy Division of the Ministry has already started such activities 
which are detailed in the reply to Point N o.9.  Attention is drawn, in particular, to 
two facts: 
 
i)    The 21 lectures already organised under the Distinguished Lecture Series 
at various university campuses.   These provide direct interaction with 
students to encourage them to join the foreign service. 
 
ii)   A Digital Diplomacy approach using Web 2.0 tools that consciously aims 
to connect with the younger generation. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
 The Committee understand that there is a change in the educational and 
socio-economic profile of the new entrants to the Indian Foreign Services.  
Simultaneously, the framework of international relations has also undergone 
tremendous change over the past few years with diverse and increased arenas 
of engagement.  Due to these factor s the freshers are under a lot of stress. The 
Committee would like to suggest that the Ministry should modify the training 
process in such a manner that it acts as a facilitator in reorienting  the freshers 

 49 
and to familiarize them with their current enviro nment.  More innovative and 
diversified training should be provided to empower them to face the new and 
growing challenges in conduct of India‟s Foreign Policy.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The training programme of IFS Probationers has been revised and ne w 
modules on environmental and climate diplomacy, energy security and 
international trade relations have been introduced. In addition to the traditional 
foreign policy subjects, the young entrants to the Service are also briefed on the 
contemporary social development issues, minority rights and problems, right to 
information, human rights issues etc. During their District training, the 
Probationers are given the opportunity to learn about grass -root level 
administration and problems faced by rural communiti es. Group discussions and 
presentations on topical issues have also been introduced in order to develop 
effective communication skills and creative thinking among the Probationers. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
 The Committee take note  of Ministry‟s endeavor to keep pace with the 
challenges and changes posed by the fast pace of developments in global 
politics and communication.  The Committee appreciate the intellectual and 
academic content of its engagement with the target audiences.  However, the 
Committee are of the view that Ministry should also arrange for translation and 
publication of books written in Indian languages which are of everlasting 
importance, in various languages in association with Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations, so as to directly engage with the general public.  The Committee in 
particular note the initiatives of MEA „Distinguished Lecture Series‟ on India‟s 
foreign policy at University level in India.  The Committee desire that such 
lectures should be held in Universities across India as well as abroad, so as to 
enlighten the youth who are the future policy/opinion makers about the nuances 
of Indian foreign policy, to project MEA‟s working and make it as attractive career 
option for meritorious youth in India.  At the same time, the Ministry will benefit by 
such interaction resulting in the flow of fresh ideas, approaches and insights in 
conduct of its international relations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Public Diplomacy Division is grateful for the Committee ‟s appreciation with 
regard to the intellectual and academic content of the engagement of the Division 
with the target audiences.  As regards, the Committee‟s recommendation that the 
Division should arrange for translation and publication of books written in Indian 
languages of everlasting importance in various languages, it is submitted that the 
Division has supported the initiatives to publish the translations of „The 
Autobiography of Mahatma Gandhi‟ in Slovenian language, the translation of the 
„Glimpses of World History‟ by Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru in Bulgarian language and 
the translation of Tagore‟s works in Serbian language.  In addition, the Division 
took the initiative to bring out a special issue of India Perspectives to coincide 
with the commemoration  of the 150 th anniversary of Rabindranath Tagore.  To 

 50 
bring out this issue, the Division established a close partnership wit h Viswa 
Bharati.  The issue was available in 17 major languages. 
 
2. As regards, the MEA‟s Distinguished Lecture Series, the Divisio n has 
organized lectures at different central and State universities during the period  
January – November 2010 a list of which is given in the following paragraphs.  As 
desired by the Committee, this programme is being expanded and lectures are 
being organized in the coming months in universities across India.  The Division 
has taken note of the Committee‟s recommendation to organize such lectures 
abroad also.   
 
3. With respect to the Committee‟s recommendation that the PD Division 
may make arrangements for the visit of foreign journalists, it is submitted that the 
mandate for such visits broadly lies with the XP Division of the Ministry.  
However, PD Division has an active programme for hosting influential visitors 
from foreign countries. The Division is e xpanding this programme and details of 
visits which have ta ken place between January – November 2010 and the 
proposals which are in the pipeline are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
4. Details of the specific outreach activities consisting of incoming and 
outgoing visits; seminars, conferences and bilateral dialogues, MEA 
Distinguished Lecture Series; outreach to universities/think tanks; commissioning 
of documentary films and purchase of audio -visual publicity material for 
distribution to missions abro ad; publishing of the Ministry‟s flagship magazine 
„India Perspectives‟; and commissioning of coffee table books and purchase of 
books and magazines for distribution to missions abroad are given below: 
 
Outreach Activities – Workshops, Incoming & Outgoing Visits, Seminars, 
Conferences, etc. 
 
January – November 2010 
 
 The second project workshop of the GCC – India Joint Study Group 
coordination by PD Division,  Gulf Division, Indian Council of World Affairs 
(ICWA) and Gulf Research Centre, Dubai , a premier foreign affairs think -
tank in the UAE was held in New Delhi from January 5 – 7, 2010. 
 
 A Slide Presentation and Talk on  “Being Indian, Being Israeli: Migration, 
Culture and Identity Among Indian Jews in Israel” by  author Dr. Maina 
Chawla Si ngh was organized by the India International Centre with the 
support of the Public Diplomacy Division on January 15, 2010. 
 
 Visit of a 26 -member delegat ion by PIO journalists from 15 countries 
during the Prawasi Bharatiya Diwas (PBD) 2010. 
 
 Visit of a 6 -member delegation o f Permanent Representatives of Small 
Pacific Island Developing States from 23-31 January 2010. 
 
 The 3 rd MEA-IISS Dialogue wa s organized by the Division on Monday, 
22nd February 2010 in London.   
 

 51 
 PD Division, in association with the Government of Bihar,  organized a 
Seminar on „Towards a New Era in Nepal‟ in Patna  from 25 -27 
February 2010.  
 
 The Division collaborated with the U nited Services Institute (USI) to 
organize a screening of the docume ntary „Negotiating Justice‟ on 2nd 
February 2010.  
 
 The Division ‟s documentary „A Tale of Two Writers – Ismat & Annie‟ 
 was screened at India Habitat Centre on 11th March 2010. 
 
 The Div ision, in partnership with the Kerala International Centre (KIC), 
Thiruvanantapuram and the National Maritime  Foundation 
 (NMF),Chennai, organized a  highly successful  conference 
in Kochi on March 21, 2010 on the theme “India‟s Maritime Links with the 
Gulf – Old Foundations, New Perspectives”. 
 
 The Centre for Research in Ru ral and Industrial Development (CRRID), 
Chandigarh and Jamia Mil lia Islamia, New Delhi with  the support of the 
Division organized an international Conference on “Women Guiding the 
Destiny of Sout h Asia: A Media Perspective by Women Journalists” from 
March 13 – 15, 2010. 
 
 A National Seminar on Energy  Security was organi zed by the School of 
International Relation s & Strategic Studies (SIRSS), Jadavpur University 
in c ollaboration with the Jadavpur Association of International Relations 
(JAIR) on Friday, 19th March 2010. 
 
 The University School of Open Lea rning, Department of Political Science, 
Panjab University, Chandigarh, with the financial assistance from the 
Division organized a National Seminar on  “Indian Foreign Policy in 
the 21st Century: Challenges and Prospects on 25-26 March 2010. 
 
 The Division in association with  Jadavpur Associatio n of International 
Relations (JAIR) and CII organized a 2-day seminar  titled “From Land -
locked to Land-linked: Northeast India in BIMSTEC” at Shillong from 8 -10 
April 2010.   
 
 The Embassy of India, Jakarta, w ith the support of PD Divis ion organized 
a series of outreach activities in Jakarta and Bali during  3-5 May 
2010 in association with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, the 
ASEAN Secretariat and Udayana University, Bali.  
 
 The 9 th annual India -Korea Dialogu e was organized  by ICRIER with the 
support of PD Division in Seoul on May 24-25, 2010.   
 
 A Symposium on India‟s foreign policy with special reference to Northeast 
& East India and India‟s Look East Policy was orgnaised by Indian 
Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta at IIT camp us, Guwahati on 31 st July, 
2010 with support of PD Division. 

 52 
 
 A 7 -member NETPAC delegation of eminent writers on cinema from 
Asian countries visited India from 18-27 August to attend the international 
conference of NETPAC and visit to Hyderabad and Mumbai supported by 
Public Diplomacy Division. 
 
 Familiarisation visit of a Multi -Party Parliamentary Delegation to India 
from the Cambodian National  Assembly between 22 -28 August, 2010 
supported by Public Diplomacy Division, Ministry of External Affairs 
 
 TARAgram YATRA 2010 – an international conference “Towards Green 
Economies” – scalable solutions for people and our planet” – 17 – 21 
September 2010 – supported by Public Diplomacy Division, Ministry of 
External Affairs 
 
 Visit of Dr. Eberhard Sandschneider, Otto -Wolff-Director of the Research 
Institute of the German Council on Foreign Relations (DGAP) at the 
invitation of Public Diplomacy Division, Ministry of External Affairs from 
September 11 – 16, 2010 
 
 Visit of a 7 -member UK Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) Parl iamentary 
delegation consisting of six Members of Parliament (three each from the 
House of Lords and the House of Commons) from 26 th September to 2 nd 
October 2010 at the invitation of Public Diplomacy Division, Ministry of 
External Affairs. 
 
 Financial support to Missions abroad to celebrate International Day of Non 
Violence ( 2nd October 2010). 
 
 A Seminar on 150 th anniversary of arrival of Indian indentured labour in 
South Africa from October 4 – 6, 2010;  
 
 The Indo-Gulf Partnership Project – GCC-India Study Group‟s meeting at 
Riyadh on 16-17 October 2010;  
 
 Release of the book In the National Interest: A Strategic Foreign Policy for 
India authored by Rajiv Kumar and Santosh Kumar by Hon'ble Vice 
President of India Shri M. Hamid Ansari on 3rd November 2010 a t Nehru 
Memorial Museum & Library, Teen Murti Bhawan 
 
 Financial support to invite leading writers and intellectuals to the Hay 
Festival in Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala from November 13 – 14, 2010; 
 
 Visit of a 4 -member Lithuanian Parliamentary delegation – 13 – 18 
November 2010 
 
 Visit of Shri Tarun Das to speak at a Business Seminar in Buenos Aires 
on 16th November 2010 supported by Public Diplomacy Division, Ministry 
of External Affairs 
 

 53 
 Support to South Asia Women‟s Media Summit from November 21 -23, 
2010 by International Centre, Goa at Goa;  
 
 Visit of Multi -party delegation of young parliamentarians from Nepal 
organised by PD Division from November 21-28, 2010. 
 
 Visit of the Australian Parliamentary delegation to India –  27 Nov – 5 Dec 
2010 at the invitation  of Public Diplomacy Division, Ministry of External 
Affairs 
 
Proposals in the pipeline for  FY 2010-2011 
 
 Conference on Inclusive Growth in association with the Confederation of 
Indian Industry, UK on 29 th November 2010 at London and 30 th 
November at Birmingham.. 
 
 International Public Diplomacy Conference being organized by the Centre 
for Media Studies in association with the Public Diplomacy Division from 
10 – 11 December 2010. 
 
 United States Visitors to India Programme (USVIP) under the US 
 Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Programme -  December 12 – 
19, 2010 
 
 Financial support to the Centre for African Studies, University of Mumbai, 
for an international conference titled “India, Africa and Food Security: 
Between the Summits”, in January 2011 
 
 India as a Soft Power Symposium – London – February 18, 2011 
 
 India Week in Mexico – March 2011 
 
 Seminar on UNSC reforms being organised by PD Division in March 2011 
 
 Commemoration of the 150th birth anniversary of W.M. Haffkine  - a joint 
India-Israel event in  Jerusalem with support from the Public Diplomacy 
Division, Ministry of External Affairs 
 
 Financial support to the activities of Association of Asia Scholars for 
conducting seminars/workshops, etc;  
 
 A number of outreach activities with Nepal;  
 
 A visit of Future Parliamentary Leaders Group from Africa;  
 
 Financial assistance for the establishment of Nalanda University;  
 
 Seminar in Paris in partnership with French Institute of International 
Relations; 
 

 54 
Outreach Activities – Distinguished Lecture Series 
 
January – November 2010 
 The MEA Distinguished Lecture Series on India‟s Foreign Policy was 
launched at the Banaras Hindu University on 17th February 2010.  These lectures 
have had very encouraging responses from various universities.  These were: 
Lectures delivered 
     
Sl.No. Date University Speaker Subject 
1.  17/2/2010 Benaras 
Hindu 
University 
Amb.Shri 
A.N.Ram 
India‟s 
Emergence as 
a Global 
Power: 
Constraints and 
Prospects 
2.  20/03/2010 University of 
Lucknow 
Amb.R.Sen Indo-US 
Relations and 
Regional 
Issues 
3.  29/03/2010 University of 
Goa 
Amb.Shri 
Lalit 
Mansingh 
India‟s Foreign 
Policy in the 
21st Century 
4.  23/04/2010 Central 
University of 
Hyderabad 
Amb.Shri 
K.V.Rajan 
South Asian 
Developments 
and 
Implications for 
the Asian 
Century 
5.  01/05/2010 University of 
Sikkim 
Amb.Shri 
Rajiv Sikri 
India‟s Look 
East Policy 
6.  13/05/2010 University of 
Manipur 
Amb.Shri 
Rajiv Bhatia 
Addressing 
Africa‟s 
Development 
Challenges 
through 
Partnership 
with India 
7.  16/7/2010 I.I.T. 
Mumbai 
Amb. Shri 
R.M. 
Abhyankar 
India and West 
Asia 
8.  23/8/2010 University of 
Bangalore 
Amb. Shri C. 
Dasgupta 
India‟s Climate 
Change 
Diplomacy 
9.  25/8/2010 University of 
Tripura 
Amb. Shri 
S.T. Devare 
India‟s Look 
East Policy 
10.  27/8/2010 Tezpur 
University 
Amb. Shri 
S.T. Devare 
India‟s Look 
East Policy 

 55 
11.  30/8/2010 North-
Eastern Hill 
University, 
Shillong 
Amb. Shri 
S.T. Devare 
India‟s Look 
East Policy 
12.  30/8/2010 Indian 
Council for 
Social 
Science and 
Research 
Amb. Shri 
S.T. Devare 
India‟s Look 
East Policy 
13.  6/9/2010 Ranchi 
University 
Amb. Shri 
H.H.S. 
Viswanathan 
The P rospects 
& Challenges 
for a Resurgent 
Africa 
14.  7/9/2010 Central 
University of 
Jharkhand 
Amb. Shri 
H.H.S. 
Viswanathan 
India‟s 
Engagement 
with a 
Resurgent 
Africa 
15.  13/9/2010 Jadavpur 
University 
Amb. Shri R. 
Sen 
Making 
American 
Interest 
Groups 
Appreciate 
Indi a‟s 
Concerns And 
Priorities: A 
Public 
Diplomacy 
Exercise 
Abroad  
16.  14/9/2010 Calcutta 
University 
Amb. Shri R. 
Sen  
The Evolution 
Of India -
Russia 
Relations  
17.  28/9/2010 Indian 
Institute of 
Technology, 
Roorkey 
Amb. Shri B. 
Balakrishnan 
Role of 
Technology in 
India‟s Foreign 
Relations 
18.  5/10/2010 University of 
Rajasthan, 
Jaipur 
Amb. Shri 
Kishan S. 
Rana 
"Indian Foreign 
Policy: The 
Citizen 
Dimension". 
19.  22/10/2010 Guru Nanak 
Dev 
University, 
Amritsar 
 
 
Amb. Shri K. 
Sibal 
Indo – Pak 
Relations 

 56 
20.  24/10/2010 Jawaharlal 
Nehru 
University 
Amb. Shri 
Swashpawan 
Singh 
Role and 
functioning of 
UN 
organisations 
21.  26/10/2010 Panjab 
University, 
Chandigarh 
Amb. Shri G. 
Parthasarathy 
India – Pakistan 
Relations 
 
The Division is organizing lectures in the coming months at various othe r 
universities across India.  
 
Audio-Visual Publicity 
 
 The Division completed the following documentary films projecting diverse 
facets of India: - (i) Animare; (ii) Bonding with Africa; (iii) Martial Traditions; (iv) 
Urdu & Modern India; (v) A Perfect Ble nd; (vi) Humsaye – Two Nations, Two 
Neighbours; (vii) India by Choice; (viii) Love Song of the World; (ix) In the Season 
of Blue Storm; (x) God‟s Chosen One; (xi) Resurgent Manas; (xii) Footsteps into 
Future; (xiii) India Empowered; (xiv) On the Wings of C ourage; (xv) The Path 
Breakers; (xvi) Vibrant Colours; (xvii) A People‟s Project – Film on IBSA; (xviii) 
Emerging Ties and (xix) A La Cart!. Several of these films have been prepared in 
multiple formats so that not only can they be screened on various TV c hannels 
but shorter versions can also be made available through You Tube and other 
new media channels. 20 films have already been uploaded onto You Tube. 
 
 In addition the division has commissioned 20 documentaries in the current 
year on a wide variety of subjects ranging from Literature, Indian weddings, 
Jaipur foot, MNREGA, e -governance initiatives, Saree, Blind Cricket and Indian 
Architecture. In addition we have also commissioned three documentaries in 
association with other ministries/ agencies ie. on Kishori Amonkar by Shri Amol 
Palekar with National Culture Fund, a 10 -part series on the Indian Diaspora by 
Shri Siddharth Kak with MOIA and a film on Golden Temple with Discovery 
Channel. The division has also made a conscious effort to shift to High Defi nition 
format to make the documentaries compatible with the prevailing transmission 
format in other countries. 
90 documentaries produced by the division are also being screened on 
DD-India from October 2010. 
 To ensure wider availability of our documentari es, we have entered into 
non-exclusive distribution arrangements against payment of royalty to the 
Government with M/s Saregama and Magic Lantern Foundation, an NGO.  
 
Print Publicity 
 
 The Division has completed two publications – a coffee table book titl ed 
„India for a Billion Reasons‟ and a book by The Energy and Resources Institute 
(TERI) titled „Simplifying Climate Change‟.  Four new coffee table books on 
different facets of India have been commissioned and gift sets of regional 
language books in Gujarati, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu are being finalized so that 
our missions can use these for our outreach efforts to the Indian diaspora.   
 ICCR welcomes Committee‟s suggestions that Ministry should “arrange 
translation and publication of books written in In dian languages which are of 
everlasting importance, in various languages in association with ICCR”. ICCR 

 57 
has translated and published in recent past several books on Sufism, 
Pt.Jawaharlal Nehru, Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad etc. (from English into Arabic 
and F rench as well from Urdu into Hindi). At present, ICCR is engaged in a 
project to translate Indian literature books such as Ramayana, Mahabharat and 
other texts into Arabic with help from Abu Dhabi Authority for Cultural and 
Heritage (ADACH) in collaboratio n with Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi. ICCR 
would be willing to undertake such work of translation and publication of books 
written in Indian languages in various languages with additional resources 
extended to ICCR. ICCR will also be able to work in consulta tion with other 
relevant organizations. 
 
Digital Diplomacy 
 
PD Division has embarked on an active digital diplomacy approach aimed 
at harnessing the potential offered by Web 2.0 tools with three clear objectives: 
 
 To connect with the internet savvy younger generation. 
 To utilise the powerful, low cost, communication channels offered 
by Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, Blogspot, etc. 
 To use these channels for receiving feedback and for creating 
interactive platforms that improve our interface with citizens. 
 
During the period July -November 2010, PD Division has established a 
presence on each of these channels and also started a website (www. 
Indiandiplomacy.in) which is based on Web 2.0 platform.  The response from the 
public has been extremely positive and the Tw itter account for instance, already 
has close to 4,000 followers.  We have put short versions of our documentaries 
on YouTube and have created an interactive space on Facebook to convey and 
share information about activities of our diplomatic missions. The se initiatives 
have recently won recognition through the India e -gov 2.0 Awards 2010 where 
the Public Diplomacy Division received the award for most innovative use of 
social media in Government. 
 
Promoting Brand India 
 
PD Division has taken several initiat ives to promote the building of Brand 
India oversees.  A few of the major initiatives in this regard include : 
 
i) Support to the India Future of Change  campaign that 
attempts to create awareness of India in 18 major university 
campuses around the world throu gh a series of design, 
business plan, photography, essay writing and other 
competitions. 
ii) Partnership with CII to mount a major branding campaign 
during the World Economic Forum‟s forthcoming Summit in 
Davos in January 2011.  The campaign is themed 
„India.Inclusive@Davos‟. 
 
iii) The PD website makes a conscious effort to create and 
amplify examples of India‟s Development Partnerships 
around the globe under the ITEC and other aid programmes. 

 58 
iv) A similar effort is also being made to project and highlight 
the global reach and impact of India‟s softpower. 
v) Active discussions are underway with Doordarshan to 
expand its global footprint and make it an effective vehicle 
for our public diplomacy efforts. 
 
Creating an International Relations Community 
 
On a separate note, PD Division has embarked on an exercise to 
establish a nationwide database of all international relations scholars and 
experts. This has been done in partnership with the School of International 
Studies, JNU and with the Jadhavpur Association of international  Relations. As a 
starting point, a closed google mail group has been created so that these 
scholars can start interacting with each other and establish relationship with the 
PD Division.   
 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
 
 ICCR welcomes Commi ttee‟s suggestions that Ministry should “arrange 
translation and publication of books written in Indian languages which are of 
everlasting importance, in various languages in association with ICCR”. ICCR 
has translated and published in recent past several books on Sufism, 
Pt.Jawaharlal Nehru, Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad etc. (from English into Arabic 
and French as well from Urdu into Hindi). At present, ICCR is engaged in a 
project to translate Indian literature books such as Ramayana, Mahabharat and 
other tex ts into Arabic with help from Abu Dhabi Authority for Cultural and 
Heritage (ADACH) in collaboration with Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi. ICCR 
would be willing to undertake such work of translation and publication of books 
written in Indian languages in vario us languages with additional resources 
extended to ICCR. ICCR will also be able to work in consultation with other 
relevant organizations. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
 The Committee observe that Public Diplomacy Division of the Mini stry 
makes arrangement for the visit of foreign journalists/delegations to India to 
expose them to various facts and view points in India and also to assist in 
capacity building in developing countries.  The Committee take note of Ministry‟s 
efforts to eng age with global audience and create positive image for India.  
However, the Committee is of the opinion that the focus of the Division should be 
expanded to include various walks of life to broaden its ambit and enhance its 
engagement with these countries and build upon the institutional initiatives 
undertaken by Government of India to intensify the constructive and positive 
engagement with the countries of these regions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The observations of the Public Diplomacy Division are same as indicated 
in point No.9. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 

 59 
Recommendation No.11 
 
 The Committee take note of Ministry‟s effort to provide Aid and Loan to 
neighbouring countries and developing countries under various heads.  Apart 
from building very few mega -projects in neighbouring countries, the Ministry is 
engaged in Small Development Projects (SDPs) in these countries.  However, for 
all other countries the main focus of Ministry is to provide technical aid which is 
mainly focused on IT sector and capacity building of the personnel under 
International Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme. (ITEC 
Programme) The Committee are of the opinion that Ministry should evaluate the 
entire gamut of projects under „Aid and Loans‟ and come out with the 
comprehensive review and a realistic, targeted blueprint with clearly stated aims 
and objectives encompassing developing countries of  African and Latin 
American and Caribbean Countries as well as neighbouring countries.  
 
The Committee are of the view that the Minis try should also focus on investment 
in projects for creating permanent assets particularly in the area of infrastructure. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should identify such projects 
that increase India‟s presence on a long term basis a nd citizens of a friendly 
country may feel India‟s presence as a friend in need.  While making the 
investments, the attitude and affection of the people of that particular country 
should also be considered. The Committee also desire that alongwith the publ ic 
sector, the Government of India should encourage, facilitate and channelize the 
energy of Indian private sector to increase India‟s presence in the African and 
Latin American regions.  The Committee would like to reiterate that India should 
pay more att ention towards these countries, in view of various competing 
influences operating in the region. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Developing Countries, including those in Caribbean, Latin 
America and Africa are being paid due attention by the Ministry as far a s 
grant of assistance to these countries is concerned. The main focus is to set 
up IT Training Centres under Development Partnership. In the last few 
years, IT Training Centres have been set up in Cuba, El -Salvador, 
Honduras, Jamaica and Nicaragua.  Establishment of new IT Training 
Centres is under implementation in Syria and Grenada. Proposals for 
setting up similar IT Training Centres in Vietnam, Ecuador and Dominican 
Republic are under active consideration of the Ministry. 
 
 Infrastructure projects have n ot been neglected.  Apart from the 
projects mentioned above, a Vocational Training Centre for construction 
sector is being set up in Aceh, Indonesia. The Government of Montenegro 
has approached us for conducting a feasibility study on setting up of a 
communication network centre in Podgorica (Montenegro) which will link 
that Country‟s Missions with its Headquarter. Development of two wind 
farms in Syria is also being considered.  In Maldives, an 8 -storey India -
Maldives Friendship Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism Studies Centre is 
being constructed.  
 

 60 
 Ministry has given due consideration to the role of the private sector 
also.  IT Centre projects in Cuba, El -Salvador, Honduras, Jamaica and 
Nicaragua were all awarded to the private sector, as was the civil, plumbing, 
fire-fighting and electrical works part of the project in Maldives. 
 
 Besides the above, Ministry has undertaken restoration works of the 
Ta Prohm Temple complex in Cambodia and Wat Phou Temple complex in 
Laos through the Archaeological Survey o f India (ASI) to help preserve the 
cultural heritage of these two nations. 
  
Africa 
 
 In Africa, the Indo -Zimbabwe Project for Development of Small and 
Medium Enterprises Sector is under completion.  In Tanzania, feasibility 
study for mining coal for produ ction of sponge iron and steel through 
Ministry of Coal is under consideration of the Ministry.  Proposals for setting 
up of IT Centres in Burundi, Uganda, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central 
African Republic, Congo, and Liberia are also under Ministry‟s 
consideration. 
 
 This Ministry has been assisting various countries of Africa for 
development through a mix of loan and grant. Major infrastructure projects 
on the request of host countries have been undertaken through Line of 
Credit (LOC) route whereas smaller p rojects are considered under GOI 
grant as well. Year 2008 had been a landmark year in India Africa relations 
as after the India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) of April, 2008, the priorities of 
African continent were identified and the programme was chalked out  for 
meeting those priorities. During the IAFS, our PM announced US$ 5 billion 
credit to various African countries over a period of 5 years and grant 
amounting to US$ 500 million for implementation of various projects. In the 
Plan of Action, various progra mmes for capacity building in Africa through 
regular academic courses and training courses under agriculture, doubling 
of ICCR scholarships, enhancement of ITEC scholarships, etc. were offered 
to African countries.  
 
 A commitment has also been made to set up the following institutions 
in Africa:- 
 
vi. India-Africa Institute of Information Technology; 
vii. India-Africa Diamond Institute; 
viii. India-Africa Institute of Planning and Administration; 
ix. 10 Vocational Training Centres in Africa and;  
x. Human Settlement Centres.  
 
Discussions are continuing with the AU for identification of locations of the 
above institutes/centres. 
 
 The above list is only indicative and to get a complete picture, a copy 
of the Plan of Action of the Framework for Cooperation of the IAFS 
launched with the African Union (AU) Delegation in March 2010 is enclosed. 

 61 
In addition, the Africa Divisions in the MEA are implementing projects under 
grant bilaterally as well.  
 
 The decision of the IAFS focus on some of the ideas by elaborating 
capacity building programmes and working on creation of regional 
institutions. Extensive consultations with the African countries, Regional 
Communities and African Union are held so that the requirement of African 
countries is fully met.   
 
 Periodic review is conducted of our policy and programmes in order 
to safeguard India‟s interests in Africa. The energy of the private sector is 
also channelised to increase India‟s presence in Africa. To achieve this end, 
we have supported the CII -Exim Bank Conclave for 6 years in which  India‟s 
private sector and public sector meet and match their objectives with their 
African counterparts.   
 
 So far, Lines of Credit(LOCs) worth US$1446.20 million have been 
extended to the 25 countries in West Africa.  These have been done on a 
bilateral basis as also through regional organizations/initiatives.  LOCs have 
been mostly for infrastructure projects.  Our focus is for supply of projects 
which will have a lasting impression of India's contribution to the respective 
country's economic and socia l development, e.g., we have recently 
announced LOCs for two hydro power projects in DR Congo which will 
benefit a vast number of people.   
 
 During the year 2010 -11, so far, the following LOC‟s have been 
approved for the countries of East & Southern Africa: 
 
S.N. Country 
Amount in US 
$ mn 
Purpose 
1 Ethiopia 213.31 Development of sugar industry 
2 Kenya 61.60 Power transmission lines 
3 Malawi 
 
 
50.00 
Cotton processing facilities, green 
belt initiative, one village one product 
project 
4 Mauritius 
 
48.50 
For purchase of Off shore Patrol 
Vessel 
5 Mozambique 25.00 Rural electrification project 
6 Mozambique 
 
 
20.00 
Enhancing productivity of rice-wheat-
maize cultivation (US$ 20 million) 
 
 
 Revised set of guidelines for disposal of LOC applications have been 
approved by External Affairs Minister and is now awaiting the concurrence 
of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 The projects undertaken by the East and Southern Africa Division are 
invariably undertaken on the request of the host countries. 
Recommendations of our  Heads of Missions are taken into consideration 
before submiting any proposal for approval. The following important projects 

 62 
have been completed/ are under process in the countries of East & 
Southern Africa under GOI grant: 
 
1. Setting up of India -Tanzania Centre of Information Technology, in 
Dar-es-Salaam (Already implemented) 
 
2. Setting up of Centre of Excellence in Information Technology in 
Lesotho (In advance stages of implementation) 
 
3. Setting up of India -Seychelles Centre of Excellence in Informati on 
Technology (In advance stages of implementation) 
 
 These Centres have been set up at the request of the host 
Governments and apart from providing support for networking in 
medical/educational fields would also impart training to the citizens of 
respective countries in the field of Information Technology. The Centres 
would no doubt meet the expectations of the Committee as citizens of 
Tanzania, Lesotho and Seychelles would feel India‟s presence as a friend in 
need. 
 
Under the Pan -African e -Network Project , Government of India is 
helping in setting up a fibre -optic network to provide satellite connectivity, 
tele-medicine and tele -education in African countries.  M/s. 
Telecommunication Consultants India Limited, a Government of India 
undertaking, is implemen ting the project on behalf of Government of India.  
Project aims to create significant linkages for tele -education and tele -
medicine, internet, video -conferencing and VoIP services making available 
the facilities and expertise of some of the best universit ies and super -
specialty hospitals in India to the people of Africa.  47 of the 53 African 
countries have signed the agreement with TCIL for implementation of this 
project, whcih has already been implemented in 39 countries and 
implementation is likely to be completed in the remaining countries shortly. 
 
 The Government has been encouraging participation of private 
sector in investment related projects.  With this view in mind, regional 
conclaves/workshops have been organized not only in India but also in 
several African capitals to attract investment by private sector organisations.  
Recent examples are acquisition of telecommunication services by Bharti 
Mittal Group, joint venture projects by TATAs/Mahindra & Mahindra in 
Nigeria, Angola etc.  
 
Eurasia 
 
 Under our programme , Aid to Eurasian Countries , a number of 
projects in varying sectors of the economy have been funded or are being 
funded in some of the countries in the region.  These include some mega 
projects like renovation of Varzob -I project in Tajiki stan at a cost of Rs. 
74.20 crores, setting up of a Potato Processing Plant in Talas region of the 
Kyrgyzstan (cost Rs. 10.80 crores) and some smaller projects like setting up 
of  Entrepreneurship Centre in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan in addition to 
various I.T. Centres in Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and 

 63 
Turkmenistan.  Such unique capacity building and training projects in the 
entrepreneurship development sector and particularly in the I.T. field, help 
establish a strong Indian brand of excellenc e in these areas.  This will 
promote goodwill for India and also create conditions for promoting IT –
related exports in the future.  These projects are identified taking into 
consideration the requirements and aspirations of the people of the recipient 
countries and India‟s expertise and reputation in that field.  Some of these 
projects funded with our financial support have become self -sustained and 
showcase India‟s developmental experience in the particular field.  Our 
budget for the year 2010-11 has been increased to Rs. 40 crores in keeping 
with India‟s strategy to increase our presence in Eurasian countries in our 
extended neighbourhood.  
 
 Possibility of setting up certain new projects in the region like Eurasia 
e-Centre and establishment of a hospital  with Indian financial and technical 
assistance are being explored.  These are likely to further boost India‟s 
image in the Eurasia region. 
 
Latin America and Caribbean 
  
 India desires to build a multi -faceted relationship with Latin America 
& Caribbean region which is increasingly assuming strategic importance for 
India.  India has a Strategic Partnership with Brazil, a Privileged Partnership 
with Mexico and with Argentina we are working towards a Strategic 
Partnership. India wishes to nurture historical and cultural ties with the 
Caribbean region that has substantial presence of Indian Diaspora. Our 
engagement with the region in general has increased manifold both 
bilaterally and multilaterally in recent times.   There have been several 
exchanges of visit s at the Head of Government/State, Ministerial, official 
and people to people contacts. This year Prime Minister visited Brazil for the 
Bilateral, IBSA and BRIC Summits on 15 th April 2010.  Earlier former MOS 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Colombia, Peru, Domi nican Republic and Haiti in 
January 2010.  MOS Ms Praneet Kaur visited Brazil and Argentina in May 
2010.   
 
 India‟s trade with the region in 2009 was over US$ 16 billion and our 
investments so far in the region are over US$ 11 billion mostly in 
hydrocarbons. The potential is vast and we will continue to pursue our 
strategic interests in the region pertaining to energy security, food security, 
source minerals for our growing industry and facilitate market access for our 
exports.  As part of our commitment t o South -South Cooperation, we will 
continue to assist countries in the region in their capacity building initiatives.  
Trade promotion activities and business conclaves will be supported to 
bring greater awareness about the potential that exists between In dia and 
Latin America & Caribbean.   
 
 Our IT centres set up in Cuba, El Salvador, Honduras, Jamaica and 
Nicaragua are all working satisfactorily.  These IT centres are very well 
appreciated in the countries that have been set up especially since they are 
assisting countries in their capacity building initiatives and creation of 
employment.  On the request of the Governments of Nicaragua, Honduras 

 64 
and El Salvador we have extended to run the centres for one more year. 
The proposal for an IT centre in Grenada  is in an advance stage of 
consideration.  Similar proposals for Ecuador, Dominican Republic, Uruguay 
and Paraguay are being processed.  The proposal of Costa Rica is awaiting 
internal clearances of its Government.  Through our Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) we impart specialized training in varied 
sectors at our premier Institutions of India.  We also send our experts to 
these countries under this programme.  For LAC countries we provide over 
500 ITEC slots every year.  The Government Lin es of Credit (LoC) 
extended to LAC countries are primarily meant for infrastructure creation.  In 
the last quarter, proposals received from Cuba, Belize and Nicaragua are 
being examined. 
 
 In order to sustain our long term strategic interests in the region  we 
will consider opening of new missions on a case by case basis.  We have 
opened a new mission in Guatemala in December, 2009. 
 
Nepal 
 
 Our economic cooperation with Nepal under “Aid to Nepal” is broad 
based with specific focus at the grass -root level. A number of projects have 
been implemented in the areas of infrastructure, health, water resources, 
rural and community development and education. The economic assistance 
extended to the GoN durin g 2008-09 under „Aid -to-Nepal‟ budget was over 
Rs. 120 crores; and in FY 2009-2010, Rs. 161 crores. 
 
The Small Development Projects (SDPs) programme, which covers 
projects with an outlay of less than NRs 5 crore (approx I Rs. 3.125 crores), 
focuses on the critical sectors of health, education and community 
development has been implemented in Nepal  under an MoU signed with 
the Government of Nepal in 2003. So far , over 15 0 projects have been 
completed and over 200 are under various stages of implementation in all 
75 districts of Nepal. The SDP MoU has been further exte nded for a period 
of three years in July 2008. There are a number of medium to large projects 
under various stages of implementation in Nepal.  
 
 We have  been working towards development and upgradation of 
border infrastructure including (i) Integrated Che ck Posts (ICPs), (ii) Road 
and (iii) Rail Linkages along the India-Nepal border. The development of the 
border infrastructure will increase conn ectivity with the Terai region and will 
further strengthen the economic linkages and people -to-people contacts 
between the two countries. 
 
Bhutan 
 
 As recommended by the Committee, in Bhutan, Ministry have 
focused on investment in projects for creating permanent assets, 
particularly in the area of infrastructure, and on projects that increase India‟s 
presence on a long-term basis.  
 

 65 
 India is Bhutan‟s largest development partner and the principal donor 
for its economic development. GOI assistance encompasses a wide range 
of sectors of infrastructural development such as hydropower, transport, 
health, civil aviation, education, industry, information technology and 
communications.  
 
 GOI has assisted in the establishment of the Paro airport.  
 
 GOI is providing assistance for the establishment of a one million tonne 
capacity cement plant (Dungsum Cement Plant or DCP) in B hutan, 
which will provide local employment and exploit Bhutan‟s only viable 
mineral resource in the area, limestone. India is also assisting Bhutan in 
the establishment of required infrastructure for the smooth functioning of 
DCP, such as roads, transmission line for the power supply for the plant, 
electric sub-station and railway siding.  
 
 Border Roads Organisation‟s Project DANTAK has been undertaking 
works exclusively in Bhutan and has implemented several prestigious 
infrastructural projects such as deve lopment of highways and roads, 
telecommunication networks, airfields, helipads, housing complexes, 
hydel sub -stations etc. Till date. DANTAK has completed 1615 kms of 
black-topped roads, 115 kms of tracks and 4830 mts. of bridges in 
Bhutan. Other projects include four major highways, that is, 
Phuentsholing-Thimpu (179 kms), Gelephu -Trongsa (248 kms), 
Darranga-Trashigang (180 kms), and Simtokha -Trongsa-Trashigang 
(548 kms); Paro and Yangphula airfields, Bhutan Broadcasting Station, 
India House complex,  Chuk ha hydel project housing complex, SAARC 
Convention Centre (now used as offices of Bhutan’s Prime Minister and 
Foreign Minister, enhancing the visibility of India’s assistance) , 
Sherubtse College, Bank of Bhutan building and a hospital in Depthang.  
 
 Development of water resources, particularly hydroelectric power 
projects (HEPs) has been an important, mutually beneficial and highly 
successful element in India‟s assistance programme for Bhutan. Three 
major HEPs have been built with GOI assistance in Bhutan: 336 MW 
Chukha HEP, 60 MW Kurichhu HEP and 1020 Tala HEP. India has 
committed to develop 10,000 MW of hydropower in Bhutan for export to 
India by 2020. Ten new HEPs have been identified for development to 
achieve this target. Of these, work on three has sta rted – 720 MW 
Mangdechhu HEP, 1200 MW Punatsangchhu -I HEP and 1000 MW 
Punatsangchhu-II HEP. Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for the 
remaining projects are being prepared.  
 
 India is assisting in the establishment of a Medical College in Thimpu, 
for which a  Joint Project Implementation Authority has been set up. 
Some other major projects under Indian assistance include Electricity 
Distribution System for Thimpu and Paro, Indo -Bhutan Microwave Link 
and „Total Solutions Project‟, an IT and e -governance project that aims 
to make half of Bhutan‟s population computer literate.  
 

 66 
 Under the SDP programme in Bhutan, the Royal Government of 
Bhutan (RGoB) has identified projects that are crucial to socio -economic 
development including drinking water schemes, irrigatio n channels, farm 
roads, etc. So far, 1259 projects have been identified  in two phases, for 
which 90% funds have been released for the 440  projects in phase one . 
Being at the grassroot level, these projects impart high visibility to India and 
help build goodwill amongst the people of Bhutan towards India. 
 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Maldives 
 
 The bilateral aid projects in Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Myanmar and 
Maldives are identified mutually by India and the concerned countries 
keeping in view the needs of the people and in synchronization with the 
development of the countries where they are implemented.  Projects are 
chosen with a view to enhance India‟s profile, strengthen relations and 
create goodwill. As a close and friendly neighbour, India has also been 
providing humanitarian aid and assistance to Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, 
Myanmar and Maldives on times of natural disasters and calamities. 
 
 India is undertaking projects in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar 
and Maldives.  Many of these are focused on creati ng permanent assets, 
particularly in the area of infrastructure.  These projects would increase 
India‟s presence on a long term basis and enhance our affinity with the 
citizens of that country. Where possible, we are also involving private sector 
through the tendering process.   
 
 Several projects in all four countries have been completed and are at 
various stages of planning and implementation. In this context, following are 
the major projects: 
 
Bangladesh:  
 
iii. Construction of Kala Bhaban Project for the Dep artment of 
Theatre and Music Faculty at the University of Dhaka;  
iv. Construction of core shelters in 11 cyclone affected villages in 
Bangladesh 
In Bangladesh, projects like Kala Bhaban and construction of core shelters 
will create assets on the ground. 
 
Sri Lanka: 
 
vii. Rehabilitation of Kankesanthurai Port in Northern Sri Lanka; 
viii. Restoration of railway lines in Northern Sri Lanka; 
ix. Construction of Cultural Centre and restoration of stadium in 
Jaffna; 
x. Assistance in the construction of houses for the Internally 
Displaced People (IDPs) in Northern Sri Lanka; 
xi. Construction of Vocational Training Centres in Northern, Eastern 
and Central Provinces of Sri Lanka; 
xii. Various other projects in the areas of cultural cooperation, 
infrastructure in health and education. 

 67 
 During the visit of EAM between November 25 -28, 2010, EAM 
participated in the ground breaking ceremony for the railway project in 
Northern Sri Lanka being taken up under an Indian line of credit as well as 
the ground breaking ceremony for construction of a pilot proj ect of 1000 
houses for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) of Northern Sri Lanka.  Work 
on the Kankesanthurai Port is also going on schedule.  Other projects 
including the restoration of a stadium in Jaffna, vocational training centres, 
etc. are at various  stages of planning and processing.  EAM also handed 
over tractors and agricultural implements to revive the livelihood of the 
IDPs.  While deciding on the projects, the sentiments of the people is kept in 
mind, as well as consultations undertaken with various stakeholders. 
 
Myanmar: 
 
(i) Kaladan Multi-model Transit Transport Project for connectivity 
to the North-East;  
(ii) Rhi-Tiddim Road; 
(iii) Tamu-Kalewa-Kalmeyo (TKK Road); and 
(iv) Various other projects for railways, transmission lines and 
capacity building  
 
 The w ork on the Kaladan Multi -Model Transit Transport Project is 
proceeding on schedule and lines of credit have been extended to Myanmar 
of US$ 60 millions for railway equipment and US$ 64 millions for 
transmission lines. 
 
Maldives: 
 
i. Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism Studies, Male (Hotel Management 
Training Institute). 
 
 The various projects in Maldives are also being monitored at various 
stages of approval. 
 
Mongolia 
 
 Two highly visible projects on capacity building and human resource 
development in Mongolia have been set up with our assistance.  These are  
 
(i) Rajiv Gandhi Vocational Training Centre (RGVTC) : The Centre was 
inaugurated by Vice -President K.R.Narayanan in September 1996. It has 
training facilities eight different fields such as Auto Mechan ic, electrician, 
Gem Stone Cutting/polishing, etc. The Centre is now called Rajiv Gandhi 
Art and Production School (RGAPS).   
(ii) Atal Bihari Vajpayee Centre for Excellence In Information & 
Communication Technology [ABVCE] :  The Atal Bihari Vajpayee Cent re 
for Excellence in Information & Communication Technology was set up in 
October 2002 with a grant of US dollar one Million by Government of India. 
The ABVCE has facilities such as Videoconferencing, Data Networking Lab, 
Software Lab , Lecture Hall  etc. Th e Video Conferencing facility at the 
Centre is now connected to 18 Aimag (provincial) capitals. 

 68 
 In Mongolia, the Government has decided to send two experts from 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) to Ulaanbaatar to inspect the 
existing facilities  at the Rajiv Gandhi Art and Production School (RGAPS) 
and recommend upgrading of existing facilities and introduction of new 
facilities, if required, after consultations with Director of RGAPS. The above 
work is being undertaken by the Technical Cooperati on Division of this 
Ministry. 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 India‟s assistance programme in Afghanistan, being implemented in 
close coordination with the Afghan government, has been in key areas of 
infrastructure generation and rehabilitation, health, human resource 
development, education etc and is virtually spread over the whole of 
Afghanistan. India‟s assistance programme places particular emphasis on 
capacity building and human resource development. Despite daunting 
logistical and security challenges, two major GOI -funded infrastructure 
projects have been completed – construction of 218 km road from Zaranj to 
Delaram in Nimroz province in Southern Afghanistan and the construction of 
220 KV Transmission Line from Pul -e-Khumri to Kabul (202 km) together 
with a 220/110/20 kV sub-station in Chimtala. Construction of Afghanistan's 
new Parliament Building, a symbol of the common commitment of both 
countries to pluralism and democracy, commenced recently and is 
scheduled for completion within 36 months. Another ongoing infrastr ucture 
project being built with GOI assistance involves the construction of Salma 
Dam in Herat Province. India‟s assistance programme in Afghanistan has 
been substantially enhanced from 2009 -10 by a 35% increase in 
scholarships for students and others comi ng to India, underlining our 
commitment to assisting Afghanistan in capacity building and human 
resource development. We also have a number of Small Development 
Projects under implementation – quick gestation projects that that have a 
direct and visible impact on local communities. 
 
India‟s assistance programme in Afghanistan has earned it tremendous 
goodwill among the ordinary people there, cutting across the ethnic and 
geographic divides. This has been borne out most recently by opinion 
surveys conducted by reputed international organizations such as Gallup 
and BBC/ABC/ARD which found that India topped the list of countries 
viewed favourably by the Afghan people, and that too by a large margin, far 
ahead of US, Germany, Iran, Britain, Pakistan  and other c ountries or 
organizations.  
 
****** 
 

 69 
PLAN OF ACTION OF THE  
FRAMEWORK FOR COOPERATION OF THE  
INDIA-AFRICA FORUM SUMMIT 
 
Introduction 
 
In order to deepen the India -Africa strategic partnership to promote 
sustainable development, and to implement the outco mes of the First India -
Africa Forum Summit, the two sides have jointly developed this Plan of 
Action, with a view to implementing the thematic areas that are contained in 
the Framework for Cooperation. The Plan of Action is established for a 
period of 4 ye ars and will be subjected to review, adaptation and 
enhancement during and after that period. 
 
 
1. ECONOMIC COOPERATION 
 
i. Agriculture 
 
 To enhance agricultural education, science and research, India will 
provide 25 PhD and 50 Masters‟ scholarships per an num for four years to 
African students in agriculture in Indian Universities/Institutions.  The 
scholarships will cover different disciplines in agriculture. In order to ensure 
equitable distribution, the AU Commission will coordinate the process of 
selecting the prospective candidates in conjunction with the  Government of 
India and its embassies in Africa. 
 
India will also provide:  
 
 Customized short-term trainings related to transferable skills focusing 
on training of trainers who will transfer expertise  to stakeholders at 
national level; 
 Targeted visits of Indian professionals for field demonstrations based 
on mutually agreed objectives and mission with beneficiary 
stakeholders; 
 On-the-spot consultations and in-country trainings; 
 Provision of essential hardware and software in field demonstrations; 
and 
 Exchange of literature, seed, and planting materials, as well as 
sharing of best practices in agriculture. 
 
The areas to be covered under this programme will endeavour to include 
management of livestock and  fisheries; management of commodity boards; 
irrigation and water conservation; and capacity building in the area of agro -
processing. 
 
ii. Trade, Industry and Investment 
 
The two sides recognize the need to expand two -way trade, greater market 
access and investment facilitation and agree to the following: 
 

 70 
 India will establish an India-Africa Institute of Foreign Trade based on 
the model of the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade.  The institute will 
provide professional education in the field of International  trade and 
management including studies pertaining to the public and private 
sectors in Africa. In addition, the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade 
(IIFT) will provide customized capacity building programmes on 
international trade and business over a four -year period through the 
existing bilateral arrangements. This will provide capacity building as 
the process for the establishment of an India -Africa Institute of 
Foreign Trade is pursued.  
  
 India will also establish an India -Africa Diamond Institute on the  
model of the Indian Diamond Institute in an African country. The 
Institute will help to develop African capacities and skills in 
processing, polishing, and grading raw diamonds. 
 
 India‟s Duty -Free and Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for Least 
Developed Co untries (LDCs) in Africa, which has been widely 
welcomed and which allows access for African goods and services to 
the growing Indian market, will be continued.  Information sharing on 
the DFTP scheme has been carried out through various fora and will 
be enhanced under this Plan of Action.    
 
 To enhance private sector interaction and building of 
entrepreneurship and business -to-business linkages, the following 
initiatives will be undertaken:   
   
 Preparation of an India -Africa Business Guide to highlight 
opportunities on both sides for trade and investment, through the 
Chambers of Commerce of the two sides;   
 Organization of Business Councils or meetings  at the Regional level 
between Indian and African economic operators, in order to examine 
business opportunities offered by both economies; and  
 Upgrading industrial supply -side capacities and enhancing 
competitiveness; and exchange of best practices between African 
and Indian Investment Promotion Agencies.   
 
iii. Small and Medium- Scale Enterprises (SMEs) 
 
Small and Medium -Scale Enterprises are at the core of economic 
development through the private sectors of Africa and India.  They 
contribute to exports, transfer of technology, employment generation, 
development of regional trade and entrepreneurship. In this respect and to 
promote the development of capacities and support transfer of technology, 
the following actions will be undertaken: 
 
 India will establish ten (10) vocational training centers in Africa 
through the National Small Industries Corporation.  Thereafter, it will 
support existing vocational training institutions in Africa. 
 

 71 
 India will offer generous Lines of Credit on concessional terms to a 
large number of African countries; undertake programmes for 
development of capacity building in Africa a nd support the Chambers 
of Commerce in India to hold India -Africa Annual Conclave and other 
similar initiatives. 
 Programmes to provide enabling infrastructure and conducive 
operating environment for SMEs and Small and Medium -Scale 
Industries (SMIs) in Afri ca will be created as well as joint ventures 
between African and Indian SMEs including the development of 
business guides for the establishment of SMEs in Africa and India as 
a means of youth employment.  
 
iv.  Finance 
 
 Recognizing that finance is critical  to the implementation of the Plan 
of Action, India announced at IAFS 2008 that it will provide about 5.4 
billion United States Dollars in Lines of Credit to African countries 
and institutions over the 5 -year period.  A separate provision of 500 
million US D to develop capacities in Africa, of which nearly half is 
committed to this continental level Joint Plan of Action is envisaged.. 
 These financial provisions will support the integration of Africa 
through: 
 
o Provision of regional infrastructure among other programmes; 
o Provision of support for capacity building and development of 
a Pan-African Stock Exchanges; 
o Consultations between African Ministers of Finance and 
Economic Development and their Indian counterparts to share 
experiences; and 
o Sharing of experien ces on the mobilization of domestic 
savings and the strengthening of Micro -Finance institutions in 
Africa. 
 
v.  Regional Integration 
 
 Regional integration is an important objective for Africa and various 
efforts to harmonize the Regional Economic Communiti es (RECs) 
through the promotion of integrated projects are ongoing. India  has 
subsisting engagements with many of the RECs and has developed 
an implementation process for this purpose. Consequently, India 
agrees to consider financial support to mutually a greed integration 
programmes carried out by the African Union and the RECs, 
especially those of inter -regional and continental importance.  India 
will provide a line of credit of USD 300 million to support regional 
integrational infrastructure projects through the AU. 
    
3. POLITICAL COOPERATION 
 
 Bearing in mind that peace, security and development are inter -
linked, the two sides agree to: 
 

 72 
 i. Peace and Security 
 
 Enhance the capacity of African Governments, institutions and 
various stakeholders in the imple mentation of UN Resolution 1325 
on women‟s role in the peace process; 
 
 Cooperate in efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking and abuse, as 
well as small arms and light weapons; and  
 
 Cooperate in developing and implementing training of trainers 
towards e nhancing the civilian component of peacekeeping 
operations. 
 
 ii. Civil Society and Good Governance 
  
 Strengthen the African Court on Human and People‟s Rights through 
sharing best practices, capacity building of the court and provision of 
equipment and th e mobilization of resources for the activities of the 
court; 
 
 Promote the interaction of legal experts/lawyers through the Bar 
Associations, and cooperation in legal research methodology and on 
emerging international legal issues and regulatory framework t hat 
support outsourcing; and 
 
 Exchange experiences on best practices, research and human 
resources within the framework of decentralization and local 
governance alongside the conference of Ministers of Public Services 
and Administration and ECOSSOC.   
 
3. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
i. Science and Technology 
 
Conscious of the fact that science, technology, research and development 
are fundamentals and major catalysts for socio -economic activities, the two 
sides agree to the following:  
 
 Proposals for enhancement of research, development and scientific 
exchanges involving programmes and events to discuss issues of 
policy transfer of technology mechanisms through the institutional 
strengthening of three institutions and capacity building wil l be 
undertaken;   
 
 India-Africa Science and Technology Conference will be organized to 
plan an agenda;  
  
 India will support institutional strengthening in areas of mutual 
interest; 
   
 India will provide training in areas like HIV, TB and Malaria; 

 73 
 
 India will support Africa for its research and development efforts 
through specific fellowships named after CV Raman which will be 
implemented bilaterally.  These will cover medium term and long 
term support for researchers and post doctoral fellows; and 
 
 Consideration will be given to the proposal for the training of 
journalists in scientific journalism. 
   
ii. Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  
  
Recognizing the contribution made by Information Technology to the 
economic development of Africa and India: 
 
 Both sides welcome the establishment of the Pan -African e-network 
project which supports the developmental goals of African countries 
in the education, health and communication sectors.  Both sides 
agree to the early completion and implementation of  this important 
project. 
 
 India will establish an India -Africa Institute of Information Technology 
which would bridge the gap between academia and industry, and 
serve as a think -tank for the professional development of IT and 
provide capacity building and education for the growth of IT in Africa.  
 
 India will support the African Union‟s initiative in this sector and 
support capacity building to this end through the ITEC programme.  
Africa‟s desire to have India participate in the implementation of the 
interconnection of all African capital cities with broadband network by 
2012 and work with Africa to build continental and national e -
strategies including the development of all e -applications would be 
jointly developed by both sides.  
 
5. COOPERATION IN SOCIAL  DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY 
BUILDING  
 
Recognizing the importance of human capacity enhancement in the 
attainment of socio -development objectives, the two sides agree to the 
following: 
 
i. Education 
  
 India will establish an India-Africa Institute of Education Planning and 
Administration, which will provide academic and professional 
guidance to agencies and institutions engaged in educational 
planning and administration in Africa. 
 
 India will consider collaborative development of high quality open 
source Over seas Development Learning training materials for 
teachers and various categories of school managers.   
 

 74 
 India will develop training workshops on local and low cost 
production of educational materials;  
 
 India will assist in the development of TVET programm es aligned 
with labor market demands for both formal and informal economies, 
and global economic trends.  
 
ii.  Health 
  
 India will organize an India-Africa workshop on traditional medicine to 
highlight the commonalities in approach and sharing of experience.   
 
 Both sides will strengthen public and private sectors collaboration in 
the areas of  pharmaceutical production and procurement in Africa 
and India in the framework of pharmaceutical manufacturing plan for 
Africa;  
 
 Both sides will support collaborat ion in research and development in 
traditional medicine and practices in Africa and India;  
 
 Both sides agree to share experiences, specialized expertise and 
best practices in healthcare systems development and community 
health programmes;  
 
 India will col laborate with Africa in training and continuing education 
for health professionals; the Pan -African e -network tele -medicine 
component supports CME and the training of health professionals in 
various sectors already part of ongoing bilateral and regional 
programmes. 
 
iii.  Water and Sanitation 
  
 India will organize seven training programmes in specialized areas 
by reputed training/research/academic institutions in India. Up to 50 
participants per course will be invited through the African Union. 
 
 India will also support African institutions and initiatives in the field of 
integrated water management through proposals to be mutually 
decided.  
 
 India will fully support Africa in attaining the MDGs in the areas of 
water and sanitation.   
  
iv. Culture and Sports  
  
 Africa and India will endeavor to jointly: 
 
(i) Promote film and TV cultural programme exchanges;   
(ii) Organize joint international training for trainers in the field of cultural 
goods protection and cultural industries;   

 75 
(iii)  Jointly study the es tablishment of regional laboratories for doping 
control in Africa and India;     
(iv)  Organize joint international trainings of trainers in the field of sports 
management and development, including sports medical care; and 
(v) Organize youth cultural and sports festivals through events like 
Africa-India Week and by tapping the talent of the large African student 
presence in India through the Indian Council for Cultural Relations.    
 
v. Poverty Eradication  
  
 Support for the goal of poverty eradication thr ough the following 
specific programmes will be undertaken: 
 
o Organization of seminars/exhibitions across Africa, including 
through public/private partnerships;  
o Construction of prototype low -cost houses in 5 African 
countries, one per region   
o Exchange of c ost-sharing experiences in the construction of 
demonstration houses in 5 African countries, one per region.  
 
 Both sides agree to share best practices in the development of credit 
unions, especially in rural settings;   
 
 Promotion of micro-finance projects in Africa.  
 
5. TOURISM 
  
Recognizing that tourism provides economic benefits and promotes 
friendship and socio-economic understanding among nations, the two sides 
agree as follows: 
 
 India will sponsor a study towards the harmonization of policies and 
norms in the tourism sector in cooperation with relevant institutions in 
Africa;   
 Both sides will strengthen partnership with the private sector 
especially travel agencies, hotels, airlines and other tourism related 
establishments, as well as the media, with  a view to advancing 
tourism development between the two regions; and  
 Both sides will promote general tourism and offering joint tourism 
packages, including eco -tourism, to utilize the geographical diversity 
of the two sides.   
 
6. INFRASTRUCTURE, ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT 
   
Recognizing that infrastructure, energy and environment are fundamental to 
the economic growth of developing countries, the two sides agree as 
follows: 
 
 Training programmes for up to 50 African participants (annually) at 
the National Ins titute for Training of Highway Engineers (NITHE) will 
be provided by India. 

 76 
  
iv. Energy 
 
 Note that India has actively engaged with Africa through the India 
Africa Hydrocarbon Conferences and welcomes India‟s commitment 
to work with Africa to process its resou rces including by establishing 
refineries in ome countries. 
 
 Define together with the RECs, the regional power pools and national 
governments concrete projects in the field of hydropower, wind and  
bio-energy in African countries, which have high potential; and 
  
 Cooperation to explore renewable sources of energy in Africa.  
 
v. Transport  
 
d. Maritime Transport  
 
 Develop and promote mutual assistance and cooperation in the 
area of maritime safety and security, prevention and protection of 
the main environment and port users;  
 Work for the creation of regional coast guard networks (North, 
West, Central, East and South) and surveillance facilities;  
 Develop Africa's training in the area of maritime and harbor 
administration; and  
 Collaborate and exchange informatio n in the area of maritime 
transport, harbor management, safety, security and preventing, 
controlling and combating pollution, particularly through training, 
exchange of skills and knowledge programmes;  
 
In all these areas more specific proposals will be d eveloped by experts from 
the two sides.  
 
e. Air Transport  
 
 Coordination of the respective external air transport policies; and  
 Identification and· development of hubs for air bridge to support 
airlines operations between the two regions and beyond. 
   
The African side will provide a concept note on these in order to create a 
dialogue between African and Indian authorities.   
 
f. Land Transport 
  
 Status Quo Assessment of the Trans African Highway (TAH) 
Network; and 
 Development of a road safety strategy for the African continent.   
 
The African side will develop and provide India with concept notes on both 
projects.   
 

 77 
vi. Environment 
  
 Elaboration of' specific programs to combat desertification and 
climate change which constitute major challenges for the 
international community; and  
 Sharing of experiences on projects for carbon development 
mechanisms.  
 
TERI‟s MOU with ECA and support to the Africa Climate Policy Centre  is 
also recognised. The Indian initiative to have an African section at the Delhi 
Sustainable Development Summit annually organized by TERI in February 
in New Delhi initiated since 2009 will be utilized to foster closer engagement 
among the environmentl policy makers in India and Africa. 
 
7.  MEDIA AND COMMUNICATION 
   
Bearing in mind that closer lin kage in the field of media and communication 
will generate greater synergy in their relationship, the two sides agree to: 
 
 Cooperate in human resource training in the area of modern 
corporate communications using modern technology (ICT) and the 
development of language skills; and  
 
 Provide assistance in the production of documentary videos, which 
are effective in disseminating information on specific missions or 
interventions.  
 
Other programmes in this area could be undertaken through existing ITEC 
programmes and through the Public Diplomacy Division in India. These 
would be discussed between the African Union Commission and the 
Permanent Mission of India to the AU. 
 Similarly, an exchange of media delegations, editors‟ conferences 
and training of media per sons will form part of the initiatives that India is 
taking in Africa.  These will be undertaken regionally and bilaterally. 
8. With respect to the institutions to be established in Africa, namely, 
India-Africa Institute of Foreign Trade; India -Africa Diamond Institute; India-
Africa Institute of Information Technology; India -Africa Institute of Education 
Planning and Administration; Pan -African Stock Exchange and India -Africa 
Vocational Training Centers, the host countries undertake to facilitate their 
establishment and sustenance including: 
 
 Land for the Institutions; 
 Building infrastructure; 
 Budgetary provision for recurring costs;  
 Governance structures for administration and running of the 
Institutions; and 
 Business plan for future development and sustainability. 
 
 On its part India will establish and equip the institutions and maintain 
them for a period of three years.   
*********** 

 78 
As on 24/02/2011 
 
Summary of  LOCs extended to West African Countries                     
(Figures in US $ Million) 
Country  ECOWAS TEAM 
9   
NEPAD BILATERAL  
TOTAL  
Angola - - - 85.00 85.00 
Benin 18.80 - -         15.00 33.80 
Burkina Faso 15.14 55.97 -          5.00 71.11 
Cameroon  - - 37.66 37.66 
Cape Verde  - - - @@ - 
Central 
African 
Republic 
- - - 29.50 29.50 
Chad - 50.00 - @ 50.00 
Congo 
(DRC) 
- - 33.50        25.00 58.50 
Congo(ROC) - - - - - 
Cote’d Ivoire - 52.30 -       114.00 166.30 
Equatorial 
Guinea 
- 15.00 - - 15.00 
Gabon - - - 14.50 14.50 
Gambia 20.00 - 16.70 - 36.70 
Ghana 45.01 85.00 - 63.72 193.73 
Guinea 28.51 - - - 28.51 
Guinea 
Bissau  
- 25.00# - - 25.00 
Liberia      
Mali 30.00 102.00* 20.62 51.00 203.62 
Mauritania^ - - - - - 
Niger - 20.00 17.00 - 37.00 
Nigeria  - - - 100.00## 100.00 
Sao 
Tome & 
Principe 
- - - @@@ - 
Senegal 29.83 73.00 7.08 37.87 142.78 
Sierra Leone 29.45 - - 45.00 74.50 
Togo  33.04 - - - 33.00 
Grand Total 249.78 478.27 94.90       623.25  1446.20 
 
 
@During the DRC FM‟s visit on 29.10.2009, US$263mn worth fresh LOCs announced.  
@@During Cape Verde FM's visit on 20.11.2009, US$5mn LOC was announced. 
@@@During STP FM's visit on 1.12.2009, US$5mn LOC was announced.  

 79 
 
# The response of the new Guinea Bissau government and specific 
recommendations of our Ambassador in Dakar are awaited. LOCs for US$ 
15million have been earmarked and for balance US$ 10 million fresh requests to be 
processed. 
 
* Out of US$102 mn, US$20 mn is for utilization on the Cote d’Ivoire side for the 
Electricity Transmission Line. 
 
^ The data does not include figures for Mauritania as the LOC has been withheld 
following the coup. 
 
##In Dec.2009, Nigeria said that it would use this LOC for 4 power generation 
projects. DPRs received in Feb.2010. Under process. 
   The above list does not include approval of US$100 million to ECOWAS 
Bank(EBID) (5/2010) 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
 The Committee note that MoU between the Government of India and 
Government of Nepal was signed in 2005 for implementation of various projects 
in Nepal but not much headway has been made so f ar.  The Committee are 
aware of the circumstances which have adversely affected the pace of 
implementation of various projects.  However, the Committee urge the 
Government to speed up implementation of various programme for which 
agreements have been signe d and execute the projects for creation of four 
Integrated Check Posts (ICPs). The Committee would also like to underline the 
importance of ICP projects in view of the change in political and security scenario 
within the region and desire that these should  be executed on priority basis.  The 
Committee are also of the view that once these ICPs are built, the Ministry 
should be able to identify and undertake more ICP projects in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government has approved the construction o f two Integrated Check 
Posts (ICPs) on India -Nepal border crossings at (i) Raxual (India) and Birgunj 
(Nepal) and (ii) Jogbani (India) and Biratnagar (Nepal) in Phase I. M/s RITES has 
been appointed as consultant for the project. The Ministry of External A ffairs is 
supervising and funding the construction of the ICPs on the Nepalese side 
(Birgunj & Biratnagar) while MHA is supervising and funding the expenditure on 
the Indian side (Raxual & Jogbani). 
The tender for construction of the ICP at Birgunj has bee n awarded and 
construction work has commenced at the site.  
The construction of the ICPs is expected to be completed in fourteen 
months. The Ministry will be regularly monitoring the implementation of the 
project with the Consultant to ensure its early completion, as per the timeline.  
 In Phase II, construction of ICPs at Sunauli (India) –Bhairahawa (Nepal), 
and Nepalgunj Road (India) –Nepalgunj (Nepal) will be undertaken.  
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 

 80 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
 The Committee in their earlie r Report have stressed upon the need to 
enhance India‟s engagement with Latin American and African countries.  Besides 
being strategically and politically significant for India, these regions offer 
immense economic opportunities.  The Committee take note o f the start of the 
process of broad basing of India‟s economic activities in the region.  The 
Committee would like to suggest that the Government should undertake and 
encourage Indian private sector to take up studies like „Syria Phosphate 
Feasibility Stud y‟.  The Committee are given to understand that the study will 
provide inputs on various requirements for developing mines and setting up of 
Joint Venture phosphate plants.  India is already seeking participation in both of 
them.  This will help India in s ecuring fertilizer‟s resources from Syria. This will 
pave the way of entering into joint venture from the countries having fertilizer‟s 
resources all over the world including the African continent.  The Committee are 
of the opinion that it is pertinent to diversify areas of India‟s economic 
engagement with these countries.  India should leave an imprint in the field of 
economic cooperation with these countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 There is no doubt that there are immense economic opportunities 
available in Africa. Interaction with the private sector is an ongoing process and it 
is reinforced whenever there is a possibility of economic collaboration with Africa. 
Interactions are initiated by the Ministry on its own as well as through various 
Chambers of Commerce and industries in the country. 
 
 Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industries (FICCI) 
organized the 2 nd India-Africa Hydrocarbon Conference in New Delhi on 
December 7 -8, 2009. The objective of the Conference was to bring together 
ministers in-charge of oil and gas, top government officers and industry officials 
for exploring partnership opportunities in Africa. The oil rich countries in Africa 
and prospective market for our petroleum products were invited for the 
Conference. 
 
 The 6 th CCI-EXIM Bank Conclave on India Africa Project Partnership 
organized in New Delhi during March 15 -16, 2010 with the active support from 
the MEA provided a platform for Indian and African leaders to strengthen the 
bilateral and regional partnerships, increa se Indian participation in Africa‟s long -
term development projects, enhance capacity building initiatives and resource 
mobilization programmes, as well as increase outreach of information on Indian 
enterprises in Africa.    
 
 After the visit of the African  Union (A.U.) delegation in March, 2010, 
finalisation of locations of various institutions in Africa to be set up under India -
Africa Forum Summit, was vigorously taken up with the AU Commission.  As a 
result, the African Union has finalised the following locations for institutions: 
 
i)   India-Africa Institute of Information Technology – Ghana 
ii)  India-Africa Institute of Foreign Trade-  Uganda  

 81 
iii)  India-Africa Institute of Educational Planning and Administration – 
Burundi 
iv)  10 Vocational Training Centres in Africa – 8 locations of Vocational 
Training Centres in Burundi, Burkina Faso, Gabon, Gambia, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Libya and Rwanda have been finalised by the African 
Union.  Locations of two Vocational Training Centres in Southern 
Africa are yet to be finalised by the A.U. Commission. 
(v) Human Settlement Centres:  One unit of Human Settlement 
Centres has been allocated to Kenya and Togo.   
(v) India-Africa Institute of Foreign Trade-  Uganda  
(vii) India-Africa Diamond Institute – location yet to be intimated by 
African Union. 
 
 Questionnaires have been forwarded to host countries to provide data, 
which would help the implementing agency in India to plan their visit for 
preparation of Detailed Project Reports and hold discussions with the 
functionaries of host countries. 
 AU Commission is being continuously reminded to finalise the location of 
remaining institutions and action regarding forwarding of questionnaires and 
placement of funds for the visit of representatives of implementing agencies from 
our side for preparing Detailed Project Reports and discussions, will be taken as 
soon as the locations of the institutions are finalised.  
 The ASSOCHAM organized a conference on „India -Africa Agri 
Partnership‟ on 27 March, 2010 in Patiala in which approxim ately 700 
participants, mainly agriculturalists from Punjab and neighbouring States were 
briefed on potential of Africa in agriculture field and to encourage them to 
collaborate and assist the Africans in generating employment to them and also 
increase the ir agricultural produces. Any surplus grain from Africa could be 
exported to India and elsewhere so as to ensure food security of Africa and India 
both.  
 On May 6 -7, 2010, the Ministry actively participated in a FICCI organized 
Business Forum on Commercia l farming which was attended among others by 
noted executives from private sector.  
 Our relations with countries of North African region were strengthened 
further in several areas including through cooperation in the energy, trade, and 
investment sectors.  New contracts for power transmission lines were secured by 
Indian companies in Algeria.  There have been regular exchange of visits, 
including the visits of Hon‟ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Shri Murli 
Deora, to Sudan in January, 2010, and the  Hon‟ble Minister of Commerce & 
Industry, Shri Anand Sharma, to Egypt in October, 2009.   
 A delegation of regional communities from Africa was in New Delhi from 
14-17 November, 2010 to discuss the regional component of the Plan of Action 
of the programme agreed at the IAFS 2008.  The head of delegations of 7 
participating Regional Economic Communities (REC‟s) from Africa participated in 
discussions with the partners in the Govt. of India and prospective agencies of 
Govt. of India for implementation of the Plan of Action. The Heads of the REC‟s 
have been requested to forward 5-6 selective large and viable projects for setting 
up of institutions, which could be implemented on priority.  
 Several training courses for capacity building in the field of food 
processing, agriculture, training for law enforcing officers, etc.  have been 
processed and our Missions as well as African diplomatic Missions in New Delhi 

 82 
have been requested to seek nominations from the African countries so that the 
training programmes are a success.  The success of the training programmes 
however depends upon more on the African side than the GOI. 
The existing joint ventures in the fertilizers sector in this region, i.e. Indo -
Maroco Phosphore S.A. (IMACID), in Morocco, and Tunisia -India Fer tilizer 
Company (TIFERT) in Tunisia have also been working satisfactorily.   
 India‟s engagement with the Latin American countries has increased 
manifold in recent times both bilaterally and multilaterally.  In the last quarter, 
exchanges of ministerial le vel visits have been complemented by business -to-
business interactions.  Agriculture Minister led a large delegation to Mexico, 
Brazil and Argentina; Minister of State, Commerce and Industry led a large 
business delegation to Chile, Peru and Brazil and; FI EO led a large delegation to 
Colombia during that period. In the last one year, Indian investments in the LAC 
region have diversified encompassing hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals, mining, IT 
and agribusiness sectors. MEA encourages the efforts of CII and FIC CI in 
organizing India -LAC business conclaves every year to help out business to 
explore investment and trade opportunities in the LAC Region. 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.16 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs tr eats the „Indian 
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme‟ as a flagship programme of 
Government of India reflecting the true spirit of South -South Cooperation.  But 
the enhancement in expenditure from Rs. 70 crores at BE 2009 -10 to Rs. 85 
crores at RE  2009-10 stage and BE 2010 -11 at Rs. 100 crores is mainly due to 
revision in procedural expenditures.  This shows that there is very little addition in 
projects/programmes being organized in these countries. The Committee are of 
the view that under the pro gramme, Government must look beyond the IT sector 
to diversify and propel the programme to the next phase.  In ITEC programmes 
India should capitalize on its expertise in other emerging sectors like pharma, 
biotechnology etc. that will also help in the cap acity building in the recipient 
countries.  The Committee also desire that the requests from these countries 
should get preference and if required fund allocation should be augmented at RE 
stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to ensure that the ITEC p articipants carry with them an overall 
positive impression about the ITEC programme and the latter has the right 
impact, Ministry took measures with regard to (a) improvement of living 
conditions for participants during their stay in India and (b) upgradation of training 
facilities.  Apart from these factors, increased utilization of ITEC slots during 
2009-10 as compared to previous year and organisation of specialized courses in 
the fields of (i) Wind Turbine Technology, (ii) Mineral Exploration, (iii) Geo graphic 
Information System, (iv) Leadership Programme for Postmasters and Managers 
and (v) Solar Energy Technology contributed in the enhancement of budget from 
Rs. 70 crores at BE 2009 -10 to Rs. 85 crores at RE 2009 -10.  It may be 
mentioned here that due to India‟s advancement in IT sector, developing 
countries look towards India for training facilities in this field.  Therefore, the 
share of IT slots in the ITEC is higher as compared to slots in other sectors. 

 83 
 
2. Under ITEC, Ministry conducts 200 short, medium and long term courses 
in a variety of fields such as IT, Linguistics, Finance, Accounts, Audit and 
Banking, Planning and Administration, Management and Governance, Crime 
Records, Rural Development and Parliamentary Studies.  As regards courses in 
pharma and biotechnology are concerned, the Ministry conducts a course each 
on drugs and pharmaceuticals every year through National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mohali and on biotechnology through 
The Energy and Research Institute (TERI) respectively.  
 
3. For the year 2010 -11, Ministry has decided to increase the number of 
courses to be organized to 232 courses as opposed to about 200 courses 
organized during 2009 -10.  Similarly, number of ITEC slots has also been 
increased during 2010-11. 
 
4. ITEC is a demand -driven, response-oriented and fully -funded programme 
of Government of India.  Since its inception in 1964, ITEC has expand ed 
manifold and today covers 159  partner countries spread across Asia and the 
Pacific, Africa, Latin Americ a and the Carribean, Eastern Europe and CIS 
countries.  As and when a request is received from any of our ITEC partner 
countries seeking training in a particular field, it is considered favourably. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.17 
 
 Economic Diplomacy has emerged as one of the key areas of 
engagement and an important instrument to enlarge India‟s sphere of influence 
within the developing and less developed countries.  The Committee note that 
the allocation is made under two different heads , „Investment and Technology 
Promotion‟ and „Investment Promotion and Publicity Programme‟.  The 
Committee note that the objectives of these two programmes are different yet the 
Ministry has furnished overlapping replies regarding details of expenditure un der 
these programmes.  The Committee further note that the allocation for extending 
Line of Credits (LoCs) to developing countries is abysmally low.  The Committee 
feel that in the era of competing influences over the less developed countries by 
emerging e conomies, the Ministry should adopt a more liberal policy towards 
extension of LoCs. The Committee suggest that efforts should be made to 
increase the allocation and it should be at least in tune with India‟s global 
aspirations.  
 
 The Committee take note of the new initiative undertaken by MEA called 
Market Expansion Activity.  The Committee are of the opinion that MEA should 
formulate the basic frame -work before embarking on the project and approving  
the pending proposals.  The Committee would like to su ggest that in the era of 
increased economic engagement with the world, it is pertinent for Government to 
take such initiatives which enable India to look for economic opportunity across 
the continents. 
 
 
 
 

 84 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is clarified that allocation for investment promotion activities is made only under 
one head i.e. „Investment Promotion and Publicity Programme‟. There is no head 
titled „Investment and Technology Promotion‟ which is the name of the Division 
handling this scheme. It is for this  reason that the Ministry had given overlapping 
replies regarding details of expenditure.  
 
2. The Indian Development Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS) under 
which Lines of Credit (LOCs) are extended was started in 2004 -05. At the India-
Africa New Delhi S ummit in April 2008, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh 
announced India's commitment to more than double the amount on Lines of 
Credit to Africa to US$ 5.4 billion, beginning 2009 -10 over a period of five years. . 
The annual budget for Lines of Credit (LOCs)  is quite substantial. It has been 
enhanced to US$ 1700 million (Rs. 7650 crores) per annum w.e.f. 2010-11.  
 
3. The Lines of Credit are extended by Exim Bank on behalf of GOI who 
provides government guarantee for repayment and Interest Equalization Suppor t 
to Exim Bank to make up the interest differential between rates of interest 
charged to borrowing countries and the rate at which Exim Bank borrows money 
from the international market. 
 
4. Since Interest Equalization Support for LOCs to all countries exce pt 
Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal is provided by Department of Economic Affairs 
(DEA), the major part of the funding for LOCs would be reflected in DEA‟s 
budget. Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) only provides Interest Equalization 
Support for LOCs to Bangl adesh, Bhutan and Nepal. The allocation for LOCs 
under „Investment Promotion and Publicity Programme‟ budget relates to Interest 
Equalization Support extended by Ministry of External Affairs to EXIM Bank for 
LOCs to Cambodia, Vietnam and Sri Lanka, over an d above the concessional 
terms extended by DEA  to give further concessional terms to these countries for 
political and strategic reasons. It does not reflect the entire LOC budget.  
 
5. It may be mentioned that EXIM Bank borrows money from the 
international market for extending LOCs. The interest differential between the 
market borrowing rate and the concessional interest rate charged to developing 
countries is made up by GOI through interest equalization support to EXIM Bank. 
This differential is paid by t he Department of Economic Affairs (DEA). Therefore, 
the major part of the funding for  interest equalization support to be paid to EXIM 
Bank for LOCs is reflected in DEA‟s budget. MEA‟s budget only reflects interest 
equalization support for a few LOCs where  MEA has decided to give further 
concessions. 
 
6. The market expansion activities scheme was launched in 2009 -10 for 
carrying out various activities such as market surveys, seminars, conferences, 
participation in trade fairs, organizing buyer seller meets,  publicizing investment 
opportunities etc. MEA has already prepared detailed guidelines for utilization of 
this budget by Missions which have been circulated to them for reference and 
use in ensuring utilization of the funds in a productive and effective manner.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 

 85 
Recommendation No.19 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that activities of ICCR have received a 
significant boost with its allocation of additional resources by the Government of 
India.  In 2008 -09, allocation was of Rs . 85 crores which was enhanced to Rs. 
168.50 crores during BE 2009 -10 but slightly revised at RE Rs. 149.54 crores.  
Budget allocation for 2010 -11 is Rs. 150 crores.  The Committee note that in 
view of increasing important role of ICCR, it will have to inc reasingly interact with 
private sector agencies for various purposes.  Therefore, the Committee, expect 
that ICCR should overhaul present mechanism for identification of such agencies 
and artists. For this purpose an Empanelment Committee is in position. T his 
Committee should scrutinise all the proposals so as to make the entire process 
more transparent.  The Committee also recommend that in -house monitoring 
mechanism should be built to oversee optimal utilization of resources.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Empanelment of all artistes on the Council‟s Reference List is decided by 
seven different Empanelment sub -Committees covering different categories 
of performing arts, each comprising well -known experts and senior 
practioners in that particular field and comp letely independent of the 
Council. All requests for empanelment/upgradation received from individual 
artistes/groups are evaluated by these Committee, which meet at least once 
a year. The Council plays the strictly secretarial role of collating and 
categorizing all applications received, and compiling the Minutes of these 
meetings, without making any proposals/suggestions of its own. The 
recommendations of the Empanelment Committees are put up for approval 
to the Empanelment Advisory Committee of the Counci l, comprising 
eminent critics and experts, whose decisions are based strictly on the merit 
of the applicants proposed by sub -Committees. Complete transparency of 
procedure and independence of decision -making is maintained throughout 
the exercise, without a ny interference from the Council. It may be 
underlined that no artiste or group can be empanelled by the ICCR without 
scrutiny and recommendation of the Empanelment Committees. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
Recommendation No.20 
 
 The Committee note that the Passport Seva Project is still at the 
experimentation stage and repeated postponement in launching have raised 
many doubts about the future of the project.  The Committee are not happy to 
note the developments in this regard nor the invoking of penalty  clause on 
service provider placates the Committee.  The Ministry has assured the 
Committee that the service provider has been sensitized on the importance of 
timely delivery of the project and after processing sizable number of applications 
smoothly, the date of launching of the project will be announced.  The Committee 
take note of the efforts made by Ministry to ensure that there are no errors in the 
system, and want that due care should be taken to check the loopholes in the 
system.  The Committee reite rate their earlier recommendation that Ministry 

 86 
should endeavour to launch the project at the earliest and also desire that the 
efforts should be made to ensure that the project attain the world class standard 
and flawless compliance  as it deals with crit ical and sensitive matter of issuance 
of Passport. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Passport Seva Project (PSP) was operationalised at 3 Passport Seva 
Kendras(PSK) under the jurisdiction of Regional Passport Office, Chandigarh on 
August 17 th, 2010.  All the seven Pilot centres of Passport Seva Project have 
been functioning satisfactorily but for initial crowding issues faced at PSKs in 
Bengaluru due to overwhelming response.  As on November 24, 2010, a total of 
1,63,011applications were accepted at PSKs and 1 ,14,529 passport were 
dispatched in the Passport Seva Project system. The National Call Centre is 
operational to attend to the queries of applicants under the jurisdiction of 
passport offices at Bengaluru and Chandigarh.  The Third Party Audit 
Agency(3PAA) engaged by the Ministry (Standardisation, Testing and  Quality 
Certification Directorate-STQC) is in the process of certification of the Pilot phase 
after which roll out of 70 PSKs across the country will take place.  According to 
the plan submitted by th e Service Provider, all the remaining 70 PSKs are 
expected to be set up during 2011. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.22 
 
 The Committee have repeatedly suggested that MEA should chalk out a 
comprehensive plan to either acquire suitable prop erties or to take up the matter 
with the respective State Governments for early allotment of suitable land for the 
construction of Passport offices as well as the residential complexes on priority 
basis.  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that out  of total of 37 
Passport Offices, 19 Passport Offices are still functioning from rented buildings.  
Though 8 Passport Offices have already purchased land, the construction of their 
own building is yet to start.  The Committee desire that due care should be  taken 
in formulation of building designs and structure, based on futuristic projection of 
Passport Seva Kendras/e -passport and the increase in number of Passport 
Seekers and others availing of the services of Passport Offices. The Committee 
also reiterate  that efforts should be made to acquire land for the rest of the 
Passport Offices at the earliest.  
 
 The Committee take note of the fact  that various projects undertaken by 
the Ministry are not completed within schedule which results in huge cost and 
time overruns.  The Committee desire that MEA should prepare stipulated 
timeframe to ensure quick execution and timely completion of projects.  Stringent 
monitoring mechanism should also be put in place to avoid cost and time 
overruns and for ensuring optimum utilization of resources.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 There are set procedures and norms of Government of India for 
monitoring and supervising the projects taken up by various Ministries and 
Departments.   

 87 
 
i The Ministry follows these procedures and norms scrupulously. 
 
Upon receiving the detailed project proposals, the Ministry scrutinizes and as per 
prevailing norms approves the proposals.  Internal Finance Division scrutinizes 
the cost estimates in detail and conveys its concurrence. 
 
i The overall su pervision is done in consultation with the concerned Indian 
Mission on the ground.  Projects have provisions for Project Monitoring 
Committees which include representatives of the Ministry, concerned Mission 
and stake-holders. 
 
 To implement the project cr edible implementing agencies are employed.  
All possible mechanisms are put in place for feedback, evaluation and to ensure 
that the targeted population is benefited. 
 
Passport Offices 
 
 It is submitted that in the last 2 -3 years, MEA has constructed passp ort 
office  buildings/residences at Bangalore, Jaipur, Lucknow and Bhuvneshwar. At 
present, there are 37 Passport Offices, out of which 19 are functioning from 
GOI/MEA-owned buildings. The remaining 18 are functioning in rented buildings.  
However, Ministr y has already purchased land for the following 8 Passport 
offices. The process of construction is regularly monitored and the latest position 
is as under: 
 
1. Guwahati: CPWD has been asked to revise drawings due to change in 
the requirement of space in pas sport Office building in the wake of opening of 
Mini Passport Seva Kendras. 
 
2. Jalandhar: CPWD has submitted a Preliminary Estimate amounting to 
Rs.13.33 crore and is being scrutinized by the Ministry. Drawings are still awaited 
from CPWD. 
 
3. Srinagar: MEA has approved the Concept Drawings and CPWD has 
been asked to submit Preliminary Estimate. Work for construction of access rod 
is in progress at site. The speed of construction is hampered by law and order 
problems in J&K. 
 
4. Surat : Preliminary Estimate amounting to Rs,18.19 crore has been 
approved by MEA and NBCC has submitted drawings to Surat Municipal 
Corporation for approval. 
 
5. Mumbai: The basement has already been constructed and financial 
bids are being opened by CPWD for construction of supers tructure. Ministry has 
released Rs.9.05 crore for the construction of PO Building. 
 
6. Vizag: The construction of Passport Office building is complete and 
Passport Officer is asked to shift to new premises at the earliest. 
 

 88 
7. Amritsar: The land has been purchased and NBCC has been awarded 
the work of construction of Passport Office building. However, due to change in 
zoning plans of the area, the requisite Floor Area for construction of building is 
not available. Hence, Principal Secretary, Local Bodies, G overnment of Punjab, 
has been requested by the Ministry to restore the original building bye-laws. 
 
8. Pune: Transfer of land from PMC to Passport Office is underway. 
Draft lease deed has been finalized by the Ministry and PO is asked to register 
the land in the name of Ministry. 
 
 Of the remaining 10 Passport Offices, a plot of land admeasuring 2594 
sqm has been allotted by the Uttrakhand Government at a cost of Rs.57.08 lakh 
and payment is being made by the Controller of Accounts to acquire the plot after 
approval of Foreign Secretary. A plot of land admeasuring 22000 sq.ft. has been 
reserved by State Government of Madhya Pradesh and has asked its Revenue 
Department to allot the land for construction of Passport Office building. Efforts 
are on to acquire land at all the remaining locations. 
 
As regards purchase of l and for the remaining Pas sport Offices, State 
Government of Kerala has  offered plot  of land to MEA at T hiruvananthapuram 
which is under consideration of the Ministry. The Ministry through its res pective 
Passport Offices have been actively pursuing the case of allotment of land with 
respective State Governments. The recommendations of the Committee 
regarding the purchase of land and futuristic design of the Passport Offices will 
be kept in mind. 
 
China 
 
 The Projects Division is undertaking a number of projects in China like 
construction of new Chancery Building in Beijing and purchase of plot for 
Consulate General of Guangzhou. The East Asia Division has limited role in 
these projects. However, the  recommendations of the Standing Committee will 
be borne in mind while implementing these projects.  
 
Nepal and Bhutan 
 
 All efforts are made to  ensure that spending by the Ministry and 
Embassies in Kathmandu and Thimpu adhere to the allocated budget . However, 
often due to reasons beyond the control of the Division /Missions, payment 
schedule and the project implementation timelines do not adhere to the schedule 
of anticipated expenditure. This results from uncertainty arising out of stopping of 
work, bandhs, etc. in Nepal, which is undergoing a political transition. In addition, 
problems related to law and order hinder implementation of the project and result 
in delays and consequent cost overruns. Furthermore, some projects as agreed 
between India and Nepal /Bhutan are implemented by the respective institutions 
in those countries. Sometimes there are delays in implementation that are not 
anticipated. More importantly, political imperatives also dictate implementation of 
the expenditure in order to secure our interests. 
 
 

 89 
 There are adequate mechanisms in place to review and monitor the 
progress of projects being undertaken in Bhutan by GOI such as the Empowered 
Joint Group (EJG) and the Project Monitoring Committee (PMC). All efforts are 
made to ensure that th ere are no time and cost overruns during their 
implementation and that resources are utilized optimally. Funds are released for 
projects only upon the receipt and scrutiny of utilization certificates of earlier 
released funds to ensure that timelines and e xpenditure schedules are strictly 
adhered to. The EJG and PMC meet twice a year and extraordinary meetings 
may be called as required.  
 
Eurasian Countries 
 A number of projects are being funded under the “Aid to Eurasian 
Countries” budget head of the Minis try.  There have been no cost or time 
overruns in the implementation of Eurasia Division projects.  Some delays have 
occurred in the initiation of the implementation stage due to various reasons, 
including tardy procedures on the part of recipient countrie s.  Necessary clauses 
are included in the agreements signed with the Indian implementing agencies to 
clearly specify the time schedule of the project.  Project monitoring committees 
are constituted so as to ensure quick execution and timely completion of projects.  
Meetings of Project Monitoring Committees are held at regular interva ls to 
monitor completion of projects in the stipulated time schedule and with optimum 
utilization of the funds sanctioned. 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 India has undertaken projects in all pa rts of Afghanistan, in a wide range 
of sectors, including hydro -electricity, power transmission lines, road 
construction, industry, telecommunications, information and broadcasting, and 
capacity building, which have been identified by the Afghan Government  as 
priority areas for reconstruction and development. At present two mega projects 
namely construction of Afghan Parliament Building in Kabul and Salma Dam in 
Herat Province are being undertaken in Afghanistan.  
 
  As regards the construction of Afghan Pa rliament Building the wide 
difference between estimated costs and the actual bids received and approved 
are on account of the peculiar and extraordinary conditions in Afghanistan and 
different threat perceptions of the tendering parties. A Project Review a nd 
Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (PAI) has been 
constituted. The Committee quarterly reviews the project to ensure timely 
completion of the project as per already fixed targets. The Committee convenes 
review and coordinatio n meetings as and when required to expedite physical 
progress of the project and give directions for resolving related issues as well as 
problems, if any, causing hindrance to the physical progress of works.  
 
 The main reasons for delay in the constructio n of Salma Dam are non -
availability of riverbed materials, non -availability of explosives, frequent security 
threats, occurrence of sudden flood in April, 2007 and extremely cold weather 
conditions in dam site area during January and February, 2008. As reg ards cost 
escalation the reasons which contributed are increase in cost of labour, fuel, 
cement , civil and electro -mechaincal works due to instable economic and 
security situation in Afghanistan, Non -availability of dam fill(shell) material(meant 

 90 
to be so urced originally from the river bed), leading to the need for explosives 
material for rock -blasting, additional security costs and damage caused by flash 
flood in April, 2007 and further increase in the cost of imports.   In order to ensure 
timely completion and costs overruns a Project Review and Technical Advisory 
Committee for the reconstruction and completion of Salma Dam Project in 
Afghanistan has been constituted. The Committee reviews the utilization of 
funds, technical aspects, progress of works and  special technical problems, if 
any. The Committee also quarterly review the project to ensure timely completion 
of the project as per already fixed targets.    
 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Maldives 
 
 While executing projects in Bangladesh, Sri Lank a, Myanmar and 
Maldives, we take utmost care while approving projects and monitoring to ensure 
timely completion of the project so that the resources are optimally utilized. This 
is an on-going process. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
Recommendation No.25 
 
 The Committee observe that India is committed to multilateralism in the 
conduct of international affairs, for which United Nations Organization is the basic 
institution.  India‟s commitment is reflected in its role and proactive approach in 
UN Peacekeepin g Force and UN Democracy Fund.  India believes in 
strengthening of UN, for which the prime focus has been on United Nations 
reforms particularly in United Nations General Assembly and United Nations 
Security Council.  The Committee would like to urge the M inistry to adopt 
proactive approach on the issue of reforms within the UN and engage with the 
other stakeholders and make coalition with countries who share the same views.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Ministry of External Affairs accords high priori ty to the issue of UN 
reforms, in particular reform of the Security Council,  and has been pro -active on 
the issue. Various initiatives taken by MEA in this regard are as follows: 
 
i Visits of official and non -official delegations from India were utilized to 
present the case for urgent reform of the United Nations in the U nited 
Nations General Assembly .  EAM led India‟s official delegation s to the 
64th and 65 th UN General Assembly in September 2009 and September 
2010, respectively, and held bilateral meetings with his counterpart from 
several countries to, inter alia, seek their support in expediting UN reform 
process. EAM also participated in a meeting of G -4 (India, Brazil, 
Germany, and Japan) Foreign Ministers to consider how to take the 
issue of United Nations Security Council reform forward. 
 
ii A non-official delegation of India consisting of 18 Hon‟ble Members of 
Parliament participated in the 64th Session of the General Assembly in 
October-November 2009 and presented India‟s view point on, inter alia, 
UN reforms. Similarly, a non-official delegation comprising 18 Members 

 91 
of Parliament and one former MP participated in the 6 5th Session of the 
General Assembly in October-November 2010 and delivered statements 
on India‟s position, including on UN reforms.  
 
iii India, along with Brazil, Germany and Japan (together known as G -4), 
have been regularly coordinating efforts for expansion of the U nited 
Nations Security Council in both permanent and non -permanent 
categories of membership.  Meetings of the G-4 are held regu larly to 
coordinate a joint strategy in this regard. 
 
iv India has been active in bringing together the L.69 Group consisting of 
developing countries from Asia, Africa and Latin America support ive of  
early UNSC expansion. India has been holding coordination m eetings of 
the L.69 to build support for the reform process. 
 
v Due to the efforts of G -4 and L.69, inter -governmental negotiations on 
expansion of the Security Council started in an informal plenary of the 
UN General Assembly in February 2009.  This was a s ignificant 
development after years of fruitless discussions.  Till date, five rounds of 
negotiations have been completed.  In these rounds, India together with 
like-minded countries has strongly advocated urgent action on expansion 
of the Security Council.   
 
vi The first four rounds of inter -governmental negotiations were in form of 
general discussions. With a view to focus the negotiations and move 
towards a position agreeable to majority of the participants, the G -4 and 
South Africa undertook an initiative in December 2009 to push for text -
based negotiations. They mobilized the support of 140 member states for 
a joint letter to the Chair of negotiations asking him to prepare a draft text 
for negotiations. India as a member of the G -4 and as the leader of the  
L.69 wrote separate letters to the Chair seeking expansion of both 
permanent and non -permanent membership of the Security Council.  
This letter catalyzed production of a draft text by the Chair  which was 
used as a basis for the fifth round of negotiations.  
 
vii Various multilateral summits and meetings were utilized to seek support 
for Security Council reform.  For instance, the Indian delegations to the 
Summit and Ministerial level meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement, the 
Commonwealth, and the African Union  took up the issue of UN reform 
with their counterparts from other countries.  The UN reform issue was 
invariably discussed during the bilateral visits and meetings of Indian 
delegations at different levels.   
 
2. As explained above, the Ministry remains fully committed to reforms within 
the UN and has utilized every possible opportunity to build support among the 
UN member states for early reform of the UN.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
 
 

 92 
Recommendation No.26 
 
 The Committee have been apprised of the se curity situation in 
Afghanistan.  The Committee appreciate Government of India‟s resolve to 
engage in reconstruction of Afghanistan and its commitment towards pluralistic, 
democratic and united Afghanistan, despite all odds.  However, the Committee 
would u rge the Ministry to reexamine its strategy in Afghanistan in view of the 
changing perception about India in Afghanistan.  The Committee are of the firm 
view that Government should undertake all steps to protect Indian citizens and 
interests in Afghanistan at all cost.  The efforts of some countries to marginalize 
the role of India in Afghanistan should not be allowed to succeed.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has undertaken projects in all parts of Afghanistan, in a wide range of 
sectors, including hydro -electricity, power transmission lines, road 
construction, industry, telecommunications, information and broadcasting, 
and capacity building, which have been identified by the Afghan 
Government as priority areas for reconstruction and development. In 
addition, India has undertaken community level small development projects 
in the field of agriculture, rural development, education and health 
throughout Afghanistan that have direct and visible impact on community 
life and with a focus on local ownership and m anagement. India‟s 
assistance programme in Afghanistan is aimed at helping people of 
Afghanistan in their reconstruction efforts as a means to bring about peace 
and stability in that country. Government of India is fully committed to 
assisting our Afghan p artners in the process of reconstruction, economic 
development and human resource development as they build a stable, 
prosperous, democratic and pluralistic Afghanistan and will not be deterred 
by forces detrimental to our effort in this direction. 
  
  Government has comprehensively reviewed and enhanced 
security measures being taken for the safety of our personnel and other 
Indians working in Afghanistan.  It is also in regular touch with the 
Government of Afghanistan, which has assured all necessary steps  for the 
security of Indians in that country. Indian nationals registered with the 
Embassy are being regularly advised about the prevailing security scenario 
in the country through security advisories. These advisories outline the 
precautions that need to be taken for their own safety and security. 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 

 93 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
 The Committee regret to note that  there are many discrepancies in facts 
and figures furnished by the Ministry to the Committee. Moreover, there are 
variations in the figures contained in various documents prepared by the Ministry. 
The Committee have observed mistakes in the Brief submitte d to the Committee 
and the Outcome Budget and variance of figures in documents provided by the 
Ministry.  The Committee had highlighted the same issue in its 15 th Report (14th 
LS) but with no results.  The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate that  
Ministry should exercise due caution in future while presenting information to the 
Committee and Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As explained in the Ministry‟s earlier responses, the variation of 
expenditure figure for the year 2008 -09 as mentioned  in the brief submitted by 
the Ministry and the figure stated by Foreign Secretary during the course of 
evidence before the Committee was due to updating of the expenditure data by 
the accounting authorities. The incorrect figure mentioned inadvertently in  the 
Annual Report 2009 -10 is regretted. Similarly the erroneous depiction of 
percentage figures in the pie -chart appearing in the Outcome Budget 2010 -11 at 
page no. 7 was on account of a software -generated rounding off process. Due to 
a typographical erro r, the percentage figure of 0.66 indicating the increase of 
Budget Estimate 2010 -11 of Rs. 6375.00 crores over RE 2009 -10 of Rs. 
6,333.00 crores was erroneously mentioned as 2.66% in the brief submitted by 
the Ministry.  
 
 The Ministry regrets the inconven ience caused to the Committee due to 
the inadvertent and unintended discrepancies pointed out by the Committee and 
will take adequate care and caution for ensuring that no such lapse recurs in 
documents / information to be submitted to the Committee and Pa rliament in 
future. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.18 
 
 The Committee recollect that in order to have an organized set up of 
Project delivery, an agency by name „India -International Development 
Cooperation Agency‟ (IIDCA) was proposed to be set up in 2007 -08.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that Ministry of External Affairs has decided to 
drop the proposal and failed to convince DoPT even on the basic issues like the 
rationale behind setting up of India -International Development Cooper ation 
Agency/Indian Agency for Partnership Development.  Now it is proposed to meet 
the designed objectives by strengthening the concerned Divisions of MEA.    
 

 94 
 The Committee strongly feel that rather than dropping the proposal, the 
Ministry should have c ompleted the basic ground work before approaching 
DoPT/ other Ministries or Cabinet.  The Committee feel that since, a substantial 
part of allocation of the Ministry is used for International Projects, it is pertinent 
for Ministry to evolve an agency with holistic approach and futuristic outlook, 
equipped with due technical expertise in project delivery and stringent inbuilt 
monitoring mechanism.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should rethink about such an agency and move the proposal to  establish Indian 
Agency for Partnership in Development, with clearly defined objectives, sufficient 
preparation and justification.   An agency as proposed earlier may be put in place 
in order to have an organized set up of project delivery.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of External Affairs has initiated the process to revive the 
proposal to establish the Indian Agency for Partnership and Development. The 
Ministry is presently fleshing out details and will move the proposal at the 
earliest. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 95 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No.12 
 
 The Committee are informed that Tala H ydroelectric Project (HEP) in 
Bhutan is the only Plan project that has recently been completed.  The Detailed 
Project Report Cost of Tala HEP was Rs. 1048 crores as per 1993 price level,  
which was revised to Rs. 3580 crores in September 2002.  However, th e final 
completion cost of the project was Rs. 4125.84 crores in 2007.  The Committee 
do not agree with Ministry‟s view that the Tala HEP was completed successfully 
in the best possible cost and timeframe and express anguish over such huge 
cost overrun in the project.   The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should devote sufficient time for conducting adequate survey and 
investigation so as to frame more realistic estimates at the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) stage so that such cost and time overrun may not recur.  
 
 The Committee would also like to draw the attention of the Ministry 
towards the low Plant Load Factor since the Tala Hydroelectric Project (HEP) 
started working and suggest to undertake technical review and appraisal before 
identification of any other Hydroelectric Project in the region. The Committee 
would like to advise the Ministry to seek the views of the experts in the field of 
HEP and consultants about the feasibility, long term sustainability and economic 
returns from the Hydroelectric projects in the region.  
 
 The Committee note that in the light of India‟s ambitious plan to double the 
target of hydro-power development in Bhutan to 10,000 MW for export in India by 
2020 many more projects are expected to begin shortly. The Co mmittee 
recommend that proper technical and feasibility studies including Environmental 
Impact and Risk Assessment, post -facto review and audit of the project should 
be undertaken and the entire process from identification to completion of the 
project should be evaluated vigorously.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India extends technical and financial assistance to the Royal Government of 
Bhutan (RGoB) in implementing hydroelectric power projects (HEPs) which 
belong to RGoB. In the case of the Tala HEP, the Deta iled Project Report (DPR) 
cost was based on 1993 price level s, while the project was commissioned in 
2006. Therefore, the cost escalation was mainly due to inflation in the intervening 
thirteen years. There were also some unavoidable d esign changes during the 
construction stage of the project due to geo -technical findings (inlcuding surprise 
geological findings) and further optimization of project components , which could 
not have been envisaged in the DPR stage. The construction was also hit by 
unforseen si tuations such as the unprecedented flood in the year 2000, that 
escalated the cost.  
In the DPR, the Plant Load Factor (PLF) is indicated as 54.46% on average year 
generation and 44.34% on 90% de pendable year energy generation. The PLF 

 96 
has been exceeded in  2008 and 20 09 (51.60% and 49.20% respectively based 
on actual energy generation ). Lower PLF in 2006 and 2007 was due to partial 
commissioning of machines and initial teething problems. The power plant is 
generating to its optimum as per the river flow con dition without spillage from the 
dam.  
 
 Care has been taken to ensure that adequate technical review and 
appraisal is undertaken before identifying/commissioning new HEPs in Bhutan. 
Views of experts in the field and of specialized consultants have been so licited 
and incorporated in the preparation of DPRs for the new HEPs with regard to 
feasibility, long -term sustainability and economic returns. Some DPRs such as 
for Sankosh, Wangchhu and Bunakha HEPs have been updated to take into 
account current and proj ected timelines and cost estimates. There are adequate 
mechanisms in place to review and monitor the progress and working of the 
HEPs during and after implementation such as the Empowered Joint Group and 
the Project Monitoring Committee.  
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
 Government of India has made various commitments and provides aid for 
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction of war affected people and areas in Sri 
Lanka.  The Committee have noted that as against the announcement o f 
assistance of Rs. 500 crores, only Rs. 90 crores have been budgeted and Rs. 
63.49 crores utilized.  The Committee find that many of the projects are at the 
level of planning.  The Committee are of the view that Government should 
identify and  approve the project carefully keeping in mind the sentiments of 
people of Sri Lanka and initiate its execution in an efficient manner in 
consultation with various stakeholders so as to avoid cost and time overruns.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India is assisting Sri La nka in resettlement and reconstruction of war -affected 
Northern and Eastern Provinces.  Of the allocated amount of Rs.500 crores 
during financial year 2009-10, the final utilization for the FY 2009 -10 is Rs. 68.96 
crores.  Initially our focus had been pure ly humanitarian considering the large 
number of IDPs emerging out of the conflict zone.  We followed this up with 
assistance for their resettlement which included deploying seven Indian demining 
teams in Northern Sri Lanka; supplying 7800 MT of shelter mat erial and 95,000 
of agricultural implements packs for the returning IDPs; conducting a month long 
artificial limb fitment camp by a reputed Indian NGO in Northern Sri Lanka; 
supplying 4 lakh cement bags to help repair their damaged house; supplying 
seeds and 500 tractors and other agricultrual implements for revival of livelihood 
activities of farmers in Northern Sri Lanka.   
 
 In the rehabilitation and reconstruction phase, several other projects are 
being taken up.  During the visit of EAM between Novembe r 25-28, 2010, EAM 
participated in the ground breaking ceremony for the railway project in Northern 
Sri Lanka being taken up under an Indian line of credit as well as the ground 
breaking ceremony for construction of a pilot project of 1000 houses for Inter nally 

 97 
Displaced Persons (IDPs) of Northern Sri Lanka.  Work on the Kankesanthurai 
Port is also going on schedule.  Other projects including the restoration of a 
stadium in Jaffna, vocational training centres, etc. are at various stages of 
planning and proc essing.  EAM also handed over tractors and agricultural 
implements to revive the livelihood of the IDPs.  While deciding on the projects, 
the sentiments of the people is kept in mind, as well as consultations undertaken 
with various stakeholders. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.23 
 The Committee note that the idea of establishment of South Asian 
University was mooted in the year 2005 with huge expectations and was 
visualized as a major initiative to build upon the civilizational and historic al 
linkages and the past shared experiences that will enable the countries of the 
region to rediscover and rebuild connectivity with the people of the region and 
reflect upon the commonalities of the region.  The Committee note that the 
academic activities are expected to begin from August 2010 and the anticipated 
timeframe for the construction of University is 2014-15.   
 
 The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the progress made during 
the last five years. During this period, only land has been acq uired for the 
University.  For the namesake there is a proposal to start academic activities in 
August/September 2010 in rented premises.  Draft Statute, Regulations, 
Academic Structure and Business plan have not been approved so far.  The 
Committee expect  that the University should emerge as a center of excellence 
which cater to academic as well as intellectual pursuits. The curriculum should 
range from the study of deeper and serious issues of Philosophy and Cultural 
Studies to the study of contemporary S ocial Science disciplines, Humanities, 
Management and Technical Studies. The Committee desire that a well thought 
out realistic blueprint based on clear intent, aims and objectives for establishing 
the university and carrying out academic activities should  be formulated before 
initiating any course randomly.  The Committee want to be informed of the 
progress at regular intervals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 While the idea of establishing a South Asian University was mooted in 
2005, the formal Agreement betwee n SAARC Member States to establish 
the South Asian University (SAU) was signed only on 4 April 2007 during 
the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi.  
 The SAARC Inter -Governmental Steering Committee was convened in 
May 2007 to conceptualize the academic contours of the University. The 
Steering Committee, at its 6 th meeting in March 2010, finalised the 
University‟s Statutes, Regulations, Academic Structure and Business 
Plan. The Sixteenth SAARC Summit (April 2010) took note of the work of 
the Steering Committee and  appreciated the progress being made 
towards establishing the University.  
 The SAU Project Office was established on May 7, 2008. The SAU Bill 
received the approval of both houses of Parliament on 23 December 
2008. After receiving the assent of the Preside nt of India on 11 January 

 98 
2009, the South Asian University Act was notified in the Gazette of India 
on 13 January 2009. The Headquarters Agreement for establishment of 
the South Asian University in New Delhi was signed between the 
Government of India and the SAARC Secretariat on 1 December 2008.  
 The Academic Structure of the SAU envisages the creation of Faculties for 
the study of philosophy, history, culture, languages, religion, social 
sciences and humanities, as well as scientific and technological disciplines 
such as engineering, life sciences and bio -technology, earth system 
sciences, physics, chemistry, mathematics, ICT and medicine. 
 The courses and research that will be pursued at the SAU are based on 
the aims, objectives and intent for establishing such a University. The 
mandate of the SAU has been spelt out in the Inter -Governmental 
Agreement of 4 April 2007, which envisages the (i) building of a culture of 
understanding and regional consciousness; (ii) nurturing a new class of 
liberal, bright and quality leadership; and (iii) building of the capacity of the 
region in science, technology and other disciplines considered vital for 
improving the quality of life of the people. 
 As the South Asian University‟s state -of-the-art campus on its permanent 
premises is expected to take a few years to complete, academic activities 
have commenced on 26 August 2010 from rented premises. 50 students 
from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are 
already studying at the University. 
 The selection of the two courses that were initiated at SAU in August 2010 
namely, MA in Development Economics and the Master of Computer 
Applications, was a well considered decision, having been deliberated 
upon by the Inter -Governmental Steering Committee and unanimously  
approved by all SAARC Member States. The courses were considered as 
covering vital areas for the SAARC region and designed to fully meet the 
stated objectives of the University.   
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
Recommendation No.24 
 
 Nalanda University is  an East Asian Summit (EAS) initiative.  Nalanda 
Mentor Group (NMG) has come out with a plan for setting up of the University.  
The Committee observed that during BE 2009 -10, Rs. 50 crores were allocated 
for Nalanda University which was reduced in RE 2009 -10 to Rs. 1.00 crore.  The 
Committee was informed that allocation was sought on the assumption that the 
proposed Bill would be passed but it could not happen due to postponement of 
East Asian Summit (EAS).  The Committee have been informed that the draft B ill 
has been formulated.  The Committee hope that the Bill will be tabled soon and 
all efforts are made to pass the Bill to put in place the proper legislative 
framework.  The Committee are of the view that this is a very prestigious project 
and an importa nt constituent in India‟s engagement with the East.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the project should not get delayed on 
account of any procedural reasons.  The Committee desire that once the 
proposal is finalized for setting up of University is  finalized by Nalanda Mentor 
Group, there should be quick and time -bound implementation of the same in an 
efficient manner. 
 

 99 
 The Committee are of the view that Nalanda University should be evolved 
as a centre of excellence and tool of deeper engagement wi thin the region of 
East Asia and emerge as a facilitator in capitalising the soft power of India. The 
Committee feel that efforts should be made to evolve such a character and 
personality of this institution that it can match the historical significance of  its 
name „Nalanda‟. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Nalanda University is an East Asian Summit (EAS) initiative. During BE 
2009-10, Rs.50 crores were allocated for the Nalanda University, which was 
reduced in RE 2009 -10 to Rs.1 crore. It is proposed to seek an  allocation of Rs. 
100 crores in BE 2011 -12 now that all the legal formalities have been completed 
for the establishment of the University 
 
 The Nalanda University Act 2010 was passed in the Monsoon session of 
the Parliament (August-September 2010) and rec eived President‟s assent on 21 
September 2010. A Gazette Notification was issued on 19 November 2010 for 
bringing the Act into force and for the establishment of the Nalanda University 
w.e.f. 25 November 2010. Meanwhile, the Vice Chancellor –designate has 
assumed charge w.e.f. 8 October 2010 and has commenced operations from the 
Project Office in New Delhi. 
 
 The Government of Bihar has already agreed to transfer the land acquired 
for establishing the University once the University is established. The Vice 
Chancellor-designate has initiated the process with the Government of Bihar for 
transferring the land to the Nalanda University. A meeting of the Nalanda Mentor 
Group, which is now the Interim Governing Board of the University, is being held 
in February 201 1 to discuss various administrative issues connected with the 
establishment of the University, including framing of Statutes, Financial Rules 
etc.  
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 

 100 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.8 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to take note of such small number of 
interpreters in position at Headquarters and Missions. The Committee have also 
noted that as and when required the services of inte rpreters from outside the 
cadre of Ministry are also availed of. But the Ministry is not able to provide 
information about the payments made to them during the last three years.  The 
Committee expect that the Ministry should have complete data regarding av ailing 
of services of interpreters from outside at Headquarters and Missions and 
payment made to them. The compilation of such data will facilitate the Ministry to 
make realistic assessment and requirements of the interpreters language wise.   
The Committe e also feel that as India is increasing its global footprint, it is 
pertinent to have sufficient number of Interpreters in all major languages.  The 
Committee do not favour the presence of outside interpreters in the important 
and politically sensitive int ernational meetings. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that adequate study should be undertaken and the Ministry should build 
and strengthen its interpreter cadre particularly in Non-UN languages.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All the Territorial Divisions  have been working on and sharing information 
about hiring of interpreters at Headquarters.  As regards the need to expand the 
Interpreters‟ Cadre of the Ministry, it may be noted that all Indian Foreign Service 
Officers are required to learn a „Compulsory  Foreign Language‟ before they are 
confirmed in Service. Therefore, a fair degree of foreign language expertise is 
available within MEA even apart from the specialized Interpreters Cadre. At 
present the languages spoken by IFS officers cover Arabic, Chines e, French, 
Spanish, Russian, German, Italian, Persian, Korean, Japanese, Portuguese, 
Nepalese, Kiswahili, Bahasa Malay, Thai, Turkish, Bahasa Indonesia, Sinhalese, 
Vietnamese, Burmese, Dutch and Serbo -Croatian. Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad also have po sts of local interpreters and hence they do not need to hire 
interpreters in the normal course. Only in exceptional circumstances and during 
VVIP visits, do they hire additional interpreters to meet the short -term 
requirement. Since English is spoken in th e Foreign Offices of most of the 
countries in the world, the present number of specialized Interpreters, coupled 
with the foreign language expertise of IFS officers, and the services of the local 
hired interpreters in Missions/Posts is felt to be adequate to meet day -to-day 
needs. Increasing the strength of the specialized Interpreters‟ Cadre in MEA is 
also constrained by the fact that members of this Cadre are recruited by UPSC 
on the basis of their existing academic qualifications and work experience in t he 
concerned language. As such, there are very limited facilities available in Indian 
academic institutions for teaching of non-UN or single-country foreign languages. 
Hence, widening of the Interpreters‟ Cadre to include more languages is likely to 
pose considerable difficulty at the recruitment stage. 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
 

 101 
Recommendation No.21 
 
 Issuance of e -passport also called biometric passport is an ambitious 
project initiated by the Ministry in June 2008.  The Ministry in Annual Report 
2008-09 stated that based on the experience gained from the Pilot Project, it was 
proposed to start issuance of e -passports of ordinary category by the end of 
2009.  The Committee are given to understand that the inordinate delay in the 
launch of project is on account of non -procurement of e -booklets from Security 
Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL) due to technical 
reasons.  The Committee was further informed that the Technical Committee 
headed by Director General, NIC is in the proces s of freezing the technical 
specifications of inlays.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry 
should coordinate with Technical Committee for an early finalization of technical 
specifications in the project followed by initiation of global tender ing process so 
that the project becomes feasible and can be implemented on pan -India basis at 
the earliest possible opportunity.  The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress made at regular intervals in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The technica l bids of e -passport inlays were opened as per established 
procedure on the scheduled date on July 26, 2010. Following this, the Tender 
Committee decided that the financial bids would be opened only after receiving 
fresh clearance from the Technical Commit tee and a fresh security clearance 
from the Ministry of Home Affairs for the firm, M/s GEMALTO (a French 
company) against whom a communication was received from the Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) that this company is also supplying the same chip 
to the Government of Pakistan. The final decision on the award of contract will be 
taken only after the receipt of technical and security clearance from Ministry of 
Home Affairs. The matter is being followed up. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/77/10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                    ANANTH KUMAR, 
14 February, 2011____                                                                     Chairman,  
Magha 25, 1932 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 102 
Appendix-I 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 14 FEBRUARY, 2011 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1545 hrs in Committee 
Room G 074 in Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
      Shri Ananth Kumar  -  Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
4. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
5. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
6. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
8. Shri H.K.Dua 
9. Dr. K.P.Ramalingam 
10. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
11. Dr. Karan Singh 
12. Shri Tarun Vijay 
13. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
   Shri R.K.Jain    -  Director 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 
Report on Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 4th 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee in respect of Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2010-2011.   
 
 

 103 
3. The Committee then adopted the report, subject to the following 
modifications/additions: - 
I.  In recommendation No. 2    
 
  (line 1 of para no. 10) 
 
(i)   for  the words „… extremely discontented‟   
substitute the word „…regret‟    
 
 (line 9 of para no. 10) 
 
(ii) after the words „current Five Year Plan‟ 
delete the words „and the outcome thereof‟ 
 
 
II. In recommendation No. 8   
 
 (line 12 of  para no. 13) 
 
(i)        after the words „It seems that Ministry have….‟ 
delete the word „deliberately‟  
   
(ii) at the end of para 13 add the following : 
„The Committee also want that services of Hin di 
interpreters  
should invariably be made available in all the Missions 
abroad.‟ 
 
III. In recommendation No.11   
        (line 4 of para no. 16) 
 
         after the words „…there is still…‟  
                                delete the word „an‟  
 
IV. In recommendation No. 12   
(line 1 of para no. 19) 
(i) after the word „….satisfied‟  
delete the words „at all‟ 
 
(line 10 of para no. 19) 
 
(ii) for the word „stereo type‟  
 substitute the word „routine‟  
 
(iii) at the end of para no. 19 add the words „within forty five 
days‟  

 104 
 
V. In recommendation No. 14    
 
  (line 8 of para no. 22) 
 
  for the words „scenario and lack -lustre approach of the 
Government‟  
 
 substitute  the following:- 
 
„situation and would like to have an explanation as to 
why such a situation has arisen and what steps a re 
being taken to remedy the matter‟ 
 
 
VI. In recommendation No. 16   
 
(line 5 of para no. 25)  
 
(i) for the word „anyone‟  
  substitute the word „any‟ 
 
  (line 7 of para no. 25) 
 
(ii) after the words „ITEC Programme and…‟  
 add the word „that‟ 
 
  (line 8 of  para no. 25) 
 
(iii) after the words „…among partner countries.‟  
 
insert the following: 
 
„The Committee enquire as to whether all requests from 
partner countries have been honoured and whether 
there are areas of need which we have been unable to 
meet e.g. scholarships for medical education‟  
    
(line 11 of para no. 25) 
(iv) after the words „….should take all‟ 
add the word „necessary‟ 
 
VII. In recommendation No. 21    
(line 1 of para no. 28) 
(i) for the words „a long‟  
substitute the word „considerable‟ 
 
 (line 13, of para no. 28) 
 
(ii) delete the words  „the‟    and    „made‟ 

 105 
VIII. In recommendation No.22 (para no. 31) 
(line 1 of para no. 31) 
(i) (in the first line) delete the words „to note‟  
(line 3 of para no. 31) 
(ii) for the words „…stereo type‟  
substitute the word „routine‟ 
 
(line 6 of para no. 31) 
 
(iii) after the word „However‟ 
delete the following:- 
 
   „the Committee do not hesitate to state that‟ 
   (line 2 from bottom of  para no. 31) 
(iv) for the words „…them in their own‟ 
substitute the words „..them into their own‟  
IX. In recommendation No. 23   
   (lines 3 and 4 of para no. 34) 
 (i)  for the following 
„The Committee observe that an idea was mooted in 
2005 and academic activities have commenced 
recently on 26 th August, 2010 from a rented building 
with 50 students only.‟ 
 
substitute the following  
 
„The Committee observe that this idea for 
establishment of the University was mooted in 2005 but 
academic activities could commence only recently on 
26th August, 2010 from a rented building with 50 
students‟ 
 
 (line 8 of para no. 34) 
 
(ii) after the words „….should be taken as…‟ 
insert  the words „as a matter of‟ 
 
 (lines 3 and 4 from bottom of para no. 34) 
 
(iii) for the words   „….showcase the India‟s strength as a 
leader.‟ 
substitute the words „…showcase India‟s strengths.‟ 
 
 

 106 
X. In recommendation No. 24   
  
   (line 4 of para no. 37) 
 
(i) for the word „other‟  
substitute the word „all‟ 
 
   (line 5 of para no. 34)    
 
  (ii) for the words „viz. transfer of land and various…‟  
substitute  the word „and‟ 
 
 (line 3 from bottom of para no. 37) 
 
(iii) for the word „remind‟  
substitute the word „reiterate‟ 
 
 (line 3 and 4 from bottom of para no. 37) 
 
(iv) for the words „…should be evolved..‟  
substitute „…should evolve..‟ 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalize the report in 
the light of the modifications suggested by th e Members and consequential 
changes, if any, arising out of factual verification of the Report by the 
Ministry of External Affairs and to present the same to Parliament.    
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 107 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                             26 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1-2, 4-7, 9-11, 13, 15-17, 19-20, 22, 25 & 26 
 Total-18 
 
Percentage:  69.23% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  3 and 18 
Total-02 
 
Percentage: 7.69% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committ ee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 12, 14, 23 & 25 
Total- 04 
 
 Percentage: 15.39% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 8 & 21 
Total-02  
 
Percentage: 7.69% 
 
 
  