 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE PIRACY BILL, 2012 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY 2012/SHRAVANA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 16 
 

 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
THE PIRACY BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
                             
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 14th August, 2012 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14th August, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY 2012/SHRAVANA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 97  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-2012) 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
Sl.No  Name  
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
16.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
17.  
18. 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
Vacant # 
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla @ 
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
29.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
31.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
              
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
3. Shri A. Sivanandam - Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Kiran Bhargava- Executive Assistant 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Commit tee  due  to  expiry  of term of Dr. Karan Singh, Member , Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 27.01.12 and re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.02.2012. 
@ Shri Sreegopal Vyas, Member Rajya Sabha ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of 
his te rm  w.e.f. 02.04.12  and Smt. Najma Heptulla nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 
04.05.2012. 
#    Smt. Sushila Saroj ceased to be the Member of the Committee on External Affairs due to change of her nomination 
to Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment w.e.f. 13.7.12. 
 (iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Co mmittee on External Affairs (2011 -2012) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this 16th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “The Piracy Bill, 2012”. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 24th April, 2012 and was referred 
by the Hon‟ble Speaker to the Standing Committee  on External Affairs for 
examination and Report. 
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, the Committee took oral evidence 
of the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative 
Department and Department of Legal Affairs ) and DG Shipping on 16.05.2012, 
21.05.2012 and 26.06.2012 . The Committee also sought written information on 
various aspects of the Bill from these Ministries.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Re port at their sitting held on 
26th July, 2012. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry 
of Shipping, Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department and Department of 
Legal Affairs) and DG Shipping who appeared before the Committee and  placed 
their considered views and also for furnishing background information and written 
replies to the points raised by the Committee in connection with the  examination 
of the Bill.   
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                ANANTH KUMAR, 
26 July, 2012                                                    Chairman,  
04 Shravana, 1934 (Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
      
 
             PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2011-2012…………………………………   (iii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………..   (iv) 
REPORT 
 
Chapter I Introductory……………………………………………………………..     1    
 
Chapter II Clause by Clause Examination………………………………………   22     
 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16.05.2012 ………..   41 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 21.05.2012 ………..   43 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26.06.2012…………    46 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26.07.2012……….    49       
  
 
ANNEXURE 
  
 The Piracy Bill, 2012………………………………………………………   51 
 
 

 

DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE PIRACY BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
JULY 2012/SHRAVANA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
__________________________________________________________ 
 
Recommendations are at Page Nos. 16-21, 23, 24, 26-27, 30, 31, 35, 36, 38, 39 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
             PAGE 
REPORT 
 
Chapter I Introductory……………………………………………………………..   1    
 
Chapter II Clause by Clause Examination………………………………………      22      
 
Appendix-I „The Piracy Bill, 2012‟…………………………………………………       40 
 
  

_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Recommendations are at Para Nos.  1.34 – 1.38,  2.3 – 2.5,  2.11, 2.14, 2.23 – 2.24, 2.26,  
                                                            2.36, 2.38, 2.43, 2.47,  

REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 Recent times have seen intensification in incidents of piracy on high 
seas particularly off the coast of Somalia especially in the Gulf of Eden as well 
as in the region of f South-East Asia along with other high risk zones. The act 
of „ Piracy‟ involves two distinct offences including robbery or hijacking, 
wherein target of the attack is to capture/harm a maritime vessel or its cargo 
as well as kidnapping the vessel and its crew and threatening them for 
payment of ransom. 
Legal definition of Piracy  
1.2 “Piracy” as an offence is defined as follows in the  United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 (UNCLOS) (Article 101):  
 “Piracy consists of any of the following acts: 
(a) any illegal act of violence or detenti on, or any act of depredation, 
committed for private ends by the crew or the passengers of a private 
ship or a private aircraft, and directed: 
(i)  on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or against 
persons or property on board such ship or aircraft; 
(ii)  against a ship, aircraft, persons or p roperty in a place outside the 
jurisdiction of any State; 
(b)  any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of an 
 aircraft with knowledge of facts making it a pirate ship or aircraft; 
(c)  any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in 
 subparagraph (a) or (b).” 

1.3 According to the above -mentioned definition, piracy as an offence can 
only be committed on the high seas. When an offence akin to piracy takes 
place in the territorial sea and internal waters of a State , it will be called 
Maritime Robbery or Armed robbery against ships.  
International Scenario  
1.4 Seaborne piracy against ships and vessels remains a significant issue 
particularly in the waters between the Red Sea and Indian Ocean, off the 
Somalia coast, and also in the Strait of Malacca  and Singapore, which are 
used by over 50,000 commercial ships a year.  Piracy off the coast of Somalia 
has been a threat to international shipping and trade. In view of the economic 
costs of piracy and its adverse impact on global trade and threa t posed to the 
security of the crew and the seafarers , there has been a coordinated multi -
national effort to patrol the waters near the Horn of Africa including India and 
its Navy and Coast Guards.   
 1.5 An estimated 3,000 to 5,000 pirates  operated in the beginning and by 
2012, February 1,000 of such pirates have been captured and were put to trail 
under legal processes in several countries despite problems being faced in 
bringing these pirates to justice at the international level due to the dearth of 
an international institutional arrangement as well as effective domestic 
legislations to deal with the menace.  
 
 
Problem of Piracy in Indian context 

1.6 With the increase in global trade, the maritime security has emerged as 
a major challenge.  The Gulf of Aden which separates Somalia and Yemen 
and connects the Arabian Sea to the Red Sea has seen a major spurt in 
attacks by pirates operating from Somalia s ince 2008.  This problem has 
really been exasperated in recent years.  With Indian naval presence in the 
Gulf of Eden, the problem which were at the time related to Somalia and the 
Horn of Africa, some of the pirates began to shift their operations eastwar ds 
and southwards.  This led to some of the pirates operating closer to the Indian 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and the Western coast of India.  In 2011, 286 
piracy attacks took place which resulted in 33 hijacking.  From Dec ember 
2010, the Indian Navy an d the Coast Guard conducted several major anti -
piracy operations off India‟s Western Coast and apprehended around 120 
suspected pirates.  
Efforts made on international level 
1.7 Efforts are being made on international level to deal with the situation 
both through political and diplomatic means as well as defence cooperation at 
high seas.  The UN Secretary General presented a Report (S/2010/394) to 
the UN Security Council on 26 July 2010 which identified the various options 
for an international legal mechani sm for prosecution and incarceration of the 
pirates, including capacity building of regional States to prosecute and 
imprison pirates , establishment of a Somali court in the country or in another 
country in the region, establishment of a special chamber o r a regional 
tribunal or an international tribunal either with or without UN participation. The 
UN Secretary General also appointed a Special Adviser on Piracy who 
released a report in February 2011 elaborating on various options for judicial 
mechanisms to prosecute and incarcerate pirates. 

Anti-Piracy legislation in other countries 
1.8 Netherlands and Germany are some of the countries that have 
domestic anti -piracy legislation in place. Kenya has also entered into 
agreement with other countries (US, UK, EU  etc) for transfer of suspected 
pirates to Kenya for prosecution on a case to case basis. Kenya is 
nevertheless facing capacity and capability problems. Tanzania has 
concluded an agreement on transfer for prosecutions with United Kingdom 
and is considering a similar one with European Union. Seychelles has brought 
into force a legislation in March 2010 specifically authorising its personnel to 
seize a pirate ship on the high seas. Under the same legislation, personnel 
found guilty of piracy „within Seychelle s or elsewhere‟ are liable „to 
imprisonment for 30 years and a fine of R 1 million‟. However, recently 
Seychelles has conveyed that due to capacity constraints it will not be in a 
position to accommodate more defaulters. In other words countries in the 
region are facing problems in accepting pirates for prosecution and 
incarceration.  
 
Present Legal Mechanism regarding Piracy 
 
1.9 The problem of piracy continues to persist but particularly after the 
actions of Indian Navy, it is seen as being worst in the western sector of the 
Indian Ocean than in the areas immediately close to India‟s EEZ.  However, at 
present India does not have a separate domestic legislation to deal with 
piracy-related offences. In the absence of a clear and unambiguous reference 
to the offence of maritime piracy in the Indian law, problems have been faced 
in ensuring effective prosecution of the pirates. In the Alondra Rainbow case, 
which was the first piracy case to be tried in an Indian Court in  1999, in the 

absence of a piracy law or the definition of piracy in the penal law of India, 
other relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code and Admiralty Act were 
invoked to try the pirates. Although the prosecution was successful in the trial 
court, the appeal went in favour of the accused in the High court presumably 
on jurisdictional grounds.  
1.10 The 120 captured pirates are currently being prosecuted under 
provisions of IPC, Indian Arms Act etc. However, in the absence of a suitable 
domestic legislation, pirates that are captured at sea cannot be successfully 
prosecuted. The provisions of the Indian Penal Code pertaining to armed 
robbery etc as also the Admiralty Act have been invoked in the past to 
prosecute pirates apprehended by the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard. 
India‟s domestic law (i.e. IPC) has not defined piracy as an offence and an 
accused person can be charged only for offences such as attempt to murder, 
dacoity, robbery etc. Another limitation of the IPC is that the piratical acts by a 
foreigner committed outside territorial waters of India do not constitute an 
offence under the IPC. These offences may attract lower sentences and 
cases may take a long time to be disposed off. 
 
Impediments in the trial of Pirates in India 
1.11  Considering the increase in incidents and intensity of piracy and 
abduction of Indian seafarers, the Committee in their Tenth Report (15th L.S.) 
has taken up the issue and desired that “ the issue of piracy need ed to be 
addressed with the utmost seriousness it deserves.  Besides appropriately 
taking up the matter with the internati onal community to avert incidence s of 
piracy, the Committee also  wanted the Ministry of External Affairs to draw up 
a long term strategy  in coordination with other concerned Ministries viz. 
Ministries of Shipping and Defence, to stringently deal with the issue of piracy 

and making the sea lanes safer.  At the same time, the Committee also 
desired the Ministry of External Affairs to expedit iously finalize the proposed 
legislation to deal with the prosecution of pirates.” 
Draft Indian Legislation 
1.12 Regarding t he salient features of the draft Indian legislation, „The 
Piracy Bill, 2012‟, the Ministry of External Affairs stated as under: 
(i) “Piracy is defined as given in  United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea, 1982 (UNCLOS) and this definition is used to try the pirates 
by invoking universal jurisdiction under the national legislation. 
(ii) Using the UNCLOS definition would also enable international 
cooperation including extradition of persons involved in an act of piracy 
on the high seas. 
(iii) The Bill adheres to the guidelines for national legislation for Maritime 
Criminal Acts prepared by the Legal Committee of the International 
Maritime Organization (IMO). 
(iv) The provisions concerning attempt and conspiracy to commit piracy 
and other relevant  provision on investigation, trial and bail are 
formulated on the lines of the IMO Model Law on Maritime Criminal 
Acts (LEG 93/12/1, 2007) and Model Nat ional Law on Acts of Piracy 
and Maritime Violence adopted on the deliberations by the Joint 
International Working Group on Uniformity of Law concerning Acts of 
Piracy and Maritime Violence, held in Singapore in 2000. 
(v) National Legislations on Piracy from Au stralia, UK, New Zealand and 
Sri Lanka were also consulted in the process.” 

1.13 While highlighting the problem arising out of lack of legislative 
framework, the representative of Ministry of Defence during the course of 
evidence stated as under: 
“Our ships are patrolling and they are catching these people. All that 
we can do is just disarm them and let them go free. That is because we 
do not  have a legislation.  If we had legislation then this 120 pirates, 
the number would have gone up to 250 or 500 and t he piracy would 
have come under control.  We would have been able to try them and 
put them behind bars. If we have a legislation, it would greatly help.” 
1.14 The Committee further enquired about the possibility of handing over of 
the pirates to their countries of origin rather than prosecuting pirates in India.  
The Ministry of Defence in their written reply stated as under: 
“The 120 pirates were arrested in the Indian EEZ.  It was therefore 
more practical to bring them to India.  The absence of functi onal 
governance in Somalia and the absence of any agreement with 
Puntland of TFG precluded the option of their transfer.  
1.15 The Committee specifically referred to the instances of  lack of trial by 
many countries, inspite of seizure of suspected pirates  and wanted to know 
the reasons for such approach in those countries .  The Ministry of External 
Affairs stated in their written reply as under: 
“It is understood that many western countries do not undertake 
prosecution of apprehended suspected pirates becau se they are 
concerned that the pirates may claim asylum in their country after 
undergoing trial or their sentences. Reasons for lack of trial include 
problems regarding availability of adequate evidence and ensuring the 
presence of witnesses at the trial. As pirates tend to throw their 
weapons and equipment over board and destroy their passports before 

they are caught, it is difficult to collect incriminating evidence or 
establish their identities. The witnesses are usually sailors/crews/ naval 
officers of many nationalities residing at different places across the 
globe who find it difficult to appear at trial proceedings.  Many countries 
do not have the necessary legal framework to prosecute pirates. 
Evidentiary problems, burden of trials, providing counsel  and 
translation of services are some of the problems faced by the countries 
after capturing the pirates.” 
1.16 The Committee desired to know as to what persuaded Govt. of India to 
bring domestic legislation in  the form of „The Piracy Bill, 2012 ‟, while most of 
the countries do not have  any domestic legislation for p rosecution of pirates, 
particularly in the region. The Ministry of External Affairs in their written reply 
stated as under: 
“India is among the countries which have been seriously affected by 
the problem of maritime Piracy. Indian Navy and Coast Guard, during 
the course of conducting anti -piracy operations off our Western Coast, 
have apprehended several suspected pirates. As India does not have a 
separate domestic legislation to deal with pirac y-related offences, 
problems have been faced in ensuring effective prosecution of the 
pirates. The Piracy Bill under consideration has been tabled with a view 
to removing this lacuna in our law and allow effective prosecution of 
pirates apprehended by us in the future.” 
1.17 In this context, the Committee desired to be acquainted with the laws 
that were use d to prosecute pirates so far and particular Act s/Provisions 
under which the captured 120 suspected pirates are being trialed.  The 
Ministry of External Affairs submitted the following reply: 

“Acts of stealing, abduction, violence, illegal detention are punishable 
under the Indian Penal Code (IPC).  These acts , if committed on the 
sea are also punishable under the IPC.  Section 3 provides for 
punishment of offences committed beyond, but w hich by law may be 
tried within India and Section 4 deals with Extension of Code to extra -
territorial of fences. Section 188 of  the CrP C caters for offences 
committed outside India by an Indian whether on the high seas or 
elsewhere or by a foreigner on a ship or aircraft registered in India. 
Apart from that, the Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849 passed by 
the British Parliam ent, and subsequently made applicable to India by 
the Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860 are also relevant. Section 1 
of the above Act provides that any person charged with the 
commission of any act of treason, piracy, felony, robbery, murder, 
conspiracy etc committed upon the seas shall be brought to trial to any 
colony. 
The suspected pirates presently in our custody have been charged with 
clauses under the IPC, details of which would be available with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.” 
1.18 The Ministry  of Defence highlighted the impediments in the Trial of 
Pirates in India and particularly elaborated upon the MV Alondra Rainbow 
case in their written submission and stated as under: 
“An example in this regard is the MV Alondra Rainbow  case, where 
lack of separate legislation on piracy created a problem in launching an 
effective prosecution on pirates captured by the Indian Navy and Indian 
Coast Guard.  The MV Alondra Rainbow (Feb . 2003), subsequent to 
being hijacked by pirates, was rescued by the Indian Navy and Indian 

coast Guard and brought to Mumbai.  The pirates were tried by the 
Sessions Court and found guilty and sentenced to 7 years 
imprisonment along with fines.  In April 2 005, however, the Mumbai 
High Court overruled the Sessions Court verdict and acquitted all the 
convicts.  Acquittal of the convicted persons was due to certain doubts 
in the minds of the High Court with respect to exact location of the 
seizure of the ship and identification of accused persons.” 
1.19 Elaborating upon the problems in the current legislative framework and 
its ramifications and highlighting the importance of new legislation, DG, 
Shipping during the course of evidence stated as under: 
“...in ter ms of dealing with the pirates we have an Act of 1849.  
Fortuitously unrevealed, which gives us criminal jurisdiction in this 
particular instance.  There was a case, ...... where the admiralty 
jurisdiction was invoked.  It was accepted in the Sessions Cour t and 
not contested in the High Court. ...... This 1849 legislation was 
obviously before the IPC and the Cr PC. Subsequently, when the IPC 
and the Cr PC has come in, there had been recommendation of the 
Law Commission that the IPC and the  CrPC do take care of criminal 
offences.  However, if the piracy has to be made a specific offence, 
then that exercise should be done by the Inter Ministerial Committee. In 
my opinion, this particular legislation, however limited it may sound, fills 
in an important gap.” 
1.20     It was further elucidated that if Navy takes action against a ship flying 
another flag, then such kind of legislation becomes important and also that  if 
there is an Indian flagship which is attacked on the high seas, we still have 
jurisdiction under the IPC and the CrPC.” 

1.21 When t he Committee desired to know from the Ministry of External 
Affairs whether the particular issue of prosecution of pirates can be tackled by 
amending the existing Criminal Procedure Code, or any Act related with 
Shipping or regulation of commercial activities etc. and also the reason f or 
bringing in an entirely new legislation for prosecution of pirates , the Ministry 
stated in written reply as under: 
“In view of the need to grant the relevant courts universal jurisdiction 
for this crime, which is not the case for other crimes under IPC, it was 
felt that a separate legislation would be appropriate.  
Hitherto, Piracy has not been defined under any Indian  law. The 
definition introduced by this Bill is the definition internationally 
accepted. A number of UN resolutions in the recent past have urged 
States to enact legislation on piracy by adopting the definition 
contained in UNCLOS. This becomes more import ant while invoking 
universal jurisdiction and trying foreigners as they have to be tried in 
accordance with internationally accepted provisions of law and 
procedure.” 
 
1.22 The subject of Piracy involves many Ministries and agencies.  
i. The nodal agency deal ing with the issue of piracy in the 
international context is the Ministry of External Affairs.   
ii. The nodal agency dealing with welfare of seafarers and issues 
related to hostages and issues related to insurance and shipping 
is the Ministry of Shipping alon g with its Directorate General of 
Shipping.   
iii. The nodal agency for action against suspected pirates on sea is 
the Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy and Coast Guard.  

iv. The nodal agency for prosecution of pirates is the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and the State authorities where the pirates are being 
tried.” 
 
1.23 The Committee were appropriately curious to know about the 
identification of Ministry of External Affairs for introduction of the Piracy Bill.  
The Foreign Secretary clarified the position during cou rse of evidence as 
under: 
“The idea emerged out of an inter-ministerial discussion because it was 
not clear exactly which Ministry should lead this and because of the 
urgency of the matter and need to deal with in terms of the United 
Nations Laws of the Sea, to align our law with the United Nations Laws 
of the sea, the later part of which, the MEA under the allocation of 
business rules, responsible.” 
1.24 The Ministry of External Affairs further stated in a written submission as 
under: 
“Since the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) as a subject is dealt by the Ministry of External Affairs, an 
initial draft of Piracy Bill, 2012 was prepared by MEA.  The final draft 
legislation has been prepared on the basis of comments received from 
other concerned Ministries and Departments namely, Ministry of 
Defence, Shipping, Home Affairs, Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and 
Directorate General of Shipping and in consultation with the Deptt. of 
Legislative Affairs of the Ministry of Law & Justice.  The draft Piracy Bill 
was approved by Cabinet on 24 th January, 2012 and the B ill was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 24th April, 2012.” 

1.25 The Committee observed that the draft  Bill mainly dealt with the issue 
of p rosecution and punishment awarded to the pirates and desired to know 
the reasons behind focusing only on this limited arena  and for not bringing a 
comprehensive legislation dealing with Piracy.  The Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted the following justification: 
“The present anti-piracy Bill is designed to address the existing lacunae 
in the Indian laws regarding absence of a clear and unambiguous 
reference to the offences of maritime piracy or the absence of a 
separate domestic legislation to deal with piracy -related offences. The 
present Bill is intended to address the pressing and immediate need of 
the hour for a domestic legal framework to prosecute and punish 
pirates, in respect of the international crime of piracy.  The objective is 
to make special provisions for the suppression of piracy, criminalize the 
act of piracy and to establish universal jurisdiction for Indian Courts. 
The proposed Act also defines an act of piracy, provides for 
punishment, extradition and international cooperation.  Therefore, for 
the offences committed relating t o piracy, this legislation is a 
comprehensive one.” 
 1.26 Highlighting the role of the Ministry of External Affairs in 
implementation of the provisions of the Bill, the Ministry of External Affairs 
stated following in a written reply: 
“The Ministry of External Affairs was asked to pilot the Piracy Bill by the 
Committee of Secretaries as  its purpose is to serve as an enabling 
legislation for the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) 
into Indian domestic law and the UNCLOS is dealt by the L&T Divis ion 
of MEA.  MEA‟s role in implementation of the provisions of Piracy Bill is 

limited to aspects related to international cooperation or coordination 
with other countries.” 
1.27 When specifically asked about the  exact role of each 
Ministry/Agency/State Gov ernment in the preparation and implementation of 
the provisions of the Act , since the conduct of anti -piracy operation upto the 
stage of rel ease of pirates after completion of  the term, the Ministry of 
External Affairs submitted the following categorical reply: 
“…the Ministr y of Defence, the Indian Navy, t he Indian Coast Guard 
would be responsible for taking action to apprehend suspected pirates 
at sea, transporting them to their next port of call and handing them 
over to state law enforcing authorities fo r prosecution.  MHA and the 
respective state law enforcement authorities would then make 
arrangements for detention of the suspected pirates and bringing them 
to trial by the designated court.  If  convicted, after completion of their 
sentence the pirates w ill be deported to the  country of their origin 
through the good offices of the Ministry of External Affairs.  The 
Ministry of External Affairs would also be involved in case the 
Government of India seeks custody of a pirate held by another country 
or if a request for extradition of a pirate in our custody is received from 
another country.” 
1.28 During the course of evidence, when t he Committee desired  to know 
about the nodal agency for implemen tation of provision of the Bill, the  
representatives of Home Affairs clearly stated their position as under: 
“The limited but significant role of the Ministry of Home Affairs is in 
connection with the prosecution of the pirates and the State 
authorities, where the pirates have been tried.” 

1.29 However, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs described 
the responsibility of MHA in the matter as under: 
“.....for the implementation of the Piracy Bill, no specific role is 
envisaged for the Ministry of External Affairs. The Ministry of External 
Affairs has a clear role in matters relating to the Bill which involve 
action at the international level or interaction with other countries. But 
in terms of the implementation of this proposed Bill, since it is dealing 
with the violation of a law, the Ministry o f Home Affairs is competent 
Ministry to deal with this.”   
1.30 In the same context, when t he Committee desired to know whether the 
states have been consulted as they would be hosting the pirates and w ould 
be engaged in imprisonment in trial and prosecu tion, the Ministry of External 
Affairs submitted the following legal position in a written reply: 
“It may be noted that Piracy is a subject in the Union List.  The 
Schedule VII, List I, Entry 21 of the Constitution includes “Piracies and 
crimes committed o n the High Seas or in the air” ….Further, under 
Entry 14 of List I, entering into treaties and agreements and 
implementing of treaties is a Union subject”.  Entry 93 includes in List I 
“Offences against laws with respect of any of the matters in this List” .  
Since the Piracy Bill, 2012 has been introduced to penalize the offence 
of piracy as provided in the United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea; and also piracy being a matter covered in the Union List, 
under Article 245 and 246 of the Constitution  Parliament is empowered 
to make laws on this matter for the whole or any part of territory of 
India.  The consent or consultation with the States is not required as 
regards matters enumerated in List I.” 

1.31 During the course of evidence, when the Commit tee wanted to know 
about the role of Ministry of Defence in implementation of the provision of the 
Bill, their representative stated as under: 
“The role for Defence is limited and it is limited to action regarding 
apprehension of pirates on high seas and e xclusive economic zones. 
Then, the pirates subsequently be handed over to the law enforcement 
agencies, I think under MHA, to prosecute the pirates under the 
proposed Piracy Bill.” 
 1.32  During the course of evidence, the Foreign Secretary clearly submitted 
the following view before the Committee: 
”...in the Inter -Ministerial discussion, it was felt that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should be the nodal Ministry for piloting this legislation, 
not for dealing with the overall strategy.” 
1.33 The Committee noted that in view of the involvement of multiple 
Ministries and agencies with diverse roles, it is pertinent to have proper 
coordination, mechanism.  On being asked a bout the envisaged coordination  
mechanism, the Ministry of Defence in written reply stated as under: 
“In the absence of legal provisions so far, appropriate SOPs for 
handing over of the captured pirates to law enforcement agencies of 
the State do not exist.  There may be a need for MoD/MEA to establish 
suitable institutionalized agre ements/SOPs to enable smooth 
handling/taking over of the case between the Indian Navy (IN)/Indian 
Coast Guard (ICG) units and the designated Police Stations for 
prosecution under the Piracy Bill, 2012.” 
 

General Observations 
 
1.34 The Committee observe  that high sea piracy has as sumed a 
serious dimension in the extended Region of Indian Ocean in the recent 
times.  The Committee also feel that due to lack of any legal framework 
or absence of specific anti -piracy laws for repressing or capturing or 
trying these sea pirates, there is an urgent need of a comprehensive 
legislation on piracy which can provide the necessary framework within 
the country for prosecution of persons for piracy related crimes.  That is 
why, the Committee in th eir 10th Report (15th L.S.) had strongly  
recommended for the introduction of  such comprehensive domestic 
legislation to deal with all aspects of piracy.  The Committee  welcome 
the first initiative of the Government in this direction through 
introduction of a legislation in the form of „The Piracy Bill, 2012‟ which 
would certainly help to provide clarity in the law as well as form a sound 
basis for effective prosecution of pirates apprehended by the Indian 
authorities. The Committee can now hope that the proposed legislation 
will certainly enable the authorities to prosecute the pirates irrespective 
of their nationalities and also ensure that the acts of piracy do not go 
unpunished because of logistical, legal and diplom atic hurdles.   The 
Committee have also examined the Piracy Bill, 2012 in the backdrop of 
prevailing international situation and observe that a number of UN 
resolutions in the recent past have urged States to enact legislation on 
piracy by adopting the defi nition in the United Nations Convention on 
the Laws of the Sea ( UNCLOS).  This becomes more important while 
invoking universal jurisdiction and trying foreigners as they have to be 
tried in accordance with internationally accepted provisions of law and 
procedure.  The proposed Act will also be tr eated as the legal basis for 

extradition from the countries with whom we do not have a bilateral 
agreement to that effect.  The Committee also observe that there have 
been deliberations on the subject of an international legal mechanism to 
deal with pirates. The Committee, therefore, desire that in addition to the 
proposed anti-piracy domestic legislation, the Government should make 
all efforts to enhance international cooperation on the  issue of maritime 
piracy at various international fora as well as address the factors that 
have led to rise and spread of piracy in certain regions.  The Committee  
have a  strong view that  India must be a part of all such international 
endeavours to combat  piracy and play a proactive role in any such 
initiative e specially relating to India‟s Exclusive Economic Zone  and 
High Seas around Indian Ocean. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
1.35 The Committee note  that India is a major seafarer supplying 
nation and there is a possibility that many hijacked ships will have 
Indian seafarers.  As per the available information, there are a large 
number of Indian seafarers held hostage by the Somalian Pirates.  The 
Committee, therefore,  strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Shipping/D.G., Shipping must take adequate and proactive measures to 
ensure the welfare of Indian seafarers who are captured by pirates, 
whether on Indian ship or ships bearing foreign flags particu larly in 
terms of providing information to families, salary and ex -gratia payment.  
The Committee also recommend that efforts should be made to look 
comprehensively on the issues of regulation of ships, insurance of 
ships, rules for foreign flagships as we ll as address the issue of 
communication, intelligence, information sharing during pre and post 
piracy within and amongst various Ministries and Agencies. 

(Recommendation No. 2) 
1.36 During the course of examination, t he Committee went through 
the views, observations and suggestions received from various 
stakeholders in the matter of piracy  viz. Ministr ies of External Affairs, 
Defence, Home Affairs, Shipping, Law & Justice (Legislative Deptt. and 
Legal Affairs Deptt.) and DG, Shipping and discussed the purview of the 
Bill and the issues relating to implementation of its various provisions.  
The Committee, however, are unable to reach  any conclusion about the 
responsibility of each Ministry in the matter.  Bill has been introduced by 
the Ministry of External Affairs, but they are reluctant in being called as 
the Nodal Ministry in the matter.  The Committee, however, hope that a s 
per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961,  the 
Ministry of External Affairs have been allocated, inter alia , the Matters 
relating to Law of the Sea, including the Indian Territorial Waters, 
Contiguous Zone, Continental Shelf and exclusive Economic Zones 
(EEZ), questions of international law arisin g on the high seas including 
fishery rights; piracies and crimes committed on the High Seas or in the 
air; offences against the Law of Sovereign States committed on land or 
the high seas or in the air; legal matters concerning the International 
Seabed Area and Authority. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry of External Affairs should be clearly designated as nodal 
Ministry for piloting the Bill as well as implementation of the provisions 
of the Bill and they should take all initiatives to ensu re the preparation 
of appropriate rules, regulations and orders and issue of  Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) by the concerned Ministries to take care 
of procedural aspects and operational exigencies at the earliest after the 
enactment of the Bill .  Considering the involvement of various 

Ministries/agencies in tackling the menace of piracy and prosecution of 
pirates, the Committee strongly recommend that an effective 
coordination mechanism should be established, involving all concerned 
agencies including concerned State Governments.   
(Recommendation No. 3 ) 
1.37 The Committee are of the opinion that there should be a clear cut 
identification of the agency for each purpose in handling the issues 
relating to piracy to avoid any clash of  functional jurisdiction amongst 
various Ministries and State Governments.  The provisions demarcating 
the jurisdiction in regard to the issues of arrest, handing over, trial, and 
prosecution of the Pirates and regarding investigation and evidence 
should appropriately be incorporated in the Bill  itself or it should be 
done through  Rules made under the proposed Act or through Standard 
Operating Procedures.  There should be clarity on the issue of handing 
over of captured pirates to the concerned State Governments and 
Ministry of Home Affairs should evolve a formula to decide the particular 
state for acceptance of the pirates captured in specific areas of EEZ so 
that a smooth  handing over of pirates may take place without any 
conflict.  Ministry of Home Affairs should also  identify some prominent 
ports, special coastal police stations for the purpose of handing over 
the pirates  and all th ese should be notified through appropriate legal 
mechanism including the issue of bearing of expenditure relating to 
trial, prosecution and imprisonment.   The Committee, however, desire 
that the cost sharing formula should be prepared in consultation with  
the concerned State Governments.  If required, Ministry of Home Affairs 
should also consult the Ministry of Finance in the matter. 

(Recommendation No. 4) 
 1.38 During the course of evidence , the Committee  went into the 
minute details of the role of various Ministries of External  Affairs, 
Defence, Home Affairs  and Shipping in implementation of the Act  and 
noted that as there are many grey areas where there is possibility of 
conflict between the implementing agencies.  It is surprising to note that 
the affected State Governments were never consulted during the 
process of preparation of the Bill.  At present, all the expenses incurred 
in escorting Indian ships or ships joining the Convoy or for patrolling 
the high risk area are borne by the Minis try of Defence while once the 
pirates are captured by them they are handed over to the law 
enforcement agencies of the State for imprisonment and further trial and 
the expenditure for which has to be borne by the State Governments.  
The Committee note that  piracy is a union subject, however, the 
Committee recommend that  since the State Governments are the main 
implementing agencies of the provisions of the Act  relating to trial, 
prosecution and imprisonment ,  the concerned State Governments 
should adequatel y be consulted at stages of discussion particularly in 
finalizing the provisions relating to these issues.   
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
  

  
CHAPTER-II 
 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF „THE PIRACY BILL, 2012‟. 
 
I. Nomenclature and Preamble of the Bill 
 
  
The Preamble of the Piracy Bill, 2012 reads as under: 
 
The Piracy Bill, 2012 
 
“A Bill to make special provisions for suppression of piracy and to provide for 
punishment for the offence of piracy and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto”. 
 
WHEREAS, India is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Law 
of the Sea adopted by the United Nations on the 10th December, 1982; 
 
AND  WHEREAS,  the aforesaid convention, among other things, states that 
all  States shall co-operate to the fullest possible extent in the repression of 
piracy on high seas or any other place outside the jurisdiction of any State; 
AND WHEREAS,  it is considered necessary to implement the provisions 
relating to piracy contained in the Convention.” 
 
2.2 When the Committee desired to know about the reasons for 
nomenclature of the Bill, as the „Piracy Bill, 2012‟, the Foreign Secretary 
submitted during the course of evidence that it was done on the suggestion of 
Department of Legislative Affairs.  When the similar q uestion was raised with 
the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice, they submitted the 
following justification in a written reply: 
“Article 101 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) uses the term piracy.” 
 
2.3 The Committee in the very first instance feel that, since the main 
idea of „The Piracy Bill, 2012‟ is to provide legal framework for 

prosecution and punishment for an act of piracy within the Exclusive 
Economic Zone of India and in the high seas, the nomen clature of the 
Bill should reflect atleast both the issues.  The word „Piracy‟ may 
confuse anybody with other meanings of the word.  The Committee, 
therefore, opine that the nomenclature of the Bill should be suitably 
amended to „Anti -Maritime Piracy Bill,  2012‟.  Adding the prefix „Anti‟ 
would be in sync with the intent of the Bill related to 
repression/suppression of piracy and would also align with Anti -
Hijacking Act, 1982, while adding the word „Maritime‟ will denote the 
specific form of piracy for whic h the Bill has been prepared.   The 
Committee find it necessary particularly when in the present Hindi 
translation, the nomenclature of the Bill (Jaldasyuta) is more clear in 
describing the objective of the Bill and incorporates the term „maritime‟.  
Similarly, the Act may be called „The Anti-Maritime Piracy Act 2012‟. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
2.4 The Committee suggest that in the long title of the Bill, “A Bill to 
make special provisions for suppression of piracy”, the word 
“suppression” may be substituted w ith the word “repression” as it 
would be in sync with the term “repression of piracy” used in paragraph 
2 of the preamble of the Bill.  This would also be in line with Article 100 
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), 1982 
(“Duty to cooperate in the repression of piracy”).   
(Recommendation No. 7) 
2.5 The Committee further suggest that the alphabet “c” in the small 
case may be replaced with same in capital “C” in the word „Convention‟ 
used in paragraph 2 of the preamble of the Bill. 

(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Clause 1 – Short Title and Commencement of the Act 
 
2.6 This clause provides for the definition of the expression piracy, so as to 
include various Acts as given in 1982 UNCLOS as Acts of Piracy and reads 
as under: 
(1)  This Act may be called the Piracy Act, 2012. 
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2.7 During the course of evidence, the Foreign Secretary justified 
the definition and submitted that: 
“This definition is used to invoke universal jurisdiction under the national 
legislation for trying the suspected pirates; second, it will enable prosecution 
of pirates apprehended by the Indian Navy, irrespective of their nationality; 
third, the UN CLOS definition would also enable international cooperation 
including extradition of such piracy suspects. The enactment of the legislation 
would provide for certainty and clarity in the law as well as will give legal basis 
for prosecuting and punishing the pirates for committing the acts of piracy.” 
2.8 However, the Ministry of Home Affairs in a written submission to the 
Committee put forth their reservations about non -inclusion of entire coastal 
waters and stated as under: 
 
“The Indian Piracy Act, 2011 as  an initial step accepts the definition of Piracy 
as laid down by United Nations Convention on Law of the Seas (UNCLOS) for 
the purpose of the definition of the crime.  However, the said definition only 
includes acts on the High Seas.  It will be advisable  to include acts on Indian 
Coastal Waters in their totality.” 

2.9 On being asked about their view, the Legislative Department (Ministry 
of Law and Justice) in a written reply clarified as under: 
 „„The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Maritim e 
Navigation and Fixed Platform on Continental Shelf Act, 2002 (69 of 2002) 
extends to the whole of India including the limit of the territorial waters, 
continental shelf, the exclusive economic zone or any other maritime zone of 
India within the meaning of section 2 of Act No. 80 of 1976”.  
2.10 The Ministry of External Affairs in a written submission further stated as 
under: 
“This Ministry is of the view that there is no conflict between the „Piracy Bill, 
2012‟ and „The Suppression of Unlawful Acts agains t Safety of Maritime 
Navigation and Fixed Platform on Continental Shelf Act (Act 69 of 2002) 
(SUA)‟. 
The SUA is limited in its application to  acts of „terrorism‟ committed against 
safety of maritime navigation and fixed platforms on continental shelf and its 
jurisdiction extends to  fixed platforms on India‟s  Continental Shelf. For an 
offence committed outside India, the courts have jurisdiction under SUA only 
(under certain conditions)… 
The „Piracy Bill, 2012‟ on the other hand has a wider  jurisdiction and covers 
within its scope all the acts of „piracy‟ committed at high seas irrespective of 
the nationality of the offender, ship  or victim”. 
2.11 The Committee note that the provisions of the Bill apply to the 
activities of the pirates in high sea and do es not include the cases of 
robbery in Indian territorial water.  Though the MEA has categorically  
denied any conflict between this Bill and another Act namely, 

„Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Maritime Navigation 
and Fixed Platform on Cont inental Shelf Act (Act 69 of 2002)‟  which 
contains similar provision to deal with offences in territorial  waters.  
The Committee are of the considered view that MEA, who are piloting 
the Bill,  should ensure conformity in the present Act and the referred  
Act so that the security agency and implementation agencies do not 
have any procedural, as well as,  operational problem in implementation 
of the Act for  trial and prosecution of the pirates. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Clause 2 - Definitions 
2.12 This c lause deals with the definitions of various terms used in 
provisions of the Bill.  In sub clause (e) and (f) defines “piracy” and “pirate ship 
or aircraft", they read as under: 
 
e) "Piracy" means, — 
(i)  any illegal act of violence or detention, or any act of depredation, 
committed for private ends by the crew or the passengers of a private 
ship or a private aircraft, and directed —  
(A)  on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or against 
persons or property on board such ship or aircraft;  
(B)  against a ship, aircraft, persons or property in a place outside the 
jurisdiction of any State;  
(ii)  any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of an 
aircraft with knowledge of facts, making it a pirate ship or aircraft;  
(iii)  any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in sub-
clauses (i) and (ii);  
(iv)  any act which is deemed piratical under the customary international 
law; 
 
 
 (f)  "pirate ship or aircraft" means a ship or aircraft which, if, — 
  
(i)  it is intended by the persons in dominant control to be used for the 
purpose of committing one of the acts referred to in sub -clauses (i) to 
(iii) of clause (e);  
(ii)  it has been used to commit any such act, so long as it remains under 
the control of the persons guilty of that act. 

 
2.13 In a written submission to the Committee, Directorate General, 
Shipping suggested for inclusion of sub -clause (iv) of clause (e) in the ambit 
of clause (f) to which the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
have given their  acceptance. 
  
2.14 The Committee observe that in the sub clause (i) of clause (f) of 
clause 2 only sub -clause (i) to (iii) of clause (e) are mentioned.  In the 
Committee‟s view it is also essential to incorporate sub -clause (iv) of 
clause (e) therein, to cover all residual Acts, which is deemed piratical in 
nature and are covered under the provisions of customary International 
Law, lest they are not cover ed otherwise.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that sub -clause (iv) of clause (e) should also be incorporated 
suitably in the sub-clause (i) of clause (f). 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Clause 3- Punishment for Piracy 
2.15 The clause 3 contains provision that c ommitting an act of piracy shall 
be punished with imprisonment of life and where the accused has caused the 
death while committing the act of piracy, then he may be punished with death 
and in addition, restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the commission 
of the offence and reads as under: 
 
 
Whoever commits an act of piracy shall be punished with imprisonment for life 
except where the accused has caused death in committing the act of piracy or 
attempt thereof in which case he may be punished with death and in addition 
the Designated Court may  also subject to any restitution or forfeiture of 
property involved in the commission of the offence. 
 

2.16 The Committee took serious note of the provision for „death penalty‟. 
However, the Ministry of Extern al Affairs while clarifying on the need to 
incorporate the provision of „death penalty‟ in the Bill, the stated as under: 
“….death penalty is a political decision because whether (we) still retain in our 
statute book, death penalty is there.  It was suggested by the Legislative 
Department that if the acts of pirates cause a death then equivalent 
punishment should also be there and that is why death penalty has been 
provided. So, Ministry of External Affairs did not have any strong position on 
this.  This was suggested by the Legislative Department..” 
 
2.17 On the issue of problems arising in extradition of pirates due to capital 
punishment, during the course of evidence, the representative of the Ministry 
of External Affairs stated as under: 
“....many European countries do not extradite people.  In our Extradition Act, 
we have a provision where we give an undertaking that if the requested State 
says that death penalty will not be awarded then we can give an assurance 
that death penalty will not be awarded.” 
 
2.18 In another written reply the Ministry of External Affairs stated the 
following facts about the current system of extradition of Pirates as under: 
“According to this Ministry‟s information, India has not sought extradition of 
pirates so far.  Sin ce, piracy is considered to be an international crime 
amenable to universal jurisdiction under international law any State can 
request extradition of a pirate in the custody of another State in accordance 
with its national laws.”   
 
2.19 Reiterating the po ints during the course of evidence, the 

Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that in the Convention, 
there is a provision saying that the State will punish according to its own law 
and elaborated  upon Section 396 of IPC, „dacoity with murd er‟ which has 
similarity  with Clause 3 of the Bill.  
 
2.20 However, when the Committee expressed their concern about the 
implications arising out of the provision for „death penalty‟ which might hinder 
international cooperation and extradition, the Minist ry of External Affairs 
clarified the position in a written submission as under: 
“The UN Convention of the Law of Sea (UNCLOS) 1982, does not have any 
provision on extradition.   The proposed Anti -Piracy Act will be treated as the 
legal basis for extradition  to countries with which we do not have a bilateral 
agreement to that effect. The offences under this section shall be deemed to 
have been included as extraditable offences and in all the extradition treaties 
made by India.”  
 
2.21 During the course of evidence, Foreign Secretary submitted as under: 
“....(we) have to anticipate such contingencies also where we would be 
requesting a Foreign State, ...there are provisions already existing by which 
we give an assurance that even notwithstanding the prevalence of Indian law 
having the „death penalty‟ in it, in cases we are dealing with under the 
extradition, we will not apply it.  This has been done in conjunction with the 
courts.” 
2.22  However, the Committee also questioned whether the „death penalty‟ 
could be substituted with life imprisonment because, if a „pirate‟ is given life 
imprisonment and another person (perpetrator of crime) is given death 
penalty, then there may be some discrepancy in the law.  

 
2.23 This domestic legislation on piracy was introduced  to fill the legal 
vacuum and provide legal framework within the country.  However, the 
problem of piracy is an international phenomenon and many States are 
involved in combating piracy and safeguarding high seas.  The pirates 
of various nationalities are captured during the course of fighting 
against them.  The provision of clause 3 states that whosoever commits 
an act of piracy shall be punished with imprisonment for life except 
where the accused has caused death in committing the act of piracy or 
attempt thereof in which case he may be punished with „death‟.  There is 
an apparent involvement of issue of extradition of captured pirates from 
foreign countries in most of the cases.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the provision of death penalty may be reviewed in the light 
of international nature of crime and involvement of international actors 
and the past experience of Government of India having faced with 
refusals to extradite accused/criminals in view of existence of „death 
penalty‟ clause in the Indian Law. 
(Recommendation No. 11)  
2.24 The Committee further opine that in clause 3 (Punishment of 
Piracy), after the words (in line 4) “and in addition the designated court 
may also be subject”, the words “such person” may be added to bring 
specificity to the proposed action of restitution or forfeiture of property 
of that entity. 
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
 
Clause 4 – Attempt to commit piracy 
 
 
 
2.25 This clause contains provision for punishable offence with 

imprisonment for a term extendable to fourteen y ears with fine, it reads as 
under: 
An attempt to commit piracy or any unlawful attempt intended to aid, abet, 
counsel or  procure for the commission of an offence of piracy shall also 
constitute an offence and is liable on conviction to be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
 
2.26  The Committee note that c lause 4 of the Bill makes a provision of 
punishment for any attempt to commit the Act of Piracy.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that to reconfirm the mandatory nature of 
the provision  the word “is” may be substituted by the word “be”. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 
Clause 6 – Conferment of power of investigation 
2.27 This clause empowers the Central Government to issue Gazette 
Notification enabling the State Governments to exercise the powers under the 
Act, and it reads as under: 
1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, for the purposes of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by notification , confer on any Gazetted officer 
of that Government or of a State Government the powers of arrest of any 
person, investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under the 
said Code. 
 
(2)  The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to prosecute—  
(a) any person who apprehended by or in the custody of the coast guard 
vessel or an Indian naval warship regardless of the nationality or 
citizenship of such person  and is accused of committing an act 
punishable under this Act;  
(b)  when a person is accused of committing an act of piracy is a citizen 
ornational of India or is a resident foreign national in India or is a 
stateless person;  
(c)  when an offence under this Act is committed on board a foreign flag 
ship, where the law enforcement or other public authority of the port or 

place where the ship is located has been requested to intervene by the 
State whose flag the vessel is entitled to fly, or by the owner of the ship 
or its master or other person on board the ship:  
 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply if the ship in 
question is a warship or auxiliary ship or is a government owned ship 
employed in non -commercial service and under the control of the 
government authorities at the time of the act of piracy otherwise  giving 
rise to jurisdiction to the Court. 
 
2.28  The significant aspect of the Bill is that it seeks to allow in 
absentia, prosecution of person involved in piracy, and permits the 
prosecution of stateless person, as many pirates are officially stateless.  
 
2.29 On the particular issue of identification of pirates for the purpose of trial 
and prosecution, the Ministry of Home Affairs in written reply submitted as 
under: 
“It is always the effort of Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard to immediately try to 
take down exact grid location of the seizure of mother ships of the pirates and 
to identify the persons involved in the act of piracy.” 
 
2.30 In this context, the Ministry  of Defence in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“It is a practice to note down the exact location whenever pirates are 
apprehended.  On apprehension, the pirates are photographed and searched 
for any means of identification like ration card, phone bill  etc. However, as 
regards bio-metric identification on land, they referred to the Home Ministry to 
take necessary steps.” 
 
 
 
2.31 In a written submission, the Ministry of External Affairs while clarifying 
about the main investigation agency identified for the purpose and application 

of all the provisions of criminal jurisprudence, stated as under: 
“Under the Bill, the Central Government may, by notification, confer on any 
Gazetted Officer of that Government or of a S tate Government, the powers of 
arrest of any person, investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police 
officer under the said Code. The Provisions of CrPC and Indian Evidence Act 
will apply to it mutatis mutandis.”  
2.32 On the power of arrest by Gazet ted Officers, the Ministry of External 
Affairs in their written reply stated as under: 
“Under Clause No. 6 (I), the Central Government would notify appropriate 
Central or State Government Gazetted Officers to deal with piracy offences 
and only such notified Officers would be able to exercise the powers of arrest, 
investigation and prosecution in relation to offence of piracy.  Once the Bill is 
passed, Ministry of Home Affairs will prescribe the procedure in this regard.” 
  
2.33 The Committee were further in formed about designation of Marine 
Police Stations for the purpose. The Committee desired to know whether the 
provisions of the Bill are adequate to handle the issue of arrest, handing, trial 
and prosecution of the Pirates or any other Rules or Standard Op erating 
Procedures (SOPs) are proposed to be prepared/issued to implement the 
provisions of this Bill.  The Ministry of External Affairs in their written reply 
stated as under: 
“The Bill provides that for the prosecution of the offence of piracy, the 
provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code shall apply to the proceedings 
before a designated court.  Therefore, the arrest and prosecution of pirates 
would be done as provided in the Criminal Procedure Code.” 
 
2.34 During the course of evidence, the representat ive of Ministry of 
Defence submitted as under: 
“There is no Standard Operating Procedure as far as the taking of pirates to a 

particular place is concerned.  When the Commanding Officer encounters a 
situation like this, then he has to apprehend pirates.  H e will have certain 
considerations in his mind.  First of all, he would like to hand over the pirates 
at the earliest.  While doing so, he would also like to consider that he must 
take the pirates to a place where they can be handed over smoothly.  He can 
be near to the minor port but local administration may not be in a position to 
take over those pirates.  So, such are the considerations which will come in 
the mind of the Commanding Officer.”  
 
2.35 Further, representative of the Ministry of Defence  stressed  upon the 
need to have a mechanism for handing over these pirates and other such 
anti-social elements to designated Officers / Offices. This was suggested to 
MEA that creation of this mechanism in consultation with the MEA, MHA and 
MoD may be carried out.  
  
 
2.36 Clause 6 of the Bill deals with the issue of arrest of the pirates, 
which provides that the Government may, by notification, confer on any 
Gazetted Officer of the Central Government or the State Government the 
power of arrest, investigation and prosecution exercisable by police 
officers.  The Committee desire that such officers should be identified 
from amongst the officers who are capable to handle such complicated 
cases properly under the provisions of IPC and CrPC in coordination 
with Defence personnel who have handed over the pirates.   The 
Committee would also recommend that all necessary steps should be 
taken by the concerned Ministries/authorit ies for an Inter -Agency 
Coordination for investigation, prosecution and providing evidence 
during the trial process.  The Committee are of the considered opinion 

that for that purpose necessary Rules and Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) for each steps ranging from arrest of pirates, 
identification, handing over, imprisonment, prosecution to handing over 
to country of origin after the punishment etc. should be evolved and 
notified through appropriate methods at the earliest for an effective 
implementation of the provisions of the Bill.   
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Clause 7 – Presumption clause 
2.37 Provides that the Designated Court shall presume commission of an 
offence, if any of the acts listed under this clause are committed, unless 
contrary is proved, s hifts the burden of proof to the accused and reads as 
under:  
In any prosecution of an offence under this Act, if it is proved—  
(a) that the arms, ammunition, explosives and other equipments were 
recovered from the possession of the accused and there is a reason 
to believe that such arms, ammunition, explosives or other 
equipments of similar nature were used in the commission of the 
offence; or 
(b) that there is evidence of use of the force, threat of force or any other 
form of intimidation caused to the crew or passengers of the ship in 
connection with the commission of the offence; or 
(c) that there is evidence of an intended threat of using bomb, arms, 
firearms, explosives  or committing any form of violence against the 
crew, passengers or cargo of  a ship, the  Designated Court shall 
presume, unless the contrary is proved that the accused had 
committed such offence and the burden of proof that the accused has 
not committed such offence shall shift to the accused. 
 
 
 
2.38 The Committee note  that there is a significant departure in the 
approach of the Act as per clause 7(c), the Bill shifts the burden of proof 

on the accused. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Law 
and Justice must be consulted to avoid any conflict with the In dian 
Criminal Law System due to incorporation of this provision.   
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Clause 8 – Designated Courts 
 
2.39 The clause states that for the purposes of providing speedy trial of the 
offences under this Act, the Central Government, in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by notification shall specify one or 
more Court of Session in the State as Designated Court and also the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court, it reads as under: 
(1)  For the purpose of providing for speedy trial of the offences under this Act, 
the Central Government shall, after consulting the Chief Justice of the 
concerned High Court, by notification, specify— 
 
(i)  one or more Court of Session in the State, to be Designated Court for 
the purposes of this Act; and 
 
(ii) the territorial jurisdiction of each such Court.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, a Designated Court 
shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial on a day-to-day basis. 
 
2.40 While explaining the position further, the Ministry of External Affairs in 
their written reply stated as under: 
“Clause 8 provides that the Central Government after consulting the 
Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, may, by notification, specify 
one or more “Court of Session” in the State to be the designated court 
for the purposes of this Act and also specify the territorial jurisdiction of 
each such court.  O nce the Bill is passed, “Court of Session” will be 
specified along with their territorial jurisdiction for the purposes of this 
Act which will prevent conflict on the issue of jurisdiction amongst the 
states.” 
 

2.41 On further query about the consultation with High Courts regarding 
formalities for establishment of trial court under the Act, the Ministry of 
External Affairs in their written reply stated as under: 
“The High Courts have not been consulted at this stage….. once the Bill is 
passed, the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court would be consulted for 
designating or specifying one or more “Court of Session” and their territorial 
jurisdiction” 
 
2.42 The Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice further clarified 
that: 
“Clause 8 of the Bill m akes provisions for specifying of one or more court of 
sessions in a State. Under the General Clauses Act, 1897 State includes a 
Union Territory under sub-clause (b) of clause (58) of section 3.  Provision for 
Designated Court for coastal State/UT is a matter of policy.” 
2.43 In regard to clause 8 concerning the provision of „designated 
court‟,  the Committee are of the opinion that the process to designate 
or specify the „Court of Sessions‟ and their territorial jurisdiction should 
be clearly defined to av oid/prevent any conflict on the issue of 
jurisdiction amongst the States.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
at least one designated court should be identified in each coastal state 
so that all such cases may be taken up in the designated court to 
facilitate and fast track the trial process.  The Committee also desire that 
the provision in this regard should also be incorporated in the 
subsequent Rules immediately after passing of the Bill. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
Clause 13 – Arrest and Seizure of Property 
 

2.44 The clause empowers the State to arrest and seize property in the high 
seas.  It can only be carried out by warships or military aircraft or ships/aircraft 
clearly marked for that purpose, it reads as under: 
(1)  “On the high seas, or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any 
State, every State may seize a pirate ship or aircraft, or a ship or aircraft 
taken by piracy and under the control of pirates, and arrest the persons 
and seize the property on board. 
 
(2)  A seizure on account of piracy may be carried out only by warships or 
military aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable 
as being on government service and authorised to that effect.” 
 
2.45 While further elaborating upon the provision, during the course of 
evidence, the representative of Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under: 
“The sub-section 2 says that a seizure on account of piracy may be carried 
out only by warships or military aircraft or other ship or ships clearly marked 
and identifiable as being on Government service and authorized to that effect. 
So, whether it is Navy or otherwise, if they come across piracy, they could 
immediately catch hold of that under the sections which the Central 
Government will notify … than they could then be handed over to investigation 
authorities”. 
 
 
 
2.46 In this context, the representative of Ministry of Shipping placed before 
the Committee that the Bill could perhaps also cover immunity for acts done in 
good faith.  Though, this is inherent in any law, but  even if it is made explicit, 
as in the case of aviation sector, in the Anti -Hijacking Act, that covers 

immunity for any act done in good faith. Discussing an earlier draft of the Bill 
and reiterating to include provision explicitly in the Act, he further added as 
under: 
 “In the draft Piracy Act 2011, which was circulated earlier by the MEA, 
that included clause 5, which has protection of action taken in good 
faith. It basically says two things:  
The first thing said is that any act done in good faith to rescue a person 
or to recover stolen property or to regain lawful control of a ship or 
maritime structure. The second thing is, an act done in good faith to 
protect the person, ship or related property against an act of piracy. 
These are the two things which were included as acts in good faith.”  
 
2.47 Considering the nature of the crime of maritime piracy and efforts 
made to combat piracy on high seas, the Committee are of the view that 
the proposed Bill must include provision for legal immunity for acts 
done in good faith.  Though, such a provision may be inherent in the 
Bill, but the Committee strongly recommend that such provision must 
be explicitly incorporated in the body of the main Bill and that the 
security personnel duly authorized by the Governmen t shall be covered 
with certain immunity provisions.  
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 
 
 
2.48 The Committee, therefore, approve, “The Piracy Bill, 2012” subject 
to the appropriate inclusion of suggestion/recommendations made by 

the  Committee  in the preceding pa ragraphs  in the current Bill or 
through other appropriate  methods like Rules or Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs).  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                      ANANTH 
KUMAR, 
26 July, 2012                                                           
Chairman,  
04 Shravana, 1934 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on 
External Affairs 
  

Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 16th MAY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room „E‟, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S. Alagiri 
3. Dr. Bhola Singh 
4. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
5. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri H.K. Dua 
7. Dr. Najma Heptulla 
8. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10. Dr. Karan Singh 
      
Sl. No.  Name & Designation 
 
        
 1.      Shri Ranjan Mathai                     - 
 2.     Shri Asoke Kumar Mukerji          - 
 3.     Shri Pavan Kapoor                       - 
4.     Dr. Neeru Chadha                      
5.     Dr. B.M. Vinod Kumar                  
 6.     Shri Sanjay Rana                        - 
 
Foreign Secretary 
Special Secretary 
JS (UNP) 
JS (L&T) 
JS (Parl. & VIP) 
Director (UNP) 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri K.D. Muley                - Director 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Additional Director 
3. Shri A. Sivanandam                 - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, 
Secretary and other officers of Ministry of External Affairs and drew their atte ntion 
towards Direction 55 (I) of  the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.   The    
Chairman also welcomed and congratulated Smt. Najma Heptulla for being 
nominated to the Standing Committee on External Affairs.   He further informed the 
Committee that the Piracy Bill 2012, as introduced in Lok Sabha was referred to 
Standing Committee on External Affairs for examination and to Report thereupon. 
3. After introductions, Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee on the Piracy Bill , 2012.  
The Problem of piracy in the areas immediately close to India‟s Exclusive Economic Zone 
was elaborated upon.  The purpose for enacting new domestic legislation on Piracy for 
more effective prosecution of pirates apprehended by Indian Navy and the Coast Guard 
was discussed. 
 
4. During deliberations, the Members of the Committee inter-alia raised various qu eries 
related to the subject particularly, MEA‟s involvement in piloting the Bill, nomenclature of 
the Bill, geographical scope of the Bill, issue of death penalty under clause 3 and its 
ramifications for  extradition of the pirates, issue of child pirates  and cost bearing and 
sharing mechanism for prosecution and imprisonment etc. Other issues discussed 
included the limitations of existing  legislations in handling the pirates , structural 
arrangements and institutional framework to deal with the issue of ma ritime piracy, 
invasion of Indian territorial water, provision of immunity for Indian Sailors, Licensing of 
vessels, situation in Somalia and role of IOC -ARC and Afro Asian consultative Committee 
on the issue. 
 
5. In view of involvement of other Ministries , the Committee decided to take evidence of 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry o f Shipping, Directorate General  
Shipping alongwith Ministry of External Affairs in the next sitting of the Committee.   
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 A verbatim proceeding of the sitting has been kept on record. 

Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 21ST  MAY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
Present 
Dr. Karan Singh  –  In the Chair 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
5. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
6. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
Rajya Sabha 
7.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla 
8. Dr. Bharatkumar B.Raut 
9. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
10. Shri Tarun Vijay 
  
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Sl. No. Name & Designation 
 
1. Shri Ranjan Mathai  - Foreign Secretary  
2. Shri Pavan Kapoor  - JS (UNP) 
4. Dr. M. Gandhi   - JS (L&T) 
5. Shri B.M. Vinod Kumar - Dir. (Parl. & VIP) 
6. Shri Sanjay Rana  - Dir. (UNP) 
 
 MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri E. Ahmad    - Secretary (BM) 
2. Shri Dharmendra Sharma  - JS (Internal Security) 
3. Shri Rakesh Singh   - JS (Border Management) 
 
   
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 

 
1. Shri Shashi Kant Sharma  - Secretary 
2. Shri Shankar Aggarwal  - Addl. Secretary  
3. Shri Ram Subhag Singh  - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Manish Pathak   - Director 
5. Vice Admiral Satish Soni  - DCNS 
6. Capt. Sunil Balakrishnan  - DNO (OPS) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar Sinha  - Secretary (Shipping) 
2. Shri Satish B. Agnihotri   - Director General (Shipping) 
3. Shri Munish Chandra Jauhari - JS (Shipping) 
4. Shri L.K. Panda   - Principal Officer, MMD, Mumbai 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Additional Director 
2. Shri A. Sivanandam                 - Under Secretary 
 
2. Hon‟ble Chairman (Shri Ananth Kumar) could not attend the sitting of the 
Committee due to some urgent engagement.  The Committee therefore, chose Dr. Karan 
Singh to act as Chairman for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home 
Affairs and Ministry of Shipping and drew their attention towards confidential nature 
of the sitting. Thereafter, the Chairman invited representatives to submit their views 
on the various dimensions of the „Piracy Bill, 2012‟.   
4. The Foreig n Secretary submitted the basic purpose of the Piracy Bill and 
clearly stated that the Bill was introduced basically to fill an existing gap in domestic 
legislation to deal with piracy related offence and was not intended to be a 
comprehensive anti-piracy strategy. 
 
5. Secretary, Shipping submitted that the proposed legislation fills an important 
requirement and extends the jurisdiction from the baseline in the sea and covers 
entire Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) area. 

6. Secretary, Defence, supported the Bi ll and also elaborated upon the 
respective roles of the  Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard.  Another representative 
of the Ministry of Defence elaborated upon the international coordinated efforts to 
curb piracy. 
7. Representative of Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the proposed legal 
framework tries to synchronize legal framework with United Nations Convention on 
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and it will certainly help to deal the maritime security 
in more comprehensive way with inter -ministerial, inter-orgnizational and multi -level 
framework.   
8. Other issues discussed included provision of legal immunity to 
Government/Defence Personnel in action at sea/on board, applicability of IPC and 
Cr. PC, provision of death penalty, consultation with High Courts for establishment of 
designated courts, issues of coastal security, deployment of armed guards and 
private armed guards on ships and  international cooperation at high seas, alongwith 
role of individual Ministry in implementation of the Act. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 A verbatim proceeding of the sitting has been kept on record. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendix-III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 26TH JUNE, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room 53, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  – Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
7. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard 
9. Shri Murli Deora 
10. Shri H.K. Dua 
11. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla 
12. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
13. Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
 MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Sl. No. Name & Designation 
 
1. Shri Asoke Mukerji  - Special Secretary (POI & IO) 
2. Shri R.K. Sachdeva  - JS(Parl & VIP) 
3. Shri Pavan Kapoor  - JS (UNP) 
4. Dr. Neeru Chadha  - JS (L&T) 
5. Shri J.P. Meena  - Dir. (Parl. & ENGMT) 
6. Shri Sanjay Rana  - Dir. (UNP) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Smt. B. Bhamathi   - Addl. Secretary , MHA 

2. Shri Dharmendra Sharma  - JS (IS-I), MHA 
3. Shri S. Suresh Kumar   - JS (CS), MHA 
4. Shri M. Gopal Reddy   - JS (IS-II), MHA 
5. Shri S.K. Trivedi   - JDD, IB 
 
  MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Shankar Aggarwal  - Addl. Secretary  
2. Shri Ram Subhag Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Manish Pathak   - Director 
4. Shri P.K. Chatterjee   - DCNS 
5. Shri R. Adm B.K. Verma  - ACNS (IWOPS) 
  
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar Sinha  - Secretary (Shipping) 
2. Shri Vijay Chhibber    - Special Secretary &  
       Financial Advisor (Shipping) 
3. Shri Munish Chandra Jauhari - JS (Shipping) 
4. Shri Deepak Shetty   - Joint Director General of Shipping 
5. Capt. M.M. Saggi   - Nautical Advisor to Govt. of India 
6. Capt. Harish Khatri   - DDG (TECH) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 (Legislative Department) 
 
1. Shri V.K. Bhasin   - Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh   - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri K.V. Kumar   - Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
(Department of Legal Affairs) 
 
1. Dr. B.A. Agarwal  - Secretary  ( Deptt. of Legal Affairs) 
2. Dr. S.S. Charhar  - Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Additional Director 
2. Shri A. Sivanandam                 - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee  and 
Secretaries/Officers of  the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Defence,  Ministry of Shipping , Legislative Department and Department 
of Legal Affairs  from the Ministry of Law and Justice and drew their attention 
towards confidential nature of the sitting. Thereafter, the Chairman invited 

representatives from Ministry of Law & Justice to submit their views on the „Piracy Bill, 
2012‟ and its implementation. 
3. During the course of evidence, the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs clarified 
that it was not the nodal Ministry for prosecution of the pirates and stated that prosecution is 
entirely within the State‟s jurisdiction. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of Defence submitted that the role of 
Defence is limited to action regarding apprehension of pirates on high seas and Exclusive 
Economic Zones.  He also informed that Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for dealing with 
piracy incidents by the Indian Navy is under preparation.  Another representative of the same 
Ministry elaborated upon the lack of SOP for taking pirates to a particular place and narrated 
his past experiences with local administration in this regard. 
5. The representative of Ministry of External Affairs stated that no specific role is 
envisaged for the Ministry in implementation of the Piracy Bill.  The role of Ministry is in 
matters relating to the Bill whic h involve action at the international level or interaction with 
other countries but for implementation of Bill, the Ministry of Home Affairs is the competent 
Ministry. 
6. Other issues discussed involved jurisdiction of cases for trials, need for coordinati on 
mechanism, consultation with State Government and Ministry of Finance, cost bearing and 
cost sharing for trial, prosecution and imprisonment of Pirates, role of coastal police stations 
and provisions of death penalty and its implications for extradition of pirates. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 A verbatim proceeding of the sitting has been kept on record. 
  
 
  

Appendix-IV 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 26TH JULY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  – Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri P. Karunakaran 
5. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
6. Shri H.K. Dua 
7. Shri K.P. Ramalingam 
8. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
9. Dr. Karan Singh 
10. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
11. Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Additional Director 
2. Shri A. Sivanandam                 - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 

3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on „The Piracy Bill, 
2012‟. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
The Committee adopted the draft Report with minor modifications. 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report 
incorporating the suggestions mad e by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 Annexure 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 34 of 2012 
 
 
THE PIRACY BILL, 2012 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to make special provisions for suppression of piracy and to provide for punishment for 
the offence of piracy and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
WHEREAS India is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
adopted by the United Nations on the 10th December, 1982; 
 
AND  WHEREAS  the aforesaid convention, among other things, states that all  States 
shall co-operate to the fullest possible extent in the repression of piracy on high seas or any 
other place outside the jurisdiction of any State; 
 
AND  WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to implement the provisions  relating to 
piracy contained in the Convention. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Piracy Act, 2012. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title  and 
commence -
ment .  

 
 
Definitions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punishment 
for  piracy. 
 
 
 
 
 
Attemp t  to 
commit  
pirac y. 
 
 
 
Punishment  
to  accomplice 
to   piracy. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the contest otherwise requires,— 
 
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
 
(b) "Convention State" means a State party to the United Nations Convention 
of the Law of the Sea 1982; 
 
(c) "Designated Court" means a Court of Session specified as a Designated 
Court under this Act; 
 
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(e) "piracy" means, — 
(i) any illegal act of violence or detention, or any act of depredation, 
committed for private ends by the crew or the passengers of a private ship or a 
private aircraft, and directed — 
 
(A) on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or against 
persons or property on board such ship or aircraft; 
 
(B) against a ship, aircraft, persons or property in a place outside 
the jurisdiction of any State; 
 
(ii) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of an 
aircraft with knowledge of facts, making it a pirate ship or aircraft; 
 
(iii) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in 
sub-clauses (i) and (ii); 
 
(iv) any act which is deemed piratical under the customary international 
law; 
 
(f) "pirate ship or aircraft" means a ship or aircraft which, if, — 
 
(i) it is intended by the persons in dominant control to be used for the 
purpose of committing one of the acts referred to in sub -clauses (i) to (iii) of 
clause (e); 
 
(ii) it has been used to commit any such act, so long as it remains under 
the control of the persons guilty of that act. 
 
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code or the Code shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
those Codes. 
 
(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in any area, shall, in relation 
to that area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding la w, if an y, in force in that 
area. 
 
3. Whoever commits an act of piracy shall be punished with imprisonment for life 
except where the accused has caused death in committing the act of piracy or attempt 
thereof in which case he may be punished with death and in addition the Designated Court 
may also subject to any restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the commission of 
the offence. 
 
4.  An attempt to commit piracy or any unlawful attempt intended to aid, abet, counsel 
or procure for the commission of an offence of piracy shall also constitute an offence and is 
liable on conviction to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
5. Every person who is an accomplice to an act of piracy shall be liable on conviction 
to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
 
 
2  of 1974.  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of  1860.  
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
45  

 
 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, for the purposes of this Act, 
the Central Governmen t may, by notification , confer on any Gazetted officer of that 
Government or of a State Government the powers of arrest of any person, investigation and 
prosecution exercisable by a police officer under the said Code. 
 
5 (2) The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to prosecute— 
 
(a) any person who apprehended by or in the custody of the coast guard 
vessel or an Indian naval warship regardless of the nationality or citizenship of such 
person and is accused of committing an act punishable under this Act; 
 
(b) when a person is accused of committing an act of piracy is a citizen or 
10 national of India or is a resident foreign national in India or is a stateless person; 
 
(c) when an offence under this Act is committed on board a foreign flag ship, 
where the law enforcement or other public authority of the port or place where the 
ship is located has been requested to intervene by the State whose flag the vessel is 
entitled to fly, or by the owner of the ship or its master or other person on board the 
15 ship: 
 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply if the ship in question is a 
warship or auxiliary ship or is a government owned ship employed in non -commercial 
service and under the control of the government authorities at the time of the act of piracy 
otherwise giving rise to jurisdiction to the Court. 
 
20  (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the Designated Court shall have the jurisdiction to try a proclaimed offender in absentia. 
 
7. In any prosecution of an offence under this Act, if it is proved— 
 
(a) that the arms, ammunition, explosives and other equipments were recovered 
from the possession of the accused and there is a reason to believe that such arms, 
25 ammunition, explosives or other equipments of similar nature were used in the 
commission of the offence; or 
 
(b) that there is evidence of use of the force, threat of force or any other form of 
intimidation caused to the crew or passengers of  the ship in connection with the 
commission of the offence; or 
 
30  (c) that there is evidence of an intended threat of using bomb, arms, firearms, 
explosives or committing any form of violence against the crew, passengers or cargo 
of a ship, 
 
the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved that the accused had 
committed such offence and the burden of proof that the accused has not committed such 
35 offence shall shift to the accused. 
 
8. (1) For the purpose of providing for speedy trial of the offences under this Act, the 
Central Government shall, after consulting the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, 
by notification, specify— 
 
(i) one or more Court of Session in the State, to be Designated Court for the 
40 purposes of this Act; and 
 
(ii) the territorial jurisdiction of each such Court. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, a Designated Court shall, as far 
as practicable, hold the trial on a day-to-day basis. 
 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code,— 
 
45  (a) all offences under this Act shall be triable only by the Designated Court 
specified under sub-section (1) of section 8; 
Conferment 
of power  of 
investigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presumption.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designated  
Courts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Offences 
triable  by 
Designated 
Court.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applicatio n  of 
Code in 
proceedings 
before a 
Designated  
Court.  
 
 
(b) where a person accused of or suspected of the commission of an offence 
under this Act is produced before a Magistrate under sub-section (2) or sub-section 
(2A) of section 167 of the Code, such Magistrate may authorise the detention of such 
person in such custody as he thinks fit for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the 
whole where such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven days in the whole 5 
where such Magistrate is an Executive Magistrate: 
 
Provided that where such Magistrate considers — 
 
(i) when such person is forwarded to him under this sub-section; or 
 
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention 
authorised by him, that the detention of such person is unnecessary, 10  
 
he shal l orde r suc h perso n to be produce d befor e the Designate d Cour t having 
jurisdiction; 
 
(c) the Designated Court may exercise, in relation to the person produced before 
him under clause (b), the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a 
case may exercise under section 167 of the Code, in relation to an accused person in 15  
such case who has been forwarded to him under that section; 
 
(d) a Designated Court may, upon a perusal of a complaint made by an officer of 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, authorised in 
this behalf, take cognizance of that offence without the accused being committed to 
it for trial. 20  
 
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an 
offence other than an offence under this Act, with which the accused may, under the Code, 
be charged at the same trial. 
 
10. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code shall apply to 
the proceedings before a Designated Court and the person conducting a prosecution before 25 
a Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor appointed under the said 
Code. 
 
Provision s  as 
to bail. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provisio n as 
to  extradition.  
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an 
offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own 
bond unless— 
 
(a) the Publi c Prosecuto r has been give n an opportunit y to oppos e the 
application for such release; and 
 
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application,  the Court is satisfied 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing  that he is not guilty of such offence 
and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. 
 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of 
the High Court regarding grant of bail under section 439 of the Code. 
 
12. (1) The offence under this Act shall be deemed to have been included as extraditable 
offences and provided for in all extraditable treaties made by India. 
 
(2) In the absence of a bilateral extradition treaty, the offences under this Act shall be 
extraditable offences between India and other Convention States on the basis of reciprocity. 
 
(3) For the purposes of application of the provisions of the Extradition Act, 1962 to 
the offences under this Act, any ship registered in a Convention State shall, at any time 
while that ship is plying, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that Convention State 
whether or not it is for the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other countr y. 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
34 of  1962.  
 
 
45  

 
 
 
apply. 
 
 
(4) For the purposes of this section, the provisions of section 188 of the Code shall 
 
 
13. (1) On the high seas, or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any State, 
 
 
 
 
 
Arrest and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
80 of  1976. 
every State may seize a pirate ship or aircraft, or a ship or aircraft taken by piracy and under 
the control of pirates, and arrest the persons and seize the property on board. 
 
(2) A seizure on account of piracy may be carried out only by warships or military 
aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on government 
service and authorised to that effect. 
 
14. (1) For the purposes of geographic scope, the provisions of this Act shall also 
extend to the exclusive economic zone of India. 
 
(2) In this section, the expression "exclusive economic zone of India" shall have the 
same meaning as assigned to it in section 7 of the Territorial Water, Continental Shelf, 
Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976. 
seizure of 
propert y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Geographic 
scope.  

56 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
Since 2008, a major spurt in attacks by pirates, particularly in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia, 
has seriously affected the safety and security of maritime traffic and personnel plying between Asia and Europe 
and the east coast of Africa. With the enhanced naval presence in the Gulf of Aden, pirates have been shifting 
their area of operations eastwards and southwards and some piracy incidents have also taken place close to 
India’s Exclusive Economic Zone on its western coast. The Indian Navy and the Coast Guard have enhanced 
their vigil and successfully conducted several operations against pirates. As a result, a number of Somali pirates 
are presently in the custody of Indian police authorities and are undergoing trial. 
 
2. India does not have a separate domestic legislation on piracy. Prosecution for piracy as a crime has not 
been included in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The provisions of the 
Indian Penal Code pertaining to armed robbery and the Admiralty  jurisdiction of certain courts have been 
invoked in the past to prosecute pirates apprehended by the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard but in the 
absence of a clear and unambiguous reference to the offence of maritime piracy in Indian law, problems are 
being faced in ensuring prosecution of the pirates. 
 
3. Given the increasin g incidenc e of piracy, includin g within India’s Exclusive Economic Zone, and the 
increasing number of pirates apprehended by the Indian Naval forces, a need was felt for a domestic legislation 
on piracy which could provide the neces- sary legal framework within the country for prosecution of persons for 
piracy related crimes. 
 
4. In the above backdrop, it is felt necessary to introduce an overarching legislation which would provide 
certainty and clarity in the law as well as sound basis for effective prosecution of pirates apprehended by the 
Indian authorities irrespective of their nationali- ties. It would also promote the safety and security of India’s 
maritime trade including the safety of our vessels and crew members. 
 
5. The Piracy Bill, 2012, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 
(a)  to define the expression “piracy” so as to include various acts, as given in 
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as acts of piracy; 
(b)  to provide punishment for an act of piracy, attempt to commit piracy and accomplice to piracy; 
(c)  confers power on any Gazetted officer of the Central Government or of a State Government 
with the powers of arrest of any person, investigation and prosecu- tion exercisable by a police officer under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure; 
(d)  to specify by the Central Government after consultation with the Chief Justice of concerned 
High Court, by notification, one or more Court of Session in the State to be Designated Court for 
providing speedy trial of the offences under the proposed legislation and the territorial jurisdiction of each 
such Court; 
(e) provides for application of Code of Criminal Procedure in the proceedings before a Designated 
Court; provisions relating to bail of accused persons; 
(f) provision as to extradition of persons involved in an act of piracy; 
(g)  for the purpose of geographic scope, to extend the proposed legislation to the exclusive 
economic zone of India. 
 
5. The proposed Bill strives to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; S. M. KRISHNA. 
The 21st March, 2012. 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 

57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
— — — — — 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to make special provisions for suppression of piracy and to provide for punishment for the offence of piracy 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
— — — — — 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri S.M. Krishna, Minister of External Affairs) 
 
 
 
 
 
GMGIPMRND—4855LS(S3)—29-03-2012. 

58 
 
LOK SABHA 
------ 
 
CORRIGENDUM 
 
TO 
 
THE PIRACY BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
 
 
 
   Page 2, line 1, - 
   for      “contest” 
   read   “context” 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI; 
 
April 19, 2012 
Chaitra 30, 1934 (Saka) 
  

59 
 
Notes on Clauses 
 
Clause 1.- This clause contains short title and commencement of the Act. 
 
Clause 2.- This clause defines various terms used in the provisions of the bill. 
 
Clause 3.- This clause relates to punishment for Piracy. 
This clause provides that committing an act of piracy shall be punished with imprisonment of life 
and where the accused has caused the death while committing the act of piracy, then he may be 
punished with death and in addition restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the commission of the 
offence. 
Clasue 4.- This clause deals with attempt to commit piracy  
This clause makes it a punishable offence with imprisonment for a term extendable to fourteen 
years with fine. 
Clause 5.- This clause relates to punishment to accomplice piracy  
This clause makes it punishable offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years with fine. 
Clause 6.- This clause relates to conferment of power of investigation  
This clause empowers the Central Government to issue gazette notification  enabling the State 
Governments to exercise the powers under the Act. 
Clause 7.- This clause relates to presumption clause  
This clause provides that for the Designated Court shall presume commission of an offence, if any 
of the acts listed under this section are committed, unless contrary is proved, shifts the burden of proof 
to the accused. 
 
 
 

60 
 
Clause 8.- This clause relates to Designated Courts  
This clause provides that for the purposes of providing speedy trial of the offences under this Act, 
the Central Government after consulting with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by 
notification shall specify one o r more Court of session in the State as Designated Court and also the 
territorial jurisdiction of the court. 
Clause 9.- This clause relates to offences triable by Designated Court  
This clause covers offences triable by the designated court. 
Clause 10.- This clause relates to application of Code in proceedings before a Designated Court  
This clause explains application of Cr.PC and IPC by the Designated court. 
Clause 11.- This clause deals with provisions on bail  
This clause provides that n o person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in 
custody, be released on bail, except on certain conditions mentioned therein. 
Clause 12.- This clause provides for provisions as to extradition  
This clause provi des that o ffence under this act shall be deemed to have been extraditable 
offences and will be provided in all extraditable treaties by India. 
This clause also provides that i n the absence of bilateral extradition treaties, based on reciprocity 
the offences under this Act shall be extraditable offences with other States. 
Clause 13.- This clause relates to arrest and seizure of property.  
This clause empowers the State to arrest and seize property in the high seas. It further states that 
it can only be carried out by warships or military aircraft or ships/aircraft clearly marked for that purpose. 
Clause 14.- This clause deals with Geographic Scope of the Act.  
This clause provides that  the provisions of this Act  shall extend to the Exclusive Economic Z one 
of India (EEZ) as defined under Section 7 of the Indian Maritime Zones Act, 1976. 
 