 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2011-12] 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 11 
 

 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2011-12] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29th March, 2012 
 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29th March, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
COEA NO. 92_ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2011-2012………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (v)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           24 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       52 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            53 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………               57 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                               64  
held on 28.03.2012……………………………………………… 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                          66   
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….        
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-12) 
 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
Sl.No.  Name  
       
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana)  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
                                     (iii)  
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
27.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
30.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
31. Shri Shreegopal Vyas  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
4. Shri A. Sivanandam - Under Secretary 
5. Ms. Kiran Bhargava- Executive Assistant 
___________________________________________________________ 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao  nominated to the Committee on External Affairs 
w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee   due  to  expiry  of term of 
Dr. Karan Singh, Member Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 27.01.12 and re -nominated to 
the Committee w.e.f. 02.02.2012. 
 
 
 (iv) 
 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 11-12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 11th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 10th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Gr ants 
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2011-12. 
 
2. The10th Report was presented on 29th August, 2011. The Action Taken Replies 
of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report 
were received on 9th December, 2011. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 28th March, 2012. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given 
at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on  the recommendations 
contained in the 10th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
28 March,  2012                                                                       Chairman,                 
08 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(v) 
                                                 

 1 
       
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with 
the Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in their Tenth Report on Demands for Grants (20 11-12) of the 
Ministry of External Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 29th August, 2011. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs on all the 24 observations/recommendations contained in 
the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1-3,6-10,12,13,16,18 and 19-24. 
 Total-18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
-Nil- 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 11 and 14. 
Total- 02 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4,5,15 and 17. 
Total-04 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for which only interim replies have 
been given by the government should be furnished within three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with  some of the replies received from 
the  Government, which need reiteration or merit comments. 

 2 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
5.  The Committee had noted that a major portion of Ministry‟s budgetary 
allocation wa s being utilized in promoting technical and economic 
cooperation with friendly countries by way of taking up various 
developmental projects and programmes in those countries. The Committee 
had, therefore, desire d that the Ministry of External Affairs should m ake 
proper coordination with the se friendly countries and get requisite 
governmental clearances so as to ensure timely execution and completion 
of the projects. In the same context, it was also noted that the Committee in 
their previous Reports had recommended for adoption of practices of overall 
sound financial management particularly in terms of the projects at various 
stages since inception to its delivery, the de lay in execution had resulted in 
low utilization of allocated funds. The Committee had once again reiterate d 
that the Ministry should strengthen accounting management within the 
Finance Division and the overall budgetary management to include financial 
reporting and internal control etc. in order to ensure better control of 
expenditure and utilization of allocated resources.  
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“The Divisions concerned invariably liaise wi th the foreign governments 
and/or the authorities concerned in those countries, through the local Indian 
Missions/Posts, and through the agencies implementing the projects. This 
ensures that necessary coordination is in place. Besides, Project Monitoring 
Committees have been instituted to monitor timely execution of the projects. 
However, in spite of our best efforts, local issues/factors which are beyond 
the control of the Ministry, sometimes lead to delays.  
 
 In general, the projects finances are handled  by the various Divisions 
of the Ministry, in consultation with the Finance Division. As soon as the 
commitments are made known to the Finance Division by the spending 
Divisions, all efforts are made to make available the required funds so that 
the projects do not suffer time/cost overruns for want of funds. However, this 
is also subject to the overall budgetary ceiling communicated by the Ministry 
of Finance. The project handling Divisions are required to coordinate with 
the respective project authorities to ensure that, as far as possible, neither 
savings nor excesses over budget occur. Also, quarterly expenditure 
overview meetings are taken by the Additional Secretary and Financial 
Advisor to have a close watch over the expenditure and requirements. 
Nevertheless, the Committee‟s suggestions are noted and spending 
Divisions would be sensitized accordingly.” 
 
7. The Committee have been continuously stressing that the 
Replies to the recommendations made in the Reports of the 
Committee should be comprehensive and not inconclusive, vague or 

 3 
couched in general terms like „noted‟ or „accepted‟. However, the 
Committee n ote that the Ministry has once again submitted 
stereotype, vague and general replies to the several 
recommendations made by the Committee using similar phrases.  The 
Committee expects concrete action on the part of the Ministry rather 
than mere such assura nces.  The Committee therefore, once again 
reiterate that the Ministry should focus on the  matter and submit a 
specific and conclusive replies stating the actual action taken or 
proposed to be taken by them in context of the 
recommendations/observations made by the Committee. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
8.  The Committee had found that out of 37 passport offices, 18 passport 
offices were operating from rental buildings. Out of these 18 rented offices, 
Ministry ha d purchased plots of land for 9 offices. Besides,  the plots ha d 
been identified at three places namely Bhopal, Trivandrum and Jammu and 
the Ministry were reportedly in the process to liaise with the respective State 
Governments at tho se places for allotment of land. The Committee  had 
specifically drew the attention of the Ministry towards the promise made by 
the Ministry regarding completion of construction of building for RPO 
Guwahati by December 2011 and had reiterated that the Ministry of External 
Affairs to expedite a time-bound construction of RPO buildings at the places 
where the land ha d been purchased including one at RPO Guwahati and 
speed up the process for the remaining places. The Committee had also 
wanted to be apprised of the status of constructions of building at tho se 
places.  
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
“Regarding completion of construction of Passport Office building at 
Guwahati, by December, 2011, it is informed that Ministry has hoped that 
after approval of drawings, the proj ect would be completed in 2 years time 
CPWD had sought some clarifications for revision of drawings for deletion of 
the sections affected in the event of opening of PSK (as recommended by 
"the committee" during its study visit to PO Guwahati in July, 2010) . The 
PSK system is in initial stages, hence, its exact impact on the space 
requirements could not be assessed with perfection.  
 

 4 
Meanwhile, Ministry felt that due to shortage of accommodation for PO staff 
and also Branch Secretariat, Guwahati, is function ing from rented premises, 
this plot of land is insufficient. Therefore, Ministry is seeking a bigger plot of 
nearly 1 acre in the nearby location from State Government. A request in 
this regard has been made to Chief Secretary, Assam Government, who 
directed the Collector, District Kamrup to locate another plot as requisitioned 
by Ministry. Therefore, if State Government would be able to allot another 
plot the existing plot would be disposed off. 
As far as status of acquiring land at Bhopal, Trivandrum and Jammu is 
concerned, the status is as follows: 
 
a. Bhopal: Government of Madhya Pradesh has now formally 
allotted a plot of land admeasuring 2044.8 Sq M on lease basis for a 
premium of Rs. 8,58,73,000/ - (Rupees Eight Crore Fifty Eight Lakh 
Seventy Three Thousand only). The plot is located in a prime locality 
of Bhopal at Arera Hills.  The process of making the payment to State 
Government is underway.  
b. Trivandrum: State Government of Kerala changed its stand 
on allotment of a plot of land due to growing demand f rom various 
State Government and GoI offices. It has now proposed to construct 
a building, in which space would be allotted as per requirement of 
individual offices of various State and Centre Government Ministries. 
They have asked Ministry to intimate spa ce requirements for the 
Passport Office also. But the past experience of Ministry in 
purchasing the built -up properties from state governments has not 
been that good. Passport Office is a public dealing office and has 
specific requirements. State Governmen t would construct space but 
not as per our special requirements. Therefore, this proposal of State 
Government is not found viable. Ministry would like to purchase a plot 
of land and construct a building exclusively for Passport Office. 
c. Jammu: State Government has identified a plot of land 
admeasuring 1300 Sq M. Ministry has to check the feasibility of this 
plot of land. The average plot of land area acquired by the Ministry is 
in the range of 1800 Sq M e.g. Surat 3000 Sq M, Amritsar 1672 Sq 
M, Bhopal 2044 Sq M, Jalandhar 1430 Sq M, Pune 1602 Sq M and 
Dehradun 2594 Sq M. Currently Passport Office is running from a 
rented building. The rented area is approximately 500 Sq M (carpet 
area) in addition we would need nearly 500 Sq M more carpet area 
for locating PSK in the same building. In addition to this there is 
space required for walls, staircases, lifts, Electrical Sub -station, DG 
Set, parking for cars and two -wheelers etc. A team from Ministry is 
going in the first week of December to check the suitability of the plot 
and tentative permissible building control parameters.  
 
As desired by the committee, status of plots ongoing projects as well as the 
places where plots of land have been acquired by the Ministry, is as under: 
 
1. Vizag: The Passport office has been shifted to new building. 
 
2. Mumbai: Construction of this project is in full swing and 
CPWD has assured to complete the project in 2012. 

 5 
 
 
 
3. Surat: Construction of Passport Office building and 22 Staff 
residences is going on at full swing. 
 
4. Jalandhar: Drawings approved by the Ministry, have been 
submitted to Punjab Urban Development Authority (PUDA) in July 
2011 and approval is still awaited.  
 
5. Srinagar: CPWD has been requested to revise concept 
drawings because, as per Passport Seva Project (PSP ) based on 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) model envisages co -location of 
Passport Seva Kendra (PSK) in the Passport Office building 
which was not earlier in the concept plan. Revised drawings are 
awaited. 
 
6. Dehradun: State government has not handed over t he 
possession of the plot of land as the area available at site was 
less than allotted. Passport Officer has been directed to sort out 
the matter at the earliest. 
 
7. Pune: CPWD has been requested to provide the concept 
drawings, which are awaited. 
 
8. Amritsar: NBCC had submitted revised concept drawings and 
Preliminary Estimate amounting to Rs., 14.3 crores, which are 
under consideration in the Ministry. 
 
9. Guwahati: State Government has been requested to provide 
an alternate plot of land admeasuring at least 1 acre so that 
Passport Office, Branch Secretariat Office and staff residences 
could be constructed. In this connection, Regional Passport 
Officer, Guwahati met with Chief Minister, Assam, Principal 
Secretary (Revenue), DC, Kamrup for immediate allot ment. 
Deputy Secretary (Revenue), Govt. of Assam issued letter No. 
RSS.342/2002/32 dated 21/09/2011 enclosed the request letter of 
Ministry to Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup to furnish a suitable 
proposal. RPO is constantly pursuing the matter with state 
government.  A suitable proposal is awaited from State 
Government, Assam.” 
 
 
10. The Committee draw the attention of the Ministry to the promise 
made by the Ministry regarding completion of the said project by 
December 2011. The Committee are dismayed to note that after the 
lapse of the proposed deadline for completion of the project relating to 

 6 
construction of building for Regional Passport Office, Guwahati , 
however, the Ministry has now felt that the plot of land in possession 
is insufficient and now, the State Government has been requested to 
provide an alternate bigger plot of land.  The Committee , therefore, 
desire that no more time should now be devoted in the name of 
locating another piece of land for RPO Guwahati and the Ministry  
should make all possible efforts to settle the issue and start the work 
considering all the requirements including ope ning of PSK in 
Guwahati.  Similarly, the issue of acquiring land at Bhopal, Trivandrum 
and Jammu should also be settled amicably with the concerned State 
Governments in the shortest possible time and work should start 
without any further delay. 
 The Committee also desire that the Government should explore 
the possibility to establish PSKs  in the newly proposed building of 
RPOs well within the building control parameters of the concerned 
localities.  The Committee further desire that a clear cut decision about 
the change in drawings of construction of Passport O ffices in 
progress should be taken in view of the requirements of the new 
Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) at those places.  The Committee also 
desire that the decision should be taken quickly so that the work on all 
those projects be competed without any significant time and cost 
overrun.     
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
11.  Taking into account the grievances of Indian citizens as well as 
foreigners in respect of delivery of efficient and fast services by Indi an 
Missions/Posts abroad, the Committee had urged the Ministry to establish a 
centralized monitoring system at the Headquarters to keep check/ensure 
delivery of efficient and fast services provided by th ose Indian 
establishments abroad. The Committee desired that the public interface 
should be improved and the officials/officers posted at such places should 
undergo not only orientation programme but also be trained in soft skills and 
should be well informed about the procedures and legalities. The Committee 
had also desire d that adequate training should be provided to the staff 

 7 
attending public counters and handling telephone .  They  should also be 
adequately aware of the procedures so that the information provided  to 
service seekers/applicants wa s accur ate and updated. Apart from 
communication links like telephone, call centres etc, the Ministry should take 
help of social media on the web to acquire feedback and to know the 
grievances/suggestions of the people to make the services better.  
 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“Following are the details of the action taken on the Recommendation:  
 
1. One of the primary activities of the Foreign Service Institute is the 
training of Indian Foreign Service (IFS) Probationers with the objective of 
preparing them to handle the wide range of tasks that they would be 
required to perform during their professional careers, both in Missions and 
Posts abroad as well as in India. Probationers are duly trained in the 
procedures and legalities regarding relevant subjects. They are also 
imparted training in soft skills including representational skills. 
 
2. In addition, FSI has diversified its activities to include training 
programmes for staff and officers of the Minist ry of External Affairs at 
different levels, in particular, refresher programmes before they proceed 
abroad on posting. At the Section Officers‟ level, FSI conducts refresher 
courses, which include soft skills and communication skills, in addition to 
special sessions on dealing with general public on Consular, Passport and 
Visa matters while posted in missions abroad. 
 
3. Similar courses are also mandatory for Assistants, UDCs and LDCs 
of MEA before they proceed abroad on transfer. In addition, training in 
Integrated Mission‟s Accounting Software (IMAS) is compulsory for posting 
abroad for all levels upto Section Officers. Since January, 2011, four 
Refresher Courses have been held, apart from seven  IMAS training 
programmes. 
 
4. FSI has also conducted a train ing programme for departmentally 
promoted clerks from Group D from August 1 to 23, 2011. In addition to 
basic office procedure, accounts and basic computer training, they were 
also trained on handling telephone and on Basic English speaking, in order 
to provide better services to applicants and information seekers, while they 
are posted in missions abroad. 
 
5. FSI has conducted one-day training sessions on Right to Information 
Act, 2005 so that MEA officers/officials are familiar with the various aspects 
of the Act and take requisite action on receiving requests for information 
from the general public. 
 
6. The Joint Secretary level officers of MEA were briefed on the “New 
Public Diplomacy Tools” as part of their Mid -Career Training Programme in 
May, 2011.” 

 8 
 
 
13.  In view of the grievances of Indian Citizens as well as foreign 
nationals, t he Committee had specifically urged the Ministry to 
establish a centralized monitoring system at Headquarters to keep 
check/ensure delivery of efficient and fast services pro vided by the 
Indian establishments abroad.  But in their reply, the Ministry in the 
name of action taken on the recommendation of the Committee has 
simply stated the facts based on the routine type of training  being 
imparted to the officials at various le vels and there is no mention of 
any fresh initiative to improve the delivery of services by Indian 
posts/missions abroad.  The Committee have a firm view that 
establishment of a centralized monitoring system at the Headquarters 
will certainly improve the s ituation in this regard and therefore, this 
should be undertaken on priority basis. 
Though the Committee take note of the endeavours made by the 
Ministry regarding training and refresher programme for the officials 
before they proceed abroad,  the Committe e, however, desire that 
Foreign Service Institute (FSI) should also conduct refresher courses 
at all the level s of the Officers and staff to inculcate soft skills, 
communication skills along with the sessions on dealing with general 
public on passport, visa and consular matters .  The Committee also 
desire that the briefing and orientation programme should be arranged 
for the local staff engaged with Indian Missions/Posts, if they deal with 
public.  
 
 
 

 9 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
14.  The Committee  had noted that the project of e -passport was 
supposed to be rolled out in general category by the end o f year 2009. But 
the project had been delayed due to pendency of fresh security clearance in 
respect of a technically qualified bidder from the Ministry of Home A ffairs. 
Moreover, discussions were going on to devise a passport which would be 
tamper proof and which could not be forged. The parameter for biometrics 
had also not been standardized. The Committee had, therefore, desired that 
MEA should take up the matte r at the highest lev el so that all the 
discussions were completed and such an ambitious project m ight reach at 
the implementation level without any further delay.  
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
 
“As noted by the Committee, the project of implementation of e -passport 
has been delayed due to pendency of fresh security clearance in respect of 
a technically qualified bidder from the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Consultations are still going on with Minist ry of Home Affairs and other 
security agencies to devise a passport which would be tamper proof and 
which could not be forged. E -passports have been partially introduced for 
Diplomatic and Official passports since 5 August, 2008.”  
 
16. Considering the imp ortance of e -passport project, the 
Committee had desired that the Ministry should take up the matter so 
that the project could reach the implementation level without any 
further delay.  But, from the reply of the Ministry it is evident that no 
progress has  been made so far since last year and the consultation 
process with Ministry of Home Affairs is still on , without any specific 
timeframe. The Committee therefore, desire that the matter should be 
taken a t the highest level so that the Ministry of Home Affa irs may 
arrive at some clear decision on the issue of security so that such an 
important project is not delayed further. 
 
 
 
 
 

 10 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
17.  The Committee had noted that t he ICCR ha d engaged itself 
proactively over the last several years to p roject India‟s soft power and 
undertaken a rapid expansion of its activities and outreach both within a nd 
outside India. The Council was  maintaining 25 Indian Cultural Centres 
abroad including the 10 Cultural Centres established during the last 3 years. 
The proposal for establishing 12 more Cultural Centres at overs eas 
locations we re under active consideration of  the Ministry. The Committee 
had regularly been recommending to set up more Centres  of ICCR in the 
country and abroad also besides diversifying the activities of the existing 
Centres. But, the Committee had expressed their concern to note that there 
had been inordinate delays in opening of Regional Centres in India and 
Cultural Centres o verseas. For example, the opening of an Indian Cultural 
Centre at Washington ha d been under consideration for more than 5 years. 
The Committee  had, therefore, expect ed that the Ministry to take 
appropriate steps for completion of all the pending projects i n a time-bound 
manner. The Committee had further expressed that the responsibility of the 
Ministry was not just to open a centre in particular part of the country or 
world but sufficient staff should also be ensured for the proper functioning of 
the Centre. The Committee  had, therefore, desire d that in all newly set up 
Centres abroad, posts should be created to appoint persons who had sound 
knowledge of cultural heritage of India as well as of countries covered by 
the Centre so that they m ight be able to fo rm a cultural link between India 
and that particular country(ies). The Committee had desired to be apprised 
of the initiatives taken in that regard.  
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“Presently, the Council is maintaining 37 Indian Culture Centres and sub 
centres abroad. The proposal for establishing 08 more Culture Centers are 
under active consideration including ICC, Washington and Paris (list 
enclosed).  Proposal to open the Centre h as already been sent to Embassy 
of India, Washington and finalization of a suitable premise is still under 
consideration. 
 
 The delay in opening new centers / completion of pending projects 
could be partly attributed to finalizing suitable premises in cons ultation with 
the Ministry and the Mission.  
 
The Council deputed India based Staff i.e. Directors, Dy Directors, 
Programme Assistants and India based Teachers in the stream of Yoga, 
Tabla, Bharatnatyam Dance, Hindi, Kathak Dance etc. for conducting 
classes in the Centre to promote Indian Culture through the classes in 
Dance and Music. Through regular interaction & guidance, the Centres are 
becoming hubs for promoting  Indian Culture & heritage by organizing 
exhibitions of art & sculpture, Literary events s uch as Book Reading, Poetry 
sessions, Lectures on wide range of topics like Philosophy, History, 
Sociology, Economic Trends etc.  Indian Festivals – Holi and Diwali – are 

 11 
being celebrating as joint programmes with local institutions/resources 
resulting to form a cultural link between Indian and that particular 
country/ies. More importantly the Centres act as hubs for dialogue and 
interaction between cultural trends and personalities both India and the host 
country.   
 
 A number of Centres have already start ed new activities such as 
Music events, Book Launches, Kavi Sammelans etc.  The India based 
teachers have been encouraged to do „outreach activities‟ including visits to 
other cities and joint programmes with local institutions. 
 
 Local resources are being  increasingly utilized, such as using local 
experts to teach Indian dance, music, yoga etc. as and when required.  
Exchange of Cultural troupes are also spreading an awareness of cultural 
importance, values & tradition and foster a close link.   
 
 Recommendations of the Committee regarding appointment of 
persons with sound knowledge of cultural heritage of India and the host 
countries have been noted by the ICCR and followed in all such 
appointments. Council has appointed Directors of newly opened Centres 
keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee and in compliance 
with decisions of the Statutory Bodies of the Council.  
 
 With regard to creation of posts for Indian Cultural Centres Abroad 
(ICCs), the Council had submitted in December 2010 the propo sal for 
creation of additional posts of the levels Director (Counselor/ First 
Secretary/ Second Secretary) and Dy. Director (Third Secretary level) five 
posts for each level totaling to 20 to run the Indian Cultural Centres abroad.  
The Ministry External A ffairs sought additional information with respect to 
the level of the post at each cultural centre. ICCR in response on 15.6.2011 
had stated that the level of the Director of the cultural centre would be 
decided keeping in view the size of the Mission and cultural diversity of the 
accredited country. Thereafter, MEA, on 22.6.2011 returned the file with the 
remarks that in view of the circular on economy measures banning creation 
of posts, the proposal for creation of these posts may be taken up in the 
next financial year. In view of the strong recommendation of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on MEA, the proposal for creation of 
posts would again being submitted to MEA.  
 
 At present ICCR has 14 Regional offices. Five more Regional Offices 
are proposed to be opened at Bhopal, Ahmedabad, Jammu, Srinagar and 
Patna. The Regional Offices at Bhopal and Ahmedabad are expected to be 
operational by December 2011.  
 
 
LIST OF INDIAN CULTURAL CENTERS ABROAD 
 
1. Maulana Azad Centre for Indian Culture, Cairo, Egypt 
2. The Tagore Centre, Berlin, Germany 
3. Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture, Port Louis, Mauritius 
4. Indian Cultural Centre, Paramaribo, Suriname 

 12 
5. Indian Cultural Centre Georgetown, Guyana 
6. Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Cultural Centre, Jakarta, Indonesia 
7. Indian Cultural Centre, Bali, Indonesia 
8. Jawaharlal Nehru Cultural Centre, Moscow, Russia 
9. The Nehru Centre, London, United Kingdom 
10. Indian Cultural Centre, Astana, Kazakhstan 
11. Lal Bahadur Shastri Centre for Indian Culture, Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
12. Indian Cultural Centre, Johannesburg, South Africa 
13. Indian Cultural Centre, Durban, South Africa 
14. Mahatama Gandhi Institute for Cultural Co-operation, Port of Spain, 
Trinidad & Tobago 
15. Indian Cultural Centre, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
16. Indian Cultural Centre, Dushanbe, Tajikistan 
17. Indian Cultural Centre, Suva, Fiji 
18. Indian Cultural Centre, Lautoka, Fiji 
19. Indian Cultural Centre, Kabul, Afghanistan 
20. Indian Cultural Centre, Beijing, China 
21. Indian Cultural Centre, Kathmandu, Nepal 
22. Indian Cultural Centre, Bangkok, Thailand 
23. Indian Cultural Centre, Tokyo, Japan 
24. Indian Cultural Centre, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
25. Indian Cultural Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia  
26. Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
27. Nehru Wangchuck Cultural Centre, Thimphu, Bhutan 
28. Indian Cultural Centre, Mexcio city, USA 
29. Indian Cultural Centre, Yangon, Myanmar 
30. Indian Cultural Centre, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania 
31. Indian Cultural Centre, Seoul, South Korea 
32. Indian Cultural Centre, Prague, Czech Republic 
33. Indian Cultural Centre, Budapest, Hungary 
34. Indian Cultural Centre, Male, Maldives 
35. Indian Cultural Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
36. Indian Cultural Centre, Sao Paulo, Brazil 
37. The Gandhi Centre, The Hague, Netherlands 
 
 
CULTURAL CENTRES WHICH ARE UNDER PROCESS 
 
1. Indian Cultural Centre, Washington 
2. Indian Cultural Centre, Sydney 
3. Indian Cultural Centre, Singapore 
4. Indian Cultural Centre, Paris 
5. Indian Cultural Centre, Buenos Aires, Argentina 
6. Indian Cultural Centre, Toronto 
7. Indian Cultural Centre, Hanoi 
8. Indian Cultural Centre, Lagos 
 
 

 13 
19. The Committee had expressed their concern over inordinate 
delays in opening of Regional Offices in India and Cultural Centres of 
ICCR abroad.  The Committee had specifically pointed out the case of 
the opening of Indian Cultural Centre at Washington.  The Ministry has 
replied that the proposal to open the Centre has already been sent to 
Embassy of India, Washington and finalization of suitable premises is 
still under consideration.  The Ministry has further stated that the 
delay in opening other new Centres /completion of the pending 
projects could be partly attributed to finalizing suitable premises in 
consultation with the Ministry and the Mission.  In this context, the 
Committee feel that the issue of opening of the Cultural Centre at 
Washington has alread y faced inordinate delay and is under 
consideration since very long as the Committee in their 5 th Report 
(2001-02 of 13 th Lok Sabha) had also taken up the issue.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry of External Affairs to 
seriously look in to the issue of acquisition of property/plot and 
property management, relating to all proposed overseas centres of 
ICCR. 
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
20.  The Committee had observed that ICCR had been designated as the 
principal/coordinating organization in th e country to take welfare measures 
for all foreign students in India. The Committee had also noted that in order 
to provide better services to the scholars studying under ICCR scholarships, 
an e-portal was to be  set up with the facility of interaction betw een ICCR, 
institutions and scholars/students. The Committee had expressed their hope 
that proper feedback mechanism would also be established to address the 
grievances posed by scholars/students and ICCR would act as a guardian 
and facilitator for them ensuring their security and facilities being provided to 
them including accommodation etc. through their respective 
universities/institutions etc. The Committee had also desire d that besides 
looking into the various aspect of welfare of foreign students, the 

 14 
Council/Ministry would consider widening of the scope of scholarships and 
increase in their numbers also.  
 
21.  The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“It may please be noted that no such e -portal was to be set up by lCCR. 
Ministry of HRD was mandated to set -up the e -portal with the help of 
EdCIL, together with a helpline.  
 
Foreign Secretary had desired that ICCR‟s alumni data base would 
be launched at t he same time as the establishment of the e -portal. We 
are awaiting a notification from Ministry of HRD regarding the setting up/ 
launch of e -portal. Meanwhile, a window of ICCR‟s website would also 
be available to foreign students to post their views/ issues.  
 
 With reference to having feedback mechanisms in place and 
ICCR acting as a guardian and facilitator for foreign students, ICCR 
currently fulfils this role primarily through our Regional Offices, whose 
mandate is to maintain regular interactions with  International Students, 
FRRO's., and other relevant organizations to monitor the welfare of the 
students.  
 
 Each University I Institute where ICCR students have been 
admitted has been requested to appoint a high level official (normally 
Head of the Depar tment) as International Students Advisor (ISA) to look 
into the day to day issues related to foreign students including problems 
with landlords and brokers, as also to provide counselling and guidance 
and our Regional Offices interact closely with these IS As. The Council 
also organizes an annual meeting of all ISAs where problems being 
faced by students are discussed and addressed on a coordinated and 
comprehensive basis. For the first time, this year student 
representatives are also being invited to partic ipate in the annual ISA 
meeting. Vice Chancellors of major Universities also have an opportunity 
to raise student -related issues in the annual meeting of ICCR's General 
Assembly of which they are Members.  
 
 
 The ICCR is providing approximately 2500 schola rships every 
year to students from more than 100 countries to enable them to pursue 
under graduate I post graduate / M. Phil I Ph.D/Post Doctorate courses, 
including professional courses. The scope of scholarships offered is 
already very wide, as students are free to apply for admission to any 
subject except Medicine where no quota is given to ICCR by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Planning / Ministry of HRD, and 
Engineering, Pharmacy and Architecture, where also the quota allotted 
to ICCR students is li mited for all other courses, the only restrictions are 
the total number of scholarships available and the acceptance by the 
University for admission.  
  

 15 
Also, ICCR entertains applications to all recognized Central/State 
Universities / Institutions including those Deemed Universities 
recognized by the Government of India. The only restriction here is that 
we do not send students to private institutions not recognized by the 
Government of India.  
 
 As regards the increase in the number of scholars every year, 
this does not fall within the purview of ICCR as we only administer 
schemes on behalf of other Ministries, I Government agencies, and the 
increase In nu mber of scholarships is decided by these Ministries I 
agencies.” 
 
22. The Committee are of the view that since ICCR is mandated for 
ensuring welfare measures for the foreign students in India , t he 
Ministry should pro -actively pursue the matter of setting up of/launch 
of e-portal with Ministry of HRD.  In the meanwhile, the ICCR‟s alumini  
data base should be kept ready and should be launched 
simultaneously.  The Committee further observe that sin ce, ICCR 
administers schemes for foreign students on behalf of other 
Ministries/Government Agencies, it is all the more important to 
establish a student helpline under the overall jurisdiction of ICCR.  The 
Committee also feel that number of scholarships p rovided by ICCR is 
not adequate and those should be considerably increased specially for 
the students belonging to Asia particularly South -East Asia and 
Central Asia. 
  

 16 
(Recommendation No.17) 
 
23.  The Committee had observed that Government had announced a n 
allocation of Rs. 500 crores for assisting the Sri Lankan Government in the 
resettlement and rehabilitation of internally displaced persons in the 
Northern Province through a number of projects. But the Committee had 
noted that as against an allocation o f Rs. 90 crores only Rs. 68.96 crores 
was spent during 2009 -10, during the year 2010 -11, Rs. 83.82 crores ha d 
been spent by February 2011 against the allocation of Rs. 90 crores and a 
higher budgetary allocation of Rs. 290 crores ha d been made for the year  
2011-12. The Committee had felt that the rehabilitation and resettlement 
projects ha d been already delayed and therefore , had  desired that all the 
proposed projects including building of 50,000 houses should be completed 
in a specific timeline so that the  beneficiaries might get the benefit without 
any further delay.  
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“Government of India, based on the capacity to absorb the assistance on 
ground in Northern Sri Lanka, has implemented several resettlement, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction projects for Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs) in Northern Sri Lanka. Several con straints, including anti -human 
mines spread across vast areas of Northern Sri Lanka also slowed down the 
project implementation. Not withstanding the above, GoI during the FY 
2009-10, spent Rs. 68.96 crores, out of allocated Rs. 70 crores under „Aid to 
Sri Lanka‟ budget, on immediate relief and rehabilitation measures.  
 
During the FY 2010 -11 total of Rs. 90 cores were allocated under 
„Aid to Sri Lanka‟ for several resettlement, rehabilitation and reconstruction 
projects for Internally Displaced Persons (ID Ps) in Northern Sri Lanka. The 
total amount spent during the FY on various projects aimed at resettlement 
and reconstruction in Sri Lanka stood at Rs. 93.86 crores. The main areas 
of expenditure included supply of roofing/shelter material for IDPs in 
Northern Sri Lanka, supply of cement bags for resettling IDPs, ongoing de -
mining work by Indian teams, supply of 500 Tractors and agricultural 
implements, supply of 95,000 agricultural packs, supply of seeds to revive 
agriculture in Northern Sri Lanka, month lo ng artificial limb fitment camp, 
development of Jaffna Teaching Hospital, establishment of Vocational 
Training Institute among others.  
 
A pilot project for construction of 1000 new houses for IDPs in 
Northern Sri Lanka is under implementation. A round 100 are ready for 
occupation, work on 200 houses is till roof level and 400 under various 
stages of construction. Government of Sri Lanka has handed over another 
150 sites to contractor after clearing jungle and the work at these sites is 
being taken up by the contractor.  Another 150 sites are yet to be cleared of 
jungle by Government of Sri Lanka. 
  

 17 
The Committee on Non Plan Expenditure (CNE), on 31 st October 
2011, gave its in -principle approval for the modalities for construction of 
remaining 49,000 houses. The Government is working towards expeditious 
implementation of the project.  
 
Government has allocated Rs 290 cores under „Aid to Sri Lanka‟ in 
the CFY 2011 -12. The funds are being utilized towards construction of 
houses for IDPs and other infrastructure development projects, including 
rehabilitation of Kankesanthurai harbour, deployment of Indian de -mining 
teams, repair and construction of hospital and schools, supply of 1280 
computers to schools in the eastern province, project for capacity building of 
war widows by SEWA, second limb re -fitment camp in Jaffna, setting up of 
Vocational Training Centres in Batticaloa and Nuwra Eliya, construction of 
the Cultural Centre in Jaffna, restoration of the Duraiappah stadium in 
Jaffna and other small developmental projects.” 
 
 
25. The Committee observe that the Government has undertaken 
certain rehabilitation and resettlement projects in Northern Sri Lanka 
for Internally D isplaced Persons (IDPs) there.  But the Committee 
observe that the most important project relat ing to construction of  
50,000 houses for IDPs has been delayed a lot.  The Committee are 
dismayed to note that out of the 1000 houses projected to be 
constructed under pilot project , o nly 100 houses are ready for 
occupation and 500 are at various levels of construction.  Modalities 
for construction of 49000 houses has been approved.  The Committee 
therefore, desire that the construction work should now be expedited 
as any further delay will hurt the interests of the affected people.   The 
Government shoul d pursue the matter with the Government of Sri 
Lanka regarding the availability of sites. The Ministry should furnish 
the status report of the project on quarterly basis to the Committee.  
  

 18 
(Recommendation No.19) 
 
26.  The Committee  had noted that a new H ead „Energy Security‟ was 
created by the Ministry and t he allocation made for 2011 -12 wa s Rs. 89 
Lakhs. The Committee were of the opinion that keeping the mandate in 
mind and the international climate on the issue of energy security, the 
Ministry should be  ready with adequate fieldwork, background studies and 
data with the help of academics institutions and those engaged in the field 
so as to support and legitimize their claim at international level. They had 
also desired that the Ministry should make vigorous efforts and engage with 
various stake -holders at diplomatic and political level in th at regard. The 
Committee were of the view that the functions of the Division ha d become 
all the more important in light of the recent events in North -Africa and West-
Asia. The Committee had urged the Ministry to adopt a proactive role in 
ensuring that India‟s interest were secured in the region in a more 
sustainable manner with the long term vision. The Committee were of the 
view that alongwith bringing out the handbook  on Energy Security, the 
Missions/Posts should also act as facilitator in encouraging investment and 
securing energy resources. The Ministry should also look at the qualitative 
aspects of the expenditure. Keeping in view the mandate on th at account, 
the Co mmittee had stressed upon the need to adequately enhance the 
budgetary allocation during the current financial year which c ould be taken 
up by the Ministry suitably at RE stage. 
 
27. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“With respect to the observation that “the Ministry should be ready with 
adequate fieldwork, background studies and data with the help of 
academics institutions and those engaged in the field so as to support 
and legitimize its claim at international level”, Energy Security Division is 
in the final stages of the process for hiring an institutional consultant who 
will be tasked with producing studies and research papers and compiling 
databases for the Ministry in the field of energy security. The following 
papers/studies have been identified for execution by the consultant:  
 
 Commissioned Research Papers 
 
 Paper on New and Emerging Energy Sources (focusing on 
technology, political economy and business potential aspects of 
sources like CBM, Shale Gas, new hydrocarbon finds) 
 
 Paper on Pipelines and Energy Diplomacy (focusing on technology, 
political economy, and recent developments in pipeline projects 
around the world) 
 
 Commissioned Reports on energy opportunities on a regional basis: 
 
 On Africa 
 On Latin America 
 On Central Asia 
 On South East Asia 

 19 
 Case study: An analysis of the Experience of Indian Energy 
companies working abroad 
 
  With respect to the recommendation that “Ministry should make 
vigorous efforts and engage with various stake -holders at diplomatic 
and political level in this regard”,  Energy Security division will provide 
active support to initiatives like the 3 rd India-Africa Hydrocarbon Conference 
(9-10 December) organized by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas which 
are aimed at enga ging the relevant Oil and Gas / Energy Ministers of key 
African nations. Similarly ES division will be assisting GAIL in organizing 7 th 
Asia Gas Partnership Summit in 2012 Energy Security Division will also 
provide active assistance to other nodal ministries in their engagements with 
International organizations These include assistance to MNRE for 
engagement with the IRENA; M/o Power for engagements with the IEA and 
the IPEEC; and M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas for engagements with IEA, 
IEF and other bodies. 
 
 With respect to the recommendation that “along with bringing out 
the handbook on Energy Security, the Missions/Posts should also act 
as facilitator in encouraging investment and securing energy 
resources”,  Energy Security Division will be tasking the i nstitutional 
consultant with generating the content for the Energy Security Handbook 
which will be distributed to officers in all Indian missions abroad. This 
publication should be ready for distribution before the end of the financial 
year in March 2011. This will be an useful tool in carrying out of energy 
security related work. With the help of focused inputs from the institutional 
consultant, Energy Security Division will provide timely inputs to our 
Missions/Posts to gather information and intervene in  a manner which will 
encourage investment and secure more energy assets abroad. 
 
 With respect to the recommendation that “adequately enhance the 
budgetary allocation during the current financial year which can be 
taken up by the Ministry suitably at RE stage”, while the budget at the 
Revised Estimate state is at Rs 0.435 Crore, the budget proposed for the 
next year, 2012-13,  is at Rs 0.89 crore. It may be noted that the proposed 
budget at BE stage for the current year was  Rs 0.89 crore, but it was 
reduced to Rs 0.435 crore at RE stage, since this is a new Division dealing 
with a highly specialized field and it took some time to work out in detail the 
modalities of implementing the proposal to hire an institutional consultant.” 
 
28. Considering the manda te and the importance of the issue of 
energy security, the Committee had stressed upon the need to 
adequately enhance the budgetary allocation during the current 
financial year and to take the matter at RE stage.  However, it is 
surprising that the budget allocation for this newly created Head has 
been substantially reduced at RE stage.  The Committee take a serious 
note of the issue as it reflects the casual approach of the Government 

 20 
on a very burning and important issue of energy security of India.  
Though the Committee understand the nuances of establishing a new 
Division,  however, the Committee desire that the Ministry should not 
take much time in deciding the modalities in impleme nting their 
proposals in view of the relevance of the issue.  The Committee further 
recommend that the Ministry should engage in Inter -Ministerial 
consultations to enhance the arena of the Commissioned Reports/ 
research papers or any other research activit ies.   The Committee 
further desire that due consideration and deliberation should be done 
before hiring of institutional consultant and  qualitative aspects should 
also be taken care of.   
(Recommendation No.23) 
 
29.  As per information furnished by the Ministry, during the last five years 
(2007-2011) a total of 175 Indian crew members were taken hostage on 
board of various merchant ships. The Ministry of External Affairs ha d a 
limited role and they use Diplomatic Channels to facilitate release of Indian 
Nationals from pirates. In order to deal with prosecution of pirates, the 
Ministry of External Affairs was engaged in piloting a comprehensive 
domestic legislation. The Committee further note d that the MEA was 
coordinating with the UN and other internationa l bodies like the contract 
group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the International Maritime 
Bureau to seek coordinated solutions to the problem of combating piracy off 
the coast of Somalia and ha d also demanded that naval patrolling in the 
affected area should be carried out under the UN flag. The Committee had 
expressed their concern over the growing incidents of abduction of Indian 
seafarers from private/foreign/cargo ships by pirates in the Gulf of Aden . 
Referring to the involvement of many agenci es in the process of their 
release and communication gap , the Committee had desired the issue of 
piracy need ed to be addressed with the utmost seriousness it deserve d. 
Besides appropriately taking up the matter with the international community 
to avert inc idents of piracy, the Committee had also desired the Ministry of 
External Affairs to dr aw a long term strategy in coordination with other 
concerned Ministries viz. Ministries of Shipping and Defence, to stringently 
deal with the issue of piracy and making the sea lanes safer. At the same 
time, the Committee  had also desire d the Ministry of External Affairs to 
expeditiously finalize the proposed legislation to deal with the prosecution of 
pirates. The Committee further desired to be apprised of the concrete steps 
taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
30. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
“1.       MEA has been closely coordinating with the Ministry of Shipping and 
the Ministry of Defence regarding the counter -piracy action to be taken at 
the international level. Composite delegations of these Ministries have been 

 21 
participating in the delibe rations of the Contact Group on Piracy off the 
coast of Somalia. The Indian Navy has been coordinating and exchanging 
information with other naval forces operating in the Gulf of Aden regarding 
action against the pirates and for protection of maritime traffic.  
 
2.      A draft of an Anti -Piracy Act has been prepared by MEA in 
consultation with the Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy, 
Indian Coast Guard and the Directorate General of Shipping. The draft has 
been submitted to the Departmen t of Legislative Affairs, Ministry of Law & 
Justice for legal vetting.  As soon as the legally vetted draft is received back 
by MEA, it will be submitted for Cabinet‟s consideration with the approval of 
the External Affairs Minister.” 
 
31. The Committee are happy to note that a draft Anti-Piracy Act has 
been prepared by Ministry of External Affairs in consultation with 
other concerned Ministries and agencies.  However, considering its 
importance, the Committee desire that an effective Bill  capable to 
handle the issue of piracy stringently should be finalized and placed 
before the Parliament at the earliest.  The Committee further desire 
that the Government should continue with its engagement with 
various international actors and domestic agencies to curb the  
menace of piracy. However, the Committee would like to urge the 
Government to adopt humane approach to the hostages and provide 
clear cut information to their families/concerned at the time of 
distress.   
 
(Recommendation No.24) 
 
32.  In connection with  the Indian nationals languishing in jails in 
neighbouring countries, the Committee had noted that there were 317 
Indian civilian prisoners in jails of Bangladesh. The Government of India 
were reportedly making efforts for their repatriation to their homelan d. The 
Committee had expressed their deep concern and had requested the 
Government of India to expedite their release. Similarly, the Committee had 
desired that the process of preparation of a list of Indian prisoners in jails of 
Pakistan should be expedited and the concrete steps should be taken by 
the Government to secure their early and safe release after completion of 
the nationality verification process.  
 

 22 
33. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“The total number of Indian nationals in Bangladesh jails has come down 
from 317 to 263. Out of this, 88 are convicted prisoners and 91 are under 
trial prisoners, leaving only 84 prisoners  who have finished their jail 
sentences and are due for repatriation.   
 
 Our Mission has been making consistent efforts to get these 84 
Indian nationals repatriated.  In many of the cases, repatriation gets delayed 
on account of incorrect and incomplete addresses of the prisoners provided 
by the Bangladesh Government. We h ave sought consular access to meet 
the Indian nationals in jails to ascertain their correct addresses.  
 
  In January, 2011, the  Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons 
between the two countries came into force and under Article 4 of the 
bilateral agreement Mission has already sought details of 88 Indian convicts 
from the Bangladesh Government in order to transfer them to Indian jails to 
serve their remaining sentences.  
 
 Government of India has been consistently taking up the issue of 
release and repatriation of all Indian prisoners, lodged in Pakistani jails with 
the Government of Pakistan at all appropriate levels. The matter was raised 
with Pakistan at the Foreign Secretary Level talks on February 25, 2010 in 
New Delhi and again on June 24, 2010 in Islamabad.  The issue was also 
raised during Home Minister‟s visit to Islamabad on June 25 -26, 2010 and 
during the Foreign Minister level talks in Islamabad on July 15, 2010.  The 
issue was again taken up at the Foreign Secretary level talks in February 
2011 in Thimphu;  Home/Interior Secretary level talks on March 28-29, 2011 
in New Delhi; Foreign Secretary level talks in Islamabad on 23 -24 June, 
2011 and Foreign Minister level talks in New Delhi on July 27, 2011. 
 
 In the Foreign Minister level talks between India and Pakistan held on 
July 27, 2011, in New Delhi both sides noted with satisfaction the fact that 
since the resumption of dialogue earlier this year, the process of release of 
prisoners and fishermen from both sides has continued. In this regard,  the 
Ministers agreed with the recommendations of the Judicial Committee on 
Prisoners regarding (a) early repatriation of the prisoners who have 
completed their sentences and whose travel documents are available; (b) 
adoption of a humane approach in dealin g with cases of fishermen, women, 
elderly, juvenile prisoners, prisoners terminally ill or suffering from serious 
illness or physical / mental disability and (c) need to monitor the welfare of 
prisoners in order to ensure their humane treatment 
 
 Further, an India -Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners 
consisting of four retired judges from each side has been set up to 
recommend steps for humane treatment and expeditious release of 
prisoners of the respective countries in each other‟s jails. The committee  
has so far had four meetings and has given several recommendations. The 
Committee has to -date met four times on 26 -27 February 2008, 9 -14 June 
2008, 18-23 August 2008 and 19-23 April, 2011.  

 23 
 
 Members of the India -Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners 
visited Pakistan from 18 -23 April 2011 and visited jails in Karachi, 
Rawalpindi and Lahore. During the visit, the Pakistani side shared the lists 
of Indian Fishermen and civilian prisoners. Consular Access was conducted 
in respect of some of the fishermen and prisoners on the spot. The 
Committee suggested that the Nationality verification process should be 
facilitated and all those prisoners who have completed their sentences and 
whose travel documents are available should be repatriated to their 
respective countries at the earliest.  The next meeting of the Judicial 
Committee is likely to be held in India shortly. 
 High Commission of India, Islamabad, on a continuing basis, 
monitors the status of Indian prisoners in Pakistani jails and requests for 
consular access for these prisoners. Once the consular access is granted 
by the Government of Pakistan, the verification papers are sent to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs through the Ministry of External Affairs for 
nationality status verification of these prisoners . High Commission of India, 
on a continuing basis, takes up the matter with the Government of Pakistan 
for the release of all those Indian prisoners who have completed their 
sentences. A  Consular Access Agreement was signed on 21 st May 2008 
between the two  countries, which provides that India and Pakistan 
exchange list of prisoners of each in the other‟s country on 01 January and 
01 July each year.   Government is committed to taking all necessary steps 
for earliest possible release and repatriation of all Indian Prisoners, in 
Pakistani jails. 
 As a result of Governments efforts, 473 Indian nationals lodged in 
Pakistani jails were released and repatriated to India in the 2010. In 2011, 
as on 1 stSeptember, 116 Indian nationals have been released and 
repatriated to India from Pakistan.” 
 
34. The Committee are satisfied to note that total number of Indian 
nationals in Bangladesh Jails has come down from 314 to 263.  There 
are 84 prisoners who have finished their jail sentences and waiting for 
repatriation such persons should be repatriated soon resolving the 
issues relating to their current addresses etc.  The Committee are, 
however, deeply concerned about the plight of Indian citizens who are 
convicted prisoners or under trial prisoners.  
 The Committee are hap py to note that 589 Indian prisoners 
lodged in Pakistani Jails were released during 2010 and 2011.  
However, the Committee feel that along with monitoring the status of 
Indian prisoners, the Ministry should also look whether inspite of all 
the efforts, there are many unidentified Indian citizens in Pakistan jails 
and take up the matter at the highest level.  The process of preparation 
of list of such prisoners should be expedited. 

 24 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
1. The Committee acknowledge that during the last two years, the 
Ministry has made efforts to reduce the tendency to surrender the allocated 
resources at the end of the year. However, the Committee also note that 
there is still a vast gap between the proposal s made by the Ministry of 
External Affairs and the budget granted by the Ministry of Finance. 
Budgetary Allocation of MEA for the financial year 2011 -12 is pegged at Rs. 
7106 crores which is grossly lower to the tune of 65% of allocation of nearly 
Rs. 11,0 00 crores initially proposed by the Ministry. Therefore, the 
Committee are of the opinion that while formulating the Budgetary 
proposals, Ministry should ensure that proposals are formulated in 
accordance with the actual needs and provide enough justificat ion for 
allocation so that the Ministry of Finance is convinced enough not to reduce 
the grants at the time of consideration of demands of the Ministry of 
External Affairs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestion of the Committee is well -considered. In this 
connection, it is stated that the spending Units/Divisions are invariably 
advised to prepare a realistic budgetary requirement, as exhaustively and 
comprehensively as possible, so that no item is lost sight of or inadequately 
projected. The Ministry i nvariably gives full justification for the budgetary 
allocation that it seeks from the Ministry of Finance at the proposal stage. 
Additional funds are generally allocated only in those cases where 
inescapable commitments have been made. Further, all these 
Units/Divisions are also advised to surrender identified excess allocations, if 
any, at RE stage itself, unutilizable during the remaining part of the FY. 
Thus, the spending Units/Divisions are time and again sensitized to match 
their proposals with the actual needs during the ensuing Financial year.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
  The Committee also note that a major portion of Ministry‟s budgetary 
allocation is utilized in promoting technical and economic cooperation with 
friendly countries by way of taking up various developmental projects and 
programmes in those countries. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry of External Affairs should make proper coordination with those 
friendly countries and get requisite gover nmental clearances so as to 
ensure timely execution and completion of the projects. In the same context, 
it is worthwhile to note that the Committee in their previous Reports had 
recommended for adoption of practices of overall sound financial 

 25 
management p articularly in terms of the projects at various stages since 
inception to its delivery, the delay in execution resulted in low utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee once again reiterate that the Ministry 
should strengthen accounting management with in the Finance Division and 
the overall budgetary management to include financial reporting and internal 
control etc. in order to ensure better control of expenditure and utilization of 
allocated resources.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Divisions concerned invariably liaise with the foreign 
governments and/or the authorities concerned in those countries, through 
the local Indian Missions/Posts, and through the agencies implementing the 
projects. This ensures that necessary coordinatio n is in place. Besides, 
Project Monitoring Committees have been instituted to monitor timely 
execution of the projects. However, in spite of our best efforts, local 
issues/factors which are beyond the control of the Ministry, sometimes lead 
to delays.  
 
 In general, the projects finances are handled by the various Divisions 
of the Ministry, in consultation with the Finance Division. As soon as the 
commitments are made known to the Finance Division by the spending 
Divisions, all efforts are made to make avai lable the required funds so that 
the projects do not suffer time/cost overruns for want of funds. However, this 
is also subject to the overall budgetary ceiling communicated by the Ministry 
of Finance. The project handling Divisions are required to coordin ate with 
the respective project authorities to ensure that, as far as possible, neither 
savings nor excesses over budget occur. Also, quarterly expenditure 
overview meetings are taken by the Additional Secretary and Financial 
Advisor to have a close watch over the expenditure and requirements. 
Nevertheless, the Committee‟s suggestions are noted and spending 
Divisions would be sensitized accordingly. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
  The Committee in their various reports have been recommending for 
reduction in rental liabilities of MEA. However, the Committee note that 
contrary to their recommendations, the rental liabilities of the Ministry is 
increasing year after year which has gone to the extent of Rs. 215.97 crores 
in the year 2010 -2011 (upto February, 2011). Despite continuous advising 
the MEA to acquire built up property/construction of property, MEA has 
fallen short of action. The delay in acquiring property and the process 
involved in it has been a matter of grave concern which is evident from 
C&AG reports also. Taking a cue from the observation made by C&AG in 
regard to purchase/acquire of property at Prague, the Committee note that 
the Ministry has reportedly entered into sal e/purchase agreements for 
acquisition of property and contracts for construction of properties abroad 
and has been striving to improve property management. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should evolve certain mechanism and 

 26 
prepare guide lines relating to purchase/acquisition of property abroad 
keeping in mind the qualitative, security & structural aspects of the property 
and engagement of consultant/evaluator of property wherever needed. The 
Committee also feel that the Ministry should co nduct a study to assess that 
whether the existing properties abroad are being optimally utilized and on 
the basis of that study the property management system should 
appropriately be modified. The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard  and also the reply furnished by the Ministry on the 
observations made by C&AG pertaining to property purchased at Prague. 
As the real estate prices are falling in various parts of the world especially in 
Europe, the Committee desire that the Government sh ould appropriately 
explore this opportunity to create the assets for Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad with an objective to reduce huge rental liabilities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs and has purchased a number of properties at 
various stations and initiated action on construction of properties abroad 
with a view to reduce the rental liability. The Ministry has also been seeking 
enhanced allocation  under Capital Outlay in order to meet the requirements 
of funds for purchase / construction of properties abroad.  The allocation 
and utilization of funds in the past four years as detailed below is reflective 
of the focussed and increased attention being given to acquisit ion and 
construction of properties as well as to renovation of existing properties:  
 
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND ACTUAL UTILIZATION SINCE 2007-08 
 
FY Budget allocated 
under Major Head 
4059 (Actual 
Utilization) 
(In ` Crores) 
Budget allocated 
under Major Head 
4216 (Actual 
Utilization) 
(In ` Crores) 
Total Allocation 
(Total Utilization) 
 
 
(In ` Crores) 
2007-08 165 (154.18) 85 (101.51) 250 (255.69) 
2008-09 200 (211.20) 100 (131.52) 300 (342.72) 
2009-10 275 (260.28) 80 (83.18) 355 (343.46) 
2010-11 300 (315.08) 100 (100.22) 400 (415.3) 
 
2. Details of various properties purchased since 2007-08 are as follows: 
 
S. No. Year Station Particulars. Cost  
(In `  crores) 
1 2007-08 E/I, Bogota Chancery 10.89 
2 2007-08 E/I, Sofia Embassy Residence 15.33 
3 2007-08 CGI, Milan Staff Residences 33.38 
4 2007-08 RPO Surat Plot of land 6.83 
5 2007-08 RPO, Amritsar Plot of land 9.01 

 27 
6 2008-09 E/I, Tripoli Embassy Residence 12.54 
7 2008-09 CGI, Hamburg CG Residence 11.66 
8 2008-09 E/I, Dublin Chancery 31.26 
9 2008-09 HCI, Gaborone Plot of land 0.17 
10 2008-09 HCI, Wellington Plot of land 22.43 
11 2009-10 CGI, Dubai CG Residence 21.39 
12 2009-10 South Asian University, New 
Delhi 
Plot of land 63.5 
13 2009-10 CGI, Sydney Residences 4.25 
14 2010-11 CGI, Hong Kong Chancery 63.78 
15 2010-11 E/I, Rabat Chancery 9.51 
16 2010-11 E/I, Paris Indian Cultural Centre  
Building 
30.38 
17 2010-11 E/I, Paris Residence 10 
18 2010-11 E/I, Helsinki Chancery 14.1 
19 2010-11 E/I, Santiago Chancery  10.22 
20 2010-11 E/I, Santiago Residence 11.32 
21 2010-11 CGI, Sydney Chancery 39.5 
22 2011-12 CGI, Houston Chancery 16.87 
23 2011-12 CGI, Perth  Chancery  17.86 
24 2011-12 CGI, Perth CG's Residence  12.07 
25 2011-12 HCI, Port of Spain  Residences  9.36 
 
3. The proposals for purchase of properties at Atlanta (Chancery & 
CG's Residence), Rome (Chancery), Slovenia (Chancery and Embassy 
Residence), Munich (Chancery) and Yerevan (Embassy Residence) are at 
advanced stages and likely to be concluded in the financial year 2011-12.   
 
4. The Ministry has taken note of the conclusions / recommendations of 
the Standing Committee on External Affairs and is closely monitoring the 
progress on various construction / renovation projects with the objective of 
ensuring their e arly commencement / completion. Details in respect of the 
recently concluded projects as well as those which are at implementation 
stage and projects which are at pre-construction stage are given as under:  
 
S. No. Name of Project Present Status 
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan 
(MEA Headquarters) 
Nearing completion 
2. Canning Lane (Hostel) Completed in November, 2009 
3. Chanakyapuri Officers 
Residential Complex 
Completed  in 2009 
4. Kathmandu Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Construction is in progress (project is 
delayed and efforts are being made to get 
the contractor to speed up construction) 

 28 
5. Beijing Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Nearing completion 
6. Tokyo Reconstruction of 
Chancery and Residences 
Completed in July, 2009 
7. Singapore Embassy 
Residence renovation 
Completed in March, 2009 
8 Muscat Completed in January, 2008 
9 Budapest Chancery 
Extension Project 
Completed in November, 2010 
10 Kabul Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Nearing completion 
11 Brasilia Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Agreement with the contractor to be signed 
shortly and construction is expected to 
commence in December 2011.  
12 Dhaka Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Construction is in progress (scheduled 
completion date is February 2012) 
13 Islamabad Residence 
Complex 
Construction is in progress (scheduled 
completion date is March, 2012) 
14 Tashkent Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Design Proposal approved by local 
authorities in 2010. Project is at the stage 
of Pre-Qualification of Contractors 
15 Warsaw Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Project is at the stage of Prequalification of 
Contractors 
16 Abuja Chancery cum 
Residence Complex and 
HC's residence 
Agreement with Contractor signed and  
construction activities commenced.  
17 Wellington Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Architect has been appointed in September 
2010; the architectural design has been 
finalised  
18 Addis Ababa Chancery cum 
Residence Complex and 
Ambassador's residence 
Architect has been selected for 
development of designs. 
19 Bahrain Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Architect has been appointed and concept 
design has been finalized.  
20 Doha Construction Project Architect has been appointed. Project is at 
design stage.  
21 Gaborone Chancery Project Approval of local Government for 
construction of residences (in addition to 
the Chancery) is awaited. 
22 Mauritius Chancery-cum- 
Residence Complex 
Architect has been appointed. Project is at 
the Design stage. 
23 Dar-es-Salaam Chancery 
cum Residence Complex 
Pre-qualification of contractors is under 
process. 
24 Kyiv Chancery cum 
Residence Complex 
Architect has been appointed and Project 
is at conceptual design stage and the 
approval from various local bodies for 
change of land use and construction of 
both Chancery and residences is in 
process. 
 

 29 
25 Nicosia residential project Concept Design has been finalised. 
Detailed design is being developed for 
seeking local approvals. 
26 Bangkok residential 
complex 
The utilization/disposal of land acquired in 
1974 has been reviewed by the Ministry 
and it has been decided that in the long 
term interest of the Government of India 
the plot will be developed for residences 
for Indian based officials of the Mission. 
Concept design for the residential complex 
is being developed. 
27 Berlin residential complex The design brief for the construction of 
residential complex has been finalised. 
Process has been initiated for appointment 
of Architect and Project Manager for 
implementation of the Project. 
28 Redevelopment of GOI 
properties in Singapore  
Redevelopment of GOI -owned properties 
in Singapore with a view to make it a zero 
rental stantion  has been approved in 
principle. Design brief for the 
redevelopment of the properties is at 
advanced stage of processing.   
 
5. The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs and refined the guidelines for  purchase / 
acquisition of properties abroad.  An exercise was undertaken to revise the 
space norms for construction / acquisition of properties abroad for 
residences with a view to make the properties suitable for meeting the 
functional / representational  requirements. The revised area norms for 
residences were approved in February 2011 and have been incorporated in 
the guidelines for purchase / construction.  The security and structural 
aspects for both purchase and construction of properties are being 
thoroughly examined in each case with the engagement of professional 
agencies.   
 
6. The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs  and based on the success of the Tokyo 
reconstruction project, has identified Singapore and Oslo for redevelopment 
of Government of India -owned properties with a view to utilize the existing 
properties optimally.  The Singapore redevelopment project has progressed 
well and as per the preliminary design for redevelopment of propert ies, all 
the office and residential requirements in Singapore would be met.  As 
regards Oslo, it has been decided to explore the options for redevelopment 
of GOI-owned properties and a team, including a technical representative,  
is expected to visit at an  early date.  The Ministry has also reviewed the 
construction projects at preliminary stage and wherever found feasible, has 
revised the design with a view to optimally utilize the existing properties 
abroad. The concept design for the construction project s in Dar -es-Salaam  
and Kyiv have been suitably revised taking into account the qualitative and 
other functional / representational requirements.  The Ministry has also 
examined various options to improve property management and decided to 

 30 
set up a project  / technical cell to be manned with personnel having 
requisite experience in project management.  In this regard, Ministry has 
sought nomination of qualified engineers from Central Public Works 
Department for deputation to the Ministry for the proposed pro jects / 
technical cell for property management.   
 
7. As regards the C&AG observations on purchase of a property for the 
Chancery in Prague, the Ministry has furnished the Action Taken Note to 
the office of the C&AG. It has been stated by the Ministry that  the 
surrounding area of the Chancery in Prague is generally considered among 
the more secured areas in Prague, close to the official residence of the 
Prime Minister, and not far from Prague Castle (the seat of the Czech 
President).  Two other Embassies ar e located in the vicinity, with the Israeli 
Embassy (which maintains a very high level of security world -wide) located 
just behind the Chancery.  The building was found to be structurally sound 
and the residual life of the building was assessed at 50 years .  It has also 
been conveyed to the audit authorities that at the time of the purchase of 
the property, knowledge of the tunneling project was not in public domain. 
The Ministry had no information that an underground tunnel  project would 
be implemented cl ose to the property, as concluded in the report of the 
C&AG.  It was only subsequently, in the course of discussions on the 
prjoect with the Consultant and with the city authorities, that the Mission 
became aware of the Prague City Council's decision to go  ahead with this 
project which had been conceived many years ago but had been indefinitely 
shelved.  Even in January 2006, there remained considerable uncertainty 
about whether the project would ever go ahead,since funding had not been 
tied up.  Moreover, important details of the tunnel project – like the actual 
alignment of the tunnel or the extent of its proximity to the Embassy – were  
not available. In the absence of this crucial information, it was impossible to 
assess the impact of the tunnel project on the structural soundness of the 
Embassy building.   
 
8. The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs and advised Missions / Posts abroad to make 
efforts and locate suitable properties for acquisition w ith a view to seize the 
opportunity of low real estate prices in various parts of the world and has 
separately requested for additionality under Capital Outlay of the Ministry for 
making the requirement of funds for purchase of properties abroad in the 
current and next financial year.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 
  The Committee find that a review of the staff strength in 
Missions/Posts abroad had been undertaken and a cabinet note proposing 
augmentation of local posts in select 31 Missions/Posts is under preparation 
in consultation with Administration and Finance Di vision. The Committee 
may like to be informed of the various steps taken to make these services 
better and also the progress made so far in the direction of augmentation of 
the staff in select Missions/Posts as well as the implementation of IMAS in 
those 16 Missions where it has not be implemented so far.  

 31 
Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to improving the quality of consular services especially at 
stations with large and expanding presence of Indian diaspora, the Ministry 
has carried out an assessment t aking into account the inputs received from 
the concerned Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  Based on these inputs and 
the Ministry‟s assessment, a proposal is already under consideration for 
creation of additional 145 local posts spread over 29 carefully sele cted 
Missions/Posts abroad.  The proposal is currently under submission for 
necessary financial approval.  
 
 Of the 16 Missions/Posts abroad where the iMAS System could not 
be introduced till the last report, the implementation of IMAS has been 
successfully accomplished in 15. Only one station is pending, namely, 
Zahidan (Iran). A team from the Principal Chief Controller of Accounts is 
scheduled to visit Zahidan very soon. With this the Ministry aims to 
complete the introduction of IMAS at all Missions/Posts abroad. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
 The Committee reiterate their concern that the Foreign Service Cadre 
is not being augmented adequately to meet India‟s growing diplomatic 
requirements around the world for which the Commit tee have been 
continuously recommending in their earlier Reports and urge the Ministry to 
take effective and urgent measures in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The long-term Expansion Plan of the Indian Foreign Service Cadre 
that was approved by t he Union Cabinet in August 2008 is currently under 
implementation to address the issue of shortages of officers and staff in this 
Ministry. A total of 514 posts are to be created over ten years under this 
Expansion Plan. 249 such posts (including 139 posts  of Group „A‟ officers) 
will be located at Headquarters, while 265 (including 75 posts of Group „A‟ 
officers) such posts will be located in Missions and Posts abroad.  
 
 The proposal is being implemented following a three pronged 
strategy of increasing Direct Recruitment, fast tracking promotions from IFS 
(B) and attracting officers from other cadres on deputation. Action to 
operationalise all the three tracks is underway.  Around 155 additional posts 
have already been created over three rounds. Creation of 4 th tranche is 
underway. The indent for Direct Recruit Officers was suitably adjusted for 
the 2011 Batch of IFS Officers to incorporate the approved augmentation.  
 
 Ministry has also identified areas of work with MEA where deputation 
of officers from other Ministries/Departments would be of benefit. Eleven 
officers from other Ministries have already joined MEA and more requests 
are in the pipeline. Requests have been made to the Ministries/Departments 
mentioned below: 

 32 
 
1. Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance 
2. Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
3. Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. 
4. Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
5. Ministry of Information & Broadcasting 
6. Ministry of Defence 
7. Railway Board 
8. Ministry of Communications and Information Technology. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
 The Committee note that under the Pilot Project 7 Passport Seva 
Kendra (PSKs) have been launched under RPO Bengaluru and RPO 
Chandigarh in order to improve and to streamline the passport delivery 
system. There is proposal to open 70 more PSKs in various pa rts of the 
country in the current financial year. The Committee during their visit to one 
such Passport Seva Kendra at Bengaluru had observed all the procedural 
aspects from entry of applicant for depositing of passport application till exit 
of the applica nt and had made several suggestions to improve the system. 
The Committee are happy to note that adequate measures have been taken 
to reduce waiting time and reduce congestion in PSKs and they have also 
become successful in getting expeditious police verifi cation too. But, the 
Committee have apprehension that similar situation may arise in other new 
PSKs also. Therefore, all the measures based on the experiences of Pilot 
Projects should be taken from the very beginning so that the primary 
objective of timely and efficient issue of passport to citizens through PSKs is 
achieved. The Committee would also like to caution that the passport offices 
should not keep pending applications in RPOs which are received through 
post or through direct submission in RPOs or D istrict Collection Centres as 
it was being done during implementation of the pilot projects in Bengaluru. 
Such applications should also be cleared simultaneously within the 
prescribed time-frame. The Committee further assert that before proceeding 
further, the Ministry should evaluate the results of the ongoing pilot projects 
and make necessary amendments, if required, depending upon the 
outcomes and feedback from service seekers. The Committee further desire 
that delivery of passport services to smaller to wns/cities should not be 
adversely affected due to establishment of PSKs only in big cities.  
 
 The Committee are anguished to note that no initiatives have been 
taken to fulfill the commitment made by the Ministry during the study visit of 
the Committee in July 2010 at Guwahati where it was promised to establish 
Mini PSKs in Aizwal by December, 2010 and other Mini PSKs in the North -
Eastern States by the end of December, 2011 and desire that the 
establishment of Mini PSKs should be undertaken on priority ba sis without 
any further delay.  
 
 
 

 33 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Having due regard to the  comments and suggestions of the 
Committee  on the improvement of the system and the experience gained  
during the operationalisation of the Pilot Project in Bengaluru  a nd 
Chandigarh, adequate measures have been taken to reduce waiting time 
and congestion in PSKs. The RPOs have been instructed to clear the 
pendency in the old system as well as to deal expeditiously with the cases 
received through post or the District Passport Centres. The Standardisation, 
Testing and Quality Certification (STQC), under the Deptt. of Information 
Technology , Govt. of India, after several rounds of testing,   has   verified 
the project  for compliance on 11 th   January 2011.  It was only aft er the 
certification by STQC that the Ministry   started rolling out the PSP further  in 
the country.  As on 31st October 2011,  22 Passport Seva Kendras   have 
been  operationalised in Bangalore (2),  Mangalore, Hubli -Dharwad, 
Chandigarh, Ambala, Ludhiana , Trichy, Madurai, Thanjavur,  Tirunelvelli,  
Coimbatore, Visakhapatnam , Delhi, Gurgaon, Chennai (3), Jalandhar (2), 
Hoshiarpur and Amritsar.  It is clarified that the PSKs are being established 
in smaller towns as well such as Tirupati, Nizamabad, Alapuz ha and 
Behrampore besides the ones in major cities. 
 
 As regards setting up mini -PSKs in the North -Eastern States, 
contract has been awarded to a Consultant for carrying out civil and 
electrical works for mini-PSK at Aizawl (Mizoram).  Earnest efforts are being 
made to establish mini-PSKs in other North-Eastern States. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
 The Committee observe that under the PSK Scheme, the Ministry 
has outsourced some of the front -end and non -sensitive activities to a 
service provider. The existing passport offices will be converted as passport 
back offices for handling of applications rec eived through the District 
Passport Cells (DPCs) and designated Speed Post Centres (SPCs). The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should examine the issue of 
coordination in its entirety alongwith studying the minutest of all details and 
functional specifications and also that there should be clear-cut demarcation 
of jurisdiction and distribution of work and responsibility between the two 
offices namely PSKs and RPOs. The Committee feel that well defined limits 
would enable transparency in opera tional aspects and demarcation of the 
responsibility and accountably at each level will ensure that there is no 
overlapping and duplication of work. To avoid any future complexities, 
communication channels should be well defined. The Committee also fore -
caution the Ministry that opening of PSK should not become analogous to 
Passport Office and become another channel of delay. Moreover, the role 
and functions of District Passport Collection Centre and various Passport 
Collection Centres, within the ambit of the Passport Seva Project should 
also be analyzed in detail.  
 
 

 34 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a)  The role and responsibilities to be performed at  the PSK and the 
Passport Office under the PSP have  been clearly delineated.  Front-end 
activities, such as  initial scrutiny of the application forms and supporting 
documents, token issuance, acceptance of fee, scanning of  documents, 
capturing photos, signature and biometrics of the applicant,  are performed 
by the Service Provide r‟s staff. The sovereign functions such as    the 
verification of documents, index and Prior Approval Category checks and 
granting functions are performed by Government officials at the PSK.  A 
Centralised Passport Printing Facility, under the control of t he Ministry, has 
also been set up to take care of spill -over printing load emanating from 
various Passport Offices.    
 
b)  The type of applications namely Pre -Police-Verification cases, 
complex cases, policy cases which require further investigation are 
escalated to Passport Office where requisite actions are taken by concerned 
officers. Other functions performed at the Passport Office are review of 
Police Verification Report, Revocation/Impounding of passports and 
decisions on DPC/SPC cases which are digi tized at PSKs and then sent to 
Passport Offices for further action. In addition, printing and dispatch of 
passports are undertaken at the Passport Office. 
 
c)  It may be ideal to close down the DPCs and other application form 
collection channels such as SP Cs where PSKs are operational because of 
two reasons i.e.  i) in the DPC applications, biometric fingerprints are not 
taken resulting in risk of duplicate issuance of passports and ii) the 
DPC/SPC applications take longer time to process because of lack of  
proper documents and insufficient data provided by applicants in the 
physical (hard) copy of forms, Moreover, these applications require 
digitisation, once received at the Passport Office and further actions like 
verification and granting amounting to additional staff needs. 
 
d)  However, till the PSP system is operational throughout the country 
with sufficient number of PSKs, it is prudent to have DPCs in place as part 
of the existing application collection channel.  A clearer picture could 
emerge on the full roll -out of 77 PSKs across the country when a final 
decision on continuance of DPCs and PACCs and on opening of more 
PSKs could be taken. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
  The Committee during the course of the study visit wen t through the 
concerns regarding the issues of security and other procedural aspects in 
the Passport Seva Kendras. The Committee stress upon the need to take 
into consideration the security aspect in the Passport Seva Project. The 
Committee opine that utmo st care must be paid to the issue of strategic 
control and software security. Random technical audit should be conducted 
periodically to check that technical standards are maintained and fraud 
detection ability of the system should be enhanced. The Government should 

 35 
also have a full fledged blue -print of the contingency plan. The Committee 
urge the Ministry to particularly look into the issue of digital signature and 
strive to establish certain mechanism to establish some kind of 
accountability on part of the employees of PSK.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(A) It is submitted that security of the overall system (technical, functional 
and operational) has been given utmost care in the Project.  The Ministry 
has appointed the Standardisation, Testing & Quality Ce rtification (STQC), 
an organisation under the Department of Information Technology to act as 
the Third Party Audit Agency  for ensuring security compliance of the PSP 
system. Strategic assets like Data Centre, Application software, System 
software, Disaste r Recovery Centre and Central Passport Printing Facility 
are owned by the Ministry to have the strategic control over the Passport 
Seva System.  A strategic control team of the Ministry is taking care of 
required technical functional and operational contro l of PSP system.  In 
order to ensure security  of the “Software Codes”,  the  following security 
procedures have been followed  : 
 
i. Application Software has been written by the Service Provider (SP) 
as per approved  Software Requirement Specifications (SRS)   
prescribed by the Ministry. 
ii. SP had done various round of its internal QA (Quality Assurance) of 
the “Code” as per the international norms. Ministry reviewed the 
“Code” developed by SP with the help of independent  the Third 
Party Audit Agency (3PAA) viz. STQC. 
iii. Six rounds of Software Testing and QA had been done by the 3PAA 
before moving the “Code” and application software into production 
(Live environment). 
iv. Development Zone and Production Zone for the PSP is physically 
and logically separated and has been  verified and okayed by the 
3PAA. 
v. Even development zone for the PSP  is kept Physically and Logically 
separated from other development zones being used by the SP for 
other projects. 
vi. Ministry‟s Strategic Control Team consisting of C -DAC (a Govt. 
Agency spec ialized in software system) and PMU  and the  MEA 
personnel supervise all software/system related activities, right from 
development zone to pre-production/ testing and production zone. 
vii. The production zone is fully and solely controlled and supervised by 
Ministry‟s Strategic Control Team. 
viii. Dual Software Key has been implemented in the production zone 
(like a Bank Locker), having one software key with the Strategic 
Control Team of the Ministry 

 36 
ix. The Root Key is held only with the Ministry. 
x. Any task being perfor med in the production zone  with the help of 
dual key, be it software specific or system specific – the use of dual 
key is audited, logs are preserved , tampered - proof and is subject to 
audit by 3PAA on a periodic basis. 
xi. All tasks of the Application Admin istrator, System Administrator, 
Database Administrator, Storage Administrator, Back -up 
Administrator, Network Administrator etc are audited and   are  
subject to Audit by 3PAA on a periodic basis. 
 
(B) (i) As regards the need to establish accountability of  the 
employees  as well as SP‟s personnel,  in respect of any task performed in 
the PSP system,  it is submitted  that three level authentication and 
authorisation checks are being followed i) biometric log -in, ii) User 
ID/Password  and iii) Digital Signat ures. A  digital signature to electronic 
documents is what a handwritten signature is to printed documents. A digital 
signature is an electronic signature that can be used to authenticate the 
identity of the sender of a message or the signer of a document. Electronic 
documents, for example e -forms are required to be signed digitally using a 
Digital Signature Certificate  in the same way as physical documents are 
signed manually, 
(ii) The digital signatures have been recognized under the Indian 
Information Te chnology Act 2000 (IT Act). The  Act   provides  for legal 
recognition of electronic transactions and digital signatures. Section 5 of the 
Act gives legal recognition to digital signatures.  The  Act  provides for the 
use of Digital Signatures on the docum ents submitted in electronic form in 
order to ensure the security and authenticity of the documents. Digital 
Certificates are issued only through a valid Certification Authority (CA).  In 
India, the Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA ) is the governing body 
under the Department of Information Technology, Ministry of 
Communication and Information Technology, which is empowered to license 
and regulate the working of Certifying Authorities.  The Certifying Authorities 
(CAs) issue digital signature  certificates for electronic authentication of 
users.  Currently there are eight CAs who have been licensed by the CCA to 
issue Digital Signature Certificates under the Information Technology Act 
2000. 
(iii) The advantages of Digital Signatures are as under :-- 
 
 Fraud prevention : By using digital signatures, the possibility of 
committing fraud is eliminated as the digital signature cannot be 
altered. Moreover the signature  cannot be forged. 
 Message integrity : By having a digital signature,  the recipient i s 
assured that the document is valid and free from forgery or false 
information.  
 Legal requirements: Using a digital signature satisfies certain types 
of legal requirements for the document in question. A digital signature 
takes care of any formal legal a spect of executing the document. For 

 37 
example,  when sending e -mail to a bank for  a transaction, a digital 
signature will verify that the request has come from the account 
holder.   
(C) The security measures  deployed as part of the PSP are as under :-
- 
1) As soon as the user switches on, the System  asks for  mapping of 
Biometric-Authentication of the concerned user for entering into the system. 
This authentication takes place from the central servers and the logs are 
preserved and are made available for post-facto audit. 
2) Even  after  entering  into the desktop system after Bio -metric 
authentication, the user is not allowed to access the PSP application as it 
requires 2 more levels of authentication processes i.e. Digital Signature 
Certificate (DSC) and PIN number as password.  
3) Once user attaches  his/her DSC and provides the PIN, the specific 
part of the PSP application (as per the role and task assigned to the user) is 
made accessible to the user. 
4) Thereafter, whatever task is performed by the user, each of his/her 
activity is audited and kept tamper - proof for post -facto verification as per 
the need. 
5)  Typically various audit trails that are preserved in the PSP System 
are: 
 Bio-metric Log-in  
 Web Server Logs 
 Token Life Cycle 
 Activity Trails 
 Digital Signature Signing 
In essence, the PSP system has been designed, developed and 
implemented as per the best security norms followed internationally and as 
per the ISO 27001 security controls. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
 The Committee observe that system of online appointment to submit 
the passport applications was introduced by the Ministry to make the entire 
process speedier, citizen friendly and delivery oriented. However, the 
Committee came across certain instances in some passport offices wherein 
applicants had to wait for more than a week and in some cases upto 20 
days just to get an online appointment, which defeated the very purpose of 
installing the system. The Committee desire that all initiatives should be 
taken to identify the reasons which cause such inordinate delays and the 
current practices and procedure should be reviewed with an objective to 
resolve the hindrances including the technical hiccups in the process, if any.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Having given due regard to the recommendation of the Committee 
and to implement the vision of the   PSP, the  practices and procedures, 
including technical aspects relating to giving appointments have been 
reviewed by the Ministry. As a result of intensive  efforts made by the 

 38 
Ministry in consultation with the Service Provider,  the time lag in giving 
appointments has been greatly reduced. It is submitted that at the  22 PSKs 
in operation as on 31st October 2011, appointments are released in 
advance varying from 2 – 9  days,  keeping in view the  load/volume,  
handling capacity of the Government staff  and capacity of each PSK  which 
is gradually   settling  down in the new system.  In addition, Walk-in facility is 
also available for those applicants requirin g passports on urgent and 
emergency basis. The appointments situation  is continuously monitored 
and efforts are  continuously underway to address this issue. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
 The Committee observe that there are 17 posts of Passport Officers 
in CPO Cadre. But surprisingly, as against the 12 posts available for CPO 
Personnel, there is not a single officer from that cadre in position and all the 
positions are occupied by deputationists belonging to All India Services. The 
Committee do not agree with the reason given by the Ministry that that this 
situation has arisen due to non -availability of officers from the CPO cadre 
with qualifying service. The Committee understand that non -availability of 
officers with qualifying service in CPO is due to delays in promotions in the 
CPO cadre. DPCs meetings are not being organized on regular basis during 
the last several years and after a long time promotions have taken place 
recently in 2010 -11. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should re -look at the recruitment rules and make necessary 
amendments/relaxation in eligibility for officers of CPO cadre, so that all the 
posts available to them are filled from CPO cadre personnel an d that the 
deputationists are posted within the limit only.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recruitment Rules for Group „B‟ posts in Central Passport 
Organization were amended in December 2010.  Promotions, as per the 
amended rules have since been affected in December 2010 and in August 
2011 respectively. 
 
2. Amended Recruitment Rules for Group „A‟ posts were notified in 
June 2011.  For affecting promotions in accordance with these rules, 
prescribed qualifying service needs to be relaxed for the grades of Assis tant 
Passport Officer and Deputy Passport Officer for promotions to next higher 
grades.  A proposal seeking necessary relaxation was sent to Department 
of Personnel and Training (DoPT) in June 2011.  The DoPT has given its 
necessary relaxation on 10 th October 2011 for panel year 2012 -13 for the 
post of Passport Officer and Deputy Passport Officer and for the panel year 
of 2011-12 for the post of Assistant Passport Officer which has been sent to 
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) on 17 th October 2011 for  their 
concurrence.  However, the DoPT has also given relaxation for ad -hoc 
promotion, till regular appointment is made.  Departmental Promotion 
Committee met for ad hoc promotion of Passport Officer, Deputy Passport 
Officer and Assistant Passport Officer on 17 th November 2011 and 

 39 
promoted  5 Deputy Passport Officer as Passport Officer, 9 Assistant 
Passport Officer as Deputy Passport Officer and 47 Passport Granting 
Officer as Assistant Passport Officer. 
 
3.     Committee‟s observation that deputationists a re posted in CPO within 
the limits only has been noted and are kept in view. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.16) 
 
  International cooperation and providing aid through Technical and 
Economic Cooperation to neighbouring countries and countries of Africa 
and Eurasia has been one of the outstanding features of Ministry‟s budget 
allocation. Out of a total budget of Rs. 7120  crores at BE 2011 -2012, an 
amount of Rs. 3050 crores has been shown as loan and aid to these 
developing countries on account of technical cooperation and on carrying 
out mega projects. However, there are instances where time and again the 
additional grants have been sought by the Ministry through Supplementary 
Demands to meet the urgent needs of projects in these countries. 
Thereupon, the Committee observe that due to long implementation 
schedule and other external forces in the countries where the project s are 
being implemented, excessive delays take place in completion of the 
projects consequently causing time and cost overrun. Recognizing the need 
to strengthen relationship with these developing countries, the Committee 
would like to reiterate the sugges tions given by the Committee in their 15th 
Report (14th LS on DFG 2006 -07) that the relevant project details such as 
the original and anticipated dates of completion, factor -wise analysis of cost 
escalation, impact of cost overrun and viability of project etc. should be 
disclosed in the Outcome Budget of the Ministry every year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The requirement of disclosure of the relevant project details such as 
the original and anticipated dates of completion, factor -wise analysis of cost 
escalation, impact of cost overrun and viability of project etc. in the Outcome 
Budget of each year has bee n noted. The same will be implemented in the 
forthcoming Outcome Budget of the Ministry and onwards.  
 
 Incidentally, the budgetary allocation of the Ministry in BE 2011 -12 is 
Rs. 7106 crore and not Rs. 7120 crore.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
 
(Recommendation No.18) 
 
 The Committee note that Nalanda University Act 2010 was passed 
and came into force w.e.f. 25 November, 2010. The Vice Chancellor 
assumed charge in October, 2010. The State Government of Bihar allotted 
446.85 acres of land to the Univers ity and a timeline for the construction 

 40 
work of the University has been drawn according to which the construction 
work is likely to begin by January 2012 and a part of academic session will 
likely begin in the year 2013 -14. The Committee observe that East Asia 
Summit (EAS) countries namely Australia, China, Singapore and Laos have 
offered voluntary contributions for the Project. The Governing Body has also 
proposed to establish a Group called „Friends of Nalanda‟ comprising 
various countries who could help the University in various ways including 
raising funds for it. But the Committee are surprised to note that no 
initiatives have been taken to remove the drawbacks of the Report 
submitted by EdCIL regarding cost of the project in the year 2007. The 
Committee would, therefore, like that EdCIL should be asked to submit fresh 
report without any drawback so that the cost of the project may be 
ascertained taking into account all the factors. The contribution made by the 
Nalanda in ancient times in spreading the k nowledge at that time should 
also be projected in all the countries particularly in China, Greece, Italy and 
the Arabian Countries, where similar seat of learning had flourished in 
ancient times for cooperation and for their financial contribution. Nalanda  
has provided an opportunity to us to revive the emotional bonding with the 
countries having similar heritage of old and rich civilizations. The Committee 
also desire that the „Friends of Nalanda‟ Group may be constituted 
immediately and the collection of contributions from other countries should 
also start immediately. The Committee expect that a timely release of funds 
and ensuring diligent use of allocated resources only can avoid any further 
delay in completion of the project. The Committee would like t o be apprised 
of the progress made in the Project from time to time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At the second meeting of Nalanda University Governing Board held 
in Patna on July 6 -7, 2011, EdCIL made a preliminary presentation on the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR). It was observed that its presentation needed 
improvement and its budget projection was far from realistic. Based on 
suggestions from the Governing Board and several rounds of meetings 
between Nalanda University and EdCIL, a revised 2 nd draft DPR w as 
submitted by EdCIL on October 5, 2011. This document is being scrutinized. 
 
Master Plan 
 
The Master Plan for Nalanda University will be developed by a 
specialized firm in campus planning. It will have three different areas - 
academic, recreational and residential - but all connected through a road 
network, pathways and open spaces. All buildings in Nalanda University are 
to be designed to follow the criteria of Green Rating Integrated Habitat 
Assessment (GRIHA) 4 star rating. 
 
Schools 
 
According to the revised draft DPR, the University will have 7 
Schools of Learning with a two year Masters‟ program and a 
Research/Doctoral program. Each School will have 5 departments each, 
with an annual student intake of 20 (increased to 30 in the 4 th year of 

 41 
establishment of the university). Each School will have a maximum annual 
intake of 10 for research/doctoral programs. The student intake will be 
stabilized by the end of the 10 th year, with 2,100 students in the Masters 
program and 350 students in the Research/Doctoral program. 
 
The School of Environment and Ecology and the School of Historical 
Studies will be operational in the first year of establishment of the university. 
The School of Languages and Literature will be operational in the second 
year. The School of Buddhist Studies, Philosophy and Comparative 
Religions and the School of International Relations and Peace Studies will 
be operational in the fourth year. The School of Management and the 
School of Information Technology will be operational in the sixth year. 
 
Staff 
 
Three categories of human resources, i.e  Teaching Staff, Non -
Teaching Staff and Outsourced Staff are being considered for the 
University. The Teacher- to- Student ratio is proposed as 1:5. The Teacher -
to- Non teaching staff ratio is proposed as 1:1. Teaching Staff is subdivided 
into three catego ries, i.e. Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant 
Professor in the ratio of 1:2:3, i.e, for each Professor there will be two 
Associate Professors and three Assistant Professors. Professors can be 
promoted to a fourth category called Dean/Founding Profes sor/Director. By 
the end of the 10 th year, the total requirement for teaching and non teaching 
staff will be 490 each. Housekeeping, security, horticulture, cafeteria etc. will 
be dealt with by outsourced staff. 
 
Budget 
 
The projected total capital expendi ture is Rs. 2153.8 cr. (US $ 431 
mn). This includes cost of Building & Civil Works - Rs. 1840 cr., cost of 
Furniture, Teaching Equipment and Machinery - Rs. 202.29 cr., Preliminary 
expenses- Rs. 50 cr. and contingency -Rs. 61.27 cr.  
 
The projected recurrin g cost in the 1 st year is Rs.32.69 cr.(US $ 6.5 
mn), and in the 10 th year is Rs. 323.25 cr.(US $ 65 mn.) (Rate of Exchange, 
US $ 1 = Rs. 49.90). This includes all running administrative expenses of 
the university. 
 
Current Status of EdCIL report 
 
At its me eting in Beijing on October 14 -15, 2011, the Governing 
Board discussed the revised draft DPR. The Board suggested that EdCIL 
project the estimated cost of construction in future (say, the next five years) 
based on the trend of inflation in the last 5 years , so that a more realistic 
figure is available and can be budgeted for. Detailed comments by the 
Governing Board and the university are awaited.  
 
Meanwhile, the report needs to address a number of other issues. 
EdCIL has to indicate if thought has been gi ven to the proposed fee 
structure, and, if so, how much the university is likely to earn from this, or 

 42 
any other source. EdCIL needs to clarify whether the estimated 15% cost 
towards achieving the GRIHA standard is an additional cost, as compared 
to non -GRIHA construction. Taking these suggestions into consideration, 
EdCIL is expected to submit its Final DPR soon. 
 
Friends of Nalanda 
 
 At the 1st meeting of the Nalanda University Governing Board held in 
New Delhi on February 21 -22, 2011, it was proposed that a group titled 
“Friends of Nalanda” could be constituted, comprising of a group of people 
who could help the university in various ways. The consensus was that such 
persons should not be labeled as “fundraisers” for the university. It was 
suggested that core funding should come from the Government of India. It 
was suggested that “Friends of Nalanda” will not be stakeholders in the 
university bu t can give suggestions to the Chairman of Governing Board 
and to the Vice Chancellor. 
 
 The “Friends of Nalanda” is an informal group and not a statutory 
body. This group is expected to provide informal advice and assistance to 
the university in academic m atters, the general management of the 
university and the raising of funds.  
 
International Advisors Panel 
 
 At its 2 nd meeting in Patna in July, 2011, the Board decided to 
institute a body similar to, but different from “Friends of Nalanda”, called 
“International Advisors Panel”. This would be a panel of eminent persons to 
ensure continuity and create greater global awareness of the broader vision 
and objectives of Nalanda University, and to perform such roles and 
functions as the Governing Board may determ ine. At its meeting in Patna, 
the Board decided that the Panel will be chaired by Mr. George Yeo, the 
former Foreign Minister of Singapore, and a member of the present Board. 
The Board had, however, not deliberated upon who the other members of 
the Panel would be. At its 3 rd meeting in Beijing in October, 2011, the Board 
discussed inviting distinguished persons to join the Panel. Approval of the 
External Affairs Minister and Prime Minister has been sought for the 
constitution of the International Advisors P anel and the appointment of Mr. 
George Yeo as its chair. Thereafter, the approval of the President as Visitor 
of the university would be sought.  
  
Contributions 
 
EAS member states had been asked to send contributions for 
Nalanda University by October 24, 2011. The Singapore Buddhist 
Community has indicated a contribution of S $ 8 mn (US$ 5mn 
approximately) for the library of the Nalanda University. The Government of 
China has pledged US $ 1 mn. Australia has announced that they would 
establish (set up/fund ) a Chair in the University. Mr. Madanjeet Singh, 
Goodwill Ambassador for UNESCO, and an Indian citizen, has pledged US 
$ 1 mn. Lao PDR has announced a contribution of US $ 50,000. Countries 

 43 
like Sri Lanka and Bhutan outside the EAS have indicated their in terest in 
being associated with the university in some manner.  
 
At the 3 rd meeting of the Nalanda University Governing Board in 
Beijing, Thailand pledged US $ 100,000. The Chinese Executive Vice 
Foreign Minister, Mr. Zhang Zhijun, informed the Chair at th eir meeting on 
October 14, 2011 that China wants a part of its contribution of US $ 1 mn to 
be spent on a China floor in the university library. He said that China would 
consider funding a Centre for Chinese Studies at a later date. To date, 
written pledges have come from Mr. Madanjeet Singh and the Government 
of Thailand. 
 
India‟s contribution 
 
India as the host country has made the major contribution. The 
Government of Bihar has provided 446.85 acres of land free of cost on a 99 
year lease. In 2010-2011, the Government of India provided Rs. 1.12 crores 
to the university. In 2011 -2012, the government made a budgetory 
allocation of Rs.10 crores and had already provided Rs. 5.5 crores, out of 
which Rs. 3 crores is for beginning the construction of boundary wa ll. 
Revised Estimates of Rs. 19.834 crores for 2011 -2012 and Budget 
Estimates of Rs. 15.922 crores for 2012 -2013 are being sent to Ministry of 
Finance for approval. All the funds the university has so far received have 
come from the government of India.  
 
Current Progress 
 
Steps have been taken in recent weeks to speed up work on the 
university. The Visitor has been requested to confirm the appointment of Dr. 
Gopa Sabharwal as the Vice -Chancellor. On November 3, 2011, the 
university has signed an agreement with Bihar Rajya Pul Nirman Nigam Ltd. 
on the construction of the boundary wall. The Ministry of Human Resource 
Development has nominated Professor Peter Ronald De Souza, Director, 
Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla, as a member of the new 
Governing Board. The Government of Bihar has also nominated two 
members to the new Governing Board. Steps are being taken for the 
selection of a project management consultant for the Global Design 
Competition and construction of the university. 
 
 To demonstrate it s intent to begin functioning even before the 
construction of a campus and selection of faculty and students, the 
university has begun sponsoring academic events, to build the Nalanda 
brand. It sponsored two scholars at the workshop on Historic and Cultura l 
Interactions between China and India, held at Beijing on October 15, 2011.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
 
 
 
 

 44 
(Recommendation No.19) 
 
  The Committee note that a new Head „Energy Security‟ has been 
created by the Ministry and the allocation made for 2011-12 is Rs. 89 Lakhs. 
The Committee are of the opinion that keeping the mandate in mind and the 
international climate on the issue of energy security, the Ministry should be 
ready with adequate fieldwork, background studies and data with the help of 
academics institutions and those engaged in the field so as to support and 
legitimize its claim at international level. Ministry should make vigorous 
efforts and engage with various stake -holders at diplomatic and political 
level in this regard. The Committee  are of the view that the functions of the 
Division have become all the more important in light of the recent events in 
North-Africa and West -Asia. The Committee urge the Ministry to adopt a 
proactive role in ensuring that India‟s interest are secured in t he region in a 
more sustainable manner with the long term vision. The Committee are of 
the view that alongwith bringing out the handbook on Energy Security, the 
Missions/Posts should also act as facilitator in encouraging investment and 
securing energy res ources. The Ministry should also look at the qualitative 
aspects of the expenditure. Keeping in view the mandate on this account, 
the Committee stress upon the need to adequately enhance the budgetary 
allocation during the current financial year which can be taken up by the 
Ministry suitably at RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  With respect to the observation that “the Ministry should be ready 
with adequate fieldwork, background studies and data with the help of 
academics institutions and those engaged in the field so as to support 
and legitimize its claim at international level”, Energy Security Division is 
in the final stages of the process for hiring an institutional consultant who 
will be tasked with producing studies and research papers and compilin g 
databases for the Ministry in the field of energy security. The following 
papers/studies have been identified for execution by the consultant:  
 
 Commissioned Research Papers 
 
 Paper on New and Emerging Energy Sources (focusing on 
technology, political eco nomy and business potential aspects of 
sources like CBM, Shale Gas, new hydrocarbon finds) 
 
 Paper on Pipelines and Energy Diplomacy (focusing on technology, 
political economy, and recent developments in pipeline projects 
around the world) 
 
 Commissioned Reports on energy opportunities on a regional basis: 
 On Africa 
 On Latin America 
 On Central Asia 
 On South East Asia 
 
 Case study: An analysis of the Experience of Indian Energy 
companies working abroad 

 45 
   With respect to the recommendation that “Ministry sho uld make 
vigorous efforts and engage with various stake -holders at diplomatic 
and political level in this regard”,  Energy Security division will provide 
active support to initiatives like the 3 rd India-Africa Hydrocarbon Conference 
(9-10 December) organized by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas which 
are aimed at engaging the relevant Oil and Gas / Energy Ministers of key 
African nations. Similarly ES division will be assisting GAIL in organizing 7 th 
Asia Gas Partnership Summit in 2012 Energy Security Di vision will also 
provide active assistance to other nodal ministries in their engagements with 
International organizations These include assistance to MNRE for 
engagement with the IRENA; M/o Power for engagements with the IEA and 
the IPEEC; and M/o Petrole um and Natural Gas for engagements with IEA, 
IEF and other bodies. 
 
  With respect to the recommendation that “along with bringing out 
the handbook on Energy Security, the Missions/Posts should also act 
as facilitator in encouraging investment and securing  energy 
resources”,  Energy Security Division will be tasking the institutional 
consultant with generating the content for the Energy Security Handbook 
which will be distributed to officers in all Indian missions abroad. This 
publication should be ready fo r distribution before the end of the financial 
year in March 2011. This will be an useful tool in carrying out of energy 
security related work. With the help of focused inputs from the institutional 
consultant, Energy Security Division will provide timely inputs to our 
Missions/Posts to gather information and intervene in a manner which will 
encourage investment and secure more energy assets abroad. 
 
 With respect to the recommendation that “adequately enhance the 
budgetary allocation during the current fin ancial year which can be 
taken up by the Ministry suitably at RE stage” , while the budget at the 
Revised Estimate state is at Rs 0.435 Crore, the budget proposed for the 
next year, 2012-13,  is at Rs 0.89 crore. It may be noted that the proposed 
budget at BE stage for the current year was  Rs 0.89 crore, but it was 
reduced to Rs 0.435 crore at RE stage, since this is a new Division dealing 
with a highly specialized field and it took some time to work out in detail the 
modalities of implementing the proposal to hire an institutional consultant. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.20) 
 
  The Committee welcome India‟s election as a Non -permanent 
Member of the United National Security Council for the term 2011 -12 with 
an overwhelming support from the other UN Member States. The 
Committee desire that India should assume a leadership role and take 
principled stand on various global issues and challenges and channelize its 
creative energies to resolve contentious international issues in an amicable 
and peaceful manner. The Committee express that as a founder and 
pioneer member of the Non -Aligned Movement, India should live upto the 
spirit and work towards non -interference by global actors in regional and 
internal issues of the Member States. The Committee feel that India should 

 46 
also champion the cause of developing, under -developed and least 
developed countries at various fora and at various negotiations for treaties 
and agreements particularly on the issues of new emerging politics and 
trade.  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.     India joined the Security Council as a non -permanent member on 1 
January 2011 for a two year term 2011 -2012. At the Council, India has 
taken a leadership role and stressed the need to respect the principles of 
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member -states and 
non-interference by global actors. India has also supported the peaceful 
resolution of conflicts without recourse to the threat of or actual use of force, 
for the need to consult national authorities, and for transparency in the 
working methods of the UN Security Council.  
 
2.       During the period  that India has been on the Security Council, the 
Council has adopted 54 resolutions, 18 Presidential Statements and 52 
Press statements. India abstained on Resolution 1973 which authorized 
military action against Libya. India also abstained on a resolutio n in the 
Security Council which called for sanctions against Syria. We instead called 
for a Syrian -led inclusive political process, without foreign interference, 
which should address the legitimate concerns of all sections of the Syrian 
society. Prime Minister, speaking at the General Debate of the 66 th Session 
of the United Nations General Assembly on 24 September 2011 reiterated 
this view when he said, ”the observance of the rule of law is as important in 
international affairs as it is within countries. S ocieties cannot be reordered 
from outside through military force”.  
 
3.        As the leading contributor to the UN peacekeeping operations, India 
expressed its concern at the expansion of the mandates of UN 
Peacekeeping missions without commensurate increase in resources which 
are made available to them. India stressed the need that peacekeeping 
missions should work on the principle of national consent and should 
support the efforts of the national authorities to resolve conflicts. 
 
4.      As part of  its ongoing commitment to the purposes and principles of 
the Non -Aligned Movement, India participated at the XVI NAM Ministerial 
Conference in Bali, Indonesia in May 2011 and the 50 th anniversary 
Commemorative Meeting in Belgrade in September 2011. India reaffirmed 
it's solidarity with the Least Developed Countries(LDCs) and reiterated its 
commitment to their needs at the First India -LDC Conference hosted in New 
Delhi in February 2011 and again at the IV UN LDC Conference held in 
Istanbul in May this year.  At the Second India -Africa Forum Summit held in 
Addis Ababa, also in May, Prime Minister announced lines of credit to 
African countries worth five billion US dollars for the next three years and an 
additional 700 million dollars to establish new instituti ons and training 
programmes in consultation with the African Union and its institutions.  
 
                                                                 (File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
  

 47 
 (Recommendation No.21) 
 
  Taking note of the proceedings of the Exchange of the 7th Round of 
the Inter-Governmental Negotiations on UNSC Reforms, the Committee are 
of the opinion that Government of India must strategically work with other 
like minded countries and built up the case  of UN reforms including 
expansion of Security Council and seek their support and cooperation in 
favour of India. Further, in the light of the recent visits of Heads of 
State/Government of all P -5 Members and their broadly positive approach 
on the issue of  reform and support to India endorsed by most of them, 
Government must strive to channelize the goodwill generated by such visits 
and seek further endorsement of India‟s claim to UNSC permanent seat. 
However, the Committee also acknowledge the road -blocks in the process 
posed by some countries which have built stake in the status -quo and 
hence, challenge the very idea of UN Reforms and particularly to India‟s 
claim for permanent seat in the new structure. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to draw a suitable strategy to deal with those countries to 
steer clear the road for India‟s claim for permanent seat in an expanded UN 
Security Council. The Committee may also be kept apprised of the latest 
developments made in this regard from time to time. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.       The Minister of External Affairs of India, the Federal Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of Germany, the Minister of External Relations of Brazil and 
the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Japan met in New York on 11 
February 2011 to exchange views on Security Council reform. At this 
meeting the Ministers "agreed to press ahead, with all necessary steps to 
achieve at the earliest an expansion in both the permanent and non -
permanent membership categories of the Security Council".  
 
2. Beginning early March 2011, the G -4 (India, Brazil, Japan and 
Germany) started a process of reaching out to others on their proposal that 
calls for expansion in both permanent and non -permanent categories and 
an improvement in working methods. Th is outreach was also in response to 
the letter of Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Chair of the inter - Governmental 
Negotiations on Security Council reforms of 23 February, 2011 which stated 
that the process of Council reform must evolve in an open, transparent, 
inclusive and comprehensive membership-driven manner. The G-4 initiative 
has garnered cross-regional support and demonstrated that a wide coalition 
of member States support expansion of the Security Council in both the 
permanent and non -permanent categories and an improvement of its 
working methods. 
 
3. The Foreign Ministers of the G-4 countries met again in New York on 
the margins of the 66 th Session of the UN General Assembly on 23 
September, 2011. At this meeting they agreed that the strong support for 
expansion of the Security Council in both categories and an improvement of 
its working methods "should be considered as the basis for further 
discussions in the on -going inter -Governmental Negotiations to create the 
momentum needed for real negotiations."  

 48 
 
The Government has been actively seeking support from all UN member -
states for India's candidature for permanent membership in an expanded 
Security Council. The reactions to our demarches have been positive and 
there is a clear acknowledgment of the increas ingly important role that India 
is playing in international affairs. As a result of these efforts, there has been 
a steady accretion of support from every region for India's candidature for 
permanent membership of the UN Security Council. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.22) 
 
  The Committee are happy to note the 'Operation Home Coming' 
exercised by the Ministry in evacuation of more 18000 Indian nationals from 
Libya when the violence escalated there and the cost of operation was 
borne by the Government of India. However, at the same time the 
Committee feel stressed to note that 749 Indian nationals those were 
brought back from Cairo (Egypt) to Mumbai were charged air-fare more than 
the normal air fare by Air India. The Committee are not satisfied with the 
explanation of the Minis try of External Affairs that this was not an 
evacuation but an arrangement facilitated by the Government upon a 
request made by the Indian community in Egypt. In the backdrop of 
prevailing circumstances and the whole issue of evacuation in such 
situations, the Committee desire the Ministry of External Affairs to constantly 
monitor the situations in these countries and draw an advance contingent 
plan and strategy in consultation with the other concerned 
Ministries/Departments including the Air India to deal with such situations 
and the safe evacuation of Indian nationals, whenever so warranted in 
future.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of External Affairs has taken note of the 
recommendation for compliance in the future on similar occasions such as 
had happened in Egypt earlier this year when Indian nationals in distress 
had to be brought back to India. Ministry continues to constantly and closely 
monitor the situation in the Arab world. Ministry has a strategy and 
contingency plan drawn up in consult ation with the concerned Missions and 
other Ministries/Departments including Air India to ensure smooth handling 
of the situation and, if required, consequent evacuation of Indian nationals. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.23) 
 
 As per information furnished by the Ministry, during the last five years 
(2007-2011) a total of 175 Indian crew members were taken hostage on 
board of various merchant ships. The Ministry of External Affairs has a 
limited role and they use Diplomatic Channels to  facilitate release of Indian 
Nationals from pirates. In order to deal with prosecution of pirates, the 

 49 
Ministry of External Affairs is currently engaged in piloting a comprehensive 
domestic legislation. The Committee further note that the MEA is 
coordinating with the UN and other international bodies like the contract 
group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the International Maritime 
Bureau to seek coordinated solutions to the problem of combating piracy off 
the coast of Somalia and has also demanded that naval patrolling in the 
affected area should be carried out under the UN flag. The Committee 
express their concern over the growing incidents of abduction of Indian 
seafarers from private/foreign/cargo ships by pirates in the Gulf of Aden. 
The Committ ee understand the sufferings of the families of Indian sailors 
who are taken hostages by pirates. The issue becomes more complicated 
for them since many agencies are involved in the process of their release 
and more often they do not get information/status  of their safety and 
release. Hence, the Committee desire the issue of piracy needs to be 
addressed with the utmost seriousness it deserves. Besides appropriately 
taking up the matter with the international community to avert incidents of 
piracy, the Committee also desire the Ministry of External Affairs to draw up 
a long term strategy in coordination with other concerned Ministries viz. 
Ministries of Shipping and Defence, to stringently deal with the issue of 
piracy and making the sea lanes safer. At the s ame time, the Committee 
also desire the Ministry of External Affairs to expeditiously finalise the 
proposed legislation to deal with the prosecution of pirates. The Committee 
may be apprised of the concrete steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.       MEA has been closely coordinating with the Ministry of Shipping and 
the Ministry of Defence regarding the counter -piracy action to be taken at 
the international level. Composite delegations of these Ministries have been 
participating in the deliberations of the Contact Group on Piracy off the 
coast of Somalia. The Indian Navy has been coordinating and exchanging 
information with other naval forces operating in the Gulf of Aden regarding 
action against the pirates and for protection of maritime traffic.  
 
2.      A draft of an Anti -Piracy Act has been prepared by MEA in 
consultation with the Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy, 
Indian Coast Guard and the Directorate General of Shipping. The draft has 
been submitted to the Department of Legislative Affairs, Ministry of Law & 
Justice for legal vetting.  As soon as the legally vetted draft is received back 
by MEA, it will be submitted for Cabinet‟s consideration with the approval of 
the External Affairs Minister.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.24) 
 
  As regards the Indian nationals languishing in jails in neighbouring 
countries, the Committee note that there are 317 Indian civilian prisoners in 
jails of Bangladesh. The Government of India are reportedly making efforts 
for their repatriation to their ho meland. The Committee express their deep 
concern and request the Government of India to expedite their release. 

 50 
Similarly, the Committee desire that the process of preparation of a list of 
Indian prisoners in jails of Pakistan should be expedited and the c oncrete 
steps should be taken by the Government to secure their early and safe 
release after completion of the nationality verification process.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The total number of Indian nationals in Bangladesh jails has come 
down from 317 to 263. Out of this, 88 are convicted prisoners and 91 are 
under trial prisoners, leaving only 84 prisoners  who have finished their jail 
sentences and are due for repatriation.   
 
 Our Mission has been making consistent efforts to get these 84 
Indian nationals repatriated.  In many of the cases, repatriation gets delayed 
on account of incorrect and incomplete addresses of the prisoners provided 
by the Bangladesh Government. We have sought consular access to meet 
the Indian nationals in jails to ascertain their correct addresses.  
 
  In January, 2011, the  Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons 
between the two countries came into force and under Article 4 of the 
bilateral agreement Mission has already sought details of 88 Indian convicts 
from the Bangladesh Government in order to transfer them to Indian jails to 
serve their remaining sentences.  
 
 Government of India has been consistently taking up the issue of 
release and repatriation of all Indian prisoners, lodged in Pakistani jails with 
the Government of Pakistan at all appropriate levels. The matter was raised 
with Pakistan at the Foreign Secretary Level talks on February 25, 2010 in 
New Delhi and again on June 24, 2010 in Islamabad.  The issue was also 
raised during Home Minister‟s visit to Islamabad on June 25-26, 2010 and 
during the Foreign Minister level talks in Islamabad on July 15, 2010.  The 
issue was again taken up at the Foreign Secretary level talks in February 
2011 in Thimphu;  Home/Interior Secretary level talks on March 28-29, 2011 
in New Del hi; Foreign Secretary level talks in Islamabad on 23 -24 June, 
2011 and Foreign Minister level talks in New Delhi on July 27, 2011. 
 
 In the Foreign Minister level talks between India and Pakistan held on 
July 27, 2011, in New Delhi both sides noted with sa tisfaction the fact that 
since the resumption of dialogue earlier this year, the process of release of 
prisoners and fishermen from both sides has continued. In this regard, the 
Ministers agreed with the recommendations of the Judicial Committee on 
Prisoners regarding (a) early repatriation of the prisoners who have 
completed their sentences and whose travel documents are available; (b) 
adoption of a humane approach in dealing with cases of fishermen, women, 
elderly, juvenile prisoners, prisoners terminally  ill or suffering from serious 
illness or physical / mental disability and (c) need to monitor the welfare of 
prisoners in order to ensure their humane treatment 
 
 Further, an India -Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners 
consisting of four retired judges  from each side has been set up to 
recommend steps for humane treatment and expeditious release of 

 51 
prisoners of the respective countries in each other‟s jails. The committee 
has so far had four meetings and has given several recommendations. The 
Committee has to-date met four times on 26 -27 February 2008, 9 -14 June 
2008, 18-23 August 2008 and 19-23 April, 2011.  
 
 Members of the India -Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners 
visited Pakistan from 18 -23 April 2011 and visited jails in Karachi, 
Rawalpindi and Lahore. During the visit, the Pakistani side shared the lists 
of Indian Fishermen and civilian prisoners. Consular Access was conducted 
in respect of some of the fishermen and prisoners on the spot. The 
Committee suggested that the Nationality verificatio n process should be 
facilitated and all those prisoners who have completed their sentences and 
whose travel documents are available should be repatriated to their 
respective countries at the earliest.  The next meeting of the Judicial 
Committee is likely to be held in India shortly. 
 
 High Commission of India, Islamabad, on a continuing basis, 
monitors the status of Indian prisoners in Pakistani jails and requests for 
consular access for these prisoners. Once the consular access is granted 
by the Government  of Pakistan, the verification papers are sent to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs through the Ministry of External Affairs for 
nationality status verification of these prisoners. High Commission of India, 
on a continuing basis, takes up the matter with the Go vernment of Pakistan 
for the release of all those Indian prisoners who have completed their 
sentences. A  Consular Access Agreement was signed on 21 st May 2008 
between the two countries, which provides that India and Pakistan 
exchange list of prisoners of e ach in the other‟s country on 01 January and 
01 July each year.   Government is committed to taking all necessary steps 
for earliest possible release and repatriation of all Indian Prisoners, in 
Pakistani jails. 
 
 As a result of Governments efforts, 473 In dian nationals lodged in 
Pakistani jails were released and repatriated to India in the 2010. In 2011, 
as on 1 stSeptember, 116 Indian nationals have been released and 
repatriated to India from Pakistan. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
  

 52 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 53 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
 
  The Committee note that the project of e -passport was supposed to 
be rolled out in general category by the end of year 2009. But the project 
has been delayed due to pendency of fresh security clearance in res pect of 
a technically qualified bidder from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Moreover, 
discussions are still going on to devise a passport which would be tamper 
proof and which could not be forged. The parameter for biometrics has also 
not been standardized s o far. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA 
should take up the matter at the highest level so that all the discussions are 
completed and such an ambitious project may reach at the implementation 
level without any further delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  As noted by the Committee, the project of implementation of e-
passport has been delayed due to pendency of fresh security clearance in 
respect of a technically qualified bidder from the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Consultations are still going on with Ministry of Home Affairs and other 
security agencies to devise a passport which would be tamper proof and 
which could not be forged. E -passports have been partially introduced for 
Diplomatic and Official passports since 5 August, 2008.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
  The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) functions as the 
cultural arm of the Ministry of External Affairs to formulate policies and 
programmes relating to India‟s external cultural relations. The ICCR has 
engaged itself proactively over the last s everal years to project India‟s soft 
power and undertaken a rapid expansion of its activities and outreach both 
within and outside India. The Council is presently maintaining 25 Indian 
Cultural Centres abroad including the 10 Cultural Centres established 
during the last 3 years. The proposal for establishing 12 more Cultural 
Centres at overseas locations are under active consideration of the Ministry. 
The Committee has been regularly recommending to set up more Centres 
of ICCR in the country and abroad also  besides diversifying the activities of 
the existing Centres. But, the Committee express their concern to note that 
there have been inordinate delays in opening of Regional Centres in India 
and Cultural Centres overseas. For example, the opening of an Indi an 
Cultural Centre at Washington has been under consideration for more than 
5 years. The Committee, therefore, expect that the Ministry would take 

 54 
appropriate steps for completion of all the pending projects in a time -bound 
manner. The responsibility of Mi nistry is not just to open a centre in 
particular part of the country or world but sufficient staff should also be 
ensured for the proper functioning of the Centre. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that in all newly set up Centres abroad, posts should be c reated to 
appoint persons who have sound knowledge of cultural heritage of India as 
well as of countries covered by the Centre so that they may be able to form 
a cultural link between India and that particular country(ies). The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Presently, the Council is maintaining 37 Indian Culture Centres and 
sub centres abroad. The proposal for establishing 08 more Culture Centers 
are under active consideration includi ng ICC, Washington and Paris (list 
enclosed).  Proposal to open the Centre has already been sent to Embassy 
of India, Washington and finalization of a suitable premise is still under 
consideration. 
 
 The delay in opening new centers / completion of pending  projects 
could be partly attributed to finalizing suitable premises in consultation with 
the Ministry and the Mission.  
 
The Council deputed India based Staff i.e. Directors, Dy Directors, 
Programme Assistants and India based Teachers in the stream of Yog a, 
Tabla, Bharatnatyam Dance, Hindi, Kathak Dance etc. for conducting 
classes in the Centre to promote Indian Culture through the classes in 
Dance and Music. Through regular interaction & guidance, the Centres are 
becoming hubs for promoting  Indian Cultur e & heritage by organizing 
exhibitions of art & sculpture, Literary events such as Book Reading, Poetry 
sessions, Lectures on wide range of topics like Philosophy, History, 
Sociology, Economic Trends etc.  Indian Festivals – Holi and Diwali – are 
being cel ebrating as joint programmes with local institutions/resources 
resulting to form a cultural link between Indian and that particular 
country/ies. More importantly the Centres act as hubs for dialogue and 
interaction between cultural trends and personalities both India and the host 
country.   
 
 A number of Centres have already started new activities such as 
Music events, Book Launches, Kavi Sammelans  etc.  The India based 
teachers have been encouraged to do „outreach activities‟ including visits to 
other cities and joint programmes with local institutions. 
 
 Local resources are being increasingly utilized, such as using local 
experts to teach Indian d ance, music, yoga etc. as and when required.  
Exchange of Cultural troupes are also spreading an awareness of cultural 
importance, values & tradition and foster a close link.   
 
 Recommendations of the Committee regarding appointment of 
persons with sound knowledge of cultural heritage of India and the host 
countries have been noted by the ICCR and followed in all such 

 55 
appointments. Council has appointed Directors of newly opened Centres 
keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee and in compliance  
with decisions of the Statutory Bodies of the Council.  
 
 With regard to creation of posts for Indian Cultural Centres Abroad 
(ICCs), the Council had submitted in December 2010 the proposal for 
creation of additional posts of the levels Director (Counselo r/ First 
Secretary/ Second Secretary) and Dy. Director (Third Secretary level) five 
posts for each level totaling to 20 to run the Indian Cultural Centres abroad.  
The Ministry External Affairs sought additional information with respect to 
the level of the post at each cultural centre. ICCR in response on 15.6.2011 
had stated that the level of the Director of the cultural centre would be 
decided keeping in view the size of the Mission and cultural diversity of the 
accredited country. Thereafter, MEA, on 22. 6.2011 returned the file with the 
remarks that in view of the circular on economy measures banning creation 
of posts, the proposal for creation of these posts may be taken up in the 
next financial year. In view of the strong recommendation of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on MEA, the proposal for creation of 
posts would again being submitted to MEA.  
 
 At present ICCR has 14 Regional offices. Five more Regional Offices 
are proposed to be opened at Bhopal, Ahmedabad, Jammu, Srinagar and 
Patna. The Regional Offices at Bhopal and Ahmedabad are expected to be 
operational by December 2011.  
 
 
LIST OF INDIAN CULTURAL CENTERS ABROAD 
 
1. Maulana Azad Centre for Indian Culture, Cairo, Egypt 
2. The Tagore Centre, Berlin, Germany 
3.  Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture, Port Louis, Mauritius 
4. Indian Cultural Centre, Paramaribo, Suriname 
5. Indian Cultural Centre Georgetown, Guyana 
6. Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Cultural Centre, Jakarta, Indonesia 
7. Indian Cultural Centre, Bali, Indonesia 
8. Jawaharlal Nehru Cultural Centre, Moscow, Russia 
9. The Nehru Centre, London, United Kingdom 
10. Indian Cultural Centre, Astana, Kazakhstan 
11. Lal Bahadur Shastri Centre for Indian Culture, Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
12. Indian Cultural Centre, Johannesburg, South Africa 
13. Indian Cultural Centre, Durban, South Africa 
14. Mahatama Gandhi Institute for Cultural Co-operation, Port of Spain, 
Trinidad & Tobago 
15. Indian Cultural Centre, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
16. Indian Cultural Centre, Dushanbe, Tajikistan 
17. Indian Cultural Centre, Suva, Fiji 
18. Indian Cultural Centre, Lautoka, Fiji 
19. Indian Cultural Centre, Kabul, Afghanistan 
20. Indian Cultural Centre, Beijing, China 
21. Indian Cultural Centre, Kathmandu, Nepal 
22. Indian Cultural Centre, Bangkok, Thailand 

 56 
23. Indian Cultural Centre, Tokyo, Japan 
24. Indian Cultural Centre, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
25. Indian Cultural Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia  
26. Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
27. Nehru Wangchuck Cultural Centre, Thimphu, Bhutan 
28. Indian Cultural Centre, Mexcio city, USA 
29. Indian Cultural Centre, Yangon, Myanmar 
30. Indian Cultural Centre, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania 
31. Indian Cultural Centre, Seoul, South Korea 
32. Indian Cultural Centre, Prague, Czech Republic 
33. Indian Cultural Centre, Budapest, Hungary 
34. Indian Cultural Centre, Male, Maldives 
35. Indian Cultural Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
36. Indian Cultural Centre, Sao Paulo, Brazil 
37. The Gandhi Centre, The Hague, Netherlands 
 
CULTURAL CENTRES WHICH ARE UNDER PROCESS 
 
1. Indian Cultural Centre, Washington 
2. Indian Cultural Centre, Sydney 
3. Indian Cultural Centre, Singapore 
4. Indian Cultural Centre, Paris 
5. Indian Cultural Centre, Buenos Aires, Argentina 
6. Indian Cultural Centre, Toronto 
7. Indian Cultural Centre, Hanoi 
8. Indian Cultural Centre, Lagos 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
  

 57 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
 The Committee find that out of 37 passport offices, 18 passport 
offices are presently operating from rental buildings. Out of these 18 rented 
offices, Ministry has purchased plots of land for 9 offices. Besides, the plots 
have been identified at three plac es namely Bhopal, Trivandrum and 
Jammu and the Ministry are reportedly in the process to liaise with the 
respective State Governments at these places for allotment of land. The 
Committee would specifically like to draw the attention of the Ministry 
towards the promise made by the Ministry regarding completion of 
construction of building for RPO Guwahati by December 2011 and reiterate 
the Ministry of External Affairs to expedite a time -bound construction of 
RPO buildings at the places where the land has been  purchased including 
one at RPO Guwahati and speed up the process for the remaining places. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of constructions of 
building at these places.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding completion of construction of Passport Office building at 
Guwahati, by December, 2011, it is informed that Ministry has hoped that 
after approval of drawings, the project would be completed in 2 years time 
CPWD had sought some clarifications for revision of drawings for deletion of 
the sections affected in the event of opening of PSK (as recommended by 
"the committee" during its study visit to PO Guwahati in July, 2010). The 
PSK system is in initial stages, hence, its exact impact on the space 
requirements could not be assessed with perfection.  
 
Meanwhile, Ministry felt that due to shortage of accommodation for PO staff 
and also Branch Secretariat, Guwahati, is functioning from rented premises, 
this plot of land is insufficient. Therefore, Ministry is seeking a bigger plot of 
nearly 1 acre in the nearby location from State Government. A request in 
this regard has been made to Chief Secretary, Assam Government, who 
directed the Collector, District Kamrup to locate another plot as requisitioned 
by Ministry. Therefore, if State Governmen t would be able to allot another 
plot the existing plot would be disposed off. 
 
As far as status of acquiring land at Bhopal, Trivandrum and Jammu is 
concerned, the status is as follows: 
 
a. Bhopal: Government of Madhya Pradesh has now formally 
allotted a plot of land admeasuring 2044.8 Sq M on lease basis for a 
premium of Rs. 8,58,73,000/ - (Rupees Eight Crore Fifty Eight Lakh 
Seventy Three Thousand only). The plot is located in a prime locality 

 58 
of Bhopal at Arera Hills.  The process of making the payment to State 
Government is underway.  
 
b.  Trivandrum: State Government of Kerala changed its stand 
on allotment of a plot of land due to growing demand from various 
State Government and GoI  offices. It has now proposed to construct 
a building, in which space would be allotted as per requirement of 
individual offices of various State and Centre Government Ministries. 
They have asked Ministry to intimate space requirements for the 
Passport Off ice also. But the past experience of Ministry in 
purchasing the built -up properties from state governments has not 
been that good. Passport Office is a public dealing office and has 
specific requirements. State Government would construct space but 
not as per our special requirements. Therefore, this proposal of State 
Government is not found viable. Ministry would like to purchase a plot 
of land and construct a building exclusively for Passport Office. 
 
c.  Jammu: State Government has identified a plot of la nd admeasuring 
1300 Sq M. Ministry has to check the feasibility of this plot of land. The 
average plot of land area acquired by the Ministry is in the range of 1800 
Sq M e.g. Surat 3000 Sq M, Amritsar 1672 Sq M, Bhopal 2044 Sq M, 
Jalandhar 1430 Sq M, Pune 1602 Sq M and Dehradun 2594 Sq M. 
Currently Passport Office is running from a rented building. The rented 
area is approximately 500 Sq M (carpet area) in addition we would need 
nearly 500 Sq M more carpet area for locating PSK in the same building. 
In addi tion to this there is space required for walls, staircases, lifts, 
Electrical Sub-station, DG Set, parking for cars and two -wheelers etc. A 
team from Ministry is going in the first week of December to check the 
suitability of the plot and tentative permiss ible building control 
parameters.  
 
As desired by the committee, status of plots ongoing projects as well as the 
places where plots of land have been acquired by the Ministry, is as under: 
 
1. Vizag: The Passport office has been shifted to new building. 
 
2. Mumbai: Construction of this project is in full swing and CPWD has 
assured to complete the project in 2012. 
 
3. Surat: Construction of Passport Office building and 22 Staff 
residences is going on at full swing. 
 
4. Jalandhar: Drawings approved by the Ministry, have been submitted 
to Punjab Urban Development Authority (PUDA) in July 2011 and 
approval is still awaited.  
 
5. Srinagar: CPWD has been requested to revise concept drawings 
because, as per Passport Seva Project (PSP) based on Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mod el envisages co -location of Passport 
Seva Kendra (PSK) in the Passport Office building which was not 
earlier in the concept plan. Revised drawings are awaited. 

 59 
 
6. Dehradun: State government has not handed over the possession of 
the plot of land as the area a vailable at site was less than allotted. 
Passport Officer has been directed to sort out the matter at the 
earliest. 
 
7. Pune: CPWD has been requested to provide the concept drawings, 
which are awaited. 
 
8. Amritsar: NBCC had submitted revised concept drawings and 
Preliminary Estimate amounting to Rs.  14.3 crores, which are under 
consideration in the Ministry. 
 
9. Guwahati: State Government has been requested to provide an 
alternate plot of land admeasuring at least 1 acre so that Passport 
Office, Branch Secretaria t Office and staff residences could be 
constructed. In this connection, Regional Passport Officer, Guwahati 
met with Chief Minister, Assam, Principal Secretary (Revenue), DC, 
Kamrup for immediate allotment. Deputy Secretary (Revenue), Govt. 
of Assam issued  letter No. RSS.342/2002/32 dated 21/09/2011 
enclosed the request letter of Ministry to Deputy Commissioner, 
Kamrup to furnish a suitable proposal. RPO is constantly pursuing 
the matter with state government.  A suitable proposal is awaited 
from State Government, Assam. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.5) 
 
  Taking into account the grievances of Indian citizens as well as 
foreigners in respect of delivery of efficient and fast services by Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad, the Committee urge the Ministry should establish a 
centralized monitoring system at the Headq uarters to keep check/ensure 
delivery of efficient and fast services provided by these Indian 
establishments abroad. The Committee desire that the public interface 
should be improved and the officials/officers posted at such places should 
undergo not only orientation programme but also be trained in soft skills and 
should be well informed about the procedures and legalities. The Committee 
also desire that adequate training be provided to the staff attending public 
counters and handling telephone and should be adequately aware of the 
procedures so that the information provided to service seekers/applicants is 
accurate and updated. Apart from communication links like telephone, call 
centres etc, the Ministry should take help of social media on the web to 
acquire feedback and to know the grievances/suggestions of the people to 
make the services better.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following are the details of the action taken on the Recommendation:  
 
1. One of the primary activities of the Foreign Service Institute is the 
training of Indian Foreign Service (IFS) Probationers with the objective of 

 60 
preparing them to handle the wide range of tasks that they would be 
required to perform during their professio nal careers, both in Missions and 
Posts abroad as well as in India. Probationers are duly trained in the 
procedures and legalities regarding relevant subjects. They are also 
imparted training in soft skills including representational skills. 
 
2. In additio n, FSI has diversified its activities to include training 
programmes for staff and officers of the Ministry of External Affairs at 
different levels, in particular, refresher programmes before they proceed 
abroad on posting. At the Section Officers‟ level, FSI conducts refresher 
courses, which include soft skills and communication skills, in addition to 
special sessions on dealing with general public on Consular, Passport and 
Visa matters while posted in missions abroad. 
 
3. Similar courses are also mandator y for Assistants, UDCs and LDCs 
of MEA before they proceed abroad on transfer. In addition, training in 
Integrated Mission‟s Accounting Software (IMAS) is compulsory for posting 
abroad for all levels upto Section Officers. Since January, 2011, four 
Refresher Courses have been held, apart from seven  IMAS training 
programmes. 
 
4. FSI has also conducted a training programme for departmentally 
promoted clerks from Group D from August 1 to 23, 2011. In addition to 
basic office procedure, accounts and basic comp uter training, they were 
also trained on handling telephone and on Basic English speaking, in order 
to provide better services to applicants and information seekers, while they 
are posted in missions abroad. 
 
5. FSI has conducted one-day training sessions on Right to Information 
Act, 2005 so that MEA officers/officials are familiar with the various aspects 
of the Act and take requisite action on receiving requests for information 
from the general public. 
 
6. The Joint Secretary level officers of MEA were br iefed on the “New 
Public Diplomacy Tools” as part of their Mid -Career Training Programme in 
May, 2011.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
 The Committee observe that ICCR has been designated as the 
principal/coordinating organization in the country to take welfare measures 
for all foreign students in India. The Committee also note that in order to 
provide better services to the scholars studying under ICCR scholarships, 
an e -portal has been set up with the facility of interaction bet ween ICCR, 
institutions and scholars/students. The Committee hope that proper 
feedback mechanism would also be established to address the grievances 
posed by scholars/students and ICCR would act as a guardian and 
facilitator for them ensuring their securit y and facilities being provided to 
them including accommodation etc. through their respective 

 61 
universities/institutions etc. The Committee also desire that besides looking 
into the various aspect of welfare of foreign students, the Council/Ministry 
would consider widening of the scope of scholarships and increase in their 
numbers also.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It may please be noted that no such e -portal was to be set up by 
lCCR. Ministry of HRD was mandated to set-up the e-portal with the help 
of EdCIL, together with a helpline.  
 
Foreign Secretary had desired that ICCR‟s alumni data base would 
be launched at the same time as the establishment of the e -portal. We 
are awaiting a notification from Ministry of HRD regarding the setting up/ 
launch of e -portal. Meanwhile, a window of ICCR‟s website would also 
be available to foreign students to post their views/ issues.  
 
 With reference to having feedback mechanisms in place and 
ICCR acting as a guardian and facilitator for foreign students, ICCR 
currently f ulfils this role primarily through our Regional Offices, whose 
mandate is to maintain regular interactions with International Students, 
FRRO's., and other relevant organizations to monitor the welfare of the 
students.  
 
 Each University I Institute where I CCR students have been 
admitted has been requested to appoint a high level official (normally 
Head of the Department) as International Students Advisor (ISA) to look 
into the day to day issues related to foreign students including problems 
with landlords and brokers, as also to provide counselling and guidance 
and our Regional Offices interact closely with these ISAs. The Council 
also organizes an annual meeting of all ISAs where problems being 
faced by students are discussed and addressed on a coordinated and 
comprehensive basis. For the first time, this year student 
representatives are also being invited to participate in the annual ISA 
meeting. Vice Chancellors of major Universities also have an opportunity 
to raise student -related issues in the annual me eting of ICCR's General 
Assembly of which they are Members.  
 
 
 The ICCR is providing approximately 2500 scholarships every 
year to students from more than 100 countries to enable them to pursue 
under graduate I post graduate / M. Phil I Ph.D/Post Doctorate courses, 
including professional courses. The scope of scholarships offered is 
already very wide, as students are free to apply for admission to any 
subject except Medicine where no quota is given to ICCR by the 
Ministry of Health and Family  Planning / Ministry of HRD, and 
Engineering, Pharmacy and Architecture, where also the quota allotted 
to ICCR students is limited for all other courses, the only restrictions are 
the total number of scholarships available and the acceptance by the 
University for admission.  
  

 62 
Also, ICCR entertains applications to all recognized Central/State 
Universities / Institutions including those Deemed Universities 
recognized by the Government of India. The only restriction here is that 
we do not send students to pri vate institutions not recognized by the 
Government of India.  
 
 As regards the increase in the number of scholars every year, 
this does not fall within the purview of ICCR as we only administer 
schemes on behalf of other Ministries, I Government agencies, and the 
increase In number of scholarships is decided by these Ministries I 
agencies. 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
(Recommendation No.17) 
 
  The Committee observe that Government had announced an 
allocation of Rs. 500 crores for assisting the Sri Lanka n Government in the 
resettlement and rehabilitation of internally displaced persons in the 
Northern Province through a number of projects. But the Committee note 
that as against an allocation of Rs. 90 crores only Rs. 68.96 crores was 
spent during 2009-10, during the year 2010-11, Rs. 83.82 crores have been 
spent by February 2011 against the allocation of Rs. 90 crores and a higher 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 290 crores has been made for the year 2011 -12. 
The Committee feel that the rehabilitation and reset tlement projects have 
already been delayed and therefore, desire that all the proposed projects 
including building of 50,000 houses should now be completed in a specific 
timeline so that the beneficiaries may get the benefit without any further 
delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India, based on the capacity to absorb the assistance 
on ground in Northern Sri Lanka, has implemented several resettlement, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction projects for Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs) in Northe rn Sri Lanka. Several constraints, including anti -human 
mines spread across vast areas of Northern Sri Lanka also slowed down the 
project implementation. Not withstanding the above, GoI during the FY 
2009-10, spent Rs. 68.96 crores, out of allocated Rs. 70 crores under „Aid to 
Sri Lanka‟ budget, on immediate relief and rehabilitation measures.  
 
During the FY 2010 -11 total of Rs. 90 cores were allocated under 
„Aid to Sri Lanka‟ for several resettlement, rehabilitation and reconstruction 
projects for Interna lly Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Northern Sri Lanka. The 
total amount spent during the FY on various projects aimed at resettlement 
and reconstruction in Sri Lanka stood at Rs. 93.86 crores. The main areas 
of expenditure included supply of roofing/shelter m aterial for IDPs in 
Northern Sri Lanka, supply of cement bags for resettling IDPs, ongoing de -
mining work by Indian teams, supply of 500 Tractors and agricultural 
implements, supply of 95,000 agricultural packs, supply of seeds to revive 
agriculture in Nor thern Sri Lanka, month long artificial limb fitment camp, 
development of Jaffna Teaching Hospital, establishment of Vocational 
Training Institute among others.  

 63 
A pilot project for construction of 1000 new houses for IDPs in 
Northern Sri Lanka is under imp lementation. A round 100 are ready for 
occupation, work on 200 houses is till roof level and 400 under various 
stages of construction. Government of Sri Lanka has handed over another 
150 sites to contractor after clearing jungle and the work at these sites is 
being taken up by the contractor.  Another 150 sites are yet to be cleared of 
jungle by Government of Sri Lanka. 
  
The Committee on Non Plan Expenditure (CNE), on 31 st October 
2011, gave its in -principle approval for the modalities for construction of 
remaining 49,000 houses. The Government is working towards expeditious 
implementation of the project.  
 
Government has allocated Rs 290 cores under „Aid to Sri Lanka‟ in 
the CFY 2011 -12. The funds are being utilized towards construction of 
houses for IDPs a nd other infrastructure development projects, including 
rehabilitation of Kankesanthurai harbour, deployment of Indian de -mining 
teams, repair and construction of hospital and schools, supply of 1280 
computers to schools in the eastern province, project for capacity building of 
war widows by SEWA, second limb re -fitment camp in Jaffna, setting up of 
Vocational Training Centres in Batticaloa and Nuwra Eliya, construction of 
the Cultural Centre in Jaffna, restoration of the Duraiappah stadium in 
Jaffna and other small developmental projects. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/188/2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                            ANANTH KUMAR, 
28 March, 2012                                                                           Chairman,  
Chaitra 08, 1934 (Saka)              Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 64 
Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 28TH MARCH, 2012  
   
 
The Co mmittee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1645  hrs. in Committee Room „B‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
6. Dr. Bhola Singh 
7. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
8. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
RAJYA SABHA 
9.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya   
10. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
11. Shri H.K. Dua  
12. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
13. Dr. Karan Singh  
14. Shri Shreegopal Vyas  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
 
 

 65 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on 
Action Taken by Govt. on the recommendations contained in the 10 th 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Exter nal Affairs for the year 2011 -12. The Chairman invited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the dra ft 
Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized 
the Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

 66 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                   24 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1-3,6-10,12,13,16,18 and 19-24. 
 Total-18 
 
Percentage:  75% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. -Nil- 
Total-00 
 Percentage: Nil 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 11 and 14,  
Total- 02 
 
 Percentage: 08.33% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4,5,15 and 17 
Total-04 
 
Percentage: 16.66% 
 
 
  