 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
PROBLEMS RELATING TO OVERSEAS INDIAN MARRIAGES : 
SCHEME FOR PROVIDING LEGAL/FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE/ 
REHABILITATION TO INDIAN WOMEN DESERTED BY THEIR 
OVERSEAS INDIAN SPOUSES 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JUNE 2012/JYAISTHA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 15 
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
PROBLEMS RELATING TO OVERSEAS INDIAN MARRIAGES : 
SCHEME FOR PROVIDING LEGAL/FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE/ 
REHABILITATION TO INDIAN WOMEN DESERTED BY THEIR 
OVERSEAS INDIAN SPOUSES 
 
 
 
                      Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th July, 2012 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 14th August, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14th August, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JUNE 2012/JYAISTHA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 96  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2010-2011) 
Sl.No.  Name  
        
1. Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS (LOK SABHA) 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
11. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
12. Shri Takam Sanjoy  
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
14. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
15. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
16. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
17. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
18. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
19. Vacant# 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS (RAJYA SABHA) 
22. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya* 
23. Shri H.K. Dua* 
24. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
25. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut* 
26. Dr. Karan Singh 
27. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
28. Shri Tarun Vijay 
29. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
30. Vacant$ 
31. Vacant@ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena      –   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley         –        Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai        –   Additional Director 
4. Shri D.K. Arora          –        Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 21.9.2010. 
$ Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta nominated w.e.f. 21.9.10 and vacancy raised due to his sad demise 
w.e.f. 26.9.2010 
# Dr. Manda Jagannath ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 04.10.2010 consequent upon 
his nomination to Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
@           Shri Ashwani Kumar ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment of 
as Minister of State w.e.f. 19.01.2011. 
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-2012) 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
Sl.No  Name  
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla # 
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
29.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
31.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
                  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
4. A. Sivanandam - Under Secretary 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of term of Dr. Karan Singh, Member , 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 27.01.12 and re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.02.2012. 
# Shri Sreegopal Vyas, Member Rajya Sabha ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  
expiry  of his term  w.e.f. 02.04.12  and Smt. Najma Heptulla nominated to the Committee on External 
Affairs w.e.f. 04.05.2012. 
 (iii) 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Co mmittee on External Affairs (2011 -2012) having 
been authorized by the Committee to present on their behalf, present this 1 5th Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Problems relating to Overseas In dian Marriages : Scheme for 
providing Legal/Financial Assistance/ Rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by their 
Overseas Indian Spouses”. 
 
2. The Committee selected the subject Problems relating to Overseas Indian 
Marriages : Scheme for providing Legal/ Financial Assistance/ Rehabilitation to Indian 
Women deserted by their Overseas Indian Spouses” for detailed examination and report 
during the year 2010 -11. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 30.12.2010 and 21.06.11. The discussion, since, 
remained inconclusive, the Committee decided to continue with the subject during their 
next term i.e. 2011 -12 for detailed examination and report. The Committee took further 
evidence of the representatives of t he Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs  and National 
Commission for Women (NCW) on 08.12.2011.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Re port at their sitting held on  
19.06.2012. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs  and National Commission for Women for placing before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection with the examination of the subject.  They also 
wish to thank in particular the representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs  
and National Commission for Women  who gave evidence and placed their considered 
views before the Committee.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                           ANANTH KUMAR, 
19 June, 2012                                                              Chairman,  
29 Jyaistha, 1934 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iv) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2010-2011                      (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2011-2012                      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION           (iv) 
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Introductory                1 
 
Chapter II Common Issues/Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages       3 
 
Chapter III Ministries/organizations concerned with NRI marriages      7 
A. Role of Ministries and Coordination between them      7 
B. Role of National Commission for Women     11 
C. Role of Missions/Posts abroad and State Governments   20 
D. Inter-Ministerial Sub-Committee       21 
 
Chapter IV Scheme for giving Legal/Financial assistance to Indian women  
  deserted by their Overseas Indian/foreigners husbands             35
   
(i) Basic Feature of the Scheme       35 
(ii) Assistance Provided under the Scheme      42 
(iii) Awareness Building Programme       57 
        
 
Chapter V Legal hiccups, international conventions and bilateral treaties   65
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 30.12.2010    76 
II.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 21.06.2011    79 
III.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 08.12.2011          82 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 19.06.2012         85 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
I   N   T   R   O   D   U   C   T    O   R    Y 
        
 The Overseas Indians, irrespective of their Status, constitute a ve ry 
significant chunk of Indian s ociety who have, seemingly tasted economic success 
and achieved certain social and  cultural status globally. The Overseas Indians not 
only include Indian Citizens who have opted the foreign countries for higher studies 
and/or wo rk, but also those who are born  of Indian parents migrated there.  In 
general, these Indians have not only car ried along with them their religion, 
traditions, culture, languages and food habits etc. but, also the privileges of 
traditional Indian marriages for the welfare of their future g enerations i.e. their sons 
and d aughters.   It w ere these Indians settled abr oad who set the ball rolling, 
especially for Indian brides, and started taking India n brides for their foreign born 
sons with the hope to rejuvenate the India n culture and traditions in the way they 
practiced in their foreign land, and also to avoid infiltration of the foreign brides.  It 
is this luring of India n brides and b ridegrooms by the Overseas Indians that were 
taken seriously by these communities in India wherein, alliances with Overseas 
Indians were seen as promises of better future, not for th e bride/bridegroom but for 
her/his entire family.   
1.2 However, after few decades most of the NRI marriages became fraught with 
problems of mismatches not only in persons getting married  but also in the change 
in attitude of the NRI sons and daughters perhaps due to many reasons of change in 
traditional and cultural values born out of globalization and other economic factor s 
experienced by both the sides.       
 1.3 In the recent decade, the brides of Overseas Indian marriages have 
undergone and experience d a lot of problems which  ultimately le d to the 
abandonment by the husbands.  The abandonment occurs even before she is taken to 
the foreign country of her husband‟s residence or while travelling to the foreign 
country and which is ultimately resulted into  coming back within a year, or either 
sent back or forced to flee etc.  The problems generally arise due to incompatibility 

 
2 
 
of the bride with her groom and also because of inability on the part of family of the 
bride to meet the demand in cost or kind or also due to pre existing marriage of the 
groom to another woman i.e. apart from the Indian b ride, especially when the groom 
continues t o live with his earlier partner  or ultimately due to  and unexplainable 
domestic violence.  In such situation, knowledge of true information regarding 
spouse‟s job, immigration status, earning, property, marital status  etc, never 
disclosed to the bride or her parents.  In most of the cases, cheating husband obtains 
divorce-often-ex-parte, in the foreign country behind the back and the information 
reaches to the wife or her relatives to o late and by that time, she has already been 
exploited by her husband bodily and mentally. 
1.4 Such non-committal marriages with overseas Indian b ridegrooms, have not 
only awakened the Indian parents and public in general, but have become an 
important matter of concern  for the  Indian Government. If the data shows any 
indication, then these marriages have le d to abandonment of thousands of brides in 
various States, particularly Punjab.  The ground situation is very disturbing .  Not 
only the girls belonging  to rural or semi-urban areas or the girls who are less 
qualified or totally uneducated are being cheated by their o verseas husbands but the 
urbanite and educated girls also fall as prey of such sharks.   It has increasingly 
been felt by the Indian society that it is not only essential to protect the affected 
brides from such fraud , but it is also important to educate them about their rights 
and responsibilities highlighting the availability of precautionary measures  and 
other social defence mechanisms so that, they can protect themselves and save their 
dignity in the hour of crisis. 
1.5  Taking into  account the in crease in number of fraudulent/s ham NRI 
marriages that has been affecting the Indian brides at large, the Committee have 
taken up the subject „ Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages : Scheme for 
providing Legal/financial Assist ance/Rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by 
their Overseas Indian Spouses‟  for detailed examination.  During the course of the 
examination of the subject, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs a nd the National Commission for Women  
which is the nodal agency of this subject. The issues involved in such fraudulent 
marriages have been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  

 
3 
 
CHAPTER-II 
Common Issues/Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages 
 
 The incidents of failed and fraudulent marriages of Indian Women with 
NRIs are increasing day by day.   The problems in Overseas Indian marriages are 
complex in nature as these  often fall within the purview of Private International 
Law and the laws of the foreign land. The problems faced by Indian women include 
desertion and ex -parte divorce and have been articulated in several forums 
including the media. The common issues/problems relating to Overseas Indian/NRI 
marriages being faced by Indian Women include    -  
 (i) Abandonment of the wife for various reasons 
 (ii) Domestic Violence 
 (iii) NRI husband already married 
 (iv) Continued demands for dowry, pre and post marriage  
 (v) Lenient legal system abroad in respect of grounds for divorce etc. 
   
 2.2  Abandonment of the wife for various reasons  
 
 There are large numbers of cases reported in various communities wherein  
Indian wom en married to the NRI husband s are abandoned in India shortly after 
their marriage. After a short honeymoon  in India,  the hus band goes back  to his 
foreign country  promising to send her travel documents/visa etc., but that never 
happens. In many cases the woman would already get pregnant when he leaves and 
so both wife and the child (born later) are abandoned. The husband never calls or 
writes and never returns to his wife (and child).  The in -laws who would still be in 
India would either plead helplessness or flatly refuse to help the innocent girl. 
 It is not always easy to the wife or her parents to arrange the travel 
documents, visa etc. to go to the country of husband due to poverty or lack of 
knowledge about procedure to visit a foreign country.  In some cases even if t he 
woman somehow manage s and reaches the foreign country of her husband‟s 
residence and waits helplessly at the international airport there only to find that 
neither  her husband nor anyone else has come to meet her, thus leaving her at the 

 
4 
 
mercy of total stran gers in a foreign land.  At that particular time of crisis neither 
she can speak either English or language of that country nor her family members 
are there with her. This can be quite a scary experience for any innocent naïve 
simple woman travelling abroa d for the first time. The woman is abandoned in the 
foreign country with absolutely no support or means of sustenance or escape and 
without even the legal permission to stay on in that country. 
  
2.3 Domestic Violence  
 
 The woman goes to her husband‟s hom e in the foreign country only to face  
domestic violence both mentally and physically, malnourished, confined and ill -
treated by her husband in several ways. She is, therefore, either forced to flee or is 
forcibly sent back. She may not be allowed to take h er children with her in most 
cases. In many cases, the children are forcibly taken away from the woman.   
2.4 NRI husband already married 
 
 The woman learns on reaching the country of her NRI husband‟s residence 
that he is already married in that country a nd continues to live with his first wife. 
He may have entered into this 2 nd marriage due to pressure from his parents and to 
please them or sometimes even to use her as domestic help or to  extract from the 
bride‟s side. 
 
2.5 Continued demands for dowry, pre and post marriage 
 The woman and may be  her  parents as well,  are  held to ransom for 
payment of huge  dowry, in cash or  kind  or both before and after marriage, thus  
making her life miserable and her stay risky  in her husband‟s country of residence  
making her dependent and continued submission to dowry demands  failing which 
subjected to atrocities, harassment etc. 
 
2.6 Lenient legal system abroad for grounds for divorce etc. 
 
1) The  NRI husband  takes advantage of the more lenient divorce grounds in 
other legal systems and obtains ex-parte decree of divorce in foreign country 
through fraudulent representations and/ or without her knowledge, after she 
is sent back or forced to go back to India or even while she is still there. 
 

 
5 
 
2) The woman is denied maintenance in India on the pretext that the marriage 
had been dissolved by the court in another country. 
 
3) The woman approaches the court either in India or in the foreign country for 
maintenance or divorce but repeatedly encounters technical legal obstacles 
related to jurisdiction of courts, service of notices or orders, or enforcement 
of orders or learns of the husband commencing simultaneous retaliatory 
legal proceedings in the foreign country. 
4) The woman seeks to use criminal law to punish her husband and in -laws for 
dowry demands and/ or matrimonial cruelty only to find to her dismay that 
the trial cannot proceed as the husband will not come to India and appear at   
the trial or respond in any way to summons or even warrant of arrest. 
5)  The woman is coaxed into traveling to the foreign country of the man‟s 
residence and getting married in that country, only to later discovers  that 
Indian courts have very limited jurisdiction in such cases. 
6) The woman has to fight nasty legal battles for custody of her children and 
for child support and to bring them back with her after she is divorced or 
forced to leave, sometimes even facing c harges of illegally abducting her 
own children. 
 
2.7 NRI marriages involve the union of a non-resident Indian man 
who was bo rn outside India  or has migrated to another country and a 
resident Indian woman .  But, in search of better resources for better 
life of their daughters , the families overlook the potential dangers 
posed by this type of impulsive match -making which often results into 
a variety of grim consequences.  These women are abandoned in a 
foreign country with absolutely no support of sustenance, mean of 
returning home and often without even legal permission to stay on.  
Others find themselves a victim of ex -parte divorce from a cou rt 
abroad without their consent.   Some wives are brutally battered, 
abused, malnourished, confined and for ced to flee or forcibly sent 
back to India.  There are also NRI marriage stories of children being 
abducted or forcibly taken away from their mothers. 

 
6 
 
 The Committee note with a grave concern that the problem of 
fraudulent/sham marriages have increased man ifold and the problem 
faced by Indian women engulfed in such non-committal marriages with 
Overseas Indian bridegrooms have not only awakened the Indian 
parents and public in general, but have sensitized the Indian 
Government also. The Committee find that i n the name of complexity 
of the matter and involvement of international protocol and jurisdiction 
issues and role of State Governments, the Ministries/organization of 
the Central Government have not paid the desired attention to develop 
a system to support  the abandoned women. The Committee feel that 
providing legal, financial and other required assistance to the victims 
and the sensitization  of various authorities in foreign land as well as 
local authorities including concerned Ministries/Departments, 
Embassies and State Governments particularly the police are very vital 
in such situation.   Considering the sensitiv ity of the issue, the 
Committee desire that concerted efforts from all concerned quarters of 
the Government of India should be made to address the issues 
relating to NRI marriages.   
(Recommendation No. 1 ) 
  

 
7 
 
CHAPTER-III 
Ministries/organizations concerned with NRI marriages 
 
Various agencies viz. Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child Development, National 
Commission for Women, National Human Rights Commission and State 
Governments are dealing with the issue of problematic NRI marriages. 
A. Role of Ministries and Coordination between them 
3.2 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is t he nodal Ministry for all mater 
relating to overseas Indians.  However, based on the recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Committee on Empowerment of Women , the National Commission 
for Women (NCW) was nominated as the coordinating agency at the national le vel 
to receive and process all the complaints related to Indian women deserted by the ir 
Overseas Indian husbands.  Accordingly, a separate Cell called „ NRI Cell; of NCW 
was formally inaugurated on 24 th September 2009 and is engaged in   assisting 
unfortunate victims by taking their cases with foreign missions abroad  and other 
concerned agencies.  Interaction is also maintained with the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, Ministry 
of Home Affairs an d also the State Governments to look out the procedural 
problems faced by NCW in giving timely relief to the victims. 
3.3 The complaints received in the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs are 
forwarded to the NCW as the coordinating agency for taking acti on and also to the 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad, State Governments  (Police authorities) or other 
Ministries for an appropriate remedial action on their part. 
3.4 On being asked about the specific role being played by concerned Ministries 
of the Government of India  in handling the issues relating to NRI marriages, the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in a written reply stated as under:- 
 “The approach of the Ministry in addressing these issues has been to create 
 awareness amongst prospective brides and their families on the precautions 
 to be taken before entering into marriages with overseas Indians. 
 Accordingly, the Ministry has taken various proactive measures to address 
 these issues with relevant stakeholders and state Governments. Ministry of 

 
8 
 
 Overseas Indian Affairs has issued guidelines and launched awareness cum 
 publicity campaign through print and electronic media. The Ministry has 
 published guidance booklet on Marriage to Overseas Indians, distributed 
 multi-lingual pamphlets, conducted seminars, telecast scrolls on TV , audio-
 visual spots on TV etc . In addition the Ministry extends financial /legal 
 assistance to Indian women who are deserted/di vorced by their NRI 
 husbands, through credible NGOs empanelled with the Indian 
 Missions/Posts abroad in countries where there are large number of cases 
 of  desertion/divorce by NRI husbands. 
. 
 The National Commission for Women (NCW) was nominated by the 
 Government of India as the coordinating agency at the national level for 
 dealing with issues p ertaining to NRI marriages.  The NRI Cell of NCW 
 helps in  facilitating effective action on the complaints of such women 
 victims by coordinating with the relevant agencies and  spreading 
 awareness  on the subject of marriage to NRI men and precautions t o be 
 taken to avoid  such adverse post marriage situations. The NCW has 
 published a report “Nowhere Brides”, networking with foreign NGOs to 
 give better support system to the deserted women and also coordinates 
 with the Indian Embassies, High Commissio ns and Consulates abroad for 
 obtaining/providing relief to the deserted women. 
 The State Governments and other stakeholders also play pivotal roles in 
 addressing the issues by way of awareness campaign, issuing guidelines 
 etc.”  
3.5 Elaborating further on the type of inter -Ministerial coordination mechanism 
that exist s amongst all the concerned Ministries/Departments and State 
Governments involved in resolving such issues and the efforts being made to make 
the system more efficient, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs stated in a 
written reply as under:- 
“One of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee on 
Empowerment of Women (EWC) (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject “  Plight of 
Indian Women deserted by NRI husbands” was to evolve a  well defined 
/coordinated mechanism to deal with the issue of  problematic NRI 
marriages to enable the aggrieved women to get a  respectable solution to 
the problem. This recommendation of the  EWC  was deliberated at an 
Inter Ministerial meeting comprising representatives from  Ministries of 
Overseas Indian Affairs, External Affairs, Home  Affairs,  Law and 
Justice, Women and Child Development, National Commission for  Women 
(NCW) and National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)  on 7 th July, 
2008. As decided in the meeting, NCW was nominated by  this Ministry on 
28th April, 2009 as the coordinating agency at the  national level to receive 
and process all the complaints related to Indian  women deserted by 
their overseas Indian husbands. Chief Secretaries of all Stat e 

 
9 
 
Administrators of all Union Territories and Heads of Indian Missions /Posts 
abroad have been advised of this decision and requested to take further 
action accordingly. 
  
 The NCW launched an NRI Cell on 27 th August, 2009 to deal with problems 
 of Indian women deserted by their NRI husbands.  They render all possible 
 assistance to victims of NRI marriages. NCW looks  int o complaints and 
 takes suo-moto action on any issue brought to the notice of th e NRI Cell in 
 accordance with S ection 10 (1) ( f) of the National Commission for Women 
 Act, 1990 read with Sub-Section 4 of Section 10 and Section 8 of the Act. 
 
 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs also forwards complaints on the subject 
 received in the Ministry   to State Governments /NCW and other  Ministries 
 for appropriate action. The Ministries/Departments co -operate in taking 
 necessary and timely action within the ambit of their powers.” 
 
3.6 While going into the details of the agencies dealing with the 
issue of NRI marriages, the Committee fi nd that various Ministries of 
the Government  of India like Overseas Indian Affairs, External Affairs,  
Women and Child Development and Home Affairs and also the 
National Commission for Women, the Human Rights Commission, 
State Governments, State Commissio ns for Women are also 
concerned with the issue of providing timely relief to the victims of 
such marriages.  The Committee are, however, constrained to note 
that in absence of any defined coordination mechanism amongst the 
various agencies, no satisfactory results have come out so far.  It is 
more disturbing to observe that MOIA being the nodal Ministry for all 
matters relating to Overseas Indians and the National Commission  for 
Women (NCW) being the nominated coordinating agency at the 
national level to receive and process all the complaints related to 
Indian Women deserted by overseas Indian husbands, are working 
independently for the same cause without the desired  coordination 
with each other.  No doubt, they are creating awareness but using 

 
10 
 
separate methods and materials MOIA extends financial and legal 
assistance through Missions/Posts abroad in the countries where 
there are large number of cases of desertion/divorce by NRI husbands, 
whereas NRI Cell of NCW helps in facilitating action on the complaints 
of such woman victims by coordinating with the relevant agencies.  
MOIA also forwards the complaints received in the Ministry in this 
regard to the State Governments/NCW and other Ministries for 
appropriate action.  The Committee does not approve this state of 
confusion where the victims of such marriages have to approach 
different agencies for different kind of assistance.  The aggrieved 
women need immediate and respectable  solution to their problem s.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry  of Overseas 
Indian Affairs, Ministry of External Affairs and NCW in coordination 
with other agencies should develop an effective mechanism to provide 
a single window timely so lution to the problems of affected women.  
The Committee further desire that an inter -ministerial Coordination 
Committee should be set up for better monitoring of the welfare 
measures being undertaken in this regard.  The Committee also desire 
that Ministr y of External Affairs should issue a well -framed practice 
directions or protocol in conjunction with MOIA and Ministry of 
Women and Child Development directing the embassies and foreign 
missions to provide meaningful consular assistance to such 
unfortunate abandoned NRI brides. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 

 
11 
 
3.7 The issue of multiple marriages is also a major area of concern 
for all.  Several cases of contracting multiple marriages have come to 
the notice of the Committee.  This all happens due to non -availability 
of information about such erring husbands or habitual NRI offenders 
who contract multiple marriages.  The Committee, therefore, desire  
that to prevent such incidents,   the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
in conjunction with respective State Governments  should maintain 
separate effective link on the website of the Ministry containing all the 
pamphlets relating to NRI marriages and other relevant information 
along with the details of such erring NRI husbands and habitual NRI 
offenders who enter into multi ple marriages.  The Committee are 
confident that availability of such information on website will certainly 
act as a major deterrent and more importantly a source of 
information/caution to general members of public  to prevent them 
from marrying a dishonest  NRI groom, who is already a guilty of 
escaping from the clutches of law after contracting multiple marriages 
on the Indian soil.  The Committee also want that for the benefit of the 
people of all regions of the country whole information should be 
available in all major regional languages in one link. 
(Recommendation No.3) 
B. Role of National Commission for Women (NCW) 
3.8 The National Commission for W oman has been nominated as the 
coordinating agency at the national level for dealing with issues pertaining NRI 
marriages by Government of India vide Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs order 

 
12 
 
dated 28 th April, 2009, based on the recommendation of the Parliamentary 
Committee on Empowerment of Woman (14 th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Plight of 
Indian Woman deserted by NRI husbands” which was discussed and deliberated 
upon by the Inter-Ministerial Committee meeting held on 7th July, 2008. 
3.9 In furtherance of this, the NRI Cell was formally inaugurated on the 24 th of 
September, 2009, NRI Cell deals with complaints received from within the country 
and abroad resulting from cross country marriages wherein there is any deprivation 
of woman‟s rights or any issue involving injustice to women. 
3.10 When asked about the function and responsibilities and staff strength of NRI 
Cell in National Commission for Women.  NCW submitted following details in a 
written reply:- 
 “Major functions and r esponsibilities of the NRI Cell of NCW are as 
follows: 
a. NRI Cell is the coordinating agency  to receive and process all the 
complaints related to Indian women deserted by their NRI/Overseas 
husbands. 
b. NRI Cell renders all possible assistance to the complaints including 
conciliation, mediation between the parties and advising the complainant 
on related issues. 
c. Associating, networking with NGO‟s community organizations in India 
and abroad and State Women Commissions for wider areas coverage, so 
as to facilitate easy reach and provide support services. 
d. NRI Cell Endeavour towards a coordinated response  amongst various 
Government agencies/organizations such as Stage Governments, the 
National Human Rights Commission, Indian Embassies and Mission, 
concerned Ministries etc. 
e. Providing assistance to the aggrieved woman in litigation and other 
issues pertaining to the complainant/case. 
f. Maintain a data bank of cases registered with NCW. 
g. Seek reports from the State Government and other authorizes on the 
complaints filed and action taken thereon. 
h. To give advice and recommendations to the Government on any policy 
or issue relating to the NRI marriages. 
i. To analyze various legal treaties on the issue and advise the Government 
on the subject, wherever required. 
j. To carry out awareness campaigns for the masses on the issue.  For this, 
all the available media services be utilized by the Cell. 
k. To encourage/support research and study in the related field like issues 
of grievances associated with dual citizenship, enactment of new 

 
13 
 
legislation or signing of international treaties, marriages laws of other 
countries etc. 
l. To look into complaints and take suo -moto notice on any issue brought 
to the notice of the NRI Cell in accordance with Section 10 (i) (f) of the 
National Commission for Women Act, 1990 read with sub -section 4 of 
Section 10 and Section 8 of the Act. 
m. Perform any other function as assigned to it by the Commission/Central 
Government.” 
3.11 When specifically asked about the budget allocated and spent by NCW for 
providing assistance for creation of the NRI Cell, NCW stated as under:- 
“There is not specific budget alloca ted for the NRI Cell.  The Cell consists 
of staff drawn from the total strength of NCW who do NRI Cell work.  There 
is no scheme of NCW for providing financial assistance to victims of such 
marriages.” 
3.12 When asked about the nature of assistance provide d so far by the NCW to 
the affected Indian women, NCW submitted in a written reply as under:- 
“Depending upon nature of the complaints received, assistance through 
following actions are provided so far by the NCW to the affected Indian 
women: 
i) If cognizance  of the complaint is taken, notice is issued to the 
opposite party/parties calling upon, to furnish their reply on the 
complaint received by the Commission or summons shall be issued 
to the opposite party/parties to appear and answer the claim before 
the Commission on the day to be therein specified. 
ii) Letter is written to the concerned police station for Action Taken 
Reports, where any matter is pending investigation or there has been 
any failure on their part to take appropriate action with regard to the 
complaint registered. 
iii)            If the complaint is required to be forwarded to Indian Embassy 
abroad, it is so done. 
iv) The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, Ministry of External 
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice may be duly written to, for service of summons, warrants 
issued or any orders passed, by the appropriate Court of Law and for 
other relevant matters, whenever and wherever required under 
intimation to the complainant. 
v) The MOIA or Indian Embassies abroad may be written for providing 
legal and financial aid to victim as per scheme of MOIA. 
vi) The Passport Authority may be written for any matter relating to 
passports. 
vii)          If necessary complaints can be forwarded to the employers of the 
respondent husband to take necessary action against him.” 
   

 
14 
 
3.13 When asked about the type of support/cooperation expected by NCW and 
actually getting from all the related wings of Government of India, NCW submitted 
following written reply:-  
 “NRI Cell of NCW if required to forward the complaint to: 
1.      The Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs and the 
Ministry of Law and Justice for service of summons, warrants issued or any 
orders passed, by the appropriate Court of Law and for other relevant 
matters, whenever and wherever required unde r intimation to the 
complainant.  
2.      The MOIA or Indian Embassies abroad may be written to for providing 
legal and financial aid to victim as per scheme of MOIA.  
3.      The Passport Authority may be written to for any matter relating to 
passports. 
4.       Letters are written to the concerned police station for Action Taken 
Reports, where any matter is pending investigation or there has been any 
failure on their part to take appropriate action with regard to the complaint 
registered.” 
  
3.14 About th e difficulties being faced by NCW in coordinating with other 
Ministries, NCW stated as under:- 
“NCW largely adopts a convergence approach among different Ministries 
and efforts are made getting on providing assistance while taking up mater 
for the victims.” 
 3.15   Furnishing the details of cases registered by the Cell so far, the NCW 
furnished the following details:-  
State-wise data 
State Total No. of Complaints 
Delhi 78 
Uttar Pradesh 44 
Haryana 41 
Punjab 31 
Maharashtra 31 
Gujarat 28 
Andhra Pradesh 36 
Karnataka 13 
West Bengal 13 
Tamil Nadu 14 
Rajasthan 11 
Madhya Pradesh 12 
Uttrakhand 08 

 
15 
 
Kerala 05 
Bihar 05 
Himachal Pradesh 04 
Goa 04 
Assam 04 
Jharkhand 02 
Chattisgarh 02 
Tripura 01 
Arunachal Pradesh 01 
J&K 01 
Orissa 03 
Cases registered twice or more 12 
Others 76 
Total 480 
 
Country-wise data 
Country Name Total No. of complaint 
India 480 
USA 19 
Australia 12 
U.K. 10 
Thailand 06 
UAE 10 
Singapore 04 
Canada 04 
Nepal 03 
Italy 02 
Germany 02 
Brazil 01 
Kuwait 01 
Tanzania 01 
Pakistan 01 
Norway 01 
Mauritius 01 
Malaysia 01 
Nigeria 01 
Saudi Arabia 02 
China 01 
Others* 31 
Total 594 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
Year wise Data 
Data from September 2009 till 31 March 2011 
S.No. Year No. of 
cases 
1 2009 
September-December 
 
148 
2 2010 
January-December 
367 
3 2011 
January-March 
79 
Total  594 
 
Total No. of Complaints of NRI Cell - 594 
3.16   In response to the query about the number of cases resolved so far and the 
number of cases closed by the Cell, it was informed that in the NCW 30 cases stand 
closed as on date. 
  
3.17 The most primary and easily accessible information provider to any distress 
women in foreign country is website of the Ministry/NCW. However the website of 
NCW, is short of such information.  The link “List address of advocates/NGOs in 
foreign countries – shows –“Will be updated very soon”. Similarly, the link for 
address of advocate s/NGOs in India indicates only one  advocate that too in Delhi. 
This status on these links is for quite some time. Justifying the time to be  taken to 
update the website of NCW, the Ministry in a post evidence written reply stated as 
under:- 
  “With regard to the list of NGOs abroad, the NCW has provided a link to 
the MOIA‟s website where the list of foreign NGOs empanelled with the 
Indian Miss ions/Posts is displayed. With regard to the link for address of 
advocates/NGOs in India and the time to be taken to update the website of 
NCW, the NCW‟s reply is reproduced below: 
“Similarly, the link for address of advocates/NGOs in India indicates - only 
1 advocate that too in Delhi shows the status of the website at the time of 
creation of NRI Cell.  The name of the advocate has since been removed and 
it has been decided to display only the names of NGOs empanelled under 
the Scheme of MOIA for providing l egal/financial assistance/rehabilitation 
to Indian women deserted by overseas Indian spouses on the website of 
NCW”. 

 
17 
 
3.18 The Committee observe that National Commission for Women 
(NCW) has been nominated as the Coordinating agency at the national 
level to receive and process all the complaints related to Indian 
women deserted by their Overseas Indian husbands.  Accordingly, a 
‘NRI Cell’ was launched in NCW to render assistance to victims of NRI 
marriages and it has been assigned almost all the responsibilities 
starting from lodging of complaints to providing all possible legal and 
financial assistance, networking with national and international NGOs, 
coordination with all concerned Ministries/State Governments, 
analysis of legal treaties and give advic e to the Government, 
encouragement/support for enactment of new legislation, management 
of laws of other countries etc.  The Committee are , however, 
anguished to note that there is no separate demarcated staff for th e 
NRI Cell and no specific bud get has been allocated for this  Cell.  
Without any fund, this Cell is not in a position to  provide any financial 
assistance to victims of such marriages.  The Committee deplored 
casual approach of the NCW in handling such sens itive and important 
issue where in the name of disposal, only 30 cases stand closed since 
inception, against  813 received complaints .  On the ground, NCW is 
giving the support to the victims simply by following up the cases by 
sending correspondence to the  concerned agencies and follow up 
with reminders.  As a matter of fact, the victims are not getting any 
support in the matter due to poor response from Missions/Posts or 
State Governments on the cases forwarded to them .  The Committee, 

 
18 
 
therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Women and Child 
Development should provide sufficient number of separate staff for 
NRI Cell of NCW along with adequate separate fund allocation from the 
current year itself to enable the NCW in handling a very important and 
sensitive responsibility assigned to them relating to abandoned and 
aggrieved women.  The Committee also desire that NCW in 
consultation with  Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and other 
agencies, should h old regular review meetings with an objective to 
improve the response from Missions/Posts and State Governments so 
that maximum number of victims get quick and timely response and 
help from the designated coordinating agency. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
3.19 When the girls married to NRIs either with their own high flying 
wishes or with the wishes of their parents are deserted, they face the 
trauma of failed marriage as it leads to a lot of econom ic, social and 
psychological problems.  Economic helplessness and lack of 
communication with the husband and at the same time non -receipt of 
money coupled with problems created by in -laws makes her pre y for 
exploitation.  In Committee’s view, there is an u rgent need of 
rehabilitation of such affected women by giving them  some vocational 
training, if needed , or  financial assistance for education,  counseling 
and consultancy.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the National Commission for Women being the coordinating agency in 
the matter and their involvement in the  welfare of women should 

 
19 
 
incorporate these activities as essential responsibilities of NRI Cell.  
The Committee also desire that Ministry of Women and Child 
Development should apportion sufficient fund from the head of welfare 
of women for this purpose and NCW should be strengthened by 
providing sufficient number of experts capable to handle these 
responsibilities.  The Committee further desire that the awareness 
material prepared by the Ministry should contain all the details relating 
to suc h facilities ava ilable with NCW for the benefit  of such 
unfortunate girls and their parents. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
3.20 The Committee, however, have a strong view that if we are 
actually serious enough to help the people , we have to make sincere 
efforts to prevent them  from being trapped into such net and not after 
they have had problems.  The Committee, also feel that in addition to 
publication of pamphlets and other material more has to be done by 
NCW on awareness front.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development should sensitize the young 
generation on these issues by organizing seminars in colleges and 
high schools, particularly in Girls  Schools/Women’s Colleges.  The 
Committee expects that administration s of the Universities  or high 
schools would be persuaded through State Governments and Ministry 
of the Human Resource Development to facilitate such efforts. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 

 
20 
 
C. Role of Missions/Posts abroad and State Governments  
3.21 When asked as to how the MOIA sensitizes the Indian Missions abroad 
while dealing with such issues  particularly by those Missions  which are reportedly 
already overworked/ overloaded with such complaints an d other routine work, the 
MOIA submitted the following written reply:-  
“Most of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad have a Consular Section to cater 
 to the needs of the Indian community, including to women in distress, and 
 they are pro - actively engaged in dealing with such issues. In those places 
 where such cases are in large numbers, the Indian Missions/Posts have on 
 their panel NGOs/Indian Women Organizations/Indian Community 
 Associations to whom such cases are referre d for legal help and also for 
 counseling.”  
3.22 When the Committee enquired about the present system of counseling at the 
Embassies and  the initiatives taken to strengthen the present system especially in 
critical Missions where there is large India Dias pora, MOIA  submitted the 
following written reply:  
 “(a) The Officers in charge of Community Relations at Indian Missions 
abroad keep regular contact with the Indian Community and are accessible 
when approached for advice in this regard.  In different forum of 
interactions with the community members, the issues concerning the NRI 
marriages, their pros and cons, are indeed discussed with a view to sensitize 
the Community.  NGOs do play an important role in this regard. 
 High Commission of India, London has stated that the NGOs on the 
panel of HCI have been encouraged to come out with a Hand book for 
Indian women marrying UK nationals.  Their website also has relevant 
information in this respect. 
(b) In every State, a State L egal Services Authority has been c onstituted 
to give effect to the  polices and directions of the National Legal Services 
Authority and to provide free legal services and counseling to persons 
approaching them. 
 On its part, MOIA has printed Guidance Booklets and Pamphlets on 
the care to be taken by parents while selecting an NRI bridegroom for them 
daughter. 
(c) NGOs play the vital role of social parenting with their networking 
space in the society, with the benefit of access and experience in social 
sector.  Credible services of reputed NGOs enlarge their acceptance to 
victims of fraudulent NRI marriages.” 

 
21 
 
3.23 Giving details of the steps taken by the State Government s in dealing with 
such problems/issues, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs  furnished following 
details in a written reply:- 
 “The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has drawn the attention of all 
 States/Union  Territories to the judgment   of the Supreme Court in the 
 case of „Smt.    Seema Vs. Ashwain Kumar‟ and has requested them to make 
 law for compulsory  registration of marriages.   
 The State Governments of Punjab, Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, 
 Chhattisgarh, NCT of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra 
 Pradesh etc.  have taken steps in their States for conducting information 
 campaigns, ensuring  that FIRs in such marriage disputes/problems are 
 registered without delay, passing  on court orders against accused NRI 
 man to Emigration Authorities to prevent such people from leaving 
 Indian against court orders etc.”  
D. Inter-Ministerial Sub-Committee 
3.24 An inter-ministerial sub-committee was constituted under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs consisting of members from 
various Ministries to study the problems relating to marriages to Indian women with 
overseas Indians.  The recommendations of the inter -ministerial sub -committee 
were discussed by the Inter-Ministerial meeting held on 7th July, 2008 for adoption. 
3.25 On being asked to furnish details of the decisions taken by the inter -
Ministerial sub -committee and the initiatives being taken by the concerned 
Ministries and State/UT authorities, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-  
(i) There was agreement over the sub-committee‟s recommendation that 
all marriages solemnized in India should be compulsorily registered 
and pro-forma for registration of marriages should be uniform in all 
states and should contain all relevant information that would help in 
identifying the persons.  
 It was further agreed that the pro -forma for registration of 
marriages should also have columns, in the case of overseas Indians, 
for the social security number, passport particulars, ID card / labour 
card etc. to build a proper identification and tracking system. 
Introduction of a uniform format would need interaction w ith the 
State Governments. Ministry of Law and Justice would prepare an 
appropriate pro -forma and take it up with the State/UT 
Governments. 

 
22 
 
Action Taken:  The matter was referred to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
on 19th August, 2008.  As desired by the Department of Legislative Affairs, 
relevant papers were forwarded to them on 19 th February, 2009. The 
decisions were also communicated, on 19 th August 2008, to the Chief 
Secretaries of all State Governments/Union Territori es by Secretary, 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, for implementation. State Governments 
of Punjab, Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, NCT of 
Delhi, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Administration of Dadra etc ack nowledged the receipt of Inter -Ministerial 
Committee‟s decisions for compliance. Further action was conveyed by 
some States/UTs as follows: 
(a) Home Department, Govt. of Tamil Nadu informed that they have 
taken initiatives to give effect to the implementation of the decisions. 
The Commissioner of Social Welfare, Chennai issued a circular to 
all District Social Welfare Officers to give wide publicity in this 
matter. 
(b) Govt. of NCT of Delhi has stated that action was being taken on the 
recommendations of the Inter Ministerial Committee for 
implementation.  Further the Govt. of NCT of Delhi conveyed that it 
has forwarded a Draft Bill on the Registration of Marriages to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for its‟ approval. 
(c) Govt. of Himachal Pradesh, Home Department circulat ed the 
recommendations of Inter Ministerial Committee to DGP and Addl. 
DGP for compliance and action. 
(d) Special Secretary, Govt. of U.P. has been requested to implement the 
recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee. Also, Registrar 
General of High C ourt of Allahabad, U.P., has issued circular 
letters to all sub -ordinate courts functioning under its supervision 
for deciding such cases expeditiously and not to unnecessarily 
adjourn such cases and to decide as far as possible within a period 
of 6 months from the date they are instituted. 
(e) Govt. of Andhra Pradesh [Gen. Admn. (NRI) Department] has 
issued certain instructions on 15 th June, 2009 to the Registrar of 
High Court of A.P in this matter. 
(f) Govt. of Chhattisgarh issued notification on 5.12.2008 seekin g 
objection or suggestions from the public for making amendment in 
the Registration of Marriages Rules.  
(g) Administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, U.T. requested the 
officials concerned for strict compliance of the recommendations. 
(h) Government of Sikkim, Ho me Department issued instructions to all 
District Collectors, SDMs and BDOs for giving vigorous information 
campaign at all levels in the State. 
(i) Government of Gujarat, Health & Family Department informed that 
they were concerned with compulsory registratio n of marriages. 
That Government has been reminded on 13.3.2009 to implement the 
recommendations of the Committee. 

 
23 
 
(j) Registrar General, High Court of Jhar khand and High Court of 
Patna, at their request, were provided with copies of Inter -
Ministerial Meeting for taking appropriate action. 
(k) Governments of Punjab and Haryana had also acknowledged the 
receipt of Secretary ( MOIA)‟s letter for compliance.  
 
The States/UTs from which no response has been received have 
been reminded again, and those which had initiat ed action asked 
to give updates on the action taken.  
NCW has conveyed that it had constituted an Expert Committee 
under the  NCW Act, 1990, for drafting of amendments to provisions 
contained in existing legislations/fresh legislation where considered 
appropriate in respect of NRI/Overseas marriages. 
(ii) There was agreement over the sub -committee‟s 
recommendation that: 
(a) Litigations related to overseas Indian marriages should be 
taken up by fast track courts. It was felt that instead of 
building up a new  system for these courts, this should be 
brought within the scope of the existing family courts.  
(Action: State /UT Governments, Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Ministry of Women and Child Development).    
(b) Efforts may be made to let the family courts clear the pending 
cases early and a mechanism may be put in place for regular 
monitoring of such cases.  
(Action: State /UT Governments, Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Ministry of Women and Child Development).    
Action Taken:   
Ministry of Home Affairs issued circular to all State 
Governments/Union Territories directing them to ensure that FIRs in 
such marriage disputes/ problems are registered without any delay.  
However, Ministry of Women & Child Development stated on 
17.3.2009 that they do not see any role i n the matter. The State 
Governments of U.P. and Andhra Pradesh have communicated the 
recommendations to their judiciary for appropriate action. 
(iii) There was agreement over the sub-committee‟s recommendation that 
provisions on serving of notices, summons , and enforcement of 
maintenance orders be made part of the Mutual L egal Assistance 
Treaties (MLAT) especially with USA, UK, Canada, Australia and 
New Zealand where problem of desertion of Indian women by 
overseas Indians is acute. (Action: Ministry of Law  and Justice, 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs). 

 
24 
 
            Action Taken:  References were made, on 9.9.2008, to both Ministry 
of Law & Justice and Ministry of External Affairs for follow -up 
action. Ministry of External Af fairs (CPV Division) has informed 
that it is examining the issue of additions to the Mutual Legal  
Assistance Treaties (MLAT) in consultation with other divisions of 
that Ministry handling relations with USA, Canada etc. 
(iv) There was agreement over the sub-committee‟s recommendation that 
whenever there is an ongoing litigation in a foreign court, the Indian 
bride‟s case should not go unrepresented. MOIA‟s Scheme to assist 
Indian women in defending their cases abroad was appreciated. 
However, it was felt th at the amount being sanctioned per case by 
MOIA i.e. US $1,000/ was grossly inadequate and should be 
enhanced substantially. The possibility of creating a flexi -fund may 
also be explored by pooling of money by Indian Associations. A 
matching grant from the government could be considered.  
(Action: Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, Ministry of External 
Affairs, Indian Missions/Posts abroad). 
 
Action Taken : The MOIA‟ s Scheme gives initial, financial/legal 
assistance to the deserted/divorced Indian woman overseas for 
documentation and preparatory work for filing the case.  She is put 
in touch with the empanelled NGO which is already dealing with 
women‟s issues and has an establishment and a structure of its own.  
The NGOs then hand over the case to advocates who are ready to 
work on the case on pro -bono basis.  Thus the Indian deserted wife 
whose case is taken up under the Scheme is assisted in her litigation 
in a forei gn court.  The initial amount of assistance of US $ 1000 
was enhanced to US $ 1500 w.e.f. October 2009.  Further increases 
up to US $ 3000 per case for developed countries and US $ 2000 per 
case for developing countries is under consideration.  Apart from 
this assistance under the MOIA‟s Scheme, Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs has established the Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(ICWF) in all the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  One of the target 
beneficiaries of this fund is the deserted spouses of Overseas  
Indians. 
(v) It was agreed that a vigorous information campaign was necessary 
at all levels using the media and NGOs to educate prospective brides 
and their families to take possible precautions before entering into 
marriage alliance with overseas Indians . The information campaign 

 
25 
 
launched by MOIA was appreciated and it was decided that the 
campaign needs to be continued.  
(Action: Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, Ministry of Women and 
Child Development, National Commission for Women, State/UT 
Governments). 
Action Taken: The Ministry has launched publicity cum awareness 
campaign through audio visual advertisement on regional T.V 
network primarily covering the States of Punjab, Kerala, Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The national and many 
regional channels show one or two minute awareness campaign 
clippings in -between prime time programmes. The National 
Commission for Women (NCW)‟s publications “Nowhere Brides – A 
report on NRI Marriages” and “Problems  relating to  NRI 
Marriages – Dos and Don‟ts” are being widely circulated. The NCW 
in collaboration with MOIA had organized two regional workshops 
(at Chandigarh & Trivandrum in 2006) and a national  seminar in 
Delhi in February 2011 to address the problems relating to 
NRI/Overseas Indians marriages. As the problem is particularly 
acute in Punjab, NCW in association with Maya Foundation 
organized a public hearing in Chandigarh on 15.7.2011. 
 The print media is also used to spread awareness as can be seen 
from the news item that appeared in The Hindu daily of May 9, 2011, 
captioned Police guidelines on ‘ Pravasi’ marriages  which is an 
advisory containing the do‟s and don‟ts for Indian women marrying 
NRIs/PIOs.  Copy of the said news item is at Annexure. 
(vi) It was agreed that information brochure may be prepared by experts 
having knowledge of  Private International Law on the working of 
the relevant Hague Conventions and procedures that is to be 
followed by the general public regarding serving of notices, 
summons etc. to parties staying abroad. Thereafter , a campaign may 
be launched to make the general public as also the concerned 
officers aware of these provisions. (Action: Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Ministry of Women and Child Development, National 
Commission for Women). 
            Action Taken:  The matter was referred to Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child Development and NCW on 
09.09.2008, and reminders have been issued. Feedback is awaited.  

 
26 
 
(vii) There was agreement over the sub-committee‟s recommendation that 
States/Union Territories should pass on information regarding court 
orders against accused NRIs to Emigration Authorities to prevent 
such people from leaving India against court orders.  
(Action: Ministry of Home Affairs, State/UT Governments). 
           Action Taken: All Chief Secretaries of State/Union Territories were 
addressed by MOIA in the matter.  The Governments of Punjab, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar and U.P. have acknowledged the receipt  of 
MOIA‟s letter for compliance. The Ministry of Home Affairs issued 
circular in the matter to all State Governments/UTs. The High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh as also DGP, A.P. issued circulars to all 
concerned.  The Government of NCT of Delhi, Revenue Depart ment 
also forwarded the recommendations of the Committee to the 
Departments concerned in their Government for implementation.  
Similar action taken by the Government of Himachal Pradesh, Home 
Department.   
(viii) It was agreed that appropriate instructions  may be issued by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to the States/Union Territories to ensure 
that FIRs in such marriage disputes/problems are registered without 
any delay.  
(Action: Ministry of Home Affairs, State/UT Governments). 
Action Taken: All Chief Secre taries of State/Union Territories were 
addressed by MOIA in the matter.  D.O letters have been written to 
all Chief Secretaries of State / UTs by  Secretary (MOIA) on 19th 
August, 2008. Government of Punjab, Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar and 
UP have acknowledged t he receipt of Secretary (MOIA)‟s letter for 
compliance. MHA issued a circular dated 30.10.2008 to all State 
Governments /UTs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi, Revenue Department vide 
their letter dated 25.2.2009  has forwarded the recommendations of 
the Inter Minist erial Committee to the Departments concerned in 
their Govt. for implementation letter dated 12.3.2009 from Home 
Department , Govt. of Tamil Nadu. DGP, Chennai has issued a 
Circular Memorandum to all SPs in Districts and Commissioner of 
Police in cities to adhere to these recommendations. Govt. of Sikkim, 
Home Department, Gangtok has stated that they have issued 
instructions to the police Department for prompt filing of FIRs 
regarding dispute relating to marriage of Indian women with 
Overseas Indians.    

 
27 
 
(ix) There was agreement over the sub-committee‟s recommendation that 
appropriate bilateral agreements may be considered with foreign 
countries with a view to protect the interests of Indian women  
victims of overseas Indian marriages.  
             It was suggested that a team of officers from Ministries of External 
Affairs, Law and Justice, Women and Child Development and 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should visit USA, Canada, UK, 
Australia and New Zealand, the countries where the problem of 
deserted I ndian women is acute to study local regulations, hold 
discussions on the issue with the concerned local authorities and 
determine the clauses which could be incorporated in the proposed 
agreements to assist the affected Indian women. 
Action Taken : MEA (CPV Division) has informed that they have 
referred the decisions of the Inter Ministerial Committee to the 
concerned territorial divisions of their Ministry to elicit their views. 
MEA (CPV Division) has stated vide their U.O dated 30.1.2009 that 
they are in touch with their Missions in target countries and Ministry  
of  Law and Justice and MHA on the issues of feasibility of entering 
into bilateral agreements with countries like USA, Canada etc.   
3.26 The inter -ministerial meeting also discussed the following items on the 
agenda:   
 Recommendation made by the Parliamentary Committee on 
Empowerment of Women to evolve a well defined/coordinated 
mechanism among all the concerned agencies to deal with the i ssue 
of problematic NRI marriages and to enable the aggrieved women to 
get a respectable solution to the problems - It was decided that the 
National Commission for Women will, henceforth, be the 
coordinating agency at the national level to receive and proc ess all 
the complaints related to deserted Indian women by overseas 
Indians.  
Action Taken:  National Commission for Women (NCW), New Delhi 
is authorized as a coordinating agency at the national level to 
receive and process all the complaints related to In dian women 
deserted by their Overseas Indian husbands (Vide MOIA Letter No. 
OI-19021/3/2006-SS dated 28.4.2009)”  
 
3.27 On being enquired in how many cases legal action has so far been taken 
against those husbands who entered into fraudulent marriages and subsequently 
deserted their wives, the Ministry furnished the following reply:-  

 
28 
 
 States/ Union Territories have been requested to give  the number of NRIs 
 arrested and prosecuted in their States/Union Territories for fraudulent 
 marriages during the last three years. They have been reminded. On receipt 
 of the details they will be made available.  
 In one of the brochures brought out by the Ministry it has been stated that in 
 a    case Dayal vs. Union of India, 2005   it has been stressed that passport 
 of the offending husband can be impounded if the husband does not 
 appear before the Court? 
 
3.28 In regard to the changes  proposed to made in the Passport Act especially 
impounding of passport of erring husbands abroad, the Ministry of Ov erseas Indian 
Affairs in a post-evidence reply stated as under:-  
  “The issue was examined by Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in 
consultation with Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and others. After that 
the MEA issued the following guidelines to all Passport Issuin g Authorities 
(PIA) with reference to Section 10(3)(h) of the Passport Act: 
a. Section 10(3) (h) of the Passport Act is an enabling provision and 
not mandatory one; 
b. PIA should weigh the merits of the case where NBW under Section 
498A of the IPC has been issued and use their discretion to impound 
/revoke the passport based on the explanation given by the passport 
holder in response to the Show Cause Notice; 
c. Impound/revoke the passport of there is a specific order to this effect 
by the court in India and; 
d. Advise the passport holder who has been issued warrant or summons 
to cooperate with the court by presenting himself before it as 
desired.   
NB. Section 10(3)(h) of the Passport Act 1967: 
10. Variation, impounding and revocation of passports and travel 
documents 
(3) The passport authority may impound or cause to be impounded or 
revoke a passport or travel document-  
(h) if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a warrant 
or summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the arres t, of the 
holder of the passport or travel document has been issued by a court 
under any law for the time being in force or if an order prohibiting 
the departure from India of the holder of the passport or other travel 
document has been made by any such co urt and the passport 
authority is satisfied that a warrant or summons has been so issued 
or an order has been so made. “ 
 

 
29 
 
 
 
3.29 The Committee observe that an Inter -Ministerial Committee was 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MOIA consisting of 
Members from various Ministries to study the problems relating to 
marriages of Indian women with Overseas Indians.  The 
recommendations of the Sub -Committee were adopted on 7 th July, 
2008. The Committee also observe that most of the decisions  / 
recommendations of the Inter -Ministerial Committee relating to NRI 
marriages have actually not been implemented by the concerned 
Ministries/State Governments/UTs after receiving the communications 
from the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs .  The Committee , 
therefore, urge upon MOIA to take up each recommendation seriously 
and follow up with the concerned Ministries/Departments and State 
Governments for an early implementation of the recommendations 
adopted by the Inter -Ministerial Committee and submit a report to  the 
Committee within three months.   
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
3.30  While going into the details of recommendations of the Inter -
Ministerial Committee it may be noted that all the State /UT authorities 
were communicated about the decision that all marriages solemnized 
in India should be compulsorily registered as per a uniform pro -forma 
for registration containing information of social security number, 

 
30 
 
passport particulars, ID Card/ Labour C ard etc. to build a proper 
identification and tracking system.  The Committee find that only few 
States have given response to this  decision and very little has been 
done in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, desire that MOIA 
should take up the matter particularl y with the State Governments at 
the highest level where more number of such cases are reported so 
that the registration of marriages containing all desired information is 
implemented at the earliest.  If the uniform pro -forma has not been 
finalized so far,  it should be finalized without any further delay in 
consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice and supplied to those 
States.  The Committee should be informed about the progress  in this 
regard on quarterly basis.   
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
3.31 The Committee also note that there was an agreement  that 
litigations in such cases should be taken up by fast track courts within 
the scope of the existing family courts along  with a mechanism for 
regular monitoring of such cases. In this regard, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs ha d issued circulars to ensure that FIRs in such marriage 
disputes/ problems are registered without any delay.   But the 
Committee find that the State Governments of U.P. and Andhra 
Pradesh only have forwarded these communications to their judiciary 
for appropriate action.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs/NCW should ensure an early 
implementation of this decision in all the States/UTs in conjunction 
with the Ministry of Law & Justice.  T he Committee may be informed 
about the progress and achievements in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 

 
31 
 
3.32 The Committee also observe that as agreed, serving of notices, 
summons and enforcement of maintenance orders are to be made part 
of the Mutual Lega l Assistance Treaties (MLAT) especially with USA, 
UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand where the problem of 
desertion of Indian women by overseas Indians is acute. The issue is 
still under examination in the CPV Division in the Ministry of External 
Affairs.  It should to be expedited and reported back to this Committee 
within three months’ time. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
3.33 The Inter Ministerial Committee had also  decided that 
information Brochure in this regard may be prepared by experts 
having knowledge of  Private International Law on the working of the 
relevant Hague Conventions and procedures that is to be followed by 
the general public regarding serving of notices, summons etc. to the 
parties staying abroad followed by launching a campaign to make the 
general public and also the concerned officers aware of these 
provisions. But the Committee note that n o further progress has been 
made so far in this regard after sending a reference to the Department 
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child Development and NCW.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that initiatives should be taken by 
MOIA to expedite the matter along  with Coordinating Agency  and 
Committee should be informed about the progress made in this 
regard. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 

 
32 
 
3.34 The Inter-Ministerial Committee was also in agreement over the 
decisions that States/Union Territories should pass on information 
regarding court orders against accused NRIs to Emigration Authorities 
to prevent such people from leaving India against court orders. That  
decision was conveyed to all Chief Secretaries of State/Union 
Territories and Ministry of Home Affairs.  Circulars in the matter were 
issued to all State Governments/UTs. But, it seems that the decision is 
not being implemented on ground level.  The Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs should ensure that implementation of this decision 
starts immediately.   
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
3.35 The Committee further note that t he Inter-Ministerial Committee 
had agreed that appropriate bilateral agreements will be considered 
with foreign countries with a view to protect the interests of Indian 
women  victims of overseas Indian marriages. It was sugges ted that a 
team of officers from Ministries of External Affairs, Law and Justice, 
Women and Child Development and Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs should visit USA, Canada, UK, Australia and New Zealand to 
hold discussions on the issue with the concerned local authorities and 
determine the clauses which could be incorporated in the proposed 
agreements to assist the affected Indian women.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that the feasibility report of bilateral agreement is 
still pending and no satisf actory progress has been made so far.  The 
views of territorial divisions of the concerned Ministries have also not 

 
33 
 
been obtained till date. The Committee, therefore, desire that a matter 
should be taken at the appropriate diplomatic level for an early 
finalization of the clauses to be incorporated in the proposed 
agreement.   
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
3.36 The Committee observe that all the decisions taken by the 
Central Government on the issues relating to NRI marriages are being 
conveyed to the State Governments for further action but the response 
of the State Government s is not very enthusiastic.  The victims 
residing in different parts of a particular State are also not able to 
follow their cases by visiting the state capital frequently.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that, the State Governments of the states 
from where more number of people reside abroad and the problem of 
desertion is acute, should be asked to appoint/nominate nodal officers 
at district level for a regular monitoring of such cases and also for the 
benefit of such victims. The Committee also desire th at names, 
addresses and phone numbers of such nodal officers should be made 
available on the website of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and the 
National Commission for Women and also be included in  all the 
printed  regional language pamphlets. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 

 
34 
 
3.37 The Committee are not satisfied with the initiatives taken by the 
Missions/Posts and Passport Issuing Authorities regarding 
impounding and revocation of passports of the offending NRI 
husbands.  The Committee feel that a significant he lp may be provided 
to the affected women through an effective implementation of the 
provisions of Section 10 (3)  h of the passport Act, 1967.   The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Passport 
Authorities should be asked to play a pro -active role in such matter 
and use their discretion under this section by taking immediate action 
to impound/revoke the passport of such erring passport holder s if it is 
brought to their notice that the passport holder who has been issued 
warrant or summons is no t cooperating with the court by presenting 
himself before it as desired. 
(Recommendation No.15) 

 
35 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
Scheme for giving Legal/Financial assistance to Indian women deserted by 
their Overseas Indian/ foreigner husbands 
 In a bid to assist the needy Indian women deserted by their Overseas Indian 
spouses of facing divorce proceeding in a foreign country , Ministry  of Overseas 
Indian Affairs ( MOIA) launched a  scheme in February 2007 to provide financial 
assistance for obtaining legal aid/counseling through Indian Missions abroad.   The 
scheme has been launched in USA, UK, Canada, Australia and Gulf countries.   
(i) Basic features of the Scheme 
4.2 The MOIA furnished the following details  in a written reply  about the 
concept and objective of scheme:-  
  “The objective of the scheme is to provide initial financial assistance, for 
 obtaining cou nseling and legal services, to  needy women  in distress who 
 have been deserted by their overseas Indian spouses.    The term 
 “Overseas Indian”  would include NRIs and foreign citizens of Indian 
 origin.  The counseling and legal services would be provided through 
 credible Indian Women‟s   Organizations/Indian Community 
 Associations and NGOs identified for providing such services and 
 empanelled w ith the Indian Missions/Posts in the   USA, the UK, Canada, 
 Australia, New Zealand  and  the Gulf.  The scheme is a welfare measure to 
 support Indian women in distress, through the mobilization of the local 
 Indian community in the endeavor and with some financial assistance 
 from the Government of India.  
  The Scheme would be available to women who have been deserted by 
 their overseas Indian spouses or are facing divorce proceedings in a 
 foreign country subject to the following conditions:- 
  (i) The woman is an Indian passport holder. 
 (ii) The marriage of the woman has been solemnized in India. 
 (iii) The woman is deserted in India or after reaching abroad within five  
       years of the marriage. 
 (iv) Divorce proceedings are initiated within five years of the marriage by  
       her overseas Indian spouse. 

 
36 
 
 (v) An ex-parte divorce has been obtained by the overseas Indian spouse       
      within 10 years of marriage and a case for maintenance and alimony  
      is to be filed. 
 (vi) The scheme would not be available to a woman facing criminal charges 
        or having a criminal case decided against her. 
 (vii) The domicile of the woman seeking relief under the scheme is not  
        relevant for allowing the benefit. The woman may be domiciled in the  
        country of her overseas Indian spouse or in India at the time of making   
        the application. 
 (viii) Preference may be given to applicants on the basis of financial needs. 
 (ix) Assistance will be limited to meeting in itial cost and incidental charges 
        for documentation and filing of the case by the Indian Women‟s  
        Organizations/ Indian  Community Associations/ NGOs on the       
         woman‟s behalf. 
 (x) The assistance will be limited to US $ 1500 per case and will be released 
       to the Indian Women‟s Organizations/ Indian Community Associations/ 
       NGOs concerned to enable it to take steps to assist the woman in      
      documentation and preparatory work for filing the case. 
 (xi) The Indian Women‟s Organizations/ Indian Community Associations/         
       NGOs will make efforts to enlist community advocates, preferably     
       women advocates, to extend further legal assistance/appearance in court 
       etc on a pro-bono basis. 
  The scheme has been modified/revised within 3 -4 year of the launch 
taking note of the difficulties/problems conveyed by the Missions/Posts 
abroad operating the scheme and the suggestions made by the standing 
Committee on External Affairs.  The m odified scheme has been 
circulated to all our missions/posts for implementation and has been 
posted on the website of the Ministry for general awareness.  The 
following comparative statements show  provisions of the earlier and 
Revised Scheme”-   
 
 
 
4.3 The following table shows comparative details  of the provisions of the 
earlier Scheme and Revised Scheme. 

 
37 
 
Provisions as in the earlier Scheme  Revised provisions in the present Scheme  
I Objective: 
The objective of the scheme is to provide 
some financial assistance to needy women 
in distress who have been deserted by their 
overseas Indian spouses for obtaining 
counselling and legal services. The term 
“Overseas Indian” would include NRIs and 
foreign c itizens of Indian origin. The 
counselling and legal services would be 
provided through credible Indian  Women’s 
Organizations/ Indian Community 
Associations/NGOs identified for providing 
such services and empanelled with the 
Indian Missions in the  USA, th e UK, 
Canada, Australia,  
New Zealand and the Gulf.   
 I  Objective: 
The objective of the scheme is to provide some 
financial assistance to needy Indian women in 
distress who have been deserted by their 
overseas Indian /  foreigner husbands  for 
obtaining counselling and legal services. 
“Desertion” in the context of eligibility for 
providing financial assistance under the 
MOIA’s Scheme would mean the voluntary 
abandonment of the wife by her husband. 
Also, if the husband - by his words - compels 
the wife to lea ve the matrimonial home or 
stay away without reasonable cause, he will 
be guilty of desertion, though the wife has 
seemingly separated from him. Desertion is 
frequently coupled with non -support, which is 
a failure to provide monetary resources for 
those to whom such an obligation is due.  
The scheme is a welfare measure to 
support women of Indian origin in distress, 
through the mobilization of the local 
Indian community in the endeavour and 
with some financial assistance from the 
Government.  
The term “Overseas Indian” would include 
Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) and Persons of 
Indian Origin (PIOs). The counselling and legal 
services would be provided through credible 
Indian Women’s Organizations/Indian 
Community Associations/NGOs identified for 
providing such services and empanelled with 
the Indian Missions in the USA, UK, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and the Gulf 
countries. The Scheme is a welfare measure to 
support Indian women in distress through the 
mobilization of the local Indian  community in 
the endeavour and with some financial 
assistance from the Government.  
 II.     Scope of and Eligibility for the 
Scheme:  
The scheme would be available to the 
women who have been deserted by their 
overseas Indian spouses or are facing 
divorce proceedings in a foreign country 
subject to the following conditions 
 II.     Scope of and Eligibility for the Scheme:  
The scheme would be available to Indian 
women who have been deserted by their 
overseas Indian / foreigner husbands or are 
facing divorce proceedings in a foreign 
country, subject to the following conditions:- 
(ii) The marriage of the woman has been 
solemnized in India 
(ii) The marriage of the woman has been 
solemnized in India or overseas with an 
overseas Indian or a foreigner  

 
38 
 
(iii) The woman is deserted in India or after 
reaching abroad within five years of the 
marriage. 
(iii) The woman is deserted in India or 
overseas within fifteen years of the marriage; 
or  
(iv) Divorce proceedings are initiated 
within five years of the marr iage by her 
overseas Indian spouse. 
(iv) Divorce proceedings are initiated within 
fifteen years of the marriage by her overseas 
Indian / foreigner husband; or  
(v) An ex -parte divorce has been obtained 
by the overseas Indian spouse within 10 
years of marriage and a case for 
maintenance and alimony is to be filled. 
(v) An ex -parte divorce has been obtained by 
the overseas Indian / foreigner husband 
within twenty years of marriage and a case for 
maintenance and alimony is to be filed by her. 
(vi) The sc heme would not be available to 
a woman facing criminal charges or having 
a criminal case decided against her. 
(vi) The scheme would not be available to a 
woman having a criminal case decided against 
her, provided that a criminal charge of 
Parental Child Ab duction shall not be a bar if 
the custody of the child has not yet been 
adjudicated upon. “Parental Child Abduction” 
for this purpose will be defined as the 
unauthorized custody by the mother, without 
the other parent’s agreement and contrary to 
family law  ruling, which largely removes the 
child from care, access and contact of the 
other parent and family side and shall be 
deemed to be Parental Child Abduction.  
International child abduction occurs when a 
parent, relative or acquaintance of a child 
leaves the country with the child or children in 
violation of a custody decree or visitation 
order.  Another related situation is retention 
of children when they are supposedly taken on 
vacation to a foreign country and are not 
returned.” A criminal charge of Pare ntal Child 
Abduction, in the context of this Scheme, 
would mean the framing of charge against the 
mother by the police authorities consequent 
on lodging FIR or its equivalent.  
(vii) The domicile of the woman seeking 
relief under the scheme is not relevan t for 
allowing the benefit.  The woman may be 
domiciled in the country of her overseas 
Indian spouse or in India at the time of  
making the application.    
(vii) The domicile of the Indian woman seeking 
relief under the Scheme is not relevant for 
allowing t he benefit. The woman may be 
domiciled in the country of her overseas 
Indian / foreigner husband or in India at the 
time of making the application. 

 
39 
 
(ix) Assistance will be limited to meeting 
initial cost and incidental charges for 
documentation and filing  of the case by 
the Indian Women’s Organizations/ Indian 
Community Associations/NGOs on the 
woman’s behalf. 
(ix) Assistance will be provided to meet the 
legal and other costs, by the Heads of Indian 
Missions/Posts overseas directly to the 
applicant’s legal counsel empanelled with the 
concerned Indian Mission/Post, or through the 
Indian Community Associations / Women’s 
organizations / NGOs* acting on the woman’s 
behalf in an overseas legal institution. 
(x) The assistance will be limited to US $ 
1500 per cas e and will be released to the 
Indian Women’s Organizations/ Indian 
Community .Associations/NGOs concerned 
to enable it to take steps to assist the 
woman in documentation and preparatory 
work for filing the case. 
(x) The assistance will be limited to US$ 30 00 
per case for developed countries and US$ 
2000 per case for developing countries and 
will be released to the empanelled legal 
counsel of the applicant or Indian Community 
Association / Women’s organization / NGO 
concerned to enable it to take steps to as sist 
the woman in documentation and preparatory 
work for filing the case. 
(xi) The Indian Women’s Organizations/ 
Indian Community Associations/NGOs will 
make efforts to enlist community 
advocates, preferably women advocates, 
to extend further legal assist ance/ 
appearance in court etc on a pro -bono 
basis.  
(xi) The Indian Women’s Organizations / 
Indian Community Associations / NGOs will 
make efforts to enlist community advocates, 
preferably women advocates, to extend 
further legal assistance / appearance in  court 
etc on a pro-bono basis 
Note: *NGOs would also include local NGOs that are empanelled with 
the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  
4.4 The Committee observe that under the Scheme for providing 
legal/financial assistance to Indian women deserted by their Overseas 
Indian/foreigner husbands , the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
provides financial assistan ce meant for defraying initial costs of 
documentation and preparatory work for filing the case s by 
empanelled NGOs who have lawyers on their panel  who render such 
services pro bono (free of charge).  During the course of discussion 
on the scheme, the Committee had observed that there were several 
provisions which created hurdles in the implementation of scheme 

 
40 
 
and welfare of victims. The Committee are pleased to note that taking 
a note of the views expressed by  the C ommittee, the Scheme was 
revised during the course of examination itself incorporating several 
important modified provisions.  In response to the suggestion of the 
Committee, the amount of legal/financial assistance has been 
enhanced from US $ 1500 to US $ 3000 per case for developed 
countries and US $ 200 0 per case for developing countries.  
Moreover, as per the revised provisions , financial assistance would 
be provided by the heads of Indian Missions/Posts Overseas directly 
to the applicant’s legal counsel empanelled to work for the concerned 
Indian Mission/Posts.  Thus , now  the Head of Missions/Posts has 
discretionary powers for disbursement of assistance to meet the need 
of the assistance seeker. The Committee are hopeful that utilization of 
the fund will now improve after giving the discretionary power to 
HOMs/HOPs to provide assistance directly to the applicant’s legal 
counsel empanelled with the Indian Mission/Post where there are no 
empanelled NGO s.  The Committee , therefore,  strongly recommend 
that MOIA should appropriately enhance the fund allocation 
assessing the requirement for that purpose during the current 
financial year onwards and ensure that through better implementation 
of the scheme as many needy Indian women get help as possible with 
available funds under the scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 

 
41 
 
 4.5 The Committee , however , find that the financial assistance 
under the sc heme is for defraying initial legal expenses of 
documentation and preparatory work for filing the case by empanelled 
NGO etc. only.  It does not even include lawyers’ fees which are  
supposed to be met by the NGOs who have on their panel that lawyers 
who render such services pro bono.  It is more surprising to note that 
the rehabilitation of women in distress has still not been made a part 
of the recently revised scheme of MOIA.  In such cases , the deserted 
women require shelter and other urgen t assistance for their 
sustenance and only then they can think about taking any legal action 
against the erring husbands .  The Committee have a clear view that 
the temporary assistance being provided to them  as emergency 
measure through Indian Workers  Resource Centre and through Indian 
Community Welfare Fund in the Missions does not serve the purpose  
of these abandoned women who have to undertake a long legal fight in 
a foreign country .  The Committee, therefore, desire that  the 
provisions for  rehabilitation and counseling of such women should 
also be incorporated under the ambit of the revised scheme under 
which,  the Indian embassies should be empowered to provide crisis 
assistance and support to such brides in distress outside India 
through appropriate mechanism .  They should also be directed to 
extend all necessary legal and monetary support and shelter as per 
their requirement.  
(Recommendation No. 17) 

 
42 
 
(ii) Assistance provided under the Scheme 
4.6 When asked about the number of victims those have been helped under this 
scheme so far, the MOIA furnished the following Missions/Posts-wise details:-  
Name of the Missions/Posts  Year  Total number of 
beneficiaries  under the 
scheme  
High Commission of India, Canberra, Australia  
Consulate General of India, Melbourne  
 Consulate General of India, Sydney 
2006-07 
2007-08 
  2010-11 
10 
09 
 01 
Embassy of India, Washington  
 Consulate General of India, San Francisco  
  
  
Consulate General of India, New York 
 Consulate General of India, Chicago  
2007-08 
 2007-08 
2008-09 
2010-11 
 2008-09 
  2010-11 
02 
 01 
02 
02 
 01 
01 
High Commission of India, Wellington , New Zealand  
  
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 
04 
05 
03 
High Commission of India, London, U.K 2010-11 36 
Total No. of beneficiaries    77 
 
 4.7 Referring to the comments made by t he Mission at San Francisco “one way 
of widening the coverage of the scheme would be to support the NGO‟s that are 
helping Indian women by providing them with an annual grant on the  basis of the 
number of Indian women assisted in previous year”  the Committee sought the 

 
43 
 
reaction of the Government . In this regard the M OIA in a post evidence reply 
furnished the following response:-  
 “The NGOs deal with a variety of issues relating to women, whereas, the 
assistance of US $ 1500 per case is meant only for initiating steps to assist 
the deserted/divorced Indian woman in documentation and preparatory 
work for filing a case. This assistance of US $ 1500 is disbursed by the 
Indian Mission/Post on a case to case basis to the NGO concerned.  As 
such, to support the NGOs with an annual grant does not appear to be 
feasible under the MOIA‟s Scheme for providing assistance to Indian 
women deserted/divorced by their overseas Indian spouses.”  
4.8 The following table shows the year -wise details of complaints received in 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and National Commission for 
Women (NCW), the coordinating agency at the national level to receive such 
complaints from Indian women pertaining to harassment/desertion by their overseas 
spouses: 
Sr.No.  Year  No. of complaints 
received in MOIA  
No. of complaints 
received in NCW 
after formation of 
NRI Cell in Sep.2009   
1 2005 19  
2 2006 65  
3 2007 138  
4 2008 55  
5 2009 56 NRI Cell set up in 
Sep. 2009 
Sep-Dec.2009 
148 
6 2010  15 Jan-Dec-2010 
367 
7 2011 31 Jan-Dec-2011 
298 
 Total  379 813 

 
44 
 
4.9 The following table show s the allocation made to Indian Missions/Posts , 
amount utilized and the percentage of utilization since inception of the scheme. 
         (In Rs. Lakhs) 
Year Allocation made to 
Indian 
Missions/Posts 
Amount 
Utilized 
Percentage 
of utilization 
(%) 
2006-07 200.00 4.59 2.16 
2007-08 50.00 4.79 9.58 
2008-09 56.38 3.11 5.16 
2009-10 35.00 3.52 10.57 
2010-11 52.46 16.86 32.13 
2011-12 50.00* 3.39* 6.78* 
*As on 30.11.2011 
 
4.10 Stating the reason for low utilization, the Ministry submitted that it was due 
to non-availability of NGOs to whom the funds can be released. 
4.11 The Ministry further stated that this problem has been solved in the Revised 
Scheme by giving discretionary power to HOMs/HOPs to provide assistance 
directly to the applicant‟s legal counsel empanelled with the Indian Mission/Post 
where there are no empanelled NGO‟s. 
 4.12 When asked about the fund released to each Mi ssion/Post and the amount 
actually spent by them on yearly basi s since inception of the scheme, the Ministry 
furnished the following details:-  
Year 2006-07 
Indian Mission   Allocation of fund  
during 2006-2007 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Total No. of beneficiaries with 
amount disbursed 
U.S.A 40   NIL 
U.K. 40  NIL 
Canada 40 NIL 
Australia  40 10 Cases Rs. 4,58,821/-  
New Zealand  8 NIL 
Dubai (UAE)  8 NIL 
Kuwait 8 NIL 
Qatar 8 NIL 
Bahrain  8 NIL 
 Rs. 2.00 Crores  10 Cases  
Rs. 4,58,821/-  

 
45 
 
 
Year 2007-08  
Indian Mission   Allocation of 
fund  during 
2007-2008 ( 
Rupees in 
lakhs) 
Total No. of beneficiaries with 
amount disbursed 
Embassy of India, 
Washington U.S.A 
15 Embassy of India, Washington – 02 
cases  
Rs. 80,000/- 
CGI, San Francisco -01 case 
Rs. 39,890/-  
High Commission of India, 
London U.K. 
08  
High Commission of India, 
Ottawa, Canada 
08  
High Commission of India, 
Canberra, Australia  
08 HCI, Canberra- 09 Cases 
Rs. 3,59,010/-  
High Commission of India, 
Wellington New Zealand  
03 NIL 
Embassy of India, Abu 
Dubai (UAE)  
02 NIL 
Embassy of India, Kuwait 02 NIL 
Embassy of India, Doha 
Qatar 
02 NIL 
Embassy of India, Bahrain  02 NIL 
 Rs. 50.00  
lakhs 
12 Cases 
Rs. 4,78,900/-  
Year -2008-09 
Name of Mission/Post  Funds  
allotted 
Rupees in 
Lakhs 
Total No. of 
beneficiaries with 
amount disbursed 
Embassy of India, Washington    4.20    Nil 
Consulate General of India, San Francisco    2.50    02 Cases 
Rs. 86,380/-  
Consulate General of India, Chicago    4.20    NIL 
Consulate General of India, Houston    4.00 NIL 
Consulate General of India, New York   4.20    01 Case 
49,030/- 
High Commission of India, Canberra  
(including CGI, Melbourne/ Sydney) 
10.08    NIL 
High Commission of India, Wellington   8.00    04 Cases 

 
46 
 
Rs. 1,75,600/-  
Embassy of India, Bahrain   2.00    NIL 
High Commission of India, London    6.00   NIL 
Consulate General of India, Edinburgh    2.00    NIL 
Embassy of India, Doha    4.00    NIL 
High Commission of India, Ottawa  
(including CGI, Toronto/ Vancouver ) 
  5.00   NIL 
Total  Rs. 56.38 
lakhs     
 
07 Cases  
Rs. 3,11,010/-  
 
Year 2009-10 
Name of Mission/Post  Funds  allotted 
Rupees in Lakhs 
Total No. of beneficiaries 
with amount disbursed 
CGI, Melbourne 4.76  NIL 
CGI , Sydney 2.50  NIL 
HCI, Wellington, New Zealand  4.00 05 Cases  
Rs. 3,51,825/-  
Embassy of India, Safat, Kuwait  1.42  NIL 
Embassy of India, Qatar , Doha  2.00 NIL 
Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi, 
UAE 
 6.75 NIL 
Embassy of India, Bahrain  1.00  NIL 
HCI, London, U.K. 3..00  NIL 
Embassy of India, Washington, 
USA 
2.36 NIL 
CGI, Chicago 2.10  NIL 
CGI, Houston 2.10  NIL 
CGI, New York 2.36 NIL 
CGI, San Francisco  1.25 NIL 
Total 35.60 Lakhs  05 Cases  
Rs. 3,51,825/-  
 
 Year 2010-11 
Name of Mission/Post  Funds  allotted 
(in Rupees ) 
Total No. of beneficiaries with 
amount disbursed  
HCI, Canberra 3,39,825  
CGI , Sydney 5,00,000  01  case  
Rs. 67,500/-  

 
47 
 
HCI, Wellington, New Zealand  6,79,650 03 Cases  
Rs. 2,07,360/-   
Embassy of India, Bahrain  2,00,000  NIL 
Embassy of India, Doha 2,00,000 NIL 
HCI, London, U.K. 20,38,950  36 Cases 
Rs. 12,17,503/-  
Embassy of India, Washington, 
USA 
2,26,550 NIL 
CGI, Chicago 7,00,000  01 Case 
Rs. 56,000/- 
CGI, New York 2,36,000 NIL  
CGI, San Francisco  1,25,000 02 Cases 
Rs. 1,37,790/- 
Total Rs. 
52,45,975/-  
43 Cases  
Rs. 16,86,153/-  
 
4.13 The following table shows the details of legal and financial assistance rendered by 
empanelled NGOs etc under MOIA‟s scheme to Indian women deserted by their overseas 
Indian spouses: 
Sr. 
No.  
Name of the 
Mission /Post  
Name of the NGO  Total Number 
of cases  
 Total Amount  of 
assistance 
rendered  
1 Embassy of India, 
Washington DC 
ASHA For 
Women  (Asian 
Women‟s Self Help 
Association) 
  
2007-08 
2  
 
Total = 2 
Rs. 80,000/- 
2 Consulate General 
of India, San 
Francisco  
Seva Legal Aid 
  
 
NARIKA 
  
 
 
MAITRI 
2007-08  
1  
  
2008-09 
2  
 
 
2010-11 
2 
 
Total =5 
Rs.39,890/-  
 
 
Rs. 92,320/- 
 
 
 
Rs. 1,37,790/- 
 
 
Rs. 2,70,000/- 
3 Consulate General 
of India, New York  
Sneha Inc 2008-09 
1  
 
Total =1 
Rs. 49,030/- 
4 Consulate General 
of India, Chicago  
Apna Ghar 2010-11 
1  
 
Rs. 52,656/-  

 
48 
 
Total =1 
5 High Commission 
of India,  
 Canberra  
Consulate General 
of India, Melbourne 
 
 
Federation of Indian 
Associations of 
Victoria Inc,  
  
2006-07 
10  
 
2007-08  
9  
 
Total = 19 
 
Rs.4,58,821/-  
 
 
Rs. 3,59,010/-  
 
 
Rs. 8,17,831/-  
6 Consulate General 
of India, Sydney  
United Indian 
Association Inc; Post 
Box 575, Strathfied, 
NSW 2135 
 
 
 
2010-11 
1 
 
Total = 1 
Rs. 68,175/-  
7 High Commission 
of India , 
Wellington  
  
Shakti Community 
Council Inc 
2008-09 
4    
 
2009-10 
5  
 
2010-11 
5 
 
 
2011-12 
2 
Total = 16 
 Rs. 1,75,600/- 
 
 
Rs. 3,51,825/-   
 
 
Rs. 3,44,130/-  
 
 
 
Rs. 1,36,770/- 
 
Rs. 10,08,325/- 
8 High Commission 
of India, London  
M/s Good Human 
Foundation  
2010-11 
26 
2011-12 
5 
 Total =31 
Rs. 12,17,503/-  
 
Rs. 3,39,062/- 
 
Rs.15,56,565/-  
 
 
 Total amount of assistance rendered = `   39,02,582/-  
 
4.14  In a reply to the Ministry of Overseas  Indian Affairs, the Mission at San 
Francisco reportedly stated that “It is difficult to empanel NGOs in USA as they do 
not accept MOIA‟s terms and conditions.   

 
49 
 
4.15 On being asked the criteria for selection of such NGOs/Organizations and 
terms and condit ions on which these NGOs work, the Ministry in a post evidence 
reply furnished the following details:-  
“The following are the main criteria for selection of NGOs/Organizations        
for empanelment:  
 
i. that it has been in existence for at least the last three years. 
ii. that it has sound financial back ground to be able to pursue the case 
after GOI assistance is stopped. 
iii. that it is known for rendering community service to Indians, especially 
Indian women. 
iv. that it has adequate number of legal professionals to t ake up and pursue 
the cases. 
v. that it is committed to the welfare of the Indian women.” 
   
4.16 When asked about Indian Women‟s organizations/Indian Community Associations/ 
NGOs empanelled with the Indian Mission/Posts abroad to provide legal/Financial 
Assistance to Indian Women deserted by their Overseas Spouses, the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs furnished the following details:-  
Sl.
No 
Indian Mission  Indian Women‟s Association /NGOs empanelled with 
the Indian Missions /Posts  
1 Embassy of India, 
Washington DC,.USA 
ASHA (Asian Women‟s Self –help Association) , Post 
Box 2084, Rockville, MD 20847-2084 
 Consulate General of 
India, San 
Francisco,USA  
(i) MAIRI, 234 , East Gish Road, Suite 200, San Jose, 
CA 95112 
(ii) NARIKA 
Post Box NO. 14014, Berkeley, CA 94714 
(iii) SevA Legal Aid 
37053 Cherry Street # 207 
Newark, CA 94560 
Email: anu@worldwideibs.com 
3 Consulate  General of 
India,  
New York, USA 
(i) SAKHI, New York 
(ii) AWAKE, (Asian Women‟s Alliance for Kinship and 
Equality ) 
(iii) MANAVI, New Jersey 
(iv) SEWAA(SERVICE AND EDUCATION FOR 
WOMEN AGAINST ABUSE ) Philadelphia  
(v) INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF BUFFALO  
(vi) Asian Women‟s Safety Net  
(vii) Sneha Inc; Post Box No. 271650, West Hartford, 
CT-06127 
 

 
50 
 
4 Consulate General of 
India 
Chicago, USA 
APNA GHAR INC (OUR HOME), Chicago 
5 Consulate General of 
India, Houston, USA  
Daya Inc., 5890 Point West Dr, Houston TX 77036 
6 Embassy of India , 
Doha, Qatar 
Indian Community Benevolent Fund (ICBF) , Doha, 
Qatar  
 
 7 High Commission of 
India, Canberra, 
Australia  
 Federation of  Indian Communities of Queensland Inc, 
(FICQ), Brisbane 
8 Consulate General of 
India, Melbourne  
(i) The Indian Welfare & Resources Centre (IWRC), the 
Welfare wing of Federation of Indian Association of 
Victoria, Melbourne. 
(ii) Federation of Indian Associates of Victoria Inc 
(FIAV), Melbourne  
 
9 Consulate General of 
India, Sydney, 
Australia  
(i) United Indian Association Inc; Post Box 575, 
Stratified, NSW 2135 
 
10 High Commission of 
India, Ottawa , Canada  
(i) Indian Canada Association  
1301 Preston Drive, Ottawa, ON K1E , 2Z2 
(ii) Ottawa Community Immigrant Services 
Organization , 959 Wellington Street West, Ottawa, ON 
K1Y 2X5. 
(iii) National Association of Canadians of Indian Origin, 
24 Saint-Paul East, Suite 201. Montreal , QC H2Y 1G3. 
(iv) AWIC Community & Social Services 
3030 Don Mills Road, Peanut Plaza , North York, ON 
M2J 3C1. 
 
11 Indian Embassy, 
Bahrain  
Migrant Workers Protection Society (MWPS)  
12 High Commission of 
India, Wellington , 
New Zealand   
Shakti Community Council INC, Auckland  
13 High Commission of 
India, 
London, U.K 
 
 Good Human Foundation , 42 Eaton House, 39-40 
Upper Grosvenor  Street, London W1K2NG, Sangam 
Association of Asian Women, 260, Burnt Oak 
Broadway Edgware, Middlesex, HAR, OAP, U.K. 
  
 The empanelled Indian Women‟s Organizations/ Indian Community 
Associations /NGOs are engaged in different social activities especially 
the welfare of women in trouble and in need of help. Their activities 
differ from country to country depending on the pro blems prevailing in 
these countries.  

 
51 
 
   The empanelled NGO, AWIC Community and Social Services, Toronto, 
Canada provides one -to-one counseling sessions to Indian women and 
their families facing problems like cultural shock and marital problems 
and to new comer youngsters facing issues such as language barriers , 
conflicting values and gender issues.   
 The United Indian Associations (UIA), Sydney besides resolving the 
issue of assaults on Indian students, and taking on other social activities, 
have held se veral annual for a to assist women. This Association also 
acts as a channel of communication between the Australian Indian 
Community, the Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments and 
the Indian Government on welfare, social and economic matters.  
 In t he Embassy of India, Qatar, assistance groups have been set up 
which inter-alia provides help/counseling to women in trouble.  
 Seva Legal Aid, an NGO empanelled with the Consulate General of 
India, San Francisco is helping the immigrant community to under stand 
the pre-requisites to becoming a US citizen. These efforts in educating 
the Indian community are laudable. They also conduct workshop, 
offering legal counseling to the Indian -American Community in the Bay 
Area.”  
  
4.17 On being asked whether the MOIA finds it feasible to allow disbursement of 
assistance on case to case basis rather than to fix a certain amount, the MOIA 
furnished the following comments:- 
  “As per the scheme the applications for providing legal aid received by the 
Missions would b e examined by an officer designated by the Head of 
Mission on case -to-case basis and approved by Head of Mission/Deputy 
Chief of Mission.  Thus the Head of Mission/Deputy Chief of Mission  has 
the discretionary powers for disbur sing assistance in such cases  within the 
ambit of scheme.  In the rev ised scheme, the Head of Missions/Posts will 
provide assistance to meet the legal and other costs directly to the 
applicants legal counsel empanelled with the concerned Mission/Post.” 
 
4.18 When enquired about the way, a Mission/Post ensures a proper utilization of 
the amount released to them, the Ministry furnished the following details:-  
Indian Missions/Posts closely monitor the cases referred to empanelled 
NGOs.. They obtain utilization certificates f rom the NGOs after necessary 
relief is granted to the victims under the scheme.  The declaration given by 
the NGO at the time of empanelment facilitates the Ministry/Indian 
Missions/Posts to take action against the NGO in case of failure to delivers 
the required services.  This may include reporting any offensive/negative 
behavior or action on their part to the local authorities who have granted 
them permission to operate as such Organization.  
 

 
52 
 
  4.19 When asked whether the MOIA agree to the views of NCW t hat instead of 
empanelling NGOs there should be full time Counselors in all the critical Missions, 
the Ministry replied as under:-  
 “On an experimental basis, MOIA has appointed one Counselor 
(Community Affairs) each in the Embassy of India, Washington and in the 
Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi, UAE. More such appointments could be 
considered after reviewing the performance of present incumbents.” 
 
4.20 In response to specific query by the Committ ee as how the free legal and 
other counseling are provide d to the prospective brides and their parents before 
marriage both in India and abroad.  MOIA submitted the following facts in a written 
reply:- 
 “State Legal Services Authority in the Sta tes/UTs offer services without 
charging any fee if the aggrieved party is a woman belonging to any strata 
of society. 
 Indian Women‟s Organizations/Indian Community Associations and 
NGOs empanelled with Indian Missions/Posts abroad have, in many places, 
advocates who work on pro -bono basis. Whenever the prospective brides 
and their parents approach the Indian Missions/Posts abroad arrangements 
are made, where possible, to obtain free legal and other counseling before 
marriage with the help of these empanelled NGOs.”  
    
4.21 On the role of NGO‟s in providing assistance/help in such cases, the 
Ministry furnished their views as under:- 
 “The assistance of US $ 3000 in developed countries and US $ 2000 in 
developing countries per case is released by Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
to the Indian community organizations/NGO empanelled with them to  
enable it to take steps to assist the woman in documentation and 
preparatory work for filing the case.  
 The NGOs empanelled with Indian Missions/Posts abroad have pro -bono 
lawyers / Advocates who are well versed in local laws and are in a better 
position to actively help the women victims. These social organizations 
/NGOs are active in their various  spheres of work as they have the 
necessary authority/experience and expertise to take appropriate and 
timely action in the matter.”   
4.22 As regards dealing with the cases where there is no such registered NGO 
exist, the Ministry stated as under:-  
 In those pla ces where there is no NGO empanelled with the Indian 
Missions/Posts, the women victims have access to initial legal/financial 

 
53 
 
assistance from the Indian Community Welfare Fund ( ICWF) where the 
ICWF Scheme is in operation. The expenditure from the ICWF is under the 
discretionary powers of the Head of Missions/Posts abroad.  Where the 
ICWF is not in operation the Missions abroad provide assistance under the 
Consular powers assigned to them by the Ministry of External Affairs in the 
Consular Manual. 
 
  
4.23 On being asked how the Ministry propose to strengthen the common 
concern with NGOs and other Civil Society organizations to prevent occurrence of 
such cases, the Ministry in a post evidence reply stated as under:- 
 “Meetings were organized by the Consulate General of India in New York in 
September, 2007 and March, 2009 with the Women‟s Associations in which 
the Ministry‟s scheme for providing legal and financial assistance to 
deserted Indian women were explained in detail. At interactive sessions 
between th e Indian Missions/Posts abroad and the NGOs and other 
organizations they are sensitized about women‟s issues and the awareness 
that need to be spread.”  
 
4.24 As regards listing of advocates, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
stated as under:- 
“Under the MOIA‟s Scheme there are empanelled NGOs to whom cases of 
deserted women who approach the Indian Missions/Posts abroad are 
referred for legal help and also for counseling. The NGOs take the help of 
lawyers who are willing to work on pro-bono basis.  There are no advocates 
empanelled with the Mission under the Scheme.  However, under the revised 
scheme w.e.f. 30.11.2011, the financial assistance may be given to the 
empanelled legal counsel of the applicant also”. 
 
4.25 The Committee are of the opinion that apart from various efforts 
being made by Missions/Posts to help the victims of NRI marriages, 
there is a need to develop  a mechanism for quick tracking of 
concerned NRIs/PIOs in a case of desertion.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that Missio ns/Posts should be provided separate 
funds for location of such persons through agencies available for 
such purposes.  Missions/Posts may also undertake this work 
involving reputed NGOs and other linguistic civil society 

 
54 
 
organizations, which have thei r bra nches or official links in other 
prominent countries. Assistance of t hese NGOs/Civil societies may 
also be taken in verifying the antecedents of bridegroom(s) and get 
their suggestion for any proposed NRI  marriage. Their volunteers in 
the different cities  across the globe  should also be asked not only to 
help the victims, but also support in tracing the whereabouts of such 
grooms. To make this effective , the Ministry and NGOs must have a 
holistic approach to extend a helping hand to  victims of desertion and 
also to prevent such repetition.  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
4.26 The Committee feel that defending a matrimonial battle abroad 
sitting in India is an impossible task.  Moreover, issue of visa is also 
very difficult and time -taking.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
such foreign missions in India should also be requested to simplify 
the procedure for quick issuance of visa to deserted women to enable 
them to contest the proceedings filed by NRI/PIO husband in a foreign 
land.  These Missions may also be requested to introduce a system of 
cross check, when a NRI/PIO husband wants to c ancel sponsorship of 
his spouse ‘s visa .  The Committee have a view that cancellation 
should not be permitted as long as dependency of the aggrieved 
woman continues as per Indian law so as to enable her to continue to 
stay and contest proceedings in the  foreign land without being 
deported and thus deprived of the opportunity to contest the case.   

 
55 
 
Simultaneously, efforts should be made for providing extended 
residence permits or permanent residence status to the abandoned 
spouses so that they may be able to fight the legal battle.   
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
4.27 The Committee observe that over the year s, the problems of 
Indian women trapped in fraudulent marriages with overseas Indians 
are increasingly reported  in electronic and print media .  Any such 
abandoned women is isolated in an alien land far away from her home, 
inevitably facing constraints of language, communication, lack of 
knowledge of local criminal justice, police and legal system, lack of 
support network of friends and family to turn to, lack of immediate and 
readily available monetary support and a place to take shelter in.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that complaint and counseling desks 
should be set up in Indian Missions abroad with pro fessional 
counseling to help the victims especially in countries where there is a 
higher incidence of such cases.  The Committee also desire that such 
persons should be appointed as Counselors who speak the language 
of the majority or NRIs/PIOs residing in that particular country.   Such 
Missions may also be directed to prepare a list of NGOs , Linguistic 
Civil Society Organisations  which may provide help/assistance in 
knowing the credentials of the grooms before marriage or in tracking 
the NRIs/PIOs in cases of desertion.  Such list should be made 

 
56 
 
available on the website of MOIA and MEA and a lso in printed form to 
the newly wed women arriving in that country 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
4.28 The Committee are pained to note that since inception of the 
scheme, despite large number of cases being reported, a very small 
amount is being allocated by M OIA the Missions/Posts for providing 
assistance to needy Indian women deserted by their overseas Indian 
husbands or facing divorce proceedings in a foreign country.  Out of 
this meager allocation, a very small percentage ranging from two per 
cent to ten pe rcent only is being spent by the Missions/Posts.  As a 
result, s ince 2006 -07, only 82 women have got some financial 
assistance out of the total 377 complaints received in Missions/Posts 
abroad till the year 2011.  The Committee do not agree with the 
justification given by the Ministry that a majority of such claims are  
handled at the level of counseling where advice is given and legal 
position is explained to the concerned person or they are put in touch 
with NGOs, Welfare Organizations and Indian Associations working in 
those areas who then further take on the cases.  The Committee 
treats this approach of Missions/Posts  abroad as disappointing 
conveying the impression of escaping their responsibility by merely 
referring such victims to other agencies without rendering necessary 
help.  Considering sensitive and emotional  nature of cases, the 
Committee expect that Missions/Posts should adopt a sympathetic 

 
57 
 
attitude towards the deserted and needy women and they should not 
treat these cases as part of bureaucratic routine .  The Committee  
express concern at the meager level of utilization of funds allocated 
for the purpose and desire that Missions/Posts should give every type 
of required assistance to the women wh o register complaints with 
them.  The Missions should  also keep a regular track and take 
required follow up action o n the complaints received from all the 
sources under intimation to the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs or 
National Commission for Women from where the case has been 
forwarded to them.  The Committee should also be apprised about the 
improvement in fund  allocation and disbursement for this purpose 
under the revised Scheme. 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
(iii) Awareness Building Programmes 
 
4.29 Awareness building on the issues relating to women trapped in fraudulent 
marriages with overseas Indians and also creating awareness on this issue in order 
to find solutions to mitigate the problems is supposed to be the most important area 
and work to be done by the Government. 
4.30 On being asked to furnish the details of the awareness programmes 
organized, both in India and abroad since inception of the scheme along  with the 
role being played by various stakeholders, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
in a written reply furnished the following details:-  
  National Consultation and Work shops: 
A National Consultation on “Marriages to Overseas Indians” was 
organized  by the Ministry in February, 2006 following which the  
Ministry of Overseas  Indian Affairs jointly with the National Commission 
for Women (NCW), organized two regional workshops in Chandigarh and 

 
58 
 
Thiruvananthapuram in 2006 with the objective of involving the State 
Commissions for women as  well as the women‟s organizations of the 
States concerned to spread  awareness. Vividh Vikas Samithi, a Delhi 
based NGO, in collaboration with  this Ministry, conducted a one day 
National Convention on “Indian Mission  to help jilted NRI Brides” in 
New Delhi in April, 2009. The NCW, jointly with  the Ministry organized 
a national seminar on  15th February, 2011 on   “Issues Relating to NRI 
Marriages” in New Delhi. Apart from this, the Ministry, during the Pravasi 
Bhartiya Divas (PBD), organized parallel  sessions where issues relating 
to problems relating to overseas Indian marriages were discussed. NGOs, 
women‟s organizations and State Government rep resentatives, besides the 
overseas Indian delegates, attended these sessions. 
  Awareness campaign 
The Ministry has brought out information pamphlets in English, Hindi, 
Punjabi, Malayalam and Telugu to make Indian women aware of their 
rights and responsibi lities and precautions that should be exercised before 
entering into marital alliance with overseas Indians. 
 The Ministry has brought out a guidance booklet “Marriages to Overseas 
 Indians” in English, Telugu, Hindi, and Punjabi. This booklet contains 
 information on safeguards available to women deserted by their NRI 
 spouses, legal remedies available, authorities that can be approached for 
 redressal of grievances and NGOs that can provide assistance.  
 The Ministry has launched publicity cum awareness c ampaign through 
 audio visual advertisement on regional T.V network primarily covering the 
 States of Punjab, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. 
  Meetings held abroad 
              “Meetings were organized by the Consulate General of India in New 
 York in September, 2007 and March, 2009  with the Women‟s Associations 
 in which the Ministry‟s scheme for providing legal and financial assistance 
 to deserted Indian women were explained in detail.”  
4.31 As regards the wide circulation of the printed material published for this 
cause, the Ministry stated as under:-  
  The pamphlets and booklets printed by the Ministry under the awareness 
 campaign programme were sent to the State Governmen ts where problem 
 cases arising out of marriages with overseas Indians have been reported. 
 The State Governments were requested by the Ministry to distribute the 
 pamphlets through village Panchayats, Anganwadis, Self Help Groups, 

 
59 
 
 Post Offices, Banks, Ra ilway Stations, Airports, Hospitals/Dispensaries etc. 
 The State Governments have also  been requested to make a vigorous 
 information campaign at all levels using the media and NGOs to educate 
 the prospective brides and their families in taking all possi ble precautions 
 before entering into marriage alliance with overseas Indian women.  
 Government of Gujarat has reported that they have translated the Guidance 
 Booklet on “Marriage to Overseas Indians” into the Gujarati language and 
 conducted a seminar in October , 2008 and July, 2009 at Ahmedabad for 
 public awareness. The Gujarat Women‟s Commission had arranged several 
 seminars where about 10,000 delegates from villages of that State had 
 participated. Government of Punjab, Department of NRI Affairs have 
 reported that they have circulated the booklets on “Marriages to Overseas 
 Indian” ( Punjabi version) to Deputy Commissioners in the State and NRI 
 Sabha Punjab.  
 As intimated by NRI Sabha Punjab, these pamphlets and booklets have been 
distributed (Chief Patron: Chief Minister, Punjab) amongst the public 
through Central Office as well as District Unit Offices of Sabha and 
prominent Press Correspondents for publicity. The NRI Sabha gave half  an 
hour live program on FM Radio explaining merits, demerits and 
precautions to be taken by the young girls and their parents before fixing 
such marriages. As reported by the NRI Sabha Punjab, people in general 
have started becoming more aware and conscious and taking precautions in 
such matters on the lines indicated in the booklets and pamphlets.  The 
Women and Child Development Department of the Government of Haryana 
has reported that they have circulated the guidance booklets to Haryana 
Women‟s Commiss ion, Director General of Police, all Deputy 
Commissioners Superintendents of Police, Sub Divisional Magistrates, 
Programme Officers and Protection Officers in the State for giving wide 
publicity by organizing awareness programmes.  
 
4.32  Elucidating the initiative taken by the MOIA in dealing with the  menace of 
„honeymoon brides‟ the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:-  
National Commission for Women (NCW), 4 Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg,  
New Delhi -110 002  has been   designated  by Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs    as the coordinating agency at the National  level to receive and 
process all the complaints related to Indian women deserted by their 
overseas Indian husbands.  Chief Secretaries of all States, Administ rators of 
all Union Territories and Heads of Indian Missions /Posts abroad have been 
advised of this decision and requested to take further action accordingly. 

 
60 
 
The NCW, on 27th August, 2009 launched an NRI Cell to deal with problems 
of Indian women deserte d by their NRI husbands.  They render all possible 
assistance to victims of NRI marriages. NCW looks  in to complaints and 
takes suo -moto notice on any issue brought to the notice of NRI Cell in 
accordance with section 10 (1) (f) of the National Commission  for Women 
Act, 1990 read with Sub-Section 4 of Section 10 and Section 8 of the Act. 
The Government of Tamil Nadu has reported that the Commissioner of 
Social Welfare, Chennai have issued circulars to all District Social Welfare 
Officers to give wide publicity in the matter.  
Similarly the Government of Punjab has issued necessary instructions to all 
Superintendents of Police for handling such cases and fixed two days in a 
month ie 2nd and 4th Wednesday for providing public hearing.  
An NRI Commissioner has  been appointed to look into matters relating to 
the problems of girls/women deserted by NRIs. NRI Sabha Punjab, at its 
district Head Quarters at Jalandhar has been set up to look into such 
complaints. Similarly, the Punjab State Commission for women has b een set 
up. An NRI Cell has been set up at the Police Head Quarters.  
Governments of Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi, 
Himachal Pradesh and Sikkim have acknowledged the request of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for conducting   vigorous publicity 
campaign at all levels using the media and NGOs to educate prospective 
brides and their families to take possible precautions before entering into 
marriage alliance with overseas Indians.” 
 
4.33 On being asked how the MOIA propose s to sensitize the media in creating 
awareness regarding such fraudulent marriages, the MOIA in a post evidence reply 
stated as under:-  
  “The Ministry has launched publicity cum awareness campaign through 
audio visual advertisement on regional T.V network  primarily covering the 
States of Punjab, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The 
national and many regional channels show one or two minute awareness 
campaign clippings in-between prime time programmes. 
 The print media is also used to sprea d awareness as can be seen from the 
news item that appeared in The Hindu daily of May 9, 2011, captioned 
Police guidelines on ‘ Pravasi’ marriages which is an advisory containing 
the do‟s and don‟ts for Indian women marrying NRIs/PIOs.”  
 

 
61 
 
4.34 During the course of discussion, it was observed by the Committee that the 
publicity material pamphlet and was not pointed in the languages like Malayalam, 
Tamil, Marathi and Gujarati pertaining to the States from where maximum number 
of people go abroad.  Similarly, t he awareness campaign on TV was also not seen 
on the local regional languages, channels.  During the course of evidence Secretary 
MOIA accepted the anomalies and submitted. 
 
“We mentioned that we have an information pamphlet and a booklet. 
The pamphlet is in Malayalam and the booklet was not in Malayalam. 
This anomaly will be set right. We will have a booklet in Malayalam. 
It was mentioned that the booklet was not in Tamil. This will also be 
set right and the booklet will be in Tamil now.”  
 
4.35 About the TV campaign in Tamil, Secretary MOIA assured that if it was not 
adequate, they will redress the adequacy. 
4.36 The Committee considered that websites as a very important mean of 
publicity particularly for the people going outside.  The Committee felt that there 
should be one single website rather than having to many websites where right and 
complete information could be obtained at one plea.  During the course of evidence 
the Secretary reached as under:- 
“We mentioned that we have an information pamphlet an d a booklet. The 
pamphlet is in Malayalam and the booklet was not in Malayalam. This 
anomaly will be set right. We will have a booklet in Malayalam. It was 
mentioned that the booklet was not in Tamil. This will also be set right and 
the booklet will be in Tamil now. 
…As far as marriage counseling is concerned, again we consulted the 
colleague from the Ministry of External Affairs. A very positive aspect has 
emerged – we are certainly going to consider now. We will discuss this with 
MEA; we will discuss this with various Heads of Missions and Posts; we all 
agree that this is a good idea. We will try and consult them and work out an 
implementable scheme.”  
 
4.37 The Committee observe that MOIA has brought out a guidance 
booklet on ‘marriages to overseas Indians’ which contains information 

 
62 
 
of safeguards available to women deserted by their spouses, legal 
remedies available, authorities that can be approached for redress of 
grievances.  Similarly, a pamphlet entitled ‘thinking of the m arriage of 
your daughter with NRIs’ has also been brought out by the Ministry 
highlighting the precautions to be taken before entering into marriage 
alliance.  The Committee find that implementation of safeguards and 
social measures need to be addressed ea rnestly.  In Committee’s view 
this can be done by creating social awareness, counseling and 
tackling violations and implementations of safeguards, institutional 
and other arrangements.   
 The Committee find that these materials are published mainly in 
English and Hindi and a few in regional languages.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that for an effective campaign to educate the people 
in this regard, awareness material should be published in all the major 
regional languages  like Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Punjabi, 
Guajarati etc. pertaining to the  States from where more NRIs are 
settled abroad and this should be widely circulated through the State 
Governments for better awareness.  The Committee also desire that 
for an effective awareness, the print ed materials should be made 
available at Passport Offices so that when a passport is dispatched or 
handed over to young women, the pamphlet about marriages to 
overseas Indians goes along with the new passport.  Similarly, these 
pamphlets should be widely d istributed to the migrants at the time of 
immigration clearance at PoE Offices . Missions should also distribute  

 
63 
 
these pamphlets  invariably to those who report them on arrival after 
marriage. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
4.38 The Committee feel that the more people are made aware of 
pitfalls of NRI marriages, the more cautious they will be when a 
stranger comes asking for a daughter’s hand in marriage.  T he 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that t o target the larger 
possible audience, awareness of cultural, social and legal aspects of 
NRI marriages needs to be publicized via all Media outlets  including 
regional TV Channels and websites .  Awareness Programmes should 
be run principally in rural areas where the most vulnerable brides and 
their families  reside.  NGOs and state Government agencies should 
also be involved to  launch an ex tensive campaign to educate unwary 
communities about the potential dangers of NRI marriages. 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
4.39 The Committee observe that NCW are not able to follow up the 
cases of abandoned NRI brides due to non -availability of information 
about the erring spouses domiciled abroad.  The Committee, therefore, 
also desire that as a part of consular protection obligation, Foreign 
Embassies, M issions and Consulates in India should mandatorily 
furnish all the relevant data to NCW or to aggrieved spouses about  
erring spouses of NRI marriages who are domiciled in foreign 
countries.  The Committee, therefore, desire that some directives be 
framed by the Ministry of External Affairs in conjunction with the MOIA 

 
64 
 
and Ministry of Women and Child Development to provide meaningful 
consular assistance to the abandoned NRI brides.  The Committee 
also desire that such foreign missions of the country from whe re more 
such cases are reported should create dedicated desks of officers 
exclusively to provide proper assistance to such spouses in distress. 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
  

 
65 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
Legal hiccups, international conventions and bilateral treaties 
 
  While submitting a  detailed note on specific legal problems/difficulties 
detected by the Government in resolving the problems faced by Indian Women 
trapped in fraudulent marriages with overseas Indians , the MOIA furnished the 
following reply:-  
MOIA in associati on with the NCW had organized a seminar on 15 th 
February 2011 at Vigyan Bhavan, N.Delhi to consider problems/difficulties 
faced by Indian women trapped in fraudulent marriages with overseas 
Indians. The legal problems/difficulties were enumerated as follows:  
(a)  Simplification of procedure for quick issuance of visa by foreign Missions 
 in India to deserted women to enable them to contest the proceedings filed 
 by NRI / PIO husband in a foreign land. 
(b)  Introduction of a system of cross check / consent,  when a NRI/PIO husband 
 wants to cancel sponsorship of his spouse‟s visa.  Cancellation should not be 
 permitted as long as dependency of the aggrieved women continues as per 
 Indian law so as to enable her to continue to stay and contest proceedings in 
 the foreign land without being deported and thus deprived of the opportunity 
 to contest the case. 
(c)  Grant of ex-parte divorce by foreign courts be barred in the case of 
 marriages solemnized in India as per Indian law.   
(d)  Procedural delay/low prior ity to issue Look Out Certificate (LOC)/ Red 
 Corner Notice (RCN) against accused NRI/PIO husband in cases of marital 
 discord needs to be addressed.    
(e)  Cases of domestic discord to be included in the scope of extradition treaties.  
(f)  Difficulty an d consequent delay in serving judicial processes issued by 
 Indian courts through the Indian Missions abroad to be addressed.   
(g)  Simplification of procedure to facilitate extradition/deportation of errant 
 husband and cancellation of passport to face c ivil/criminal trial in India 
 especially if judicial processes of Indian courts are not responded to.  
(h)  Need to develop mechanisms to enable quick tracking of NRIs/PIOs in case 
 of desertion.  Funds may also need to be allocated for location of such 
 persons through agencies available for the purposes.   
(i)  Recognition of NCW as an authorized body to directly make applications 
 before foreign courts and foreign missions on behalf of aggrieved women 
 where so required.  
(j)  Review of MOIA Scheme for p roviding legal//financial help to the deserted 
 women in foreign lands.   
(j)  Role of State Governments in sensitization of police and authorities for 
 registration of FIR & other NRI issues. 
 The resolution of most of the above issues is complex since they fall within 
 the purview of Private International Law.   

 
66 
 
 5.2 Giving details of the  initiatives that have been taken/being taken to 
overcome such difficulties, the Ministry stated as under:-  
To a large extent the action to be taken lie with our Embassies/High 
Commissions abroad and the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has 
therefore been asked to provide support in such cases. MEA has responded 
as follows: 
 
(a) MEA has assured that though issuing visa is a sovereign right of the 
country granting the visa, as and when the problem of a deserted 
woman seeking visa to visit a country to contest the case arises, the 
concerned Territorial Division of MEA as well as CPV Division may be 
contacted for taking up the matter suitably with the concerned Embassy 
of the country located in India. 
 
(b) MEA has assured that for acknowledging the judicial process issued by 
Indian courts/on the request to locate the address of erring husband in 
foreign land, NCW wi ll be listed in the list of authorities whose 
recommendations are to be immediately acted upon by the Indian 
Missions/Posts. 
 
(c) MEA has assured that if a wife is harassed and deserted and is without 
her passport, if the original passport is valid and is in t he custody of 
erring husband, a new passport will be issued after verifying passport 
particulars from original passport issuing authority (where she does 
not have any record or photocopy of her old passport). 
 
(d) MEA has assured that if the wife has the photo copy and record of the 
old passport, a new passport will be issued fairly fast after cancelling 
the old one in the system. Registration of FIR is not essential in such 
cases. 
 
(e) MEA has assured that if the victim was on the dependent visa and the 
visa has been cancelled, the matter will have to be taken up with 
concerned Embassy of the country, and assistance will be provided in 
such cases to the victims. 
 
(f) MEA has assured that if Non Bail -able warrants (NBWs) have been 
issued, application may be mad e directly to the Passport Authority for 
revocation of the passport of the person against whom such NBWs have 
been issued, since it is a discretionary power of the Passport Office. 
 
5.3   On being asked whether any examination of relevant international con ventions 
and bilateral treaties has ever been made by MOIA since the scheme has come into 
force, the Ministry furnished the following reply:- 

 
67 
 
India has become party to the Hague Conference on Private International Law 
(HccH) by submitting the instrument of  accession on 13 th March 2008. India is 
also a Party to the following Hague Conventions: 
(i) Convention on Abolishing the Requirement of Legalisation for Foreign 
Public Documents 1961. 
(ii) Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial 
Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters 1965. 
(iii) Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial 
Matter 1970. 
(iv) Convention on Protection of Children and Co -operation in Respect of 
Inter-country Adoption.1993. 
 In addition to the above Conventions, action is also being taken to become a 
party to the following Conventions: 
(i) Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction 1980. 
(ii) Convention on the International Recovery of Child Support and Other 
Forms of Family Maintenance 2007. 
 
However, joining of the above two Conventions require necessary 
implementing legislations. The Ministry of Women and Child 
Development is preparing the implementing legislations in consultation 
with Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice. 
 
Although these Conventions are not Marriage or Divorce Specific they 
facilitate to bridge the two legal systems to which the NRI Husband and 
wife belong, by providing appropriate civil procedure acceptable to both 
jurisdictions. The civil litigations involvin g NRI marriage would, 
therefore, greatly be benefited in matters relating to service of judicial 
documents, taking evidence abroad etc. which are vital to all civil cases 
involving two or more legal systems including the cases relating to 
Marriages involvi ng two legal systems. For example, being a party to 
the Convention on Legalisation, it provides for speedy and problem -free 
attestation and verification of public documents in other foreign 
countries.  
The Convention on service abroad of Judicial and extra judicial 
documents provides a reliable method of serving the summons and other 
judicial documents in that country and vice -versa which would help in 
reducing delays in such cases. This also ensures that the defendants 
have notice of any foreign court proce edings against them and thereby 
provide them with an opportunity to defend the case. In relation to NRI 
marriage, this would ensure that the Indian woman married to an NRI 
would receive the court notice and defend any marriage related cases 

 
68 
 
filed abroad. T he Convention on Taking Evidence Abroad in Civil or 
Commercial matters facilitates taking of evidence by means of letters of 
request by Diplomatic or Consular Agents and by Commissioners as 
well as through the courts of another country in cases where it is  
necessary to obtain evidence from a witness residing abroad. It would 
also provide greater certainty regarding admissibility of evidence 
obtained before Indian courts and thereby facilitate speedy disposal of 
cases. The Conventions also facilitate speedy delivery of judicial 
documents, service, of summons on defendant NRI husbands not present 
before Indian courts, thereby avoiding passing of ex -parte orders and 
also help taking and recording of evidence before Indian courts when 
witness/defendant is residi ng abroad. The impact of joining the 
Convention on Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents 
in Civil or Commercial Matters would help in reducing the problems 
arising out ex -parte decrees in NRI marriages by ensuring service of 
notice of any suits to the other party residing in India or in other 
country.” 
5.4 On being asked whether the Ministry has taken steps to work out MOUs 
with European Union as also with other countries where Indian Diaspora is large in 
number viz Australia, Canada, USA for repatriation of groom violating Indian laws 
after marriage such as ex -parte divorce while living abroad and entering into 
marriage alliance in these countries, the Ministry in a post evidence reply stated as 
under:- 
  “Such issues are private and famil y law matters.  However, India has 
already become a party to the Hague Conference on Private International 
Law. Besides, India has signed the Convention on Abolishing the 
Requirement of Legislation of Foreign Public Documents 1961, Convention 
on the Servic e Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or 
Commercial Matters 1965, Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in 
Civil or Commercial Matter, 1970 and Convention on Protection of 
Children and Cooperation in Respect of Inter -country Adopt ion 1993.  
These conventions were signed in 2008.  This basically makes it possible for 
Indian courts to pass particular directions which can then be conveyed to 
overseas courts or overseas persons.” 
5.5 Ministry of External Affairs (CPV Division) has been  in touch with Indian 
Missions in the target countries and Ministry of Law and Justice & Home Affairs 
on the issues of feasibility of entering into bilateral agreements with countries like 
the USA, Canada, Australia etc and provisions of serving of notices , summons etc 

 
69 
 
to be made part of Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs). On being asked 
whether the ex-parte divorce taken by NRI from courts abroad are binding in India 
and whether the Ministry feel the need to bring more stringent legislations in this 
regard, the MOIA furnished the following reply:- 
 “There are many occasions wherein an ex -parte decree is obtained from 
foreign courts against the other spouse on unreasonable and fraudulent 
grounds. It has been a persistent question in the context of NRI divorces as 
to whether such decrees could be enforced in India.   
Section 13 of the Civil Procedures Code (CPC) lays down the following 
grounds on which a foreign decree would not be enforced in India: 
. . If it has not been pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction  
.. If it has not been given on the merits of the case. 
.. If the judgment was based on an incorrect view of international law; 
.. A refusal to recognize Indian law if such Indian law was applicable to the 
case; 
.. Where the judgement was not in accordance with natural justice; 
.. If the judgement was obtained by fraud; 
.. If it upholds a claim which is a result of the breach of any law in force in      
India.” 
5.6 In some quarters it h as been felt that matrimonial property arrangement at 
the time of marriage or after the marriage should be made compulsory and should 
be registered to help protect the property rights of deserted women.  To this, the 
MOIA furnished the following comments:-   
 “The matter has been referred to the Ministry of Law & Justice, Legislative 
Department in August, 2009 for resolution.  They have been reminded in the 
matter.” 
  
 5.7 Reacting  on the need of  enacting a new comprehensive legislation vis-à-vis 
review of relevant portions of IPC, CPC, Extradition Act, Indian Passp ort Act and 
such other similar laws in the light of the Scheme , the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs stated as under:- 

 
70 
 
“There is a need for a comprehensive national legislat ion vis-à-vis review 
of relevant portions of IPC, CPC, and Extradition  Act etc. However the 
large number of existing provisions on the subject means that there will be 
a strong requirement for co -ordination and action involving several 
Ministries. For instance, it may be noted that Section 494 of the Indian 
Penal Code prescribes bigamy as an offence and provides for a punishment 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. The offence of bigamy is an 
extraditable offence in India. As regards other fraudulent marriages.  
Section 366 of the Indian Penal Code provides punishment for kidnapping, 
abducting or inducing women to compel her marriage. Section 493 
provides punishment for cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully 
inducing a belief of lawful marriage. Sec tion 495 provides punishment for 
concealment of former marriage from person with whom subsequent 
marriage is contracted. Section 496 provides punishment for marriage 
ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage. Section 498 
provides punishmen t for enticing or taking away or detaining with 
criminal intent a married woman. Section 498 -A provides punishment for 
subjecting a women to cruelty by the husband or relative. The Protection 
of Women from the Domestic Violence Act, 2005 provides that the  breach 
of protection order, or of an interim protection order, by the respondent 
shall be an offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may extend to twenty thousand r upees, or with both.  Under Extradition 
Act 1962, an offence punishable with one year or more is an extraditable 
offence provided the same act is also considered as an offence in the other 
country with which India has an Extradition Treaty or Arrangement. 
5.8 On being asked w hether there is any such comprehensive law under 
consideration of MOIA/Government, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs stated 
as under:-  
 MOIA has been concentrating its efforts in bringing immediate succour to 
 the victims of the fraudulent marriages through modification of existing 
 rules and regulations, in order to maximize the use of available resources.  
 5.9  On being ask ed whether the Missions abroad consider the request of 
prospective brides/their parents  for cross checking of credentials of NRIs 
(Bridegroom) before entering into marriage alliances? 
  “In most countries, the Indian Missions/Posts abroad have no mechanism to 
verify the antecedents/credentials of NRI bridegrooms. Stringent private 

 
71 
 
laws prevail in foreign countries preventing the Indian Missions from 
verifying such credentials or personal details of a person living/working 
there. However in case of KSA , our Mission has informed as below : 
               “No requests for checking the credentials of the NRI bridegrooms have 
been received in the Consular Wing of the Mission. If such a request is 
received, the credentials could be checked in cooperation with the local 
authorities/fellow community members, etc.” 
5.10 On being asked whether the Ministry feel it appropriate to set up separate 
cell in Indian Missions for attending such problems specially in those countries 
where such cases occur large in number, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
stated in a written reply as under:-   
  “Most of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad have a separate consular section 
to cater to the needs of the Indian community, including women in distress, 
and they are pro -actively engaged in dealing with such issues. In those 
places where such cases are in large numbers, the Indian Missions/Posts 
have on their panel NGOs/Indian Women‟s Organizations/Indian 
Community Associations to whom such cases are referred for legal help and 
also for counseling. 
 MOIA has appointed one Coun selor (Community Affairs) each in the 
Embassy of India, Washington and in the Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi, 
UAE. After reviewing the performance of the present incumbents, 
appointments of Counselors in other countries would be considered.” 
5.11 On being enq uired whether the Ministry propose to provide rehabilitation 
and support services to the deserted women such as shelter homes, vocational 
training under the proposed revised schemes, the Ministry in a post evidence reply 
stated as under:-  
  “There is no p roposal under the revised Scheme to provide rehabilitation 
and support services to the deserted women.  However, Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs has established the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) 
in all the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  One of t he target beneficiaries of 
this fund is the deserted spouses of overseas Indians. As such, it is not 
required to redesign the MOIA‟s Scheme to include assistance towards stay 
and other urgent expenditure for deserted Indian women who cannot take 
care of th emselves. Besides, the MOIA is now establishing the Indian 
Community and Indian Workers Resource Centers.  These have presently 
been established and are running in Malaysia, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait 

 
72 
 
and Oman.  These are Resource Centers and shelters which are available 
whenever there is a problem with workers or, say, housemaids or any other 
women in distress. They are brought into the shelter and the Mission, 
through the Community Wing of the Mission, makes available these 
emergency measures till such time  that the woman is repatriated back to 
India.  Thus we have taken action to provide for emergency situations that 
may come up, particularly in cases where there are workers and persons 
who may not have money to be able to afford these themselves.” 
 
     5.12 The Committee understands that Marriages to overseas Indians 
are like any other marriages and may go through the same ups and 
downs.  T he Committee, however note that the number of fraudulent 
marriage cases is increasing and problem is not confin ed to  Punjab 
and Kerala alone but also a number of cases are being reported from 
other parts of the country.  Nature and dimension of such incidents 
vary but the central issue is failed or fraudulent NRI marriages,  But, 
the most important difference is that the recourse to justice is 
constrained by the fact th at these marriages are governed  not only by 
the Indian legal system  but also by the far more complex private 
International laws involving the legal system of the other country.  The 
Committee feel an urgen t need of a comprehensive law to tackle the 
problems related to NRI marriage s.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government should enact a 
comprehensive legislation and/or suitably amend existing legislation 
for the protection of women  against malicious NRI marriages.  A 
special NRI matrimonial law that deals comprehensively with marriage, 
divorce, maintenance, child custody and related issues would provide 
the distressed and abandoned brides with much needed remedial 

 
73 
 
armour.  Amending current laws and introducing new rules and 
regulations would help victims of NRI marriages reclaim their 
fundamental rights to property, equality in marriage, the protection of 
family, freedom from inhuman or degrading treatment and above all, 
dignity.  The Committee also desire that more reciprocal bilateral 
treaties, especially with countri es with large number of Indians  who 
continue to be not covered for automatic enforcement of foreign 
decrees under Section 44 and 44A of CPC  may be worked out with 
such countries. 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
5.13 The Committee strongly believe that registration  of a marriage 
provides a valid evidence/proof of such alliance and can work as a 
very strong deterrent for bigamous marriages.  A few states facing 
problems of NRI marriages have made the registration of marriages 
compulsory.  The Committee are happy to n ote that in view of the 
directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court and recommendations of 
Committee on Empowerment of Women and Law Commission, the 
Government of India has introduced ‘The Registration of Births and 
Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012’ in Rajya  Sabha recently.  This 
amendment provides for compulsory registration of marriages without 
affecting in any manner the State Law making provisions for 
compulsory registration of marriage in their respective States.  The 
proposed Bill will provide the registration o f marriages of all persons 

 
74 
 
who are citizens of India belonging to various religious denominations 
and be beneficial to women, as the registration certificate would 
provide evidentiary value in matrimonial and maintenance cases and 
prevent unnecessary haras sment meted out of them.  It will also 
provide evidentiary value in the matters of age of parties, custody of 
children and the right of children born out of such marriages.  No 
doubt, the initiatives of Government will supplement the efforts of the 
State Governments.  The Committee, however, desire that certificates 
of NRI marriages issued by the States or under the proposed Act must 
include the security number of the foreign home of the NRI husband 
along with the passport number and brief relevant details.   The 
Committee further desire that to make it more effective, the photocopy 
of the valid passport of the NRI husband should be pasted in the 
marriage register maintained with the authorities  before marriage 
certificate is actually issued to the parties an d pasting of mandatory 
certificate of marriage on the wife’s passport may certainly provide a 
documentary evidence and proof of her marriage on being abandoned.  
This should also be ensured that no NRI marriage is registered without 
the presence of bride a nd bridegroom. Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs should take necessary initiatives to ensure the implementation 
of these recommendations with the concerned authorities and State 
Governments as well. 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 

 
75 
 
5.14 The Committee note that India has become a party to the Hague 
Conference on Private International Law and is also a party to other 
conventions which facilitate to bridge the two legal systems to which 
the NRI husband and wife belong by providing appropriat e civil 
procedure acceptable to both jurisdictions.  MOIA has also strongly 
recommended that India should become a party to ‘Convention on the 
Civil Aspects of International Child Adduction 1980’ and ‘Convention 
on International Recovery of Child Support a nd other forms of family 
maintenance 2007’.  But joining these two conventions require 
necessary implementing legislations.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that Ministry of Women and Child Development 
should prepare the implementing legislati ons on priority basis in 
consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Law 
and Justice so that decks are cleared to become a party to these two 
Conventions. 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                   ANANTH KUMAR, 
19 June, 2012                                                      Chairman,  
29 Jyaistha, 1934 (Saka)            Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
  

 
76 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2010-2011) HELD ON 30TH  DECEMBER,  2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room G -074, 
Parliament Library Building , New Delhi. 
         Present 
 Shri Sreegopal Vyas  -  in Chair 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
3. Shri Pinaki Misra 
4. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Shri H.K.Dua  
6. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri R.K.Jain   -  Director 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
1. Dr. A. Didar Singh   -  Secretary   
2. Shri A. Karan Singh   -  PGE/JS(DS) 
3. Shri Atul Kumar Tiwar  -  Joint Secretary (FS) 
4. Shri Shiv Ratan   -  Director (FS) 
5. Shri Mithlesh Kumar  -  Director 

 
77 
 
6. Smt. Gloria Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary (DS) 
7. Shri M.K.Pandey  -  Under Secretary (DS-I) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs 
 
1. Shri Amrendra Khatua  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.M.Pavalan  -  Law Officer 
 
  Representatives of National Commission for Women 
 
1. Ms. Johra Chatterji  -  Member Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. Kanchan Khattar  -  Coordinator (NRI) 
 
2.  Hon‟ble Chairman could not attend the meeting due to some urgent engagement.  
The Committee designated Shri Shreegopal Vyas to chair the sitting in terms of Rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. At the outset, the acting Chairman (Shri Sreeegopal Vyas) welcomed the Members 
of the Committee, the Secretary and his colleagues from the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs, representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs and National Commission for 
Women.  After br ief introductions, a representative of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs made power point presentation on the Subject.  Thereafter, the Secretary, MOIA 
briefed the Committee on “Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages/Scheme for 
providing lega l/financial assistance/rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by their 
Overseas Indian Spouses”.   
 

 
78 
 
4. The deliberation inter-alia included some of the important issues viz. awareness 
campaign being organized for the prospective brides and their parents, role of National 
Commission for Women and NGOs, free legal aid/counseling and financial help to deserted 
Indian women by their Overseas Indian husbands, review of existing laws and the need for 
a comprehensive legislation to handle cross borders family law  problems, examination of 
international conventions and bilateral treaties related to the issue, compulsory registration 
of marriages and the issue related to Indian women married to foreign nationals.  
The Committee also suggested that the publications/ma terial related to problems 
relating to Overseas Indian Marriages/Schemes for providing legal/financial 
assistance/rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by their Overseas Indian Spouses 
reportedly circulated to State Governments as well as during awarenes s campaigns 
organized from time to time for creating awareness among the prospective brides and their 
parents may also be circulated to the visitors at the „Parvasi Bhartiya Divas‟ scheduled to 
be organized by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs  from 7-9 January, 2011 at New 
Delhi 
5. The Secretary, MOIA responded to the various queries raised by the Members and 
assured the Committee to send replies to various points on which the information was not 
readily available with them.  
6.  The verbatim record of proceedings has been kept separately.    
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
79 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 21 JUNE, 2011 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1735 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
SHRI H. K. Dua    -  In Chair 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
4. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
5. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
6. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
7. Shri  Shivkumar Udasi  
Rajya Sabha 
 8. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 9. Shri Tarun Vijay                                                          
10. Shri Sreegopal Vyas   
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri K.D.Muley   -  Director  
 
 
Representatives of the Ministries of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(MOIA),  External Affairs, Law & Justice and National 
Commission of Women (NCW) 
 
1. Dr. A. Didar Singh  - Secretary (MOIA) 
2. Shri Vinay Sahani  - JS (MOIA) 
3. Shri Roulkhumlien Buhril - PGE (MOIA) 
4. Shri Amrendra Khatua  - J S (CPV), (MEA) 
5. Shri J. L. Chugh  - J S (MHA) 

 
80 
 
6. Mrs. M. Ghose   - JS (NCW) 
7. Smt. Veena Kothavale  - Deputy Legislative Counsel   
8.  Shri P. K. Pattanayak  - Deputy Legislative Counsel   
 9.  Shri Shiv Ratan   - Director (MOIA) 
10. Shri K. C. Badhok  - Director (MOIA) 
11. Dr. Neeru Chadha  - Director (MEA) 
12.  Shri Raj Singh    - DS (NCW) 
13. Smt. Aarti Chawla   - Coordinator NRI Cell (NCW) 
14. Smt.  Gloria Kumar  - Deputy Secretary (MOIA) 
   
2. Due to his pre -occupation, Hon‟ble Chairman (Shri Anant h Kumar) could 
not attend the sitting of the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, chose Shri 
H.K.Dua   to act as Chairman for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. At the outset, the Chairpers on (Shri H.  K. Dua) welcomed the Members of 
the Committee, Secretary Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and representatives 
from the Ministries of External Affairs, Law & Justice and National Commission 
for Women.   
4. Then, the Chairperson drew attention of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs and others associated with them in the discussions to 
Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
5. Thereafter, Secretary Ministry of  Overseas Indian Affairs briefed the 
Committee about the scheme in force for the protection and welfare of the Indian 
women deserted by their overseas Indian spouses and the various other issues 
related to the subject.   
6. During discussions, the members of the Committee inter -alia raised various 
queries relating to the subject including the issues like modification in the existing 
welfare scheme based on suggestions given by Indian Missions/Posts abroad, legal 
difficulties being faced by deserted women, s igning of MOUs and bilateral 
agreements with various countries where the Indian Diaspora is large in number, 
need for raising of financial assistance from the existing limit of Rs. 1500 dollars, 
role of NGOs and terms and conditions set forth by the Minist ry for registration of 
NGOs, complaints received from deserted women and the action thereon taken by 

 
81 
 
NCW, impounding of passport of erring Indian husbands, need to amend the 
Passport Act, literature being disseminated by the Ministry under the awareness 
building programmes, working of website of MOIA and NCW,  need to provide 
rehabilitation and support services to the deserted women and the role of 
Missions/Posts/consulates abroad in  dealing with these issues. 
 8. The Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian  Affairs and others replied to 
various queries raised by the Members and assured the Committee to furnish their 
replies on the points on which the information was not readily available with them. 
 9. A verbatim proceeding of the sitting has been kept on record.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
82 
 
Appendix-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room „B‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq,  
5. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
6.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
7. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
8.  Dr. Bhola Singh 
9. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
10. Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard,  
12.  Shri Tarun Vijay 
13. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
Secretariat 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley               - Director  
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Additional Director 
3.          Shri Rakesh Bhardwaj              -          Under Secretary 
 

 
83 
 
Witnesses (Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and others) 
 
1 Shri Parvez Dewan, Secretary (MOIA) 
2 Shri Vinay Sahani, JS (MOIA) 
3 Shri Atul Kumar Tiwari, JS (MOIA) 
4 Shri Roulkhumlien Buhril, PGE (MOIA) 
5 Mrs. Ranjana Kale, Economic Advisor (MOIA) 
5 Shri Amarendra Khatua, JS (CPV) (MEA) 
6 Shri J.L. Chugh, JS (MHA) 
7 Mrs. M. Ghose, JS (NCW) 
8 Mrs. Sangeeta Verma, Eco. Advisor (M/o WCD) 
9 Mrs. Vinita Aggarwal, Director (M/o WCD) 
10 Smt. Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel (M/o Law) 
11 Shri P.K. Pattanayak, Deputy Legislative Counsel (M/o Law) 
12 Shri K.C. Badhok, Director (MOIA) 
13 Dr. Neena Chadha, Director (MEA) 
  
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed  the Secretary, Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs and officials of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Law, Ministry of Women and Child Develo pment and National Commission 
for Women and drew their attention to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha.  
 
3. Thereafter, Secretary, MOIA briefed the Committee on the subject “Problems 
relating to Overseas Indian Marriages/ Schemes  for providing Legal/Financial Assistance/ 
Rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by their Overseas Indian Spouses”.  He 
specifically mentioned that almost  all the points raised during the last sitting of the 
Committee regarding the Scheme of MOIA were se riously considered by the Ministry and 
necessary amendments have been made in the Scheme to widen the scope and make the 
scheme accessible.  Thereafter, a Power Point Presentation on the subject was made and 
elaborate upon modifications made in the earlier scheme and the new initiatives undertaken 
in the new scheme to strengthen it further. 
  

 
84 
 
4. During discussions, the Members of the Committee inter -alia raised various 
queries relating to the subject including the issues viz. more and better use of 
regional and local media   for spreading awareness on the issue, establishing 
linkages with the Passport Offices, provision for  enrolling/registering married 
Indian women in foreign Missions/Embassy, establishment of data base for all 
NRIs, appointment of marriage counsellors and NGOs in Missions and creation of 
single comprehensive website disseminating all information .   Members also took 
note of lack of any provision for rehabilitation of deserted women, non -inclusion of 
deserted husbands in the scheme, lesser number of beneficiaries, plight of Indian 
wives forced into unethical practices in Gulf countries and stressed upon the 
importance of monitoring of Non Governmental Organizations involved in the 
scheme. 
 
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and representatives of 
National Commission for Women replied to various queries raised by the Members 
and assured the Committee to furnish the requisite data and written replies on the 
points on which the information was not readily available with them. 
 
6. The verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
85 
 
Appendix-IV 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 19TH JUNE, 2012  
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room D, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
3. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
4. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
5. Dr. Bhola Singh 
6. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
RAJYA SABHA 
7.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya   
8. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
9. Shri Murli Deora 
10. Shri H.K. Dua 
11. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla 
12. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
13. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
14. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
15. Shri Tarun Vijay  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
2. A. Sivanandam  - Under Secretary                         
 
 

 
86 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the draft Report 
on the subject “Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages: Scheme for 
providing legal/Financial Assistance/Rehabilitation to Indian women deserted by 
their Overseas Indian Spouses”. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their 
suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested 
some minor modifications.  The Committee  adopted the draft Report with minor 
modifications. 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to the 
Hon‟ble Speaker and subsequently to both the Houses of t he Parliament after the 
commencement of the next Session.    
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 