 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2012-13] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 17 
 

 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2012-13] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2012 
 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. 99_ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2011-2012………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (v)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           32 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       69 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            70 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………               72 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                               78  
held on 28.08.2012……………………………………………… 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                          80   
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….        
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-2012) 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
Sl.No  Name  
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
16.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
17.  
18. 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
Vacant # 
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla @ 
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
29.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
31.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
              
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
3. Shri A. Sivanandam - Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Kiran Bhargava    - Executive Assistant 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of term of Dr. Karan Singh, Member , 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 27.01.12 and re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.02.2012. 
@ Shri Sreegopal Vyas, Member Rajya Sabha ceased  to  be  the  Member  of   the  Committee  due  to  
expiry  of his term  w.e.f. 02.04.12  and Smt. Najma Heptulla nominated to the Committee on External 
Affairs w.e.f. 04.05.2012. 
#    Smt. Sushila Saroj ceased to be the Member of the Committee on External Affairs due to change of her 
nomination to Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment w.e.f. 13.7.12. 
 (iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 11-12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on thei r behalf, present this 17th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 14th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2012-13. 
 
2. The14th Report was presented on 8th May, 2012. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were 
received on 6th August, 2012. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 28th August, 2012. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given 
at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the reco mmendations 
contained in the 14th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
28 August,  2012                                                                       Chairman,                   
Bhadrapada 06, 1934 (Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(v) 
                                                 

 1 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with 
the Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in their Fourteenth Report on Demands for Grants (20 12-13) of 
the Ministry of External Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2012. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs on all the 28 observations/recommendations contained in 
the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2,3,7,8,10-12, and 15-28. 
 Total-21 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 4. 
 Total-01 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 5. 
Total- 01 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,6,9,13 and 14 
Total-05 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have 
been given by the Government and also the 
recommendations/observations on which the Committee have made 
their comments should be furnished within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with  some of the replies received from 
the Government, which need reiteration or merit comments. 

 2 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
5.  The Committee had expressed their concern at the serious under -
resourcing of the Ministry of External Affairs, whose staff and budget did not 
commensurate with the scale and range of India‟s external challenges and 
obligations in an increasingly globalized 21 st century world. The Committee 
were not satisfied with the slow pace of implementation of the authorized 
expansion of the personnel of the Ministry and had called upon the Ministry 
to recruit external applicants with relevant expertise for lateral entry into  the 
Ministry upto and including the Joint Secretary level. In addition, the 
Committee had also expressed their concern  that the requested level of 
resources required for the Ministry‟s operations, especially in its Embassies 
and Missions abroad, had not been provided and therefore, had called upon 
the Ministry of Finance to enhance the Ministry‟s allocations so as to equip it 
to fulfil its global responsibilities. 
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“This Ministry agrees that given India‟s expanding global role, there is need 
for a matching human resource base so as to carry this mandate effectively.  
The Government of India and the Ministry of External Affairs have been 
working hard to address this issue for quite some time.  An important 
outcome of these efforts was the approval of the Union Cabinet for a 
medium term Expansion Plan for the Indian Foreign Service spanning over 
ten years from 2008 to 2018, adding a total of 514 new positions, a majority 
of them being at the dipl omatic level.  Four tranches of this expansion have 
already materialized and we are currently in the process of seeking 
approvals for the fifth tranche.  Additionally, we have also succeeded in 
getting approvals for a major expansion of the IFS[B]  Cadre w ith a net 
addition of some 380 new posts, many of which would also be at the 
diplomatic level.  These efforts would surely bear fruits over the coming 
years and the results would soon be visible.   
 
The Ministry has always been fully conscious of the requirement for 
domain expertise in some specialized fields.  Therefore, most of our large 
Missions abroad have a long tradition of having officers from various line 
Ministries/Departments and Organizations.  The number of these experts is 
fairly substantial.  This need has grown with India‟s expanding development 
partnerships with other developing countries.  Precisely because of this, the 
IFS Expansion Plan kept a fairly large quota for lateral entry of experts, 
which would eventually reach a total of 120 additional dedicated positions.  
Under this Plan, the Ministry already has taken an additional strength of 
over 25 officers from specialized services to work at the Headquarters 
through lateral entry.  T he Ministry has also taken in expertise by way of 
hiring Consultants in specialized fields.  This number is expected to grow.   

 3 
Given the nature of our functions, while majority of the non -IFS 
officers at the Headquarters and the Missions/Posts abroad are up to the 
level of Director but we certainly operate a reasonable number of these 
posts (around 13) at the level of Joint Secretary, purely in keeping with our 
functional needs.   
 
The expanding responsibilities and cadre strength also needs a 
matching enh ancement of financial resources.  The Ministry of External 
Affairs has been trying to introduce a series of cost effective measures and 
management tools as also projecting its budgetary needs in keeping with 
these changing realities.” 
 
 
7. The Committee note that though the Ministry of External Affairs 
has agreed to the observation made by the Committee about under -
resourcing of the Ministry both in terms of budget and manpower but 
has not shown its desired level of seriousness and determination to 
chalk ou t any expansion plan  in tandem with the future role being 
envisaged for the Ministry especially in view of India’s ever expanding 
role at the global level in various and diversified arenas.  Since the 
Committee were not satisfied with the pace of ongoing efforts being 
made by the Ministry in the form  of ‘medium term expansion plan’ for 
the Indian Foreign Service (IFS ) spanning over ten years , the 
Committee had asked the Ministry to consider more lateral 
recruitments of external applicants w ith relevant expertise especially 
in Embassies and Missions . In Committee’s view, such a long term 
plan is not going to serve the purpose because there is an immediate 
need of matching human resource base to carry the mandate of the 
Ministry effectively.  Moreover, the Ministry has not pronounced  any 
clear cut assessment policy and commitment towards an early 
expansion and lateral entry of officers/staff at various levels to  
enhance the overal l efficiency of the Ministry.  Therefore, the  

 4 
Committee desire th at the Ministry should appropriately assess the 
requirement and review the existing plans for expansion and infuse 
the envisioned expansion plans with scope for lateral entries of 
experienced manpower, both officers and staff with area specific 
expertise. At the same time,  the Committee also reiterate that the 
Ministry should strive to enhance its budgetary allocations.  
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
8.  The Committee had observed that the aim of Passport Seva Project 
while replacing the existing system of Passp ort Offices, District Passport 
Cells and Speed Post Centres with the network of Passport Seva Kendra 
had been  envisaged to make timely and efficient delivery of passport 
services. However, the Committee had noted that there was no 
improvement in the situation faced during implementation of the Pilot Project 
and the citizens had been  facing tough time in seeking basic information, 
getting appointments and tracking their applications in the newly established 
Passport Seva Project in different parts of the cou ntry. All the systems for 
providing guidance or support to the passport seekers ha d been suddenly 
withdrawn leaving them in limbo. In th at transitional phase, such chaos had 
been defeating the basic purpose of embarking upon the  ambitious project. 
The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Ministry should adopt urgent 
measures to resolve the problems arising at the newly established Passport 
Seva Kendras (PSKs). They had desired that the shifting should be done in 
phased manner a nd old arrangements to assist/facilitate citizens should be 
retained for some more time with necessary riders.  
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs have furnished the following in their 
action taken reply: 
“(i) The Ministry would like to submit that it is  constantly striving to 
improve information systems, response mechanism   and service 
delivery level. The Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble 
Committee that all the systems for guidance of the applicants are in 
place. T he Passport Portal provides com prehensive and latest 

 5 
information on passport services as well as status of an application, 
thus enabling anytime -anywhere access. An email ba sed helpdesk 
facility and a 24x7  call center has been set up to provide requisite 
information to citizens in local  language.  The Postal System (India 
Post) has  been integrated with PSP System to check the delivery 
status of the Passport.  As soon as passport is dispatched, a SMS/e -
mail alert is also sent to the applicant informing the Passport 
Dispatch status. 
 
(ii)      As regards delays in getting appointments, it is submitted that as  per 
the serving capacity of each Passport Seva Kendra (PSK), online 
appointment slots are opened on daily basis. However, in cases, 
where applicants are not able to obtain online appointments at PSKs, 
they may visit concerned Regional Passport Office (RPO) in their 
area. Such applicants are required to fill -up the application online, 
generate „Application Reference Number‟ and visit RPO along with 
printed „ARN Sheet‟. RPOs consider such  cases and give staggered 
appointments keeping in view the load/capacity at the respective 
PSK under their jurisdiction. Tatkaal and other urgency applications   
are given preference in allotting appointments. Applicants having 
confirmed appointments and w ho are unable to visit PSK due to 
some reason, are advised to reschedule/cancel their appointments 
at-least 15 hours prior to the scheduled date/time, so that these 
appointments may be released to other applicants in queue. In case 
of „no show‟ of the appl icant on the scheduled day & time, the data 
captured for that applicant   is deleted from the system including ARN 
number and such applicants   are required to fill -up the „data‟ again 
for obtaining fresh appointments.  Since 2 nd April 2012, a  window of 
15 days has been opened to   obtain  appointments. An advisory to 
this effect has been posted on the Passport Portal.  
 
(iii)      The Ministry would also like to assure that transition from the old 
system to the new system is done gradually. Online appointments in 
the new system are gradually increased. Both the systems run 
concurrently till the new system is able to take full load of passport 
applicants. There is no sudden cut off from the old system. The data 
from the old system is migrated to the new system. Pendency is also 
cleared side by side.” 
 
10. The Committee take note of the assurance given by the Ministry 
that all the systems of guidance for the Passport applicant s are in 
place but they find a different  ground reality wherein the new syste m 
still has serious problems and loopholes.   From the available media 
reports and feedback of citizens, Ministry’s efforts to inform public 
and create awareness through various channels regarding the new 

 6 
procedure to be followed by the applicants while de positing the 
passport applications in the new system has fallen short.  Moreover, 
the process of seeking online appointment which is the backbone in 
achieving the objective of making the passport issuance system more 
transparent and efficient, has itself come under a lot of stress a s a 
result of procedural and technical hurdles.  The PSKs are experiencing 
as much as about 30% ‘no show cases’ on every functional day.  There 
is no improvement in lessening the on-line hassles and  there is still a 
dearth of appointments with RPOs.   The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry should vigilantly probe into the reasons including any 
kind of nexus behind the huge number of “no  show cases’ 
experienced by most of the PSKs and RPOs a nd work towards a 
solution for making the system friendly, guidable, easy  and straight 
forward for applying, testifying and obtaining the Indian Passport.   
  The Committee further stress upon the need  to evolve proper 
protocol by the Ministry for cohesive and consistent 
communication/dissemination of information etc.  amongst the 
Regional Passport Offices/Passport Offices and Passport Seva 
Kendras (PSKs) and regular updating of the status of application on 
the Passport Seva Portal for transparency of the system.   
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
11.  The Committee ha d been making regular observations in their 
previous Reports regarding the delay in implementation of e -passport 
project for the general category, which was a step to check the misuse of 
passports in the current format and also to make it less cumbersome for the 
citizens of the country to obtain it in electronic format. The Committee had 
expressed their concern o ver the doubtful background of the French 

 7 
Company M/s GEMALTO which was selected to supply the chips for e -
passports. The agents of the Company as vendor were associated with 
supply of smart cards to Pakistan and on the basis of IB reports matter was 
pending with the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee  had, however, 
noted that the matter ha d been taken up with the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and MEA had been pursuing the matter with other concerned M inistries and 
Departments. The Committee had expressed their hope  that such inter -
Ministerial consultation w ould help in arriving at a concrete decision with 
due care from all angles. The Committee  had urged the Ministry to continue 
the efforts to arrive at a fin al decision especially security  aspects. The 
Committee had further desire d the Ministry to monitor the project and 
furnish quarterly progress of the same to the Committee. 
 
12. In their action taken reply, t he Ministry of External Affairs has stated 
as under: 
 
“The Ministry of External Affairs, on continuing basis provides information 
about e -passport to the Standing Committee during the Parliamentary 
meetings and briefing meetings. However, as directed,  Ministry will 
continue to monitor the  project and furnish quarterly report to the  
Committee.” 
 
 
13. The Committee are  dismayed to note that the Ministry has not 
even found it necessary  to provide the present  status or 
progress/report regarding long pending e-passport project.  The 
Committee are now of the considered view that this project can  not be 
unjustifiably deferred indefinitely for want of security clearance  to the 
specific bidder company.   Since the inter -ministerial consultations so 
far have not enabled the Government to arrive at the final decision 
about permission to  the international c ompany selected for chip 
supplying for the e-Passport Project , the Committee , therefore,  
strongly urge the Government to either finalize the fate of the selected 
company considering the security concerns or explore the possibility 

 8 
of selecting any other company by discarding the current bidder and 
thereby inviting fresh tenders for supply ing the electronic chip for the 
e-passport project in a specific time -bound manner so that the project 
takes off at the earliest.  The Committee, however, expect that the e-
passport issuance system  would be free from the technical glitches 
that are being experienced in the new on -line passport issuance 
system. 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
 
14.  The Committee had noted that the MEA‟s proposed outlay for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan was ` 52956.14 crore which was substantially 
enhanced from the last Five Year Plan due to seven new hydro -electric 
projects in Bhutan. The Committee had welcomed the departure from the 
earlier funding pattern of inter -governmental agreement model where 
Government o f India‟s funding commitment was 100%.  In four Projects, 
modalities were under negotiation for Joint Venture model which would 
reduce Government of India‟s share and outline the obligations of both the 
Governments. To ensure better conception and implementation of the 
projects, Ministry had  also created a Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA). The Committee  had, therefore, hope d that the 
Ministry wou ld now be able to get sufficient plan allocation by convincing 
Planning Commission through re alistic projections and changes in 
investment and monitoring pattern of the proposed projects in Bhutan. The 
Committee had desired to be informed about the actual allocation made by 
the Planning Commission and also about the initiatives being taken by the 
Ministry for handling these projects starting from drawing board to its 
execution. 
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“Government of India (GoI) and the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB ) 
signed an umbrella agreement on cooperation in the hydropower sector 
under which India committed to import 10,000 MW hydropower from Bhutan 

 9 
by 2020. Ten HEPs with an estimated capacity of 11,576 MW were 
identified to meet the target. Of the ten projects,  the following four projects 
have been identified for execution in the Joint Venture (JV) mode, 
 
1. Chamkharchhu-I (670 MW) 
2. Bunakha (180 MW) 
3. Kholongchhu (486 MW) 
4. Wangchhu (600 MW) 
 
  Negotiations for which are currently under way between Druk  Green 
Power Corporation (DGPC) and respective Indian Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs). Five Indian CPSUs – NTPC, NHPC, THDC, SJVNL 
and WAPCOS – have been entrusted with the task of preparing Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) for the projects and l ater assist in the 
implementation of the same as Consultants. 
 
It was decided that for the JV projects, an Inter -Governmental MoU, 
common to all JV projects, would be signed laying down the broad 
obligations of the two Governments. The detailed Shareholder ‟s Agreement 
could then be signed between the JV partners, which would elaborate 
precepts mutually agreed to in the MoU. The JV partners were directed to 
expedite the finalization of the MoU. In this regard a meeting was held 
between SJVN Limited, NHPC and  DGPC in Thimpu on 4 th and 5th June to 
finalise the MoU.  
 
Both the sides discussed elaborately on the following issues: 
 
a) Royalty Energy to be provided to Royal Government of Bhutan 
b) Management structure of the Joint Venture Company 
c) Dividend Policy  
d) Terms of reversion of Project 
 
During the meeting, both the sides committed to finalize the MoU as 
early as possible. If MoU is finalized, it is expected to reduce the financial 
burden of GOI with respect to HEP in Bhutan. 
 
As far as financial allocation for the HEPs in Bhutan, the Ministry 
takes necessary actions to get the sufficient allocation. In inter -Ministerial 
meetings held in PMO to review progress of our cooperation agenda with 
Bhutan in the hydropower sector MEA has been drawing attention to the 
fact that allocation of Plan funds for HEPs in Bhutan had been consistently 
lower than projected requirements. MEA has been requesting for 
enhancement of this allocation vide regular correspondence with Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance. The Plan funds requirement for FY 
2012-13 for India -assisted HEPs in Bhutan is `2185 crore. This has been 
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission as part 
of MEA‟s proposal for Budget Estimates 2012-13. 
 
 
 

 10 
The fund allocated and utilized with respect to HEPs  under planned 
expenditure for Eleventh FYP is described below 
                                                                                            (` in crore) 
FY Funds 
requested 
BE RE Actual 
utilization 
2011-12 1664.27  680.00 1030.00 1030.00 
2010-11 1479.17  594.00 723.00 723.31 
2009-10 1053.43  401.00 619.00 635.00 
2008-09 413.13  413.00 351.00 349.65 
2007-08 460.92  290.91 201.00 199.96 
 
The Ministry thankfully acknowledges the appreciation of the Hon‟ble 
Committee for its efforts to reduce financial burden on Govt. of India vis -à-
vis the new Hydroelectric Power Projects (HEPs) to be taken up for 
implementation in Bhutan. Preliminary meetings have already been held in 
the Ministry with the representatives of the EXIM Ban k and some PSU 
banks to explore the possibility of raising funds from the Indian capital 
market for the HEPs proposed  under the Joint Venture model. Further, the 
matter has been discussed in detail in a meeting of the Empowered Joint 
Group (EJG) of India and Bhutan held in Thimphu on 11-12 June 2012.  
 
 The Ministry would inform the Hon‟ble Committee of the final 
allocation made to it by the Planning Commission under the 12 th Five Year 
Plan as well as keep the Committee posted, from time to time, about the 
progress of implementing various projects.”  
 
16. The Committee welcome the new pattern adopted by the 
Government for funding of  the future Hydro-electric Power Projects 
(HEPs) in Bhutan and are satisfied to note  that the Ministry ha s been 
exploring the possibilities of raising funds from the Indian capital 
market for funding of the  proposed new joint venture HEPs .  The 
Committee, however, are worried about the consistent lower Plan fund 
allocation than the projected requirements of MEA during the entire 
Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
that the efforts to get desired fund allocation from the Planning 
Commission for the Twelfth Five Year Plan for the projects in Bhutan 
should be pursued vigorously by the Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs .  
Moreover, regarding efforts being made by the Ministry to raise funds 

 11 
for new joint venture  projects, the Committee would like to advise the 
Ministry to consult the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Power or 
any other concerned Ministry/Agency on the issue of raising funds for 
these new HEPs in Bhutan so that all the  administrative, technical, 
financial and policy issues are dealt appropriately well before 
finalizing the funding of the projects.   
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
17.  The Committee had expressed their happiness to note that MEA had 
finally been able to create a Development Partnership Administration (DPA) 
within the Ministry to take stock of the current status of all the projects an d 
to develop Standard Operating Procedures for the Projects. The Committee  
had, therefore, desired  that the new Division in the Ministry should be well 
equipped with the services of experts to make it capable to perform as per 
the mandate and achieve the objective to streamline the process si nce the 
inception of the idea to the actual delivery of the project. The Committee 
had further desired that the capacities of DPA should be augmented without 
any delay to ensure a time and cost-effective delivery of projects with quality 
of high internatio nal standards. The Committee were of the opinion that 
DPA should further explore the possibility of India‟s assisted developmental 
projects in other friendly and strategically important countries including from 
Africa and Latin -America. The Committee  had also hope d that with the 
creation of DPA, the Ministry w ould be able to present more realistic 
projection before the Planning Commission for obtaining desired allocations 
and with better inter-ministerial consultations, fast tracking of the process for 
quicker/enhanced results w ould also be possible. The Committee had 
desired to be regularly apprised of the progr ess and achievements made in 
that direction. 
 
 
 

 12 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs has submitted the following  action 
taken reply: 
 
“The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) was created in 
January 2012 in the Ministry of External Affairs. The DPA has started to 
utilise the services of experts for project implementation. Two officers from 
the Indian Telecom Service (ITS) have joi ned the DPA at Director and 
Deputy Secretary level, respectively. In addition, one officer from the Indian 
Audit and Accounts Service (IAAS) is in the Ministry to assist in the 
implementation of projects in Afghanistan. Furthermore, two officers from 
Indian Audit and Accounts Service (IAAS), one from Indian Railway 
Accounts Service and one officer from Indian Revenue Service are assisting 
the Ministry in implementation of the projects under the Lines of Credit 
extended by GOI to developing countries and imp lementation of the 
Technical Cooperation Programmes of the Ministry. The Ministry also plans 
to utilise the services of Consultants to assist in the implementation of 
projects. Currently, three consultants with expertise in the health & 
telecom/IT sectors are assisting the Ministry. The ongoing efforts are aimed 
at creating in-house, specialised technical, legal and financial skills in order 
to fast-track all stages of project implementation. 
 
Over the past few years, India's development assistance has started 
to cover large number of countries and consequently, the projects being 
implemented by the Ministry have increased substantially. India's 
development partnership is based on the needs identified by the partner 
countries and the effort of the Ministry is geared towards accommodating as 
many of the requests received from partner countries as is technically and 
financially possible. 
 
The budgetary projections for projects take into account the overall 
outlay and pace of implementation, which are based on the implementation 
schedule of the project. However, progress of projects on ground depends 
on several factors. While some of these factors pertain to adherence to GOI 
guidelines and regulations, others relate to the partner country. Efforts are 
made to reduce the time taken for compliance with the internal guidelines 
and regulations, local regulations and unforeseen developments in the 
country where the project is being implemented result in delay in 
implementation of the project. These factors are some times beyond the 
control of the contractor implementing the project. For e.g. land acquisition 
by the foreign Government sometimes results in opposition from affected 
population especially when they see the contractor mobilising equipment 
and labour on the  site. Unplanned strikes, bandhs, stoppage of fuel 
supplies, delay in environmental clearance, unforeseen geological surprises 
etc. also contribute to delay in project implementation. The Ministry in 
consultation with the foreign Governments, either through the mechanism of 
bilateral Project Monitoring Committees or through our Missions/Posts 
abroad, seeks the intervention of Central and local authorities of the 
concerned foreign Governments to facilitate the implementation of the 
projects and to address im pediments that arise in the course of its 
implementation. As a result, the financial progress foreseen at the time of 
the budget projections, which is about six months in advance of the financial 

 13 
year, cannot be sometimes fully adhered. However, it is expe cted that with 
the induction of experts, the Ministry would be in a position to promote more 
realistic budgetary projections. The Ministry has been in consultations with 
the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance in this regard.” 
 
 
19.   The Commi ttee welcome the creation of Development 
Partnership Administration (DPA) and note that the Ministry has 
started to induct the experts from various fields  to achieve the 
objective of timely implementation of projects .  The Committee , 
however, are not convi nced with the justification furnished by the 
Ministry regarding non -adherence to budget  projections on some 
occasions.  The Committee anticipate that with further strengthening 
of DPA , the involvement of experts from various fields and 
participation of the independent experts, the Division will be able to 
project realistic figures based on factua l evaluation and ground reality 
making pragmatic and realistic budgetary proposals to convince the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for obtaining adequate 
and enhanced budgetary requirements. The Committee are of the view 
that the Government must ensure the timely and thorough audit of all 
developmental assistance expenditures in order to ensure that 
appropriated funds are properly spent.  The Commit tee would further 
like to stress upon the need for floating the idea of collaborative 
projects with friendly countries in Asia, Africa and Latin American 
region and consider their views and share expertise to identify 
appropriate projects and ensure their early delivery so tha t India 
becomes a collaborative developmental partner leading to intensifying 
the ties with the countries of these regions. 
 
 

 14 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
 
20.  India had been engaged in construction of three Hydro -Electric 
Power Projects i n Bhutan. The Committee were concerned to note that for 
the Punatsangchhu HEP Project, as against the demand of `1000 crore 
only ` 500 crore ha d been allocated. Similarly, for Punatsangch hu HEP -II 
only ` 160 crore ha d been allocated against the demand of `969.67 crore. 
In all likelihood the funds w ould be exhausted by the second quarter itself 
and even if the Ministry g ot some additional allocation in Supplementary 
Demands for Grants, it would certainly going to slow down the pace of 
implementation causing delay to the project. The Committee had taken  a 
serious note of this issue and  had urged that such situations should be 
avoided and sufficient funds must be provided atleast to the projects which 
were in full swing of implementation. The Committee had expr essed that 
since India ha d plans for more Projects in Bhutan and that too under Joint -
Venture mode, it was all the more pertinent for the Government to ensure 
timely arrangement of adequate funds as such situation not only lead to 
time and cost overrun. 
 
21.  The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“During the last Financial Year, allocation of Plan funds was less than half of 
the requested amount . Over 70% of the allocated Plan funds were 
exhausted in the first two quarters of that financial year. The situation was  
duly reported to the Planning C ommission through EAM‟s letter to the 
Deputy Planning Commission Chairman. Moreover the allocation for these 
projects were exhausted by October 2011 and the Ministry of F inance had 
provided some additional funds of `350 crore at the R.E stage in January 
2012, which was too late to ensure adherence to the schedule. Finance 
Ministry has been duly sensitized about this shortage of funds through 
EAM‟s letter to the FM on March 15, 2012. 
 
 

 15 
Again for the annual plan 2012-13, against the projected requirement 
of `3483 crore, only `1500 crore have been allocated. The utilization of 
funds on major HEPs in Bhutan for the Current financial year has been 
described below: 
 
 
Projects Approved 
BE 
(` in crore) 
Actual Expenditure 
(up to  June 15, 
2012)  
(` in crore) 
Percentage of 
allocation exhausted 
Punatsangchhu I 500.00 204.50 40.9% 
Punatsangchhu -II 478.00 155.50 32.5% 
Mangdechu  160.00 110.00 68.7% 
 
It could be seen from the table that under Mangdech hu , more than 
68% of the allocation has been exhausted before the expiry of the first 
quarter. For other two projects also substantive allocation has been utilized. 
 
The Ministry will take appropriate steps this year also to sensitise the 
Finance Ministry and Planning Commission requesting allocation of 
sufficient funds to the projects so that their smooth implementation is not 
hindered and adequate funds are available.” 
 
 
22. The Committee ha d taken a serious note of the issue of 
insufficient budgetary allocation to the Ministry of External Affairs for 
construction of three Hydro -electric Power Projects in Bhutan  and 
exhaustion of funds in the middle of the year . The Committee are 
further dismayed to note  that similar experience is being felt where in 
68% of the allocation of Mangdechhu Project has exhausted before the 
expiry of the first quarter and similar situation is likely to arise in other 
two project s.  Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate  that the 
Ministry of External Affairs should sturdily pursue the issue of 
sufficient fund allocation at the stage of Supplementary Demands for 
Grants with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for the 
ongoing projects in Bhutan  so that such embarrassing condition may 
not arise again. 
 

 16 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
23.  The Committee had observed that as against the projection of ` 
448.33 crore, only ` 220 crore ha d been allocated by the Planning 
Commission for the Kaladan Multi-model Transit Project  in Myanmar . The 
Committee were surprised to note that MEA had submitted the enhanced 
demand for the Project without Cabinet approval. As had been rightly 
pointed out by Planning Commission before moving for an en hanced 
allocation, MEA should have obtained the Cabinet approval. The Committee 
had desired that the Ministry should approach the Cabinet at the earliest for 
further approval of the additional required funds for the project, so that, 
additional resources m ight be augmented during the Supplementary 
Demands for Grants in order to avoid any constraint in the progress of such 
an important project. The Committee had also take n note of the other 
projects undertaken/under consideration in the region. The Committee  had 
desired the Ministry to expedite the process for preparation of Detailed 
Project Report for the trilateral highway project to improve access to ASEAN 
countries directly from India by road. The Committee had also urge d the 
Ministry to identify such oth er projects to enhance connectivity with the 
Eastern neighbours. 
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“The Detailed Project Report for the road segment of the Kaladan Multi 
Modal Transit Project is currently under preparation by IRCON. Cabinet has 
approved total outlay of `535.91 crore for the project. Of this, upto FY 2011 -
12, an amount of `72.38 crore has been spent.  On completion of the 
Detailed Project Report of the road segment, clearer cost estimates  for the 
road segment of the project would be available, on the basis of which the 
Ministry of External Affairs would seek Cabinet approval for additional 
funds. 
 
During the Prime Minister‟s visit to Myanmar in May 2012, Government of 
India‟s assistance was announced for the upgradation of the Kalewa -Yargyi 
road segment of the Trilateral Highway to highway standard. This project 
would help in establishing trilateral connectivity from Moreh in India to Mae 
Sot in Thailand via Myanmar. The pre -feasibility rep ort on the Kalewa -
Yargyi- Monywa road has been obtained from the Myanmar side with a view 
to finalizing the DPR for the Kalewa -Yargyi road. Besides, during the visit of 
the Prime Minister, an Air Service Agreement was signed between the two 

 17 
sides which wo uld enhance direct air connectivity and facilitate business 
interaction, tourism and people -to people exchanges. Both sides also 
agreed to set up a Joint Working Group on Railways to determine the 
technical and commercial feasibility of cross -border rail l inks between the 
two countries.” 
 
 
25. The Committee have been stressing upon the need to enhance 
regional cooperation and increasing the arenas of developmental 
engagement in the region  and are particularly interested in the timely 
implementation of Kaladan Multi -Modal Transit Project  in Myanmar . 
While taking note of the Ministry’s proposals for seeking Cabinet 
approval for additional funds for the envisaged projects in Myanmar , 
the Committee also welcome the announcements made by the Prime 
Minister during his recent visit to Myanmar for expanding the are as of 
cooperation between the two countries which would also have an 
overall impact of establishing connectivity and intensifying ties within 
the region.  The Committee, however, urge the Ministry to t ake all 
initiatives for an early approval of additional funds after preparation of 
DPR for the road segment of Kaladan Multi-model Project so that there 
is no short fall in resources and budget  relating to such an important 
project.   Moreover, the Government should take similar initiatives for 
completion of the newly announced projects during the visit of the 
Hon’ble P.M. to Myanmar in a time-bound manner. 
  
(Recommendation No.20) 
 
26.  SAARC University had been envisaged as an institution of academic 
and intellectual engagement to forge a sense of South-Asian consciousness 
in the future generation of the South -Asians and was meant to bridge the 
knowledge gap in the subcontinent. It was anticipated that such cour ses 

 18 
would be introduced that m ight carve out South -Asian identity and build 
upon the knowledge and linkages among the people of South -Asia. 
However, after going through the launched academic programmes, the 
Committee had felt that the authorities ha d been in a hurry in launching the 
University without properly looking into the standards and quality of curricula 
to be catered to the targeted group. The Committee  had, therefore, desired 
that the courses should be offered keeping in mind the ideals of the 
University and focused to address the particular concerns of the region and 
come out with indigenous models and solutions. The Committee were 
dismayed to note, that SAARC University was yet to have its own Campus, 
hostel and a standardized curriculum in place,  library and books for 
issuance to students. The Committee were unhappy about the pace of 
construction of SAARC University which ha d forced the University to 
function from two temporary campuses at Akbar Bhavan and the Jawaharlal 
Nehru University with the Centaur Hotel as their Hostel. Since, t he major 
portion of allotted land for the University was in possession, the Committee 
had urged the Ministry to expeditiously work upon the construction so that 
the University c ould shift to its own campus with all it s academic 
programmes and intake of students c ould be increased fulfilling the 
objectives of the setting up of a dream Institution with new benchmarks. 
 
27. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“With regard to the expansion and the pace of inaugurating academic 
programme, it is noted that all academic programmes introduced so far at 
the South Asian University (SAU) have been drawn from the SAU 
Academic Structure , a document evolved jointly by all eight SAARC 
Member States through the mechanisms of an Inter -Governmental Task 
Force and the Inter -Governmental Steering Committee of the SAU. The 
document was duly approved, by the SAARC Standing Committee and by 
the SAARC Summit. 
 
  At present, the following academic programmes are being offered by 
the SAU: 
 
MA (Development Economics) Introduced in July 2010 
Master in Computer Applications (MCA) Introduced in July 2010 
M.Sc. (Biotechnology) Introduced in July 2011 
M.Sc. (Computer Science) Introduced in July 2011 

 19 
MA (International Relations) Introduced in July 2011 
MA (Sociology) Introduced in July 2011 
Master of Laws (LLM) Introduced in July 2011 
M.Sc. (Applied Mathematics) to start in July 2012 
 
 The first three programmes were approved by the SAU Steer ing 
Committee in October 2009. Academic programmes at Sl. No. 4 to 7 were 
approved by the first Governing Board meeting of SAU held in March 2011 
in New Delhi. The last programme, in Applied Mathematics, was suggested 
by the SAU Advisory Committee, which c omprised academics from Bhutan, 
Sri Lanka, Pakistan and India. This programme was later approved by the 
Academic Council of SAU (established in  2011), with members from 
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri-Lanka and later by the second meeting of the 
Governing Board of SAU held in New Delhi in March 2012.  
 
 In all cases, Course content was drawn up by international experts 
keeping in mind the focus on South Asia. The pace of expansion of the 
academic programmes and the selection of courses, is therefore a matter 
over which all eight SAARC Member States have reached a collective 
decision. The course contents of all SAU academic programmes have 
unique features designed to enhance a shared sense of South Asian 
identity. These include:  
 
MA Sociology:  This course has t wo special courses of 4 credits each 
entitled “ Sociology of South Asia I and II ” in the first and second 
semesters of MA Sociology programme. 
 
MA (International Relations):  A 4 credit course entitled “ International 
Relations in South Asia ” has been especially introduced in the second 
semester. 
 
Master of Laws (LLM):  A four credit course entitled “ Comparative 
Constitutional Law of SAARC Countries ” is an essential constituent of 
the programme. 
 
MA (Development Economics):  A compulsory course entitled “ South 
Asian Economic Development” has been introduced in the third semester.  
 
 Science programmes are by nature not regional in character. 
Nonetheless, in all science programmes, special care has been taken to 
ensure that the students from all SAARC countr ies are exposed to 
important technologies so that those who finally pass out of SAU are 
able to help in the development of their respective countries. For 
instance, a special compulsory course entitled “ Research 
Methodology” has been introduced in M.Sc. Bi otechnology programme 
which is unique. It has been evolved to provide hands -on training to 
students from all SAARC countries, to apply research technologies to 
the specific needs of their respective countries. Further, keeping the 
interests of students fro m many SAARC countries in mind, especially 
from those characterized by dominance of agriculture in their economy, 
additional emphasis has been given to teaching on Agricultural 
Biotechnology and Crop Improvement. 

 20 
 All Master level programmes have a prominen t research component. 
Research topics are picked jointly by the students and the supervisor, 
keeping in mind the specific needs of the South Asian Region. 
 All SAU students, irrespective of the course they pursue, will soon be 
required to undertake a two -credit course in “ Introduction to South 
Asia”; the course contents are being finalized. 
 
 As regards the references to the process of constructing SAU‟s 
permanent campus at Maidan Garhi, DDA has been able to hand over a 
total of 93.68 acres (85.32 acres of l and in February 2010 and 8.36 acres in 
August 2011), out of the  100 acres allocated for the SAU campus project. 
This 93.68 acres was handed over to the South Asian University by MEA in 
September 2011 for it to use in accordance with the terms of allotment by 
DDA. Thereafter, a No Objection Certificate has been issued by DDA for 
construction, but this applies only to 83.10 acres; the rest of the land is, 
unfortunately, under three separate litigation processes. The Hon‟ble High 
Court had given a stay on the allocation of these plots in 2010 and October, 
2011. 
 
 The pockets of land under stay orders are located within the 
boundary of the SAU, which prevents SAU from initiating construction of the 
campus project in the remainder of the land. It also poses security risks to 
the safety and integrity of the prospective campus and its installations. 
 
  MEA is taking necessary steps in consultation with SAU, DDA and 
its lawyers appointed to defend GoI by Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
 A Progress Report on the cons truction of the Campus at Maidan 
Garhi – as on June 4, 2012 obtained from the South Asian University. 
Salient points are: 
 
 Appointment of Project Management Consultant (PMC) is expected to 
be done by early July. Bids for PMC services have been received and  
are under scrutiny. 
 
 Layout plans were submitted by SAU for approval of MCD on February 
23, 2012. The President, SAU, has met Chief Secretary of the 
Government of Delhi on 28 th March, 2012, to impress upon the need to 
secure expeditious approvals. 
 
 SAU is working on the scrutiny of preliminary designs of the individual 
buildings which will be submitted for approval of Building Works 
Committee in mid-August. 
 
 Submission of tender documents is planned in mid September 2012. 
The award of contracts will be done on receipt of MCD approval.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 21 
 
  


 22 
 
  


 23 
28. The Committee take note of the academic progress made under 
the aegis of the South Asian University and welcome the introduction 
of new credit courses with specific thrust on the region and its 
dynamics.  However, the Committee would like  to reemphasize the 
need for introduction of more courses that cater to the particular 
requirements of the region .  The Committee also desire that specific 
courses relating to heritage, performing arts and major languages of 
SAARC c ountries should also be introduced on priority basis.   
Further, the Committee reiterate their concern over the lack of campus 
infrastructure and academic facilities in the University, especially for 
international and female students and would like to be in formed about 
the anticipated timelines for their establishment.  The Committee 
desire to be acquainted with the outcome of the meeting of the 
Scrutiny Committee of the MCD (South Zone) regarding consideration 
of the layout plan scheduled in June 2012 and w ould also like to know 
as to whether the timelines are being followed for scrutiny and 
approval of final detailed drawings and designs and approval of 
estimates etc.  The Committee desire that the time schedule fixed for 
construction activities should be s trictly adhered to and the process 
of establishment of this Uni versity is expedited so that it  attains full 
functionality with maximum academic activities at the earliest. The 
Committee may be apprised of the developments in regular manner.  
 
(Recommendation No.22) 
 
29.  ICCR had been playing an important role through various endeavors 
of cultural diplomacy and also through administering and offering various 
scholarships. The Committee  had, however, observe d that ICCR wa s not 

 24 
able to serve to its capability and mandate for the want of funds. The 
Committee had observed that during t he last three years the ICCR had  
been allocated almost the same fund of `150 crore against their demand 
ranging from `166 crore to `252 crore this ye ar. The Committee were 
convinced that with such insufficient fund allocation ICCR would not be able 
to achieve the objectives of cultural diplomacy. The Committee  had, 
therefore, strongly recommended that MEA should make all possible efforts 
to get allocat ion of the desired fund of `252 crore to ICCR at the Revised 
Estimates stage.  
 The Committee had fe lt that for exploring the huge potential for 
building long term bridges with the future generation of various countries, 
the ICCR should enhance the number of scholarships across the regions. At 
the same time, the Committee had also desire d that ICCR should start 
special scholarships and allot special slots to neighbouring countries as well 
as countries in the ASEAN region. Special slots should also be dedica ted to 
the students from Latin America. The Committee had understoo d that the 
cost of administering scholarships had  been increasing over the years. The 
Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the ICCR‟s allocation 
should be enhanced considerably, so that the amount of scholarship was in 
tune with the requirement of the students/scholars as well as ICCR should 
have enough fund to support other activities relating to cultural diplomacy. 
 The Committee had also expressed displeasure over long pendency 
of opening up of Indian Cultural Centre at Washington and had desired that 
Ministry should make sincere efforts to identify the land/space for setting up 
of this long pending Centre. 
 
30. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have  
responded as under: 
 
“The ICCR administers a large number of scholarships for students from all 
over the world.  In order to build long term bridges with the future 
generations of various countries, the Council is at present, administering 
about 3000 scholarships which include Council‟s scholarships and 
scholarships administered as agency work.  These scholarships include 

 25 
some special scholarship schemes for neighbouring countries as well as 
some ASEAN countries.  The decision t o increase Ministries/ agency 
scholarships is decided by the parent department, for which ICCR is the 
implementing agency, and therefore does not fall within the purview of the 
ICCR.  The Council is unable to increase the number of scholarships it 
provides at present since its budget has been reduced by 40% compared to 
its projected budget requirement.  Increase in numbers will be considered 
as and when the budgetary situation improves.    
 
Regarding the opening of the Indian Cultural Centre at Washington, 
the Indian Mission in Washington in consultation with Ministry of External 
Affairs, New Delhi is in the process to buy a property.  Once the deal is 
finalized, ICCR will take further appropriate steps to operationalize the 
centre.  
 
The Ministry has taken up  the ICCRs' requirement of increase in 
funds allocated for the F/y 2012 -13. The BE & RE is approved by the 
Financial Committee, General Assembly & Governing Body wherein AS 
&FA of MEA, the funds recommending authority in MEA, is a regular 
member of all the  three bodies.  The AS&FA/MEA is apprised of the 
financial crises at different level from time to time. 
 
The BE/RE for F/y2011 -12 & BE for F/y2012 -13 (prepared in 
consultation with AS&FA) and allocation thereof has been as under: 
 
 
F/y  Projection   Allocation 
2011-12 BE ` 219.56 Cr     ` 121.00 Cr 
 
  RE ` 197.02 Cr    ` 140.00 Cr 
 
2012-13         BE ` 252.00 Cr    ` 150.00 Cr 
  
Apart from interventions with the Ministry of Finance by the Ministry, 
the Finance Minister and Prime Minister have also bee n apprised of the 
financial crunch by the President, ICCR and the DG, ICCR as well.” 
 
 

 26 
31. The Committee are anguished to note that  almost no 
enhancement of the b udget for ICCR has taken place so far  despite 
their regular recommendations for enhancement of budgetary 
allocation for ICCR in view of its mandate and increased arena of 
activities and areas of engagement . The Committee appreciate the 
extraordinary efforts being made by the authorities of ICCR in taking 
up the matter of enhanced  budgetary allocation with the Finance 
Minister and the Prime Minister  and hope that the desired budgetary 
allocation for ICCR will be obtained to enable ICCR to fulfil its mandate 
of cultural diplomacy and increase in the number and amount of 
scholarships. However, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
consistently pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance to obtain the 
desired allocation at the stage of Supplementary Demands for Grants. 
 
(Recommendation No.24) 
 
32.  The Committee were dismayed to observe the lack of progress 
regarding Nalanda University Project. The Committee had noted that during 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the allocation sought by Ministry for the project 
was grossly inappropriate as compared to the actual ground re ality. The 
proposed outlay for the year 2012 -13 was ` 598.95 crore while the actual 
allocation of `15 crore had  been made under the Plan Head. The 
Committee was not at all convinced by the Ministry‟s justification in making 
such huge projections for the ye ar 2012 -13 when in all practicality, the 
University was yet to embark on the Global Designs Competition. The 
Committee had also fe lt that the time and cost estimate as per the draft 
DPR prepared by EdCIL. needed to be reviewed and revised in accordance 
with the ground realities. The Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry must expedite the process of construction of actual physical 
infrastructure of this University. 
 

 27 
33. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated 
as under: 
 
“The Ministry shares the Committee's concern regarding delay in the 
Nalanda University project. Unfortunately, confusion has arisen regar ding 
the funds sought for 2012 -13. This confusion stems from when the actual 
construction on the ground level would b egin. The year termed ”zero year” 
in EdCIL's Detailed Project Report (DPR) is more likely to be 2013 -14, and 
not the current financial  year. This is explained below.    
 
 At the request of the government of Bihar, a DPR was prepared by 
EdCIL in 2007. That  report however pertained to the establishment of a 
state university, and did not envisage setting up Nalanda University as an 
international institution.  It was, therefore, considered n ecessary to have a 
revised DPR,  taking into consideration the objectiv e of creating an 
international institution.   
  
EdCIL's draft DPR projected expenditure of `589.11 crore as the 
capital cost for the “zero year” i.e., the “Development Year ” or the year 
before the commencement of classes.  It was earlier estimated that thi s will 
be 2012-13, but now it seems more likely that the “zero year” will be spread 
over two years, namely 2012-13 and 2013-14. 
 
 Based on EdCIL's draft DPR, the University had earlier indicated that 
the requirement of funds for the “Development Year” (capital cost) would be 
to `589.11 crore.  But after a review of the timeline for the “Development 
Year,” this estimate has been revised in EdCIL's fi nal DPR. It is estimated 
that capital expenditure on the establishment of the University (including the 
pre-academic phase, or the “zero year”)   will be `2154.35 crore, spread 
over the period 2010-11 to 2020-21.  
 
 During 2012-13 expenditure on running the office, construction of the 
boundary wall and conduct of the Global Design Competition etc. is 
expected to be around  `20 crore. This is `4 crore more than requested by 
the University in the BE for 2012 -13.  The additional sum is required for the 
completion of the boundary wall, on which only a partial amount of `4 crore 
was spent in 2011-12. 

 28 
 The capital expenditure for development of infrastructure will be 
required in phases, starting from 2013 -14.  As per EdCIL's final DPR, the 
requirement of capital expenditure during 2013-14 will be `524.25 crore.  
  
 It is the University's endeavour to develop the campus at the earliest, 
keeping rules, regulations and the need for transparency in view. 
  
 The University is working towards the launch of the Global Design 
Competition, leading to construction of the campus.  Organizing the Global 
Design Competition is a technical matter.  The University has been in touch 
with prominent architects, both nationa l and international, with a view to 
seeking  their advice on the modalities of conducting such a competition, 
and preparing the necessary documents.   
  
 With this in view, on the advice of a Steering Committee of senior 
and prominent architects, the Unive rsity has engaged a Professional 
Advisor to prepare the bid documents, and help the University run the 
Competition.  It is estimated that the Competition will be concluded during 
2012-2013, and actual construction will begin in 2013-14. 
 
 However, the University would like to mention that the following steps 
need to be taken before actual construction can begin: 
 
 Announcement of the Global Design Competition  
 Receipt of entries and shortlisting of finalists who will submit final 
entries for the Competition 
 Arranging site visits by the short-listed competitors 
 Submission and presentation of final entries, including proposed 
models 
 Selection of the winning entry by a jury, and its announcement 
 Detailed drawings of prominent buildings on the campus to be 
submitted by the winner 
 Cost estimate of construction activities to be undertaken on the 
campus  
 Hiring a project management company to supervise  the 
construction  
 Floating a construction tender 
 Selection of the construction company/ contractor and award of  
work 
 Begin construction 
 
 It is envisaged that this process will be completed within a period of 
9-10 months, after which the construction will begin. 
 
 

 29 
34. The Committee are disappointed to note that the  prestigious 
project of Nalanda University is yet to be cleared on the basic issues 
like the ‘zero year’  and  the prevailing state of  confusion in the 
Ministry regarding the various aspects of construction of the campus 
of the University.  Despit e its repeated recommendations for 
expedition of construction of basic infrastructure of the University, the 
Committee are dis mayed to learn that the Ministry is still working 
towards the launch of Global Design Competition.  In view of the 
progress made s o far and Ministr y’s own admission that the basic 
process before actual construction to begin will be completed within a 
period of 9 -10 months, the Committee are not convinced with the 
projection of requirement of capital expenditure of Rs. 524.25 crores 
during 2013-14 as per EdCil’s final DPR .  The Committee  would like to 
reiterate the need to accelerate the basic process of construction of 
the campus infrastructure in the University in a specific time -bound 
manner for an early beginning of academic activi ties of the University. 
The Committee desire to be updated on the recent developments 
taking place in the matter especial ly with reference to the other 
concerned agencies  such as the Nalanda Mentor Group, Planning 
Commission and the Government of Bihar.  
(Recommendation No.25) 
 
35. The Committee had noted that though the Ministry had planned to 
have a School of International Studies of the proposed Nalanda University 
in Delhi along with a Project Office in same city, the fi nancial projections for 
same had not been made in the draft DPR. The Committee were not at all 
convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry regarding location of 
the School and Project Office in Delhi. The Committee had strongly felt that 

 30 
both these ideas will defeat the very pur pose of setting up of the Nalanda 
University and were against the spirit of the idea of setting up of the 
University at the ancient place of knowledge. The Ministry m ight review at 
the decision to establish School  of International Studies at Delhi. The 
Committee had, therefore, desire d that the responsibility to develop this 
Institution should be given to those who were devoted, genuine and 
committed to make selfless efforts for development of this prime Institution 
while sitting at the location of the in stitution and certainly not in Delhi. The 
Committee had recommended that the School of International Studies 
under  the Nalanda University should be set up at the main University 
Campus and  having capacity to carve out a unique identity for itself and 
focus upon the issues of cultural diplomacy and cultural engagement so as 
to imbibe, build upon and advocate the diplomatic and cultural traditions of 
the region and should endeavour to be a unique and one of its kind which is 
highly specialized in subjects tha t were not replicated or stereotyped by 
other academic institutions or organization. 
 
36. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
”The University has stated that it plans to establish seven schools, including 
a School of International Relations.  It is committed to establishing all the 
seven schools at its campus in Rajgir. It has further stated that, s ince it is 
not planned to have t he School of International Relations in New Delhi, no 
provision for it has been made in the DPR.  However, the University will 
need an office in New Delhi to co -ordinate its activities, and occasionally 
hold public events. 
 
 The University has stated that i ts team is fully committed to the 
creation of a world class university in Rajgir, and the development of the 
area around Rajgir and Nalanda. It has further stated that the University 
team has worked diligently to secure the foundations of the University.” 
 

 31 
37.  The Committee are satisfied to note that the authorities of Nalanda 
University ha ve shown their commitment to establish all the seven 
Schools including School of International Studies at its campus in 
Rajgir.  The need being felt by the authorities t o have a  coordinating 
office in Delhi may be accepted having  limited role and to serve 
functional purposes only. The Committee, however, desire that the 
centre at Delhi should work only as a facilitation centre to help  the 
international and out station students in seek ing admissions to the 
University.  
  

 32 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
 The Committee observe that even after an unusual experience of 
shortage of funds in the middle of the year 2011 -12 for a very important 
project being implemented in Bhutan, the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance have provided insufficient Budg etary Allocation of 
`9661.97 crore only against the projection of `14426.81 crore. The 
insufficient allocation is certainly going to create the same situation before 
the Ministry when due to paucity of funds, the projects being implemented in 
Bhutan and ot her countries were adversely affected causing cost and time 
overrun. The Committee take a serious note of insufficient Budgetary 
Allocation almost every year especially, in the light of India‟s increased 
international engagement and Indian endeavour to eme rge as one of the 
major non -traditional donors in terms of providing aid and loans to 
developing countries and also through various measures of technical 
cooperation. The Committee, therefore strongly recommend that the 
Budgetary Allocation of the Ministry  should be substantially enhanced, so 
that, its developmental engagements can intensify with not only the 
neighbouring countries, but the horizon of developmental aid is extended to 
the other countries of Latin America and Africa. The Committee also desire  
that the Ministry should sensitize the Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission about the insufficient Budgetary Allocation and if required, it 
should be taken at the highest level i.e. the Hon. Prime Minister, who is also 
the Chairman of the Planning Commission. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The aid to Bhutan is provided from this Ministry‟s Budget, which is 
substantial. As observed by the committee, the allocations have been falling 
short of the projected requirements. It hampers smooth flow of funds  for 
developmental schemes and projects in Bhutan that have been committed 
at high political levels. The issue has been reported to Planning 
Commission and Department of Expenditure at various point of time. But 
the Ministry received insufficient fund. For  instance, `1644 crore was 
projected under the plan expenditure for Bhutan in the FY 2011 -12, but was 
given only `1030 crore. Against the request of non –plan expenditure of 
`1477 crore, only `1000 crore was allotted. For the Current Financial Year 
also, against the projected `2185 crore under the planned expenditure, only 
`1138 crore have been allocated. 
 
The funds required for India to provide assistance to hydropower 
projects in Bhutan  are allocated by the Planning Commission under the 
Plan component of the „Aid to Bhutan‟ head of Ministry‟s budget. The 
regular meetings convened in PMO to discuss India‟s bilateral cooperation 

 33 
with Bhutan in the hydropower sector have repeatedly taken no te of the 
importance of the Planning Commission allocating adequate funds to  
Bhutan in a timely and smooth manner for efficient and cost -effective 
implementation of projects.  
 
 The funds requirement for 2011-12 was projected by MEA in October 
2010 at the  RE 2010-11/BE 2011-12 stage. Pursuant to the PMO meeting 
of October 15, 2010, the issue was also taken up at the level of the EAM, 
who wrote to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on November 30, 
2010 .This information was shared with all concerned throu gh the status 
note circulated by us before the March 2011 PMO meeting. Finance 
Secretary has written to Principal Secretary to PM. on March 28, 2011 
expressing concern that the inadequate provisioning of funds would force 
Ministry of Finance to make good t he deficiencies through the 
supplementaries.  
 
 EAM wrote to Finance Minister on March 15, 2012 in which he 
specifically mentioned that the three on going HEP in Bhutan will be 
affected if the fund allocation under the annual plan is not increased from 
the `1500 crore now allocated to at least `2500 crore for MEA. 
 
Keeping in view of the increased demand for the current FY , Ministry 
will reiterate its demand with Finance Ministry and Planning Commission for 
the increased  allocation. As advised by the C ommittee, the issue will be 
taken to the highest level i.e. at appropriate time for the smooth flow of 
funds for the development works in Bhutan. 
 
The Ministry thankfully acknowledges the concerns expressed by the 
Hon‟ble Committee on the insufficient budgetary allocation made available 
to the Ministry of External Affairs in BE 2012 -13.  The Ministry had taken up 
the issue at the Ministerial level. T he Minister of External Affairs had written 
to the Minister of Finance in this regard. The Minister of Finance had 
suggested to include the additional fund requirements in the proposals of 
MEA at RE stage. As desired by the Committee, the Ministry will end eavour 
for getting additional funds allocated at the RE stage as well as for 
enhancement of allocation in the BE 2013-14.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
  The Committee in their 4 th Report (15 th L.S.) had made note of the 
issue of variations in the figures contained in various documents prepared 
by the Ministry and had also reiterated that Ministry should exercise due 
caution in future while presenting information to the Committee and the 
Parliament. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that there were 
a large number of discrepancies in the Budget documents and even the 
figure variations within the same documents. The Committee also note that 
few figures were not furnished in the Outcome Bud get, though, later the 
Ministry has submitted corrected figures to the Committee. The Committee, 

 34 
therefore, would like to caution the Ministry that due care should be 
exercised henceforth so that the documents/information presented to the 
Committee are complete and flawless. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of External Affairs sincerely regrets submission of 
materials to the Hon‟ble Committee that had some errors. Adequate caution 
will be exercised by the Ministry hereafter to ensure that the information 
presented to the Committee is free from errors.   
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
  The Committee observe that in vi ew of the Ministry‟s presence and 
permanent diplomatic engagement with almost all the countries of the world, 
it would be important for the Ministry to observe economy and reduce rental 
liabilities of the Ministry and acquire/purchase buildings for Office space 
abroad. Due to the issue of cost and quality of acquisition, cost escalation 
and time overrun in the renovation projects, the Committee had been 
stressing upon the need to improve property management. The Committee 
are happy to note that the Ministry  has taken several initiatives for better 
evaluation of the projects at initial stage to avoid the modifications at 
execution stage. This will certainly help in timely and cost effective 
execution of the projects. The Committee are hopeful that with due 
expertise, the Ministry would be able to make judicious decisions to ensure 
maximum utilization of allocated resources. The Committee expect that the 
newly established Technical Cell in the Projects Division should be 
strengthened by adding more technical ex perts having requisite experience 
in project  management to ensure proper monitoring and timely evaluation 
and thorough review of all the proposals under consideration and 
implementation in the various parts of the world. The Committee would also 
like to r eiterate their earlier  recommendation that sincere and concerted 
efforts should be made to acquire/purchase maximum properties utilizing 
the opportune time of low property prices world-wide. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken note of the observations of the Committee 
relating to the Technical Cell under the Projects Division of the Ministry and 
has taken necessary action to strengthen the Technical Cell with the 
induction of two additional Executive Engin eers having requisite experience 
in project management.  In this connection, nominations have been sought 
from the Central Public Works Department for deputation of two Executive 
Engineers to this Ministry for the Technical Cell.  
 
 The Ministry has also t aken note of the recommendation of the 
Standing Co mmittee relating to acquisition /purchase of properties. The 
Ministry is making concerted efforts to acquire plots of land/built -up 
properties taking advantage of the opportune time of low property prices 

 35 
world-wide.  In the current financial year, approval has been accorded for 
purchase of built -up properties in Atlanta (Chancery) and Toronto (CG's 
Residence) and plots of land in Colombo for construction of Indian Cultural 
Centre and residences of India -based officials and in Bangkok for 
construction of residences of India -based officials. In addition, proposals for 
acquisition of built -up properties in Ashgabat, Hamburg, Port Moresby and 
Washington are under active consideration.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
  The Committee have noted that in the past years, particularly during 
Eleventh Five Year Plan period, there have been several instances when 
inadequate allocations were made by the Planning Commission. The 
Committee feel that  inappropriate projections made by the Ministry before 
the Planning Commission and the performance and requirement of the 
Projects has significantly contributed in the lower allocation by the Planning 
Commission. The Committee urge the Ministry to streamli ne the existing 
Budgetary process and instill techniques and other budgetary instruments 
for arriving at near realistic proposals/projections and present the demand 
strongly before the Planning Commission, particularly the projects that are 
under implementation. The Committee suggest that if need be, services of 
the financial/budgeting/project experts as well as expertise from the 
recipient countries may be utilized for the purpose. Factual evaluation 
coupled with actual monitoring of the progress of the pr oject should be 
carried out and budgetary demands made by PIAs or  consultants should be 
thoroughly examined and counter -checked before submitting the proposals 
for Budgetary Allocation from the Planning Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The fund requirements of projects being implemented abroad by the 
Ministry of External Affairs are discussed threadbare with the concerned 
Territorial Divisions, Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) and 
representatives of the foreign governments. The budgetary dema nds of 
PIAs are evaluated in the Ministry on the basis of the ground level progress. 
It is hoped that with the creation of the Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA) in this Ministry, a nodal agency responsible for 
implementation of all projects abroad, the project related budgeting exercise 
as well as projection of fund-requirements would become more realistic. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
 The Ministry has time and again mooted the idea of creating an 
agency for ensuring speedy and efficient implementation of India‟s external 
assistance programme in the form of India International Development 
Cooperation Agency (IIDCA), and later, revising it to Indian Agency for 
Partnership and Development (IAPD). The Committee are happy  to note 
that MEA has finally been able to create a Development Partnership 

 36 
Administration (DPA) within the Ministry to take stock of the current status of 
all the projects and to develop Standard Operating  Procedures for the 
Projects. The Committee, ther efore, desire that the new Division in the 
Ministry should be well equipped with the services of experts to make it 
capable to perform as per the mandate and achieve the objective to 
streamline the process since the inception of the idea to the actual deli very 
of the project. The Committee further desire that the capacities of DPA 
should be  augmented without any delay to ensure a time and cost -effective 
delivery of projects with quality of high international standards. The 
Committee are of the opinion that DPA should further explore the possibility 
of India‟s assisted developmental projects in other friendly and strategically 
important countries including from Africa and Latin-America. The Committee 
also hope that with the creation of DPA, the Ministry will  be able to present 
more realistic projection before the Planning Commission for obtaining 
desired allocations and with better inter -ministerial consultations, fast 
tracking of the process for quicker/enhanced results will also be possible. 
The Committee s hould regularly be apprised of the progress and 
achievements made in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) was 
created in January 2012 in the Ministry of External Affairs. The DPA has 
started to utilise  the services of experts for project implementation. Two 
officers from the Indian Telecom Service (ITS) have joined the DPA at 
Director and Deputy Secretary level, respectively. In addition, one officer 
from the Indian Audit and Accounts Service (IAAS) is in the Ministry to 
assist in the implementation of projects in Afghanistan. Furthermore, two 
officers from Indian Audit and Accounts Service (IAAS), one from Indian 
Railway Accounts Service and one officer from Indian Revenue Service are 
assisting the Mini stry in implementation of the projects under the Lines of 
Credit extended by GOI to developing countries and implementation of the 
Technical Cooperation Programmes of the Ministry. The Ministry also plans 
to utilise the services of Consultants to assist in  the implementation of 
projects. Currently, three consultants with expertise in the health & 
telecom/IT sectors are assisting the Ministry. The ongoing efforts are aimed 
at creating in-house, specialised technical, legal and financial skills in order 
to fast-track all stages of project implementation. 
 
Over the past few years, India's development assistance has started 
to cover large number of countries and consequently, the projects being 
implemented by the Ministry have increased substantially. India's 
development partnership is based on the needs identified by the partner 
countries and the effort of the Ministry is geared towards accommodating as 
many of the requests received from partner countries as is technically and 
financially possible. 
 
 The budgeta ry projections for project s take into account the overall 
outlay and pace of implementation , which are based on the implementation 
schedule of the project. However, progress of projects on ground depend s 
on several factors. While some of these factors pertain to adherence to GOI 

 37 
guidelines and regulations, others relate to the partner country. Efforts are 
made to reduce the time taken for compliance with the internal guidelines 
and regulations, local regulations and unforeseen developments in the 
country wh ere the project is being implemented result in delay in 
implementation of the project. These factors are sometimes beyond the 
control of the contractor implementing the project . For e.g. land acquisition 
by the foreign Government sometimes results in oppos ition from affected 
population especially when they see the contractor mobilising equipment 
and labour on the site . Unplanned strikes, bandhs , stoppage of fuel 
supplies, delay in environmental clearance, unforeseen geological surprises 
etc. also contribute  to delay in project implementation . The Ministry in 
consultation with the foreign Governments, either through the mechanism of 
bilateral Project Monitoring Committees or through our M issions/Posts 
abroad, seeks the intervention of Central and local author ities of the 
concerned foreign Governments to facilitate the implementatio n of the 
projects and to address impediments that arise in the course of its 
implementation. As a result, the financial progress foreseen at the time of 
the budget projections, which is about six months in advance of the financial 
year, cannot be sometimes fully adhered.  However, it is expected that with 
the induction of experts, the Ministry would be in a position to promote more 
realistic budgetary projections. The Ministry ha s been in consultations with 
the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that India has emerged as a 
significant developmental partner in Afghanistan and has invested more 
than $1.5 billion in developmental and infrastructure works there for building 
roads, hospitals, schools and the Afghan Parliament building etc. which won 
international appreciation for the Indian policy of winning hearts and minds 
of the people of Afghanistan. The Committee appreciates various initiatives 
undertaken by the Government and completion of Pul -e-Khumri Project 
ahead of schedule despite various constraints. But, the Committee are 
dismayed to note the slow progress in the construction of Afghanista n‟s 
Parliament Building and therefore, recommend that the process should be 
expedited to ensure the timely completion of th e Project. At the same time, 
the Committee would also like to stress upon the timely delivery of other 
Projects being undertaken in Afghanistan in a cost-efficient manner. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The construction of Afghanistan‟s Parliament building commenced in 
2009 following approval of the Cabinet in November 2008, with an approved 
cost of `710 crore. The stipulated time frame for completion of the project 
was thirty six ( 36 months) viz., by  December 2011. The project is being 
executed by the Central Public Works Department (CPWD). The project is 
now expected to be completed by June 2013.  
 

 38 
The delay in the construction of the Parliament building is largely 
attributable to delays in handing over of site, change in layout and design, 
supply of c ladding material, etc. Initially, in January 2006, CPWD  had 
submitted preliminary cost estimate of the project at `296.45 crore in 
accordance with their  standard guidelines. The Ministry of Finance in May  
2006, recommended the project for approval by Cabinet at an estimated 
expenditure of `296.45 crore. 
 
However, in July - August 2006, the Government of Afghanistan gave 
certain new requirements for the proposed Afghan Parliament Building and 
also suggested some basic changes in the concept plans. The Master Plan 
and the architectural drawings for the Parliament Building had to be 
accordingly modified taking into the account the additional requirements and 
changes as suggested by the Government of Afghanistan. The Government 
of Afghanistan approved the modified plans in December 2006. In January 
2007, CPWD re-worked the preliminary cost estimate of the project to 
`337.58 crore based on the modified drawings and incorporating the extra 
cost implications on account of additional requirements and changes as 
relevant to the scope of work of the Parliament Building. The Cabinet in 
January 2008 approved and allowed CPWD to proceed with the tendering 
process for the construction of Afghanistan‟s Parliament Building in Kabul, 
and asked to revert to the Cabinet for approval of the firm estimates after 
opening of the tenders. MEA obtained the approval of the Cabinet for the 
tendered cost for `710 crore in December 2008 after the opening of the 
tenders for the project.  
 
 The progress of work at the site as of June 2012 is approx. 40%. The 
reasons for the delays are thus largely due to delay in the handing over of 
site to the agency for construction; due to change in layout plan of the entire 
complex to accommodate the requirement of the Government of 
Afghanistan to  match the centre line of Parliament building with Dar -ul-
Aman Palace; changes in architectural drawings desired by the Afghan 
authorities in July 2010, March 2011 & June 2011 and subsequent approval 
of revised architectural drawings by the Afghan authorit ies in January 2012; 
short supply of local samangan marble for external cladding, transportation 
of materials from Karachi port, etc. 
 
 It is expected that with the establishment of Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA) closer monitoring and interac tion with CPWD and 
Afghan authorities would help in making faster progress in implementation 
and overcome difficulties encountered during implementation of the project. 
Meanwhile, all e fforts are being made towards ensuring that other projects 
in Afghanistan are implemented a timely and cost efficient manner. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
 Government of India has expanded its ambit of aid to Bangladesh to 
incorporate projects to enhance connectivity between the two countries. 
Akhaura- Agartala Rail Link is an important initiative to establish railway 

 39 
infrastructure at border points between India and Bangladesh to enhance 
mutual transit  arrangements for trade and commerce. The Committee feel 
that the initiative of Government of  India can provide impetus to inter -
regional and intraregional trade within each country and enhance trade 
activities across the region. The  Committee desire that the Ministry should 
take up all the related issues of the project with Government of Banglad esh 
and also establish proper coordination mechanism with the Ministry of 
Railways to carry out the project on the Indian side. The Committee further 
desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of cooperating in 
hydro-power project and energy sector with Bangladesh to rebuild a forward 
looking relationship with Bangladesh.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government of India has been keen to enhance connectivity and 
trade links with Bangladesh. Bangladesh has also positively responded to 
our effo rts to enhancing railway and transport linkages which would be 
crucial for the enhancement of trade links and also in development of our 
North-Eastern region. The MOU on Akhaura -Agartala rail link is under 
discussion between the two sides. MEA has been in regular touch with the 
Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region for the purpose of coordination. 
 
India-Bangladesh cooperation in the power sector has been 
proceeding satisfactorily. The Government of India has welcomed the 
participation of Bangladesh in upcoming power projects especially in the 
North-Eastern states. The issue is being discussed at the Joint Working 
Group [at the level of Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power] and Steering 
Committee Meeting [at the level of Secretary, Ministry of Power] which are 
regularly held with the Bangladesh side. India and Bangladesh have also 
signed an MOU on Renewable Energy during the visit of the Prime Minister 
to Bangladesh in September 2011. A JWG to implement cooperation in 
renewable energy has also been constituted. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
 The Committee are aware that the Government of India is spending 
substantial amount on rehabilitation of Internally Displaced Persons in Sri 
Lanka by way of  constructing houses, schools, hospitals, roads etc. The 
Committee in their 10 th Report (15 th L.S.) had commented that rehabilitation 
and resettlement projects in Sri Lanka have already been delayed and 
therefore had desired that all the proposed projects including building of 
50,000 houses should be completed in specific timeline. However, the 
Committee observe that no timeline is being  followed in any of the 
proposed projects perhaps due to bureaucratic delays and lack of 
cooperation. The Committee furth er observe the difficulties like non -
availability of sites etc. is also being faced by the Government in execution 
of Pilot Project of constructing houses. The Committee are very interested 

 40 
in knowing the progress being made in the implementation of all it s Projects 
in Sri Lanka and also desire to be updated by the Ministry on this account 
on regular basis. The Committee reiterate that in order to fulfil its 
commitment and requirement of the people of affected areas, the 
Government must strive and expedite the construction of remaining houses 
in a time bound manner. Moreover, the Committee also desire that the 
Government should ensure that every assistance being provided by the 
Indian Government in any form reaches to the needy and affected persons 
only. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
GOI is implementing a number of projects in Sri Lanka particularly, 
for the resettlement and rehabilitation of Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs). These projects have a specific timeline for completion and the 
Ministry as well as th e High Commission in Sri Lanka have been closely 
monitoring the progress of work on a regular basis to ensure that these are 
completed in a time bound manner. Representatives from the High 
Commission of India, Colombo and the Consulate General, Jaffna have also 
been undertaking site visits to oversee the progress of the various projects  
 
2. Most of these projects focus on providing assistance in the resettlement 
and rehabilitation process of IDPs in the Northern Province of Sri Lanka. 
GoSL has to ensure that the sites for these projects are de -mined and 
cleared of jungles before execution of work can begin. However, in projects 
like the Housing Pilot project, there have been delays in the handing over of 
work sites by GoSL. Further, lack of  necessary support infrastructure like 
electricity, water, access roads, internal roads, etc., have also hampered 
time bound implementation. In some cases there have been delays in the 
selection of beneficiaries by the Sri Lankan Government.  
 
3. The above  mentioned issues have been repeatedly taken up with 
concerned authorities by the High Commission of India. In case of the 
Housing Pilot project, all the sites have now been handed over and as per 
the progress report dated 31 May 2012, 765 houses are fully  complete and 
a further 188 houses have been completed up to the roof level. The 
External Affairs Minister handed over the first lot of 48 completed houses on 
18 Jan 2012 at Ariyalai, Jaffna. Another, 500 houses were handed over 
during the visit of the Par liamentary delegation to Sri Lanka in April 2012. 
With respect to the construction of the remaining 49,000 houses, a 
Memorandum of Understanding for the construction of 49,000 houses was 
signed with the Government of Sri Lanka during the visit of the Exter nal 
Affairs Minister on 17 January 2012. The process of selection of 
Implementing Agencies for the construction of 43,000 under the Owner 
driven model is complete and terms of the agreements to be signed with 
these agencies are being finalised. Tendering h as also been initiated to 
select the agencies for executing the work of construction of 6000 houses 
under the Agency driven model.  As per timelines projected, we would be 
able to roll out implementation of the Project  for construction of these 
49,000 houses on the ground by July 2012. 

 41 
4. As far as the other major projects being implemented in Sri Lanka are 
concerned, the status report is enclosed. 
 
5. Steps are being taken to ensure that the assistance reaches the needy 
and affected persons and the project s are implemented in a transparent 
manner. The lists of beneficiaries are being displayed in the website of the 
High Commission of India and for the second phase of the Housing project 
(construction of 49,000 houses) there is also a proposal to set up a 
grievance redressal mechanism. 
 
 
 
 Name of the 
Project 
Scope Estimated 
cost 
Status 
1 Housing Pilot 
Project 
Construction of 
1000 houses for 
IDPs in the 
Northern Province 
of SriLanka. 
INR 53 
crore 
 
 
 765 houses have 
been completed  
 500 houses handed 
over during the visit 
of the Parliamentary 
delegation on 18 th 
April 12 at a 
function held in  
Mullaitivu   
 
The target is to 
complete the remaining  
houses by July 2012 
 
2 Housing Project 
– 2nd Phase 
Construction of 
49,000 houses for 
IDPs and IOTs in 
Northern, Eastern, 
Central and Uva 
Provinces  
INR 1319 
crore 
 Implementing 
Agencies for the 
43,000 houses  
under the Owner 
driven model 
selected.  
 Process of tendering 
to select the 
agencies for  6,000 
houses under the 
Agency driven 
model has been 
initiated 
 
As per timelines 
projected, we would be 
able to roll out 
implementation of the 
Project on the ground 
by July 2012. 
 
 

 42 
3 Rehabilitation  Of 
Kankesanthurai  
(KKS) Harbour 
 
GOI will provide 
assistance in 
rehabilitation of 
KKS which 
includes a grant for 
hydrographic 
survey, wreck 
removal, 
preparation of a 
DPR and dredging 
and extending a line 
of credit for 
construction of 
breakwater and 
piers. 
INR 2.8 
crore (For 
DPR) 
 
INR 89 
crore (For 
wreck 
removal)  
 Hydrographic 
survey complete 
 Final DPR prepared 
and handed over to 
GoSL for 
acceptance 
 Wreck removal 
complete 
 Based on the DPR, 
dredging will be 
taken up by 
Dredging 
Corporation of India   
4 Setting up of 
Vocational  
Training 
Centres 
(VTCs) 
 
The project 
involves setting up 
of VTCs at 
Batticaloa and 
Nuwara Eliya, 
Puttalam and 
Hatton   to impart 
vocational 
education to 
students passing out 
from schools. 
INR 26 
crore  
 VTCs at Hatton and 
Puttalam 
established 
 VTCs at Batticaloa: 
supply of 
equipments 
complete and on job 
training is underway 
 VTC at Nuwara 
Eliya: equipments 
are b eing 
commissioned. 
Setting up of the 
VTC expected to be 
completed by 30 
June. 
5  Project for Self 
Employment of 
Women in 
Batticaloa 
 
 SEWA is 
implementing a 
project for self 
employment of war 
affected women in 
Batticaloa by 
providing them 
training in areas 
like garment 
manufacturing, 
ornamentation, food 
processing etc 
 
INR 8.22 
crore 
 Training of trainers 
in India complete 
and the training 
process in 
Batticaloa, is 
underway. 
 
 
As per agreement 
signed with SEWA, 
expected to  be 
completed in May 2013. 
6 Construction of 
150 bed base 
hospital at 
Dickoya, 
Hatton  
 
Based on a request 
from GoSL, 
construction of a 
150 bed base 
hospital at Dickoya 
being taken up to 
benefit the 
INR 42 
crore 
Work in progress  and 
structure for 3 floors 
have been completed 
 
 Expected to be 
complete by February 
2013  

 43 
plantation 
community  
 
7 Southern 
Railway Project 
Restore railway 
Lines and supply 
rolling stock on 
different routes of 
Southern Province 
under a line of 
credit 
US $ 
167.4 
million 
(Line of 
credit) 
The inauguration of the 
completed railway track 
was held on 19 April, 
2012 during the visit of 
the Parliamentary 
delegation. 
 
 
8 Northern Railway 
Project  
 
Rehabilitation of 
railway lines  in 
North Sri Lanka 
comprising of  four 
sectors namely, 
Omanthai-Pallai, 
Medawchchiya-
Madhu, Madhu -
Talaimannar and 
Pallai-
Kankesanthurai. 
US $800 
million 
 
(Line of 
credit) 
LOC Agreement for 
balance credit line of 
US $ 382.37 offered by 
EXIM bank to GOSL 
signed on 17 January, 
2012 during the visit of 
EAM 
 
 
 
Expected to be 
complete by2013 
 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
 The Committee observe that Varzob -I Hydro -electric Project in 
Tajikistan was formally launched in August 2009 and scheduled to be 
commissioned in June  2011 is now supposed to be commissioned by June 
2012. Simultaneously, the other issues like requirement of additional 
expenditure for add itional work and non -provision of facilities as agreed 
have also cropped up. The Committee, therefore, desire that all those 
pending issues should be resolved through consultation on priority basis so 
that there is no further delay in completion of the Pro ject. The Committee 
have a firm opinion that completion of this Project will not only convey 
India‟s commitment to Tajikistan but also raise India‟s profile and presence 
in Central Asia region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Project of renovation of Varzob-I Hydro-Power Plant in Tajikistan 
is being implemented by the public sector under takings NHPC Limited and 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) at a cost of `74.20 crore.  There 
has been some delay in commissioning of this project due to various 
technical reasons including delay in finalization of the design, supply of 
additional items of work which were not part of the original contract and 
supply of some new equipment from BHEL factory in Bhopal. The project is 
now likely to be commissioned by September/October 2012.   

 44 
 
2. Meetings of the Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) for the Varzob-I 
Project are being held regularly to monitor the progress and also to ta ke 
decisions on various matters connected with the project.  In this connection, 
as recommended by the PMC meeting held on 21 st December 2011, a team 
of experts from Central Water Commission (CWC) and Central Electricity 
Authority were deputed to visit Taj ikistan from 28th April to 2 nd May, 2012 to 
sort out certain technical issues connected with the project.  Their findings 
were discussed in the PMC meeting held on 18 th May 2012, and corrective 
measures were discussed to complete the project expeditiously.  In view of 
the importance attached to this project in a strategically located country in 
our extended neighbourhood, we propose to monitor the project closely to 
resolve all remaining issues on priority, so that there is no further delay in 
completion of the project. 
 
3. MEA agrees with the Committee that the Varzob Project will 
showcase India‟s development experience in the field of power generation 
and raise the profile of the Indian power sector and public sector 
companies. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 The Committee welcome India‟s proactive participation in various 
multilateral initiatives undertaken at the United Nations as a Non -permanent  
Member of UN Security Council. The Committee are happy to note that 
India has been  endeavoring to enhance cooperation on issue of traditional, 
as well as nontraditional security . However, the Committee desire that India 
should build up world opinion against such threats. The Committee further 
desire that India should holistically take up contentious global issues and 
strive to build global coalition to arrive at consensus and ami cable solutions. 
The Committee would also like to  reiterate that India should build coalition 
for reform within the structure of United Nations in the context of the 
changed international system with 193 countries as against 51 countries at 
the time of it s birth especially with reference to increase in the number of 
permanent members in the Security Council. Though, India‟s bid f or 
permanent membership of UNSC has been backed by four permanent 
members, India must strive hard to get permanent membership in the 
Security Council at the earliest. Moreover, India must take -up the issues 
such as categories of  membership, lack of regional representation, power 
to veto, the size of the  expanded Security Council and its modus  operandi 
along with General Assembly a nd Security Council relationship etc. to 
reflect current day realities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, 
India‟s efforts have been directed towards enhancing international 
cooperation in the areas of traditional and nontraditional security, such as, 

 45 
counter-terrorism, counter -piracy, non -proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction to non -state actors, and the strengthening of UN peacekeeping 
and peace-building efforts. 
 
India‟s efforts in its capacity as Chair of the Security Council‟s 
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) during 2011 -12 have resulted in 
significant progress on implementation by the Member States of their 
obligations under UN resolutions pertaining to counter -terrorism. Under 
India's leadership, the Counter -Terrorism Committee adopted an outcome 
document on 28 September 2011 that called for 'zero tolerance' of terrorism 
and of terrorist actions. India also continues to work for progress in 
negotiations on a draft Comprehensive Conve ntion against International 
Terrorism (CCIT) and its early finalization. 
 
 India has been urging for enhanced and concerted international 
cooperation against the pirates off the coast of Somalia, who pose a serious 
threat to international maritime trade an d security.  India has supported the 
adoption of Security Council Resolutions 1976 and 2015 during 2011, which 
condemned the practice of hostage -taking by pirates and mandated 
international cooperation for securing the release of hostages as well as for 
effective prosecution of the pirates. 
 
 India has also maintained its traditional leadership role in the UN 
peacekeeping including through contribution of around 8000 troops to UN 
peacekeeping operations in 10 peacekeeping missions all over the world.  
 
 India is a leading votary of reform and restructuring of the United 
Nations, particularly expansion of its Security Council, to make it more 
representative and democratic, and to better reflect the current geo -political 
realities. India has been working along  with other like -minded countries for 
building support among the UN Member States for a meaningful 
restructuring and expansion of the UN Security Council. India, in 
collaboration with Brazil, Japan and Germany (together known as the G -4) 
had tabled a compr ehensive proposal on reform of the Security Council in 
the UN General Assembly in July 2005. They have proposed expansion of 
the membership of the Security Council from the present fifteen to twenty -
five by adding six permanent and four non -permanent membe rs. Their 
proposal included all important elements of reform, namely, the size of the 
expanded Security Council, categories of membership, veto rights, regional 
representation, and relations between the UN General Assembly and the 
Security Council. India along with Brazil and South Africa is also at the core 
of the L.69 Group which includes a number of pro -reform developing 
countries from Asia, Africa and Latin America who have also been pressing 
for urgent reform of the Security Council.   
 
 India, both in dividually as well as part of the G -4 and the L.69 
Groups, has been engaged with other Member States and their groups to 
build support for early action on expansion of the Security Council. The G -4 
countries have been undertaking sustained outreach efforts to engage other 
Members States to garner their support for expansion of the UN Security 
Council in both permanent and non -permanent categories of its 

 46 
membership as well as for improvement in its working methods. The efforts 
of the G -4 and other pro -reform countries were instrumental in the 
commencement of text-based inter-governmental negotiations at the UN on 
the issue of Security Council reform in July 2010, whose recent (8 th) round 
has been held earlier this year.  At the negotiations, a significant maj ority of 
the Member States across various regions has demanded expansion of the 
Security Council in both permanent and non -permanent categories of 
membership. 
 
 India‟s claim for permanent membership is based on its strong 
credentials such as its populatio n, size, rising GDP, significant economic 
potential, rich civilizational legacy, democratic political system and 
substantial contribution to the activities of the UN.  The Government has 
received support from several countries from all over the world for I ndia‟s 
candidature for permanent membership in an expanded UN Security 
Council.  However, the opportunity for our own membership of the Security 
Council will only arise after there is broad acceptance of the need to expand 
the Council in both categories.  The Government‟s efforts are therefore 
presently focused on this aspect. 
    
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.18) 
 
 NAM has played a historical and defining role during the past in view 
of the then international politics. Based upon its  history and experience, 
India and other like minded countries should make efforts to revitalize it, 
despite raising a question mark by several nations over the movement ‟s 
apparent irrelevance in a post cold war era and largely decolonized world. 
The Commi ttee feel that inspite of presence of multiple arenas for overall 
multilateral engagement as well as sectoral and regional multilateral 
engagement, it is pertinent to have a forum where the developing countries 
and least developed countries can deliberate and  constructively engage on 
the specific issues to address their concerns and needs and NAM has the 
potential and essential role in offering such an alternate arena. The 
relevance and revitalization of NAM in the current world is all the more  
important because of its advocacy for the United Nations reform and also 
for expansion of Security Council for a new global order aimed at altering 
the growing disparities between the developed and developing nations. In 
addition, the Committee are of the view that India should enhance its 
cooperation with different groups and networks of countries in a variety of 
configurations for different purposes. These include BRICS, IBSA, IOR -
ARC, the Community of Democracies, the East Asian Summit and other 
multi-lateral groupings. In addition, India should play a prominent role in the 
United Nations‟ specialized Agencies, notably UNESCO. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has been playing a leadership role in Non Aligned Movement 
(NAM) and other multilateral organizations including, G -77, BRICS, IBSA, 
IOR-ARC, Community of Democracies (CoD), and East Asia Summit.  As a 

 47 
founding member of the Non -Aligned Movement (NAM), India has been 
emphasizing the need for revitalization of NAM through a contemporary and 
forward-looking a pproach by focusing upon those shared challenges that 
can be addressed through South-South cooperation. We have called for the 
Movement to have solidarity of purpose and commitment, and a measured, 
result-oriented approach. India has strongly advocated tha t the Movement 
needs to support efforts towards a more democratic, equitable, and 
legitimized international architecture that reflects contemporary realities and 
provides a qualitatively significant voice to developing countries in important 
global institutions. Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh in his statement at 
the last (15th) Summit of the Non -Aligned Movement in Sharm El Sheikh, 
Egypt in July 2009 called for a greater role for NAM in addressing the global 
challenges of food security, energy security, e nvironment and reform of the 
international institutions.  
 
India regularly participates in NAM meetings. Shri E. Ahamed , 
Minister of State for External Affairs led the Indian delegation to XVI NAM 
Ministerial Conference held in Bali, Indonesia from May 25 -27, 2011. Smt. 
Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs led the Indian delegation 
to Ministerial level meeting held in Belgrade, Serbia on 5-6 September 2011 
to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the first NAM Summit held in that 
city in 1961. MoS, Shri E. Ahamed also led the Indian delegation that 
participated in the NAM Ministerial Meeting held in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, 
on 9–10 May 2012. India will be participating at an appropriate level at the 
16th NAM Summit scheduled to be held in Tehran, Iran from 30 -31 August 
2012.  
 
 India attaches importance to its engagement with BRICS and has 
participated in all th e BRICS Meetings of Foreign Ministers, Finance 
Minsters, Agriculture Ministers, Trade Ministers, Health Ministers, High 
Representatives on Security, Business Forum, Development Banks, and 
other sectoral meetings. India successfully hosted the Fourth BRICS 
Summit in New Delhi on 29 March 2012 under the overarching theme of 
“BRICS Partnership for Global Stability, Security and Prosperity”. The Delhi 
Summit hosted by Hon‟ble Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh was 
attended by the Presidents of Brazil, Russia, Ch ina and South Africa. The 
Delhi Declaration issued at the end of the Summit, captured the essence of 
discussions and put forth common position of BRICS countries on various 
economic and political issues of global and regional importance.  
 
India has been actively participating in the activities of the CoD. As a 
founder member of the C oD, India participates in the meeting of its 
Governing Council. India has also offered to host a Regional Conference on 
the theme of Education for Democracy in New Delhi in ear ly 2013 in 
partnership with Mongolia, the current Chair of the CoD.  
 
 India has been playing a prominent role in the United Nations‟ 
specialized Agencies, including UNESCO. As a founder member of 
UNESCO India plays a key role in all its core mandates and is often a 
bridge between developed and developing countries in its role as 

 48 
negotiator, facilitator and consensus builder.  India has a niche` position at 
UNESCO, where India‟s voice is heard with respect, admired for its clear 
stand on all the issues and is sought in all the major decisions affecting 
UNESCO. India‟s national interests have been successfully defended and 
promoted at UNESCO.  
           
At the last 36th Session of the General Conference  held in Paris in 
November 2011, the Indian delegation was led by the Shri Kapil Sibal, 
Minister for Human Resource Development, accompanied by a high level 
delegation from the Ministries of Human Resource Development, Culture, 
Science and  Information and Broadcasting. In the field of culture, India was 
elected to the World Heritage Committee during the last General 
Conference and would be playing a key role in the implementation of the 
World Heritage Convention. This year will also be another milestone in India 
–UNESCO ties, as the agreement for setting up th e Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute for Peace and Sustainable Development in New Delhi will be 
signed in July 2012. This will be the first UNESCO Category I Institute in the 
entire Asia Pacific Region.  
 
India has intensified various elements under its “Look East P olicy”. 
The relationship with ASEAN has been at the core of this policy. Since the 
7th ASEAN-India Summit in 2009, India set up an ASEAN -India Cooperation 
Fund of US$50 million to support projects in implementation of the ASEAN -
India Plan of Action 2010 -15. This was in addition to the ASEAN -India 
Science & Technology Fund set up in 2007 with an initial corpus of US$ 1 
million and the ASEAN-India Green Fund also established in 2007 with US$ 
5 million for funding pilot projects to promote adaptation and mitig ation 
technologies in the field of climate change. Over US$ 40 million worth of 
projects had been shared with ASEAN countries for their views and 
concurrence in the last one year across different sectors with the objective 
of capacity building and enhancin g cooperation and integration between 
ASEAN and India. There has been an annual increase of over 20% in trade 
between ASEAN and India. The volume of trade increased by 30% by 2010-
11 to reach US$ 57.89 billion. The ASEAN -India Trade -in-Goods 
Agreement sign ed in August 2009 became fully operational from August 
2011 when the process of ratification by all the ASEAN countries was 
completed. The process of intensification of ASEAN -India cooperation 
continues with events and meeting being planned in the run -up t o the 
special ASEAN -India Commemorative Summit being hosted by India in 
December 2012. Delhi Dialogue -IV in February 2012 flagged off this 
commemoration of 20 years of dialogue relationship and 10 years of summit 
level partnership between ASEAN and India. An MoU on strengthening 
Tourism Cooperation was signed in January 2012. Visa on arrival facility 
now stands extended to 7 ASEAN countries (Lao, Cambodia, Vietnam, 
Myanmar, Singapore, Indonesia, Philippines). The interface between 
Parliamentarians has also been strengthened through participation at the 
31st General Assembly of ASEAN Inter -Parliamentary Assembly (AIPA) in 
2010 and 2011 as Observer. This would be further intensified with the 
forthcoming visit of an AIPA delegation into India and the invitation  of the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha in end-July early-August 2012. 
 

 49 
  As a founder member of the East Asia Summit, India has been active 
in giving direction at this Leaders -led forum on broad strategic, geo -political 
and economic issues of common interest with the aim of promoting peace, 
security, stability and economic prosperity in the region. India has been 
supportive of the five priority areas of cooperation under EAS i.e. energy, 
finance, education, natural disaster management and pandemics and the 
two addition al areas of connectivity and Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA). Given the annual reoccurence of 
disasters in the East Asia region, disaster management & relief has 
emerged as one of the key areas of concern. India is amongst the count ries 
which are taking initiatives in this sector. India would be hosting an “ EAS 
Conference 2012: Building Regional Responses ” in New Delhi in 
September 2012. India has also undertaken three projects in the 
educational sector in the EAS Education Ministers  Meeting, oriented 
towards teacher and student mobility, regional inter -operability of national 
qualification networks and leadership development programmes in the 
higher education sector. 
 
  Another major grouping wherein India is seeking intensify  its role and 
collaboration is the 48 member Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM) bridging the 
EU with Asia. It brings together 60% of the world's population, 50% of global 
GDP and 60% of world trade. India has important and growing stakes within 
Asia and Europe. In  recognition of this, India would be hosting the 11 th 
ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in October 2013 and the Asia Europe 
Foundation (ASEF) Board of Governors Meeting on October 9 -13, 2012. 
India also contributes US$ 120,000 to ASEF, the only permanent inst itution 
of ASEM. 
 
  The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) formed in 1997 is of key strategic 
interest in India's Look East Policy. India hosted the 2 nd BIMSTEC Summit 
in November 2008 during its Chairm anship from August 2006 -2009. India 
would be a major contributor towards the setting up of the BIMSTEC 
Permanent Secretariat in Dhaka. We have also taken the lead in four 
priority areas i.e. Transport & Communication, Tourism, Environment & 
Disaster Manage ment, Counter Terrorism and Trans -National Crime. A 
BIMSTEC Information Centre was established in July 2007 by the Ministry 
of Tourism. India is working on establishing the BIMSTEC Weather & 
Climate Centre and the BIMSTEC Energy Centre. India had a major r ole in 
the signing of the BIMSTEC Convention on Combatting International 
Terrorism, Trans -National Organised Crimes and Illicit Drug Trafficking in 
December 2009. Since 2005, India has an ongoing scheme for 30 
BIMSTEC AYUSH Scholarship besides 450 ITEC Sch olarships in South 
and South -East Asia. India established the BIMSTEC Network of Think -
Tanks in 2010.  
 
  India would be hosting the 6 th Mekong-Ganga Cooperation Foreign 
Ministerial Meeting on September 3 -4, 2012 in New Delhi. It has 
constructed the buildi ng for the MGC Museum of Traditional Asian Textiles 
in Siem Riep, Cambodia at a cost of US$1.772 million. ICCR would be 
taking further steps for the inauguration of the Museum and the curation of 

 50 
its Permanent Exhibitions in coordination with the APSARA Au thority of 
Cambodia and the MGC member countries. India continues its scheme 
initiated in 2005 of offering 50 ICCR scholarships (10 each) to the five MGC 
members. The scheme has been extended until 2016. 
 
  India is also participating in the Asia Cooperati on Dialogue (ACD) 
which started in 2002 to provide an overarching framework of cooperation 
amongst Asian countries from all parts of the Continent. This 31 member 
forum deliberates collaboration in  20 areas. India is the “prime mover” in 
the areas of bio -technology and transportation linkages and “co -prime 
mover” in the area of culture. We are in the process of establishing a 
“Regional Centre of Bio -Technology Training & Education” with the 
collaboration of UNESCO in Faridabad, Haryana as a hub of expertis e for 
the entire Asian region. India has also circulated a concept paper on 
transport linkages amongst the member countries for further collaboration. 
India hosted the 2nd ACD SOM on Cultural Cooperation in April 2012. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
 SAARC is an important forum for building bridges within the South -
Asian community and the region and sharing of experience and expertise 
within the region. Though the Committee are appreciative of efforts like 
SAARC Tele - Medicine Network Project, SAARC Tele Education Project 
and India Endowment for Climate Change in South -Asia the Committee are 
concerned with the slow pace of these projects. The Committee feel that 
India should encourage the idea of Pan South-Asian institutes and initiatives 
and aim for building connectivity within the region. To enhance engagement 
India should come out with comprehensive proposal for establishment of 
trans-border infrastructure to establish linkages between the constituent 
nations as well as to exp and physical connectivity with South -East and 
East-Asia. The Committee are of the opinion that at the platform of SAARC 
India should make endeavour for enhancing trade, investment and  
cooperation on issues of management of energy resources in the region a s 
agreed upon by all the members on SAFTA. Similarly, India should also 
engage and build alliances and policy frameworks on intra -regional level on 
the issues of food security, climate change, environment protection and 
management of biological resources a nd indigenous knowledge. In the 
same context, the Committee also desire that through the fora of SAARC, 
all possibilities should be explored to develop Lumbini as an international 
centre for Buddhist Studies in the region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The SAARC Tele -medicine network, the SAARC Tele -education 
project, and the India Endowment for Climate Change in South Asia are 
among a few of the several SAARC initiatives announced by India 
unilaterally, aimed at enhancing engagement, interaction and eventua lly 
integration of the economies of the eight South Asian nations. 

 51 
 
Since the Tele -medicine network and the Tele -medicine project are 
intended to be established in cooperation with interested institutions in the 
other seven SAARC States, they are being imp lemented at a pace with 
which the other SAARC States are comfortable.  The Tele -medicine 
network project has already established linkages between super -speciality 
hospitals in India and target hospitals in Kabul (Afghanistan), Thimphu 
(Bhutan) and Pattan ( Nepal).  A beginning has also been made with the 
Tele-education project, with a linkage between the Indira Gandhi National 
Open University (IGNOU) and the Tribhuvan University in Kathmandu.  
Efforts are on to expand Tele -education projects to the remaining  six 
SAARC countries, based on their willingness and interest in the projects 
and in the training courses offered by India. 
 
The India Endowment for Climate Change in South Asia is similarly a 
unilateral Indian initiative.  It is aimed at assisting SAARC States in 
enhancing capacity to adapt to the challenges of climate change.  Like the 
Tele-medicine and Tele -education projects, it too is based on a demand -
driven approach in which South Asian Member -States take ownership of 
climate change projects that wi ll run on Indian funding.  Efforts are 
nonetheless ongoing to help relevant South Asian States develop projects 
that fit within the rubric of the IECC-SA. 
 
In keeping with the objective of developing pan South Asian Institutes 
and initiatives, India has be en promoting the development of a South Asian 
University, headquartered in New Delhi. India is meeting all the costs of 
constructing the campus of the University.  Similarly, India has unilaterally 
provided US$ 100 million to the SAARC Development Fund, ba sed at 
Thimphu, to fund deserving socio -economic developmental projects across 
the region.  This is to enhance capacity in South Asia to deal with common 
developmental challenges, including projects relating to empowerment of 
women, enhancing the quality of teachers and so on. 
 
Under SAARC, with regard to trans -border infrastructure India has 
been a proponent of efforts to promote rail, road, air and maritime 
connectivity across the region.  Since this requires active support of each of 
the Member -States of  SAARC, each of these projects is progressing at 
different speeds.  For instance, India, Maldives and Sri Lanka are 
progressing with ADB -support to develop a project for an Ocean Ferry 
Service linking the three countries.  Air connectivity between India an d Sri 
Lanka and India and Nepal is excellent; whereas in other regions 
connectivity needs to be improved.  Efforts are on to develop regional rail 
connectivity so that both goods and passengers can move easily from 
Afghanistan to Bangladesh.  A draft Regio nal Railway Agreement is 
pending finalisation, with all SAARC Member States barring Pakistan having 
accepted the terms and conditions in the text.   
 
The purpose of such connectivity and India‟s unilateral initiative to 
offer tariff free and quota -free tra de to the five LDCs in the region is to 
enhance trade, investment and transportation linkages across the region.  
Similarly, efforts are on to develop regional and sub -regional energy 

 52 
cooperation, including in renewable energy sources, hydro electric power  
generation and by enhancing capacity to develop regional power trading 
arrangements.  Power Ministers and agencies in the energy sector are 
working to identify ways in which the region‟s considerable energy potential 
is fully harnessed. 
 
With the intention of developing the widest possible range of areas of 
regional cooperation, SAARC now has structures to enable Ministerial and 
expert-level meetings on issues relating to cooperation in food security, 
climate change and environment protection as well as to  deal with matters 
relating to culture.  Given the extensive interest in enhanced cooperation in 
the promotion of the culture and history of the region, India is supportive of 
efforts within the region to develop capacity for research and study in areas 
of our shared history and tradition. 
 
In this regard, given that it would be appropriate for the Government 
of Nepal to promote the development of Lumbini (which lies in Nepal) as a 
Centre for the international study of Buddhism, the Government of India will  
be willing to work with that country‟s Government to promote such an 
objective. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 SAARC University was envisaged as an institution of academic and 
intellectual engagement to forge a sense of South -Asian consciousness in 
the future generation of the South -Asians and was meant to bridge the 
knowledge gap in the subcontinent. It was anticipated that such courses 
would be introduced that may carve out South -Asian identity and build upon 
the knowledge a nd linkages among the people of South -Asia. However, 
after going through the launched academic programmes, the Committee 
feel that the authorities have been in a hurry in launching the University 
without properly looking into the standards and quality of c urricula to be 
catered to the targeted group. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
courses should be offered keeping in mind the ideals of the University and 
focused to address the particular concerns of the region and come out with 
indigenous models and solutions. The Committee are dismayed to note, 
that SAARC University is yet to have its own Campus, hostel and a 
standardized curriculum in place, library and books for issuance to students. 
The Committee are unhappy about the pace of construction of S AARC 
University which has forced the University to function from two temporary 
campuses at Akbar Bhavan and the Jawaharlal Nehru University with the 
Centaur Hotel as their Hostel. Now, the major portion of allotted land for the 
University is in possession, the Committee urge the Ministry to expeditiously 
work upon the construction so that the University can shift to its own 
campus with all its academic programmes and intake of students can 
increase fulfilling the objectives of the setting up of a dream Inst itution with 
new benchmarks. 
 

 53 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With regard to the expansion and the pace of inaugurating academic 
programme, it is noted that all academic programmes introduced so far at 
the South Asian University (SAU) have been drawn from the SAU 
Academic Structure , a document evolved jointly by all eight SAARC 
Member States through the mechanisms of an Inter -Governmental Task 
Force and the Inter -Governmental Steering Committee of the SAU. The 
document was duly approved, by the SAARC Standing C ommittee and by 
the SAARC Summit. 
 
  At present, the following academic programmes are being offered by 
the SAU: 
 
MA (Development Economics) Introduced in July 2010 
Master in Computer Applications (MCA) Introduced in July 2010 
M.Sc. (Biotechnology) Introduced July 2011 
M.Sc. (Computer Science) Introduced July 2011 
MA (International Relations) Introduced July 2011 
MA (Sociology) Introduced July 2011 
Master of Laws (LLM) Introduced July 2011 
M.Sc. (Applied Mathematics) to start in July 2012 
 
 The first three programmes were approved by the SAU Steering 
Committee in October 2009. Academic programmes at Sl. No. 4 to 7 were 
approved by the first Governing Board meeting of SAU held in March 2011 
in New Delhi. The last programme, in Applied Mathematics, was suggest ed 
by the SAU Advisory Committee, which comprised academics from Bhutan, 
Sri Lanka, Pakistan and India. This programme was later approved by the 
Academic Council of SAU (established in  2011), with members from 
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri-Lanka and later by the second meeting of the 
Governing Board of SAU held in New Delhi in March 2012.  
 
 In all cases, Course content was drawn up by international experts 
keeping in mind the focus on South Asia. The pace of expansion of the 
academic programmes and the sele ction of courses, is therefore a matter 
over which all eight SAARC Member States have reached a collective 
decision. The course contents of all SAU academic programmes have 
unique features designed to enhance a shared sense of South Asian 
identity. These include:  
 
MA Sociology:  This course has two special courses of 4 credits each 
entitled “ Sociology of South Asia I and II ” in the first and second 
semesters of MA Sociology programme. 
 

 54 
MA (International Relations):  A 4 credit course entitled “ International 
Relations in South Asia ” has been especially introduced in the second 
semester. 
 
Master of Laws (LLM):  A four credit course entitled “ Comparative 
Constitutional Law of SAARC Countries ” is an essential constituent of 
the programme. 
 
MA (Development Economics): A compulsory course entitled “ South 
Asian Economic Development” has been introduced in the third semester.  
 
 Science programmes are by nature not regional in character. 
Nonetheless, in all science programmes, special care has been taken to 
ensure that the students from all SAARC countries are exposed to 
important technologies so that those who finally pass out of SAU are 
able to help in the development of their respective countries. For 
instance, a special compulsory course entitled “ Research 
Methodology” has been introduced in M.Sc. Biotechnology programme 
which is unique. It has been evolved to provide hands -on training to 
students from all SAARC countries, to apply research technologies to 
the specific needs of their respective countries. Furt her, keeping the 
interests of students from many SAARC countries in mind, especially 
from those characterized by dominance of agriculture in their economy, 
additional emphasis has been given to teaching on Agricultural 
Biotechnology and Crop Improvement. 
 
 All Master level programmes have a prominent research component. 
Research topics are picked jointly by the students and the supervisor, 
keeping in mind the specific needs of the South Asian Region. 
 All SAU students, irrespective of the course they pursue, will soon be 
required to undertake a two -credit course in “ Introduction to South 
Asia”; the course contents are being finalized. 
 
 As regards the references to the process of constructing SAU‟s 
permanent campus at Maidan Garhi, DDA has been able to hand ov er a 
total of 93.68 acres (85.32 acres of land in February 2010 and 8.36 acres in 
August 2011), out of the  100 acres allocated for the SAU campus project. 
This 93.68 acres was handed over to the South Asian University by MEA in 
September 2011 for it to use  in accordance with the terms of allotment by 
DDA. Thereafter, a No Objection Certificate has been issued by DDA for 
construction, but this applies only to 83.10 acres; the rest of the land is, 
unfortunately, under three separate litigation processes. The Hon‟ble High 
Court had given a stay on the allocation of these plots in 2010 and October, 
2011. 
 
 

 55 
 The pockets of land under stay orders are located within the 
boundary of the SAU, which prevents SAU from initiating construction of the 
campus project in th e remainder of the land. It also poses security risks to 
the safety and integrity of the prospective campus and its installations. 
 
  MEA is taking necessary steps in consultation with SAU, DDA and 
its lawyers appointed to defend GoI by Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
 A Progress Report on the construction of the Campus at Maidan 
Garhi – as on June 4, 2012 obtained from the South Asian University .  
Salient points are: 
 
 Appointment of Project Management Consultant (PMC) is expected to 
be done by early July. Bids  for PMC services have been received and 
are under scrutiny. 
 
 Layout plans were submitted by SAU for approval of MCD on February 
23, 2012. The President, SAU, has met Chief Secretary of the 
Government of Delhi on 28 th March, 2012, to impress upon the need to 
secure expeditious approvals. 
 
 SAU is working on the scrutiny of preliminary designs of the individual 
buildings which will be submitted for approval of Building Works 
Committee in mid-August. 
 
 Submission of tender  documents is planned in mid September 2012. 
The award of contracts will be done on receipt of MCD approval. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
  

 56 
  


 57 
 
 
 
  


 58 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
 
 The Committee take note of multi -dimensional engagement with 
Africa and  the various efforts and initiatives taken by the Government in 
African Continent on a regional as well as bilateral level. However, the 
Committee express their concern over the tardy implementation of the 
decisions taken during India Africa Forum Summit -I (IAFS -I). The 
Committee desire that the process of setting up various institutes and the 
initiatives to st rengthen the commercial partnership with Africa should be 
expedited. The Committee hope that with the setting up of Development 
Partnership Administration (DPA), the pace of setting up/implementation of 
such and other projects will improve considerably. Th e  Committee are of 
the opinion that India should simultaneously enhance its bilateral 
engagement with the countries of the region and extend technical and 
economic assistance and developmental aid as per their indigenous 
requirements 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India‟s multi-dimensional engagement with Africa under the rubric of 
the India Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) is in the nature of a partnership 
wherein all major decisions are arrived at in consultation with the concerned 
authorities of the African Union.  
 
2. While it is true that the first India Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) took 
place in April 2008, the final Plan of Action for India-Africa Framework of 
Cooperation could be launched only in March 2010. Further, the location of 
19 capacity building i nstitutions to be established under IAFS -I were to be 
decided by the AU. This was done by the AU in December 2010. The 
progress in this regard needs to be evaluated in this context.  
 
3. Capacity building training programmes under IAFS have been 
running successfully. In the field of short term training positions, as against 
the target of training 1500 African nationals during 2011 -14, nearly 1200 
African candidates have been trained from over 40 African countries in the 
last two years. Similarly, the enhanc ed slots under ICCR (long -term) and 
ITEC (short-term) scholarships are also being well utilized. 
   
4. The preparatory work with regard to the institutions to be set up 
under the second Africa India Forum Summit is fully underway. E&SA 
Division of MEA has been regularly convening inter -Ministerial meetings in 
order to hasten the implementation process. Our Missions and Posts in 
Africa have been coordinating with host countries in Africa. Several of the 
Departments/Ministries have selected implementing agenc ies and 
preliminary visits have started taking place.  
 
5. It is relevant to point out that while India is prepared to share its 
expertise etc. the necessary physical infrastructure (land, building) is to be 
provided by the African nations. This has often been the cause of delay in 

 59 
project implementation. One illustration of this could be seen in 
establishment of Vocational Training Centres (VTCs). Ten (10) VTCs are to 
be established in Africa under IAFS-I. As pointed out earlier, the location for 
these VTCs was decided in December 2010. Since then, the implementing 
agency, National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) has undertaken 
preparatory visits and prepared DPRs for 8 of these Centres with the 
exception of Burkina Faso and Libya. However, only three c ountries have 
committed to fulfill their obligations (i.e., provision of land, building and 
recurring costs) viz., Mozambique, Burundi and Ethiopia. Agreement 
between MEA and NSIC with regard to these three VTCs has been signed 
and parts of payment released to NSIC. These three VTCs are well on track 
for completion by the end of 2012.  
 
6. Experience sharing through conferences/seminars/workshops is a 
crucial element of the IAFS process. As planned various conferences were 
organized in the last FY including India- Africa Workshop on Traditional 
Medicines, International Civil Aviation Organiz ation (ICAO) Air Services 
Negotiation Conference (ICAN Conference), LOC Conference, Workshop 
on Sharing of Experience in the field of mobilization of Domestic Savings, 
India-Africa Business Partnership Summit, and Regional Economic 
Communities Conference, India-Africa Hydrocarbon Conference etc. 
 
7. Bilateral relations with African countries have been suitably 
augmented both within and outside the framework of IAFS. Whether it is the 
establishment of capacity building institutions or training of personnel o r 
provision of grants-in-aid more and more African nations are being covered.  
India-Africa trade has gone up to US$ 62 billion and the earlier trade target 
of US$ 70 billion by 2015 has been revised to US$ 90 billion. High level 
official visits between Ind ia and the African countries, both incoming and 
outgoing, have gone up.  
 
8. As the Development Partnership Administration in the MEA is 
gearing towards meeting its mandate, it is expected that effective and 
efficient handling of all our aid projects from the stages of concept, launch, 
execution and completion would result in timely implementation of projects, 
in close cooperation with the concerned territorial divisions in MEA and with 
the support and facilitation of the partner countries.  
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
 ICCR has been playing an important role through various endeavors 
of cultural diplomacy and also through administering and offering various 
scholarships. The Committee, however, observe that ICCR is not able to 
serve to its capability and mandate for the w ant of funds. The Committee 
observe that during the last three years the ICCR has been allocated almost 
the same fund of `150 crore against their demand ranging from `166 crore 
to `252 crore this year. The Committee are convinced that with such 
insufficient fund allocation ICCR will not be able to achieve the objectives of 

 60 
cultural diplomacy. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
MEA should make all possible efforts to get allocation of the desired fund of 
`252 crore to ICCR at the Revised Estim ates stage. The Committee feel 
that for exploring the huge potential for building long term bridges with the 
future generation of various countries, the ICCR should enhance the 
number of scholarships across the regions. At the same time, the 
Committee also desire that ICCR should start special scholarships and allot 
special slots to neighbouring countries as well as countries in the ASEAN 
region. Special slots should also be dedicated to the students from Latin 
America. The Committee understand that the cos t of administering 
scholarships has been increasing over the years. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the ICCR‟s allocation should be enhanced 
considerably, so that the amount of scholarship is in tune with the 
requirement of the students/s cholars as well as ICCR should have enough 
fund to support other activities relating to cultural diplomacy. The Committee 
also express displeasure over long pendency of opening up of Indian 
Cultural Centre at Washington and desire that Ministry should make  sincere 
efforts to identify the land/space for setting up of this long pending Centre. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The ICCR administers a large number of scholarships for students 
from all over the world.  In order to build long term bridges with the futur e 
generations of various countries, the Council is at present, administering 
about 3000 scholarships which include Council‟s scholarships and 
scholarships administered as agency work.  These scholarships include 
some special scholarship schemes for neighbou ring countries as well as 
some ASEAN countries.  The decision to increase Ministries/ agency 
scholarships is decided by the parent department, for which ICCR is the 
implementing agency, and therefore does not fall within the purview of the 
ICCR.  The Counci l is unable to increase the number of scholarships it 
provides at present since its budget has been reduced by 40% compared to 
its projected budget requirement.  Increase in numbers will be considered 
as and when the budgetary situation improves.    
 
Regarding the opening of the Indian Cultural Centre at Washington, 
the Indian Mission in Washington in consultation with Ministry of External 
Affairs, New Delhi is in the process to buy a property.  Once the deal is 
finalized, ICCR will take further appropr iate steps to operationalize the 
centre.  
 
The Ministry has taken up the ICCRs' requirement of increase in 
funds allocated for the F/y 2012 -13. The BE & RE is approved by the 
Financial Committee, General Assembly & Governing Body wherein AS 
&FA of MEA, the  funds recommending authority in MEA, is a regular 
member of all the three bodies.  The AS&FA/MEA is apprised of the 
financial crises at different level from time to time. 
 
 
 

 61 
 
The BE/RE for F/y2011 -12 & BE for F/y2012 -13 (prepared in 
consultation with AS&FA) and allocation thereof has been as under: 
F/y  Projection   Allocation 
 
2011-12 BE ` 219.56 Cr     ` 121.00 Cr 
  RE ` 197.02 Cr    ` 140.00 Cr 
2012-13         BE ` 252.00 Cr    ` 150.00 Cr 
  
Apart from interventions with the Ministry of Finance by the M inistry, 
the Finance Minister & Prime Minister have also been apprised of the 
financial crunch by the President, ICCR and the DG, ICCR as well. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
 The Committee are appreciative of various research and associated 
activities carried by ICWA through seminars and symposium and are happy 
to note that the requests are being received from the foreign scholars 
seeking visiting fellowship of ICWA. The Commit tee feel that ICWA should 
further enhance such engagement and more provisions should be made for 
grant of such fellowships, though, due criteria should be evolved for grant of 
such scholarships. The Committee are of the view that ICWA should 
intensify its engagement with Indian as well  International think tanks 
through conducting more such seminars and symposium on the subjects of 
vital importance. The Committee desire that the ICWA should further build 
upon its in -house research capacities and capabilitie s to be able to come 
out with larger number of qualitative research oriented publications so as to 
play a role of facilitator in influencing the conduct of India‟s foreign policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Criteria have been evolved to grant scholarships a nd fellowships to 
intending scholars. 
2. ICWA organised 61 seminars, conferences, symposiums, lectures by 
foreign dignitaries, interactions etc with  Indian as well as international 
think tanks on the subjects of vital importance to India during the year 
2011-12. 
3. ICWA Research Fellows are mainly working on India‟s neighbourhood, 
including China, Nepal, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Central Asia, West 
Asia and South East Asia, as well as Africa.  They are regularly 
bringing out Viewpoints, Briefs and Policy Briefs which  are circulated 
among the policy makers as well as put on our website.  To strengthen 
research activities, ICWA recruited four Research Fellows this year 
raising the total strength of ICWA Research Wing to thirteen, excluding 
Director (Research) and short term Research Interns.  It is planned to 
increase the size of the Research faculty to 19 academics in 2013 to 
add coverage of Latin America and Caribbean, EU, USA and North 
Americas as well as Global Commons Issues. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 

 62 
 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to observe the lack of progress 
regarding Nalanda University Project. The Committee note that during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan, the allocation sought by Ministry for the project 
was grossly inappropriat e as compared to the actual ground reality. The 
proposed outlay for the year 2012 -13 was `598.95 crore while the actual 
allocation of `15 crore has been made under the Plan Head. The 
Committee are not at all convinced by the Ministry‟s justification in mak ing 
such huge projections for the year 2012 -13 when in all practicality, the 
University is yet to embark on the Global Designs Competition. The 
Committee also feel that the time and cost estimate as per the draft DPR 
prepared by EdCIL needs to be reviewed and revised in accordance with 
the ground realities. The Committee recommend that the Ministry must 
expedite the process of construction of actual physical infrastructure of this 
University. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry shares the Committee's concern regarding delay in the 
Nalanda University project. Unfortunately, confusion has arisen regarding 
the funds sought for 2012-2013. This confusion stems from when the actual 
construction on the ground level would be gin. The year termed ”zero year” 
in EdCIL's Detailed Project Report (DPR) is more likely to be 2013 -14, and 
not the current financial  year. This is explained below.    
 
 At the request of the government of Bihar, a DPR was prepared by 
EdCIL in 2007. That report however pertained to the establishment of a 
state university, and did not envisage setting up Nalanda University as an 
international institution.  It was, therefore, considered n ecessary to have a 
revised DPR,  taking into consideration the objective  of creating an 
international institution.   
  
EdCIL's draft DPR projected expenditure of `589.11 crore as the 
capital cost for the “zero year” i.e., the “Development Year ” or the year 
before the commencement of classes.  It was earlier estimated that this  will 
be 2012-13, but now it seems more likely that the “zero year” will be spread 
over two year, namely 2012-13 and 2013-14. 
 
 Based on EdCIL's draft DPR, the University had earlier indicated that 
the requirement of funds for the “Development Year” (capit al cost) would be 
to `589.11 crore.  But after a review of the timeline for the “Development 
Year,” this estimate has been revised in EdCIL's final DPR. It is estimated 
that capital expenditure on the establishment of the University (including the 
pre-academic phase, or the “zero year”)   will be `2154.35 crore, spread 
over the period  2010-11 to 2020-21.  
 
 During 2012-13 expenditure on running the office, construction of the 
boundary wall and conduct of the Global Design Competition etc. is 
expected to be  around  `20 crore. This is `4 crore more than requested by 

 63 
the University in the BE for 2012 -2013.  The additional sum is required for 
the completion of the boundary wall, on which only a partial amount of `4 
crore was spent in 2011-2012. 
 
 The capital ex penditure for development of infrastructure will be 
required in phases, starting from 2013 -14.  As per EdCIL's final DPR, the 
requirement of capital expenditure during 2013-14 will be `524.25 crore.  
 
 It is the University's endeavour to develop the campus  at the earliest, 
keeping rules, regulations and the need for transparency in view. 
 
 The University is working towards the launch of the Global Design 
Competition, leading to construction of the campus.  Organizing the Global 
Design Competition is a technical matter.  The University has been in touch 
with prominent architects, both national and international, with a view to 
seeking  their advice on the modalities of conducting such a competition, 
and preparing the necessary documents.   
 
 With this in view, on the advice of a Steering Committee of senior 
and prominent architects, the University has engaged a Professional 
Advisor to prepare the bid documents, and help the University run the 
Competition.  It is estimated that the Competition will be concluded during 
2012-2013, and actual construction will begin in 2013-2014. 
 
 However, the University would like to mention that the following steps 
need to be taken before actual construction can begin: 
 
 Announcement of the Global Design Competition  
 Receipt of entries and shortlisting of finalists who will submit final 
entries for the Competition 
 Arranging site visits by the short-listed competitors 
 Submission and presentation of final entries, including proposed 
models 
 Selection of the winning entry by a jury, and its announcement 
 Detailed drawings of prominent buildings on the campus to be 
submitted by the winner 
 Cost estimate of construction activities to be undertaken on the 
campus  
 Hiring a project ma nagement company to supervise  the 
construction  
 Floating a construction tender 
 Selection of the construction company/ contractor and award of 
work 
 Begin construction 
 
 It is envisaged that this process will be completed within a period of 
9-10 months, after which the construction will begin. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 

 64 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
 The Committee note that though the Ministry plans to have a School 
of International Studies in Delhi along with a Project Office in same city, the 
financial projections for same has not been made in the draft DPR. The 
Committee are not at all convinced with the reasons furnished by the 
Ministry regarding location of the School and Project Office in Delhi. The 
Committee strongly feel that both these ideas will defeat the very purpose of 
setting up of the Nalanda University and are against the spirit of the idea of 
setting up of the University at the ancient place of knowledge. The Ministry 
may review at the decision to establish School of  International Studies at 
Delhi. The Committee, therefore, desire that the responsibility to develop 
this Institution should be given to those who are devoted, genuine and 
committed to make selfless efforts for development of this prime Institution 
while sitting at the location of the institution and certainly not in  Delhi. The 
Committee recommend that the School of International Studies under  the 
Nalanda University should be set up at the main University Campus and  
having capacity to carve out a unique identity for itself and  focus upon the 
issues of cultural diplomacy and cultural engagement so as to imbibe, build 
upon and advocate the diplomatic and cultural traditions of the region and 
should endeavour to be a unique and one of its kind which is highly 
specialized in subjec ts that are not replicated or stereotyped by other 
academic institutions or organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The University has stated that it plans to establish seven schools, 
including a School of International Relations.  It is committed to estab lishing 
all the seven schools at its campus in Rajgir. It has further stated that, s ince 
it is not planned to have the School of International Relations in New Delhi, 
no provision for it has been made in the DPR.  However, the University will 
need an office  in New Delhi to co -ordinate its activities, and occasionally 
hold public events. 
 
 The University has stated that its team is fully committed to the 
creation of a world class university in Rajgir, and the development of the 
area around Rajgir and Nalanda.  It has further stated that the University 
team has worked diligently to secure the foundations of the University.  
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
 The Committee are very concerned about the contents of the  
curriculum and the standards and quality of the academic courses to be 
introduced in the Nalanda University. The Committee feel that the course -
content, academic -structure as well as faculty for the Nalanda University 
should be in consonance with the unique identity and academic character of 
the University that it is envisaged to be and should be able to live up to the 
founding philosophy and ideas behind the  establishment of this University. 
The Committee feel that the University should emerge as a valuab le 
resource for promotion of studies and research in oriental cultures, literary 

 65 
tradition and languages and civilization based on the native knowledge 
systems and it should act as a living repository of cultural and literary 
traditions of the region. This  University should strengthen and build upon 
the cultural capital and carry forward the thread of identity and 
consciousness within the South -East Asian Countries. The Ministry should 
endeavour to attain the aim of achieving highest intellectual and academ ic 
standards of international quality through this University. The Committee 
further express their desire that the Ministry should also be a part of all such 
endeavours being made by the  international community in this regard in a 
proactive manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Both the Joint Press Statement issued by the EAS member states at 
the 4 th East Asia Summit,  held at Hua Hin , Thailand on October 24 -25, 
2009, and the Nalanda University Act, 2010 encourage networking and 
collaboration between Nalanda University and existing centers of excellence 
in the EAS participating countries. This is designed to build a community of 
learning where students, scholars, researchers and academicians can work 
together, embodying the spirituality that unites mankind.  
 
 The construction of the campus is under way, starting with 
construction of the boundary wall. The University has been simultaneo usly 
working on academic planning. Special attention has been paid to 
networking and collaboration with existing centers of excellence in the EAS 
region and outside.  Nalanda had layers of knowledge systems, and the 
University plans to benefit from ancient  Nalanda's rich intellectual heritage 
and create its own unique academic programmes. The endeavour at all 
times is to translate the Nalanda tradition into a model of the University that 
is truly an Asian University.  With Nalanda we have a unique opportuni ty to 
create new paradigms of higher education that will flow out from India to 
Asia, and to the rest of the world.  It must always be remembered that the 
Nalanda tradition was about high levels of specialization, without insularity.    
 
 The concept notes  on the Schools of Historical Studies and Ecology 
and Environment Studies - the first two schools to be established – have 
been developed by the University. These were approved by the Governing 
Board at its meeting in Beijing in October, 2011.  The central  philosophy of 
both the schools, with which the University plans to begin its academic 
programmes, is to harmonize and work closely both with the local populace 
and the regional concerns of the area.  
 
 The academic plan of the School of Historical Studies is being 
developed, with special emphasis on trans -regional history, the history of 
East Asia, the cultural history of Buddhism in the Asian context, 
archaeology, epigraphy and the economic history of A sia. It will be a 
language-intensive programme, with a focus on Sanskrit, Pali, Prakrit, 
Persian and classical Chinese, among other languages.  
 
 Discussions are on with Ritsumeikan and Kyoto Universities in 
Japan, and Peking University in China, for tie -ups. The University 

 66 
participated in a Workshop on “Historical and Cultural Interaction Between 
China and India,” organized in Beijing in October, 2011. It co -sponsored  a 
“Conference on Revival of Buddhism in Asia” at Singapore in December, 
2011. 
 
 The Univ ersity has held substantive discussions with Yale 
University‟s School of Forestry and Environmental Studies on the latter's 
future collaboration with Nalanda University's School of Ecology and 
Environment Studies. Meetings with the Dean of the School at Ya le, to 
concretize plans, are scheduled for mid-August, 2012. The University is also 
in discussions on collaboration with the International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Centre (CIMMYT) in Mexico, and its South Asian Institute, the 
Borlaug Institute of South Asia (BISA). BISA will actively support the 
scientific component of the School of Ecology and Environment at Nalanda.    
 
 With this in view, University officials have undertaken a number of 
tours abroad to EAS member states, and even outside, to hold disc ussions 
on tie -ups with officials of key institutions. They have participated in a 
number of conferences/seminars to create global awareness about Nalanda 
University.  
 
 The academic planning for the other schools will be undertaken in 
phases, in keeping w ith the scheduled start. The University will endeavour 
to develop the course content and academic structures, in keeping with its 
vision and unique identity.  It will also strive to develop a valuable resource 
for promotion of studies and research in orien tal cultures, as well as the 
literary traditions, languages and civilizations of South East Asia. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Energy Security Unit was set up in 
2007 within existing ITP Division in the Ministry which was upgraded as a 
Division with effect from April 2009. In tune with the mandate of the Division 
for international energy diplomacy Ministry should engage with other 
countries across the region in association with the Ministr y of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas and should explore the possibility for acquisition of energy 
assets abroad and for diversification of supply sources both traditional as 
well as non -traditional energy sources. The Committee strongly urge the 
Government to expe dite the pace of ongoing energy supply project and 
particularly focus upon proactive engagement with neighbouring countries 
on the issue of energy. The Committee are of the opinion that Ministry 
should also facilitate the Government to enter in energy dialogues at various 
multi-lateral forums regarding the policy issues related to international oil 
market. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Energy Security Division, in accordance with its mandate, is 
pursuing a strategy which is in line with the recommendations of the 

 67 
Standing committee. It involves dialogues with energy rich countries, 
diversification of supply sources, strengthening ene rgy relationships with 
neighbouring countries and participation in international forums on energy 
where policies with respect to energy are discussed and formulated. 
 
With respect to International Energy Diplomacy with other countries 
across the regions we  are engaged in structured energy dialogues with 
countries and regions such as USA, Australia, Germany, Japan and EU in 
which the line Ministries such as the Ministries of Petroleum & Natural Gas; 
Coal; Power; New and Renewable Energy etc. are always invol ved. In 
addition, bilateral Joint Working Groups / Joint Commissions are active with 
Algeria, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkmenistan, and 
Venezuela. Apart from these structured dialogues, energy issues are also 
taken up during bilatera l consultations and enjoy a high priority in 
discussions with energy rich countries.  
 
The Energy Security Division assisted the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas in organizing the 3rd India -Africa Hydrocarbon Conference 
2011 held on 9-10 December 2011 in New Delhi. 
 
For acquisition of petroleum and natural gas assets abroad, MEA 
and its Missions are in continuous contact with Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and provide the Ministry and Oil & Gas PSUs information with 
respect to various opportunit ies that arise in the respective jurisdictions of 
the concerned Missions. MEA and its Missions actively assist various 
entities like ONGC Videsh, ICVL and other energy sector PSUs and also 
companies in the private sector, in acquisitions of energy assets a broad. 
We also pursue the acquisition issues with the local governments.  
MEA has encouraged diversification of supplies in the traditional as 
well as non-traditional sectors of energy. As part of diversification of supply 
sources away from the middle -east, MEA is pursuing the stakeholders to 
increase energy supplies from North America [US -Gas & Coal and Canada 
– Oil, Gas & Coal], South America [Venezuela – Oil, Colombia – Oil, Brazil 
– Oil and Trinidad & Tobago – Gas] and Africa [Nigeria – Oil, Angola – Oil, 
Tanzania – Coal and Mozambique – Gas & Coal]. MEA is also promoting 
partnership in non -conventional sources like Shale gas, Coal -Bed Methane 
and Gas hydrates and in renewable energy and energy efficiency. In order 
to diversify the sources of supply of n atural gas, the government is pursuing 
the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India [TAPI] Pipeline Project.  
With respect to neighbouring countries, there is active bilateral 
cooperation with Bangladesh [sale of electricity and inter -grid connectivity], 
Bhutan [construction of hydro -power projects and purchase of electricity], 
Myanmar [assistance in development of its hydro potential], Nepal 
[assistance in development of its hydro potential] and Sri Lanka [inter -grid 
connectivity]. Talks are also underway f or supply of refined petroleum 
products to Pakistan. 
For policy issues related to international oil and energy markets, 
MEA actively takes apart in various multilateral fora like the International 
Energy Forum [IEF], the Joint Organizations Data Initiative  [JODI], the 
International Renewable Energy Agency [IRENA], International Partnership 

 68 
for Energy Efficiency and Cooperation [IPEEC], the Clean Energy 
Ministerial [CEM]. The government has also enhanced its cooperation with 
the International Energy Agency [IEA]. 
The existing mechanisms will be further strengthened as per the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 
 The Committee have been taking note of the various Reports and 
adverse comments and observations made by the C&AG on various issues 
of property management as well as various activities undertaken by the 
Ministry or the organization/institution under it. Th e Committee are 
dismayed to note that there have been several instances of pending C&AG 
Audit Paras. The Committee take note of the setting up of a Standing Audit 
Committee (SAC) to function as the nodal agency of the Ministry to monitor 
and review. The Co mmittee hope that the Ministry uses due diligence in its 
expenditure and should have effective monitoring mechanism in place so as 
to avoid C&AG‟s adverse observations. Further, the Committee desire that 
SAC/Ministry should ensure timely and accurate furni shing of replies to 
C&AG. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Giving due attention to the Committee‟s recommendations and 
directions, the Ministry has been regularly holding meetings of the Standing 
Audit Committee (SAC).  The last SAC meeting was held on 21.02.2012.   
The Ministry has taken a pro -active stand with the objective of exercising 
due diligence in its expenditure and effective monitoring and review of 
C&AG paras.  The SAC, in its last meeting also, impressed upon the 
respective Divisions/Departments of the Ministry, the need for timely and 
expeditious submission of pending ATNs to C&AG.   
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
  

 69 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 The Committee in their previous Reports have taken note of the 
situation arising out of non -availability of interpretation facility from Hindi to 
foreign  languages and vice versa . The Committee also observe that the 
officers in Missions/Posts having working knowledge of Hindi are either not 
available or are not competent enough to handle the job of interpreter 
during the meetings/deliberations of the visiting VIPs/dignitaries. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to reiterate tha t the necessary steps 
should be taken to develop a cadre of interpreters for interpretation from 
Hindi language to foreign languages and vice -versa and such facilities 
should be provided by local Mission/Embassy to the visiting parliamentary 
or other high level delegations from India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry does have an in -house capacity of interpretation from 
Hindi to various other foreign languages and vice versa.  This support is 
rendered by a fairly large number of Hindi speaking officers with training in a 
whole range of foreign languages as part of their compulsory foreign 
language training.  Some of the officers belonging to the specialized 
Interpreters‟ Cadre of the Ministry are also able to provide this facility both 
at the Headquart ers and Missions/Posts abroad.  Many of our Missions 
have people of Indian origin but settled abroad working against local cadre 
posts.  These officials can provide interpretation facilities from the 
concerned foreign language not only to Hindi but also to  some other Indian 
languages and vice versa.  Missions/Posts also maintain contacts with 
members of the Indian diaspora in their respective territories, who could 
render these services, as and when required.  The Ministry regularly 
emphasizes on the need for improving these services and would continue to 
do so with greater vigour.   
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
 
  

 70 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The Committee observe that the aim of Passport Seva Project while 
replacing the existing system of Passport Offices, District Passport Cells 
and Speed Post Centres with the network of Passport Seva Kendra was 
envisaged to make timely and efficient delivery  of passport services. 
However, the Committee note that there is no improvement in the situation 
faced during implementation of the Pilot Project and still the citizens are 
facing tough time in seeking basic information, getting appointments and 
tracking their applications in the newly established Passport Seva Project in 
different parts of the country. All the systems for providing guidance or 
support to the passport seekers have been suddenly withdrawn leaving 
them in limbo. In this transitional phase, su ch chaos defeats the basic 
purpose of embarking upon this ambitious project. The Committee,  
therefore, desire that the Ministry should adopt urgent measures to resolve 
the problems arising at the newly established Passport Seva Kendras 
(PSKs). The shiftin g should be done in phased manner and old 
arrangements to assist/facilitate citizens should be retained for some more 
time with necessary riders.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) The Ministry would like to submit that it is constantly striving to 
improve inf ormation systems, response mechanism   and service delivery 
level. The Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee that all the 
systems for guidance of the applicants are in place. T he Passport Portal 
provides comprehensive and latest information o n passport services as well 
as status of an application, thus enabling anytime -anywhere access. An 
email b ased helpdesk facility and a 24x 7 call center has been set up to 
provide requisite information to citizens in local language.  The Postal 
System (Indi a Post) has  been integrated with PSP System to check the 
delivery status of the Passport.  As soon as passport is dispatched, a 
SMS/e-mail alert is also sent to the applicant informing the Passport 
Dispatch status. 
 
(ii)      As regards delays in getting a ppointments, it is submitted that as  per 
the serving capacity of each Passport Seva Kendra (PSK), online 
appointment slots are opened on daily basis. However, in cases, where 
applicants are not able to obtain online appointments at PSKs, they may 
visit con cerned Regional Passport Office (RPO) in their area. Such 
applicants are required to fill-up the application online, generate „Application 
Reference Number‟ and visit RPO along with printed „ARN Sheet‟. RPOs 
consider such cases and give staggered appointme nts keeping in view the 
load/capacity at the respective PSK under their jurisdiction. Tatkaal and 

 71 
other urgency applications   are given preference in allotting appointments. 
Applicants having confirmed appointments and who are unable to visit PSK 
due to s ome reason, are advised to reschedule/cancel their appointments 
at-least 15 hours prior to the scheduled date/time, so that these 
appointments may be released to other applicants in queue. In case of „no 
show‟ of the applicant on the scheduled day & time, the data captured for 
that applicant   is deleted from the system including ARN number and such 
applicants   are required to fill -up the „data‟ again for obtaining fresh 
appointments.  Since 2nd April 2012, a  window of 15 days has been opened 
to   obtain  appointments. An advisory to this effect has been posted on the 
Passport Portal.  
 
(iii)      The Ministry would also like to assure that transition from the old 
system to the new system is done gradually. Online appointments in the 
new system are gradually increased. Both the systems run concurrently till 
the new system is able to take full load o f passport applicants. There is no 
sudden cut off from the old system. The data from the old system is 
migrated to the new system. Pendency is also cleared side by side.  
 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
  

 72 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
 The Committee express concern at the serious under -resourcing of 
the Ministry of External Affairs, whose staff and budget are not 
commensurate with the scale and range of India‟s external challenges and 
obligations in an increasingly globalized 21 st century world. The Committee 
are not satisfied with the slow pace of implementation of the authorized 
expansion of the personnel of the Ministry and call upon the Ministry to 
recruit external applicants with relevant expertise for lateral entry into the 
Ministry upto and including the Joint Secretary level. In addition, the 
Committee are concerned that the requested level of resources required for 
the Ministry‟s operations, especially in its Embassies and Missions abroad, 
have not been provided and calls upon the Ministry of Finance to e nhance 
the Ministry‟s allocations so as to equip it to fulfil its global responsibilities. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry agrees that given India‟s expanding global role, there is 
need for a matching human resource base so as to carry this mandate 
effectively.  The Government of India and the Ministry of External Affairs 
have been working hard to address this is sue for quite some time.  An 
important outcome of these efforts was the approval of the Union Cabinet 
for a medium term Expansion Plan for the Indian Foreign Service spanning 
over ten years from 2008 to 2018, adding a total of 514 new positions, a 
majority of them being at the diplomatic level.  Four tranches of this 
expansion have already materialized and we are currently in the process of 
seeking approvals for the fifth tranche.  Additionally, we have also 
succeeded in getting approvals for a major expans ion of the IFS[B]  Cadre 
with a net addition of some 380 new posts, many of which would also be at 
the diplomatic level.  These efforts would surely bear fruits over the coming 
years and the results would soon be visible.   
 
The Ministry has always been fu lly conscious of the requirement for 
domain expertise in some specialized fields.  Therefore, most of our large 
Missions abroad have a long tradition of having officers from various line 
Ministries/Departments and Organizations.  The number of these expert s is 
fairly substantial.  This need has grown with India‟s expanding development 
partnerships with other developing countries.  Precisely because of this, the 
IFS Expansion Plan kept a fairly large quota for lateral entry of experts, 
which would eventually  reach a total of 120 additional dedicated positions.  
Under this Plan, the Ministry already has taken an additional strength of 
over 25 officers from specialized services to work at the Headquarters 
through lateral entry.  The Ministry has also taken in e xpertise by way of 
hiring Consultants in specialized fields.  This number is expected to grow.   
 

 73 
Given the nature of our functions, while majority of the non -IFS 
officers at the Headquarters and the Missions/Posts abroad are up to the 
level of Director bu t we certainly operate a reasonable number of these 
posts (around 13) at the level of Joint Secretary, purely in keeping with our 
functional needs.   
 
The expanding responsibilities and cadre strength also needs a 
matching enhancement of financial resources.  The Ministry of External 
Affairs has been trying to introduce a series of cost effective measures and 
management tools as also projecting its budgetary needs in keeping with 
these changing realities. 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
  The Committee have been making regular observations in their 
previous Reports regarding the delay in implementation of e -passport 
project for the general category, which has been a step to check the misuse 
of passports in the curr ent format and also to make it less cumbersome for 
the citizens of the country to obtain it in electronic format. The Committee 
express their concern over the doubtful background of the French Company 
M/s GEMALTO selected to supply the chips for e -passports. The agents of 
the Company as vendor are associated with supply of smart cards to 
Pakistan and on the basis of IB reports matter is pending with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. The Committee, however, note that the matter has been 
taken up with the Ministr y of Home Affairs and MEA has been pursuing the 
matter with other concerned Ministries and Departments. The  Committee 
are hopeful that such inter -Ministerial consultation will help in arriving at a 
concrete decision with due care from all angles. The Comm ittee urge the 
Ministry to continue the efforts to arrive at a final decision especially security  
aspects. The Committee further desire the Ministry to monitor the project 
and furnish quarterly progress of the same to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs, on continuing basis provides 
information about e -passport to the Standing Committee during the 
Parliamentary meetings and briefing meetings. However, as directed,  
Ministry will continue to monitor the  project and fur nish quarterly report to 
the  Committee. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
 The Committee note that the MEA‟s proposed outlay for the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan is `52956.14 crore which is substantially enhanced from the 
last Five Year Plan due to seven new hydro -electric projects in Bhutan. The 
Committee welcome the departure from the earlier funding pattern of inter -
governmental agreement model where Government o f India‟s funding 
commitment was 100%. Now, in four Projects, modalities a re under 

 74 
negotiation for Joint Venture model which will reduce Government of India‟s 
share and outline the obligations of both the Governments. To ensure better 
conception and implementation of the projects, Ministry has also created a 
Development Partnership Administration (DPA). The Committee, therefore, 
hope that the Ministry will be able to get sufficient plan allocation by 
convincing Planning Commission through realistic projections and changes 
in investment and monitoring pattern of the proposed proje cts in Bhutan. 
The Committee would like to be informed about the actual allocation made 
by the Planning Commission and also about the initiatives being taken by 
the Ministry for handling these projects starting from drawing board to its 
execution. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India (GoI) and the Royal Government of Bhutan 
(RGoB) signed an umbrella agreement on cooperation in the hydropower 
sector under which India committed to import 10,000  MW hydropower from 
Bhutan by 2020. Ten HEPs with an est imated capacity of 11,576 MW were 
identified to meet the target. Of the ten projects, the following four projects 
have been identified for execution in the Joint Venture (JV) mode, 
 
1. Chamkharchhu-I (670 MW) 
2. Bunakha (180 MW) 
3. Kholongchhu (486 MW) 
4. Wangchhu (600 MW) 
 
  Negotiations for which are currently under way between Druk Green 
Power Corporation (DGPC) and respective Indian Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs). Five Indian CPSUs – NTPC, NHPC, THDC, SJVNL 
and WAPCOS – have been entrusted w ith the task of preparing Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) for the projects and later assist in the 
implementation of the same as Consultants. 
 
It was decided that for the JV projects, an Inter -Governmental MoU, 
common to all JV projects, would be signed la ying down the broad 
obligations of the two Governments. The detailed Shareholder‟s Agreement 
could then be signed between the JV partners, which would elaborate 
precepts mutually agreed to in the MoU. The JV partners were directed to 
expedite the finalizat ion of the MoU. In this regard a meeting was held 
between SJVN Limited, NHPC and DGPC in Thimpu on 4 th and 5th June to 
finalise the MoU.  
 
Both the sides discussed elaborately on the following issues: 
 
e) Royalty Energy to be provided to Royal Government of Bhutan 
f) Management structure of the Joint Venture Company 
g) Dividend Policy  
h) Terms of reversion of Project 
 

 75 
During the meeting, both the sides committed to finalize the MoU as 
early as possible. If MoU is finalized, it is expected to reduce the financial 
burden of GOI with respect to HEP in Bhutan. 
 
As far as financial allocation for the HEPs in Bhutan, the Ministry 
takes necessary actions to get the sufficient allocation. In inter -Ministerial 
meetings held in PMO to review progress of our cooperation agenda w ith 
Bhutan in the hydropower sector MEA has been drawing attention to the 
fact that allocation of Plan funds for HEPs in Bhutan had been consistently 
lower than projected requirements. MEA has been requesting for 
enhancement of this allocation vide regular  correspondence with Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance. The Plan funds requirement for FY 
2012-13 for India -assisted HEPs in Bhutan is `2185 crore. This has been 
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission as part 
of MEA‟s proposal for Budget Estimates 2012-13. 
 
The fund allocated and utilized with respect to HEPs  under planned 
expenditure for Eleventh FYP is described below 
                                                                                                          (` 
in crore) 
FY Funds 
requested 
BE RE Actual 
utilization 
2011-12 1664.27  680.00 1030.00 1030.00 
2010-11 1479.17  594.00 723.00 723.31 
2009-10 1053.43  401.00 619.00 635.00 
2008-09 413.13  413.00 351.00 349.65 
2007-08 460.92  290.91 201.00 199.96 
 
The Ministry thankfully acknowledges the appreciation of the Hon‟ble 
Committee for its efforts to reduce financial burden on Govt. of India vis -à-
vis the new Hydroelectric Power Projects (HEPs) to be taken up for 
implementation in Bhutan. Preliminary meet ings have already been held in 
the Ministry with the representatives of the EXIM Bank and some PSU 
banks to explore the possibility of raising funds from the Indian capital 
market for the HEPs proposed  under the Joint Venture model. Further, the 
matter has been discussed in detail in a meeting of the Empowered Joint 
Group (EJG) of India and Bhutan held in Thimphu on 11-12 June 2012.  
 
 The Ministry would inform the Hon‟ble Committee of the final 
allocation made to it by the Planning C ommission under the 12 th Five Year 
Plan as well as keep the Committee posted, from time to time, about the 
progress of implementing various projects. 
 
 (File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
 India is currently engaged in construction of three Hydro -Electric 
Power Projects in Bhutan. The Committee are concerned to note that for the 
Punatsangchhu HEP Project, as against the demand of `1000 crore only 
`500 crore have been allocated. Similarly, for Punatsangch hu HEP-II only 

 76 
`160 crore have been allocated against the demand of `969.67 crore. In all 
likelihood the funds will be exhausted by the second quarter itself and even 
if the Ministry gets some additional allocation in Supplementary Demands 
for Grants, it is certainly goin g to slow down the pace of implementation 
causing delay to the project. The Committee take a serious note of this 
issue and urge that such situations should be avoided and sufficient funds 
must be provided atleast to the projects which are in full swing of  
implementation. The Committee think that since India has plans for more 
Projects in Bhutan and that too under Joint -Venture mode, it is all the more 
pertinent for the Government to ensure timely arrangement of adequate 
funds as such situation not only leads to time and cost overrun. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the last Financial Year, allocation of Plan funds was less than 
half of the requested amount . Over 70% of the allocated Plan funds were 
exhausted in the first two quarters of that financial year. The situation was 
duly reported to the Planning commission through EAM‟s letter to the 
Deputy Planning Commission Chairman. Moreover the allocation for these 
projects were exhausted by October 2011 and the Ministry of Finance had 
provided some additional funds of `350 crore at the R.E stage in January 
2012, which was too late to ensure adherence to the schedule. Finance 
Ministry has been duly sensitized a bout this shortage of funds through 
EAM‟s letter to the FM on March 15, 2012. 
  
Again for the annual plan 2012-13, against the projected requirement 
of `3483 crore, only `1500 crore have been allocated. The utilization of 
funds on major HEPs in Bhutan for the Current financial year has been 
described below 
 
Projects Approved 
BE 
(` in crore) 
Actual Expenditure 
(up to  June 15, 
2012)  
(` in crore) 
Percentage of 
allocation exhausted 
Punatsangchhu I 500.00 204.50 40.9% 
Punatsanchhu -II 478.00 155.50 32.5% 
Mangdechhu  160.00 110.00 68.7% 
 
It could be seen from the table that under Mangdechu , more than 
68% of the allocation has been exhausted before the expiry of the first 
quarter. For other two projects also substantive allocation has been utilized. 
 
The Ministry will take appropriate steps this year also to sensitise the 
Finance Ministry and Planning Commission requesting allocation of 
sufficient funds to the projects so that their smooth implementation is not 
hindered and adequate funds are available. 
 
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
 

 77 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 Kaladan Multi-model Transit Project is one of the important ambitious project 
undertaken by the Government of India in Myanmar. The Committee observe that as 
against the projection of `448.33 crore, only `220 crore have been allocated by the 
Planning Commission. The Committee are surprised to note that MEA  submitted the 
enhanced demand for the Project without Cabinet approval. As  rightly pointed out 
by Planning Commission before moving  for an enhanced allocation, MEA should 
have obtained the Cabinet approval. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
approach the Cabinet at the earliest for further approval of the additional required 
funds for the project, so that, additional resour ces may be augmented during the 
Supplementary Demands for Grants in order to avoid any constraint in the progress 
of such an important project. The Committee also take note of the other projects 
undertaken/under consideration in the region. The Committee d esire the Ministry to 
expedite the process for preparation of Detailed Project Report for the trilateral 
highway project to improve access to ASEAN countries directly from India by road. 
The Committee also urge the Ministry to identify such other projects to enhance 
connectivity with the Eastern neighbours. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Detailed Project Report for the road segment of the Kaladan Multi Modal 
Transit Project is currently under preparation by IRCON. Cabinet has approved total 
outlay of `535.91 crore for the project. Of this, upto FY 2011 -12, an amount of 
`72.38 crore has been spent.  On completion of the Detailed Project Report of the 
road segment, clearer cost estimates for the road segment of the project would be 
available, on the basis of which the Ministry of External Affairs would seek Cabinet 
approval for additional funds. 
 
During the Prime Minister‟s visit to Myanmar in May 2012, Government of 
India‟s assistance was announced for the upgradation of the Kalewa -Yargyi road 
segment of t he Trilateral Highway to highway standard. This project would help in 
establishing trilateral connectivity from Moreh in India to Mae Sot in Thailand via 
Myanmar. The pre -feasibility report on the Kalewa -Yargyi- Monywa road has been 
obtained from the Myan mar side with a view to finalizing the DPR for the Kalewa -
Yargyi road. Besides, during the visit of the Prime Minister, an Air Service 
Agreement was signed between the two sides which would enhance direct air 
connectivity and facilitate business interactio n, tourism and people -to people 
exchanges. Both sides also agreed to set up a Joint Working Group on Railways to 
determine the technical and commercial feasibility of cross -border rail links between 
the two countries.   
(File No. AA/PARL/125/125/2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                       ANANTH KUMAR, 
28 August, 2012                                                                                      Chairman,  
Bhadrapada 06, 1934 (Saka)               Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 78 
Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 28TH AUGUST, 2012  
   
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „E‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
5. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
6. Dr. Bhola Singh 
7. Dr. Shashi Tharoor,  
RAJYA SABHA 
8.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
9.  Dr. Bharatkumar B. Raut 
10. Dr. Karan Singh 
11. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
12.  Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
  

 79 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee the n took up for consideration the draft  Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 14th 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Exter nal Affairs for the year 2012 -13. The Chairman in vited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft 
Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized 
the Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report in corporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

 80 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FOURTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                   28 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2,3,7,8,10-12, and 15-28. 
 Total-21 
 
Percentage:  75% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4.  
Total-01 
 Percentage: 03.57% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 5.  
Total- 01 
 
 Percentage: 03.57% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,6,9,13 and 14  
Total-05 
Percentage: 17.86% 
 
 
  