 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[ Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages : 
Scheme for providing legal/financial assistance/ rehabilitation to Indian Women 
deserted by their Overseas Indian spouses” ] 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2013 / Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2012-2013) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
21 
 

 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[ Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages : 
Scheme for providing legal/financial assistance/ rehabilitation to Indian Women 
deserted by their Overseas Indian spouses” ] 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25th May, 2013 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7th August, 2013 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7th August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2013 / Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. 105_ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (____________ Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2012-2013………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (v)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           24 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       33 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            34 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………               38 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting of the Committee                      
held on 09.05.2013………………………………………………       46 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                           
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….        48 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2012-2013) 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Member 
   1.       Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
             
                Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  
3.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
4.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
5.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
6.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
7.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
8.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
9.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
10.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
11.  Shri M.B. Rajesh  
12.  Shri J. Ramesh  
13.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
14.  Shri Elangovan T.K.S.  
15.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18. Dr. Girija Vyas 
19.  Shri Sultan Ahmed * 
20.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari @ 
21. Vacant $ 
  

                                      
                Rajya Sabha 
  
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Shri D. P. Tripathi  
31 
 
Smt. Ambika Soni# 
 
                               SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3. Shri Vikas Gachli  - Executive Assistant 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Manish Tewari ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his appointment of as Minister of State w.e.f . 28.10.2012 and Shri 
Sultan Ahmed is nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012. 
 
@ Dr. Shashi Tharoor ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his appointment of as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 and Shri 
Inder Singh Namdhari is nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012 . 
 
$ Shri Nama Nageswara Rao ceased to be Member of the Committee 
consequent upon change of nomination to Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 
13.12.2012.  
 
#  Smt. Ambika Soni has been nominated to the Committee vice Dr. M. S. 
Gill who has been nominated to the Committee on Urban Development 
w.e.f. 27th December, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 12-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 21st 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 15th Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 
“Problems relating to Overseas Indian Ma rriages : Scheme for providing legal/financial 
assistance/ rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by their Overseas Indian spouses” 
 
2. The 15th Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12 th July, 
2012 and presented to Lok Sabha & laid in Rajya Sabha on 14 th August, 2012. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Report were received on 1st March, 2013 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 9th May, 2013. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 15th  Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
09 May,  2013                                                                       Chairman,                
19 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(v)                                         

1 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in their Fifteenth Report on the subject  “Problems relating to Overseas Indian 
Marriages: Sch eme for providing legal/financial assistance to Indian women 
deserted by their overseas Indian Spouses” was presented to Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha on 12 th July, 2012 and presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in Rajya Sabha on 
14th August, 2012.  
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in the report.  
These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
 Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 16, 21, 22 & 23  
 Total-09 
 
 (ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
         Recommendation Nos. - NIL 
Total- 00 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 4, 5, 17, 18 & 20 
Total- 05 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. – 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 24, 25, 26 & 27 
 
                                                                         Total-13 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the  
recommendation/observations for which only interim replies have been given by the 
government should be furnished within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 

2 
 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations. 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
5.         While going into the details of the agencies dealing with the issue of NRI marriages, the 
Committee had found that various Ministries of the Government of India like Overseas Indian 
Affairs, External Affairs, Women and Child Development and  Home Affairs and also the 
National Commission for Women, the Human Rights Commission, State Governments, State 
Commissions for Women were also concerned with the issue of providing timely relief to the 
victims of such marriages.  The Committee were, howev er, constrained in noting that in absence 
of any defined coordination mechanism amongst the various agencies, no satisfactory results had 
come out so far.  It had all the  more disturbing to observe that MOIA being the nodal Ministry 
for all matters relati ng to Overseas Indians and the National Commission for Women (NCW) 
being the nominated coordinating agency at the national level to receive and process all the 
complaints related to Indian Women deserted by overseas Indian husbands, had  been  working 
independently for the same cause without the desired coordination wit h each other.  Doubtless, 
they we re creating awareness but using separate methods and materials . MOIA extended  
financial and legal assistance through Missions/Posts abroad in the countries where there were 
large number of cases of desertion/divorce by NRI husband s, whereas NRI Cell of NCW helped 
in facilitating action on the complaints of such woman victims by coo rdinating with the relevant 
agencies.  MOIA also forwarded  the complaints received in the Ministry in  that regard to the 
State Governments/NCW and other Ministries for appropr iate action.  The Committee did no t 
approve that state of confusion where the vic tims of such marriages ha d to approach different 
agencies for different kind of assistance.  Since t he aggrieved women need ed immediate and 
respectable solution to their problems,   the Committee, had recommended that Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs, Mi nistry of External Affairs and NCW in coordination with other 
agencies should develop an effective mechanism to provide a single window timely  solution to 
the problems of affected women.  The Committee had further desire d that an inter -ministerial 
Coordination Committee should be set up for better  monitoring of the welfare measures being 
undertaken in this regard.  The Committee had also desired that  Ministry of External Affairs 
should issue a well -framed practice directions or protocol in conjunction with MOIA and 
Ministry of Women and Child Development directing the embassies and foreign missions to 
provide meaningful consular assistance to such unfortunate abandoned NRI brides. 
 
6. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“In compliance of the recommendation of the Committee, an Inter -ministerial Coordination 
Committee(IMCC)  consisting of officials from M/o External Affairs , National 
Commission for Women, M/o Woman & Child Development, M/o Law & Justice and M/o 
Home Affairs was constituted on 21.8.2012. 
 
First meeting of the IMCC was held on 10.9.2012 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, 
MOIA and all the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee were 
discussed in detail for their impleme ntation.   Next meeting to review the progress is 
scheduled for the end of February 2013.” 

3 
 
 
7. The Committee are satisfied to note  that in compliance to the  recommendation  of 
the Committee , an Inter-Ministerial Coordination C ommittee (IMCC) consisting o f 
Officials from M/o External Affairs, National C ommission for Women, M/o Women & 
Child Development, M/o Law & Justice and M/o Home Affairs has been constituted  since 
August, 2012 and in their first meeting they have discussed all the recommendations of t he 
Committee for implementation. The Committee hope that the inter -Ministerial Committee 
would sincerely follow up the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee 
and work for better monitoring of the welfare measure s for affected women of NRI 
marriages. The Committee , however, desire that th e Inter-Ministerial Coordination 
Committee should regularly review and initiate coordinated action with whole gamut of 
problems related to the issues of NRI marriages and the welfare of the women and 
reconciliation a s well as  rehabilitation of the victims of  such marriages.  The Committee, 
further desire that in such coordinated efforts , the participation of S tate Governments 
where more such cases are reported should also be ensured during such reviews .  The 
Committee should be regularly updated about the outcome of such coordinated efforts in 
the matter. 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
 
8.         In view of reports of several cases of contrac ting multiple marriages, the Committee had 
opined that such cases  happened due to non -availability of information about such erring 
husbands or habitual NRI offenders who contract multiple marriages.  The Committee, had 
therefore, desired that to prevent such incidents, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in 
conjunction with respective State Governments should maintain separate effective link on the 
website of the Ministry containing all the pamphlets relating to NRI marriages and other relevant 
information along with the details of such erring NRI husbands and habitu al NRI offenders who 
had entered into multiple marriages.  The Committee were confident that availability of such 
information on website would certainly act as a major deterrent and more importantly a source of 
information/caution to general members of public for preventing them from marrying a dishonest 
NRI groom, who is already guilty of escaping from the clutches of law after contracting multiple 
marriages on the Indian soil.  The Committee had also desired that for the benefit of th e people 
of all regio ns of the C ountry, whole information  should be available in all major regional 
languages on one link. 
 
 
 

4 
 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
 
“The website of MOIA contains the relevant information o n the scheme and assistance 
provided by MOIA. The information is updated from time to time. 
  
In the 6th Annual Consultation meeting with State Governments held on 20-21 September 
2012, the participating State Government officials were further sensitized and requested 
to upload the details of such grooms on their websites.” 
 
 
10. The Committee observe  that the website of MOIA contains the information and 
details on the scheme  of MOIA  and the assistance being provided by them  under the 
scheme.  Howeve r, it still lacks the information  regarding the erring grooms or h abitual 
NRI offenders who contract mul tiple marriages.  The Ministry has simply sensitized the 
State Governments on the same issue during annual Consultation meeting without any 
further follow up.  The Committee, therefore, desire that MOIA should continuously  
persuade the State Governments to  upload this information on websites on priority basis  
so that people’s awareness in that regard may  prevent them from marrying such 
dishonest/erring grooms responsible for multiple marriages and spoiling the life of several 
girls. States should also be a sked to update this information on regular basis to make it 
relevant. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
11.          The Committee had observed that the National Commission for Women (NCW) had  
been nominated as the Coordinating agency at the national level to receive and process all the 
complaints related to Indian women deserted by their Overseas Indian husbands.  Accordingly, a 
„NRI Cell‟ was launched in NCW to render assistance to victims of  NRI marriages and the Cell 
had been assigned almost all the responsibilities starting from lodging of complaints to providing 
all possible legal and financial assistance, networking with national and international NGOs, 
coordination with all concerned Ministries/State Governments, analysis of legal treaties and give 
advice to the Government, encouragement/support for enactment of new legislation, 
management of laws of other countries etc.  The Committee was however, anguished in noting 
that there was no separate demarcated staff for the NRI Cell and no specific budget ha d been 
allocated for that Cell.  Without any fund, the  Cell was not in a position to provide any financial 
assistance to victims of such marriages.  The Committee had deplored the casual approach of the 
NCW in handling such sensitive and important issue where in the name of disposal, only 30 
cases stood closed since inception, against 813 complaints  received.  On the ground, NCW was 
giving the support to the victims simply by following up the  cases by sending correspondence to 
the concerned agencies and followed them with reminders.  As a matter of fact, the victims were 
not getting any support in the matter due to poor response from Missions/Posts or State 

5 
 
Governments on the cases forwarded t o them.  The Committee  had, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry of Women and Child Development should provide sufficient 
number of separate staff for the NRI Cell of NCW along with adequate separate fund allocation 
from the current year itself to enable the NCW in handling very important and sensitive 
responsibility assigned to them relating to abandoned and aggrieved women.  The Committee 
had also desire d that NCW in consultation with the  Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and 
other agencies, should hold regular review meetings with an objective to improve the response 
from Missions/Posts and State Governments so that maximum number of victims got quick and 
timely response and help from the designated coordinating agency. 
 
12. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has submitted the following action taken reply: 
 
“Two Coordinators (one to look into complaints and other to look into related Policy 
matters), a Counselor, a Research Assistant and a typist are assigned to deal with the 
work of the NRI Cell of NCW.  
 
In the NCW, 30 cases closed out of 813 cases received does not reflect that only 30 cases 
have been taken up out of 813 complaints received. 
  
NRI Cell of NCW takes up 100% complaints registered with it and takes suitable action 
on each and every complaint registered. The complaints which have not been closed  have 
been taken up for suitable action and are considered pending for various reasons. “ 
 
 
13. The Committee are surprised to note that NRI Cell of National Commission for 
Women (NCW) comprises only two coordinators, one consular, one  Research Assistant 
and one typist to handle such sensitive and important responsibilities assigned to them .  
The Committee also criticize the unsatisfactory approach show n by NCW in submitting 
the action taken reply on the issue of disposal and pendency of cases registered with them.  
They have also not found it essential to respond on the issue of allocation of separate funds 
for this Cell to handle a large number of responsibilities assigned to them as the nominated 
coordinating agency at national level for welfare of victims of NRI marriages.  NCW is not 
supposed to fulfill their responsibilities by just forwarding the com plaints to the State 
Governments and Missions/Posts.  Rather for a quick and timely response and desired 
help to those victims they have to play a proact ive and major role  in coordination with 
other concerned agencies .  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that NRI Cell of 
the NCW should be provided with sufficient number of staff along with separate Budget 
allocation proportionate to the important responsibility assigned to them so that they may 
be able to provide every type of timely help to the victims of NRI marriages. 

6 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
14.        When the girls married to NRIs either with their own high flying wishes or with  the 
wishes of their parents a re deserted, they face trauma of failed marriage as it leads to a lot of 
economic, social and psychological problems.  Economic helplessness and lack of 
communication with the husband and at the same time non -receipt of money coupled with 
problems created by in -laws makes her a prey for exploitation.  In Committee‟s view, there was 
an urgent need of rehabilitation of such affected women by giving them some vocational 
training, if needed, or financial assistance for education, c ounseling and consultancy.  The 
Committee, therefore, had strongly recommend ed that the National Commission for Women 
being the coordinating agency in the matter and their involvement in the welfare of women 
should incorporate these activities as essential  responsibilities of NRI Cell.  The Committee had 
also desire that Ministry of Women and Child Development should apportion sufficient fund 
from the h ead of welfare of women for that  purpose and NCW should be strengthened by 
providing sufficient number of experts capable to handle these responsibilities.  The Committee 
had further desire that the awareness material prepared by the Ministry should contain all the 
details relating to such facilities available with NCW for the benefit of such unfortunate girls  and 
their parents. 
 
15. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
 
“As far as NCW‟s mandate is concerned, the Commission is a recommendatory body for 
matters pertaining to women‟s rights. Hence there are no schemes administered by NCW 
including any specific scheme to provide safe rehabilitation of women deserted by NRI 
husbands. As per its mandate NCW gives advice and recommendations to the 
Government on any policy or issue relating to the NRI marriages, as it does for other 
areas of concern.  
 
 Also in the NRI Cell of NCW there is a provision for a counselor who provides h elp in 
the form of pre-counselling to the prospective Indian bride marrying a NRI/PIO spouse or 
post-counselling to the deserted Indian women by NRI/Overseas spouses, when 
approached.” 
 
 
16. The Committee are annoyed to note the reply given by the Government mentioning the 
mandate of National Commission for Women (NCW) regarding women’s rights .  The  
Committee are very much  aware  of the role of NCW as a recommendatory body for 
matters pertaining to women’s right s but as the nodal agency on the  issues relating to NRI 
marriages, its role may certainly not be limited only to give advice and recommendation for 
the policy matters pertaining to this subject.  That is why the Committee had desired that 

7 
 
as a nodal coordinating agency in the matter, the NCW should take a lead by incorporating 
the activities like education, counseling and consultancy in the functions of NRI Cell  and 
prepare a comprehensive scheme for the rehabilitation of women deserted in  NRI 
marriages and the scheme should be fully funded and  implemented by the parent Ministry 
of NCW responsible for welfare of women i.e. Ministry of Women & Child Development 
through NCW.  
 The  Committee, therefore, strong ly reiterate their views in this regard  and desire 
that a welfare scheme for rehabilitati on of the deserted women in NRI Marriages  with an 
objective to facilitate to restart their normal life on repatriation must be prepared and 
implemented  by the Women and Child Development  Ministry/NCW  with specific funds 
allocated and provided by the Mini stry of Women and Child Development.    NCW should 
take up the issue during the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee (IMCC) meetings if 
they require any assistance/support from other concerned Ministries in the matter. 
            
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
17. The Committee, had expressed a strong view that if we we re actually serious enough to 
help the people, we should have to make sincere efforts to prevent them from being trapped into 
such net and not after they have had problems.  The Committee, had also felt that in addition to 
publication of pam phlets and other material more w as to be done by NCW on awareness front.  
The Committee, had therefore, desire d that the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
should sensi tize the young generation on tho se issues by organizing seminars in colleges and 
high schools, particularly in Girls Schools/Women‟s Colleges.  The Committee had expected that 
administrations of the Universities or high schools would be persuaded through State 
Governments and Ministry of the Human Resource Development to facilitate such efforts. 
 
18. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
 
 
“In compliance of this recommendation MOIA has organized two debates as follows: 
(i)  In association with Women‟s Studies and Development Centre, University of 
Delhi   a debate was organized in the Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business 
Studies , University of Delhi on 24.9.2012; 
 

8 
 
(ii) In association with the Centre for Study of Indian Diaspora, Unive rsity of 
Hyderabad, a debate was organized in the University of Hyderabad Campus on 
6.10.2012. 
 
  Both these debates received enthuastic response from the students in the two 
Universities and were also covered by the media. Thus the events succeeded in 
generating a lot of awareness. 
 
 Similarly, NCW organized a National Seminar in collaboration with Punjab 
Police to address the problems relating to NRI/Overseas marriages in Jalandhar, Punjab 
on 30 th May 2012 wherein NCW publications in Punjabi language were  widely 
circulated.  
 
 In an attempt to provide available legal and other remedies to Indian women 
trapped in such marriages NCW has published an informative booklet “Abandoned 
Indian Women Trapped in NRI Marriages” in English, Hindi and Punjabi. 
       
 NCW is making efforts to publish  information brochure and booklets  on the 
subject in regional languages of different states. NCW has written to the concerned State 
Governments to take the initiative to jointly publish it in the regional language of the 
concerned States. Kerala Police and Punjab police are circulating this informative 
brochure in the regional languages. 
      
 NCW has widely circulated its publications on NRI marriages namely “Nowhere 
Brides-A report on NRI Marriages”; “Problems relating to  NRI Marriages -Dos and 
Don‟ts”; and booklet  “Abandoned Indian Women Trapped in NRI Marriages”, in several 
workshops and seminars conducted by NCW all over the country.” 
  
 19. The Committee  appreciate the good beginning made by MOIA and NCW in  
arranging  debates and seminars on the issues related to NRI marriages and circulation of 
awareness materials in regional languages  during these programmes  and welcome the 
enthusiastic response of younger generation thereto .  However, the Committee desire that 
similar efforts should continue  in future also and  MOIA and NCW should organize more 
such debates/seminars/workshops in a planned way particularly at Girls Schools/Colleges 
especially in the states facing more cases of trapping  of women with a reach of awareness 
campaign at the grass root level . For that purpose the assistance and cooperation from the 
State Governments and Ministry of HRD should also be obtained appropriately. 
 

9 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
20.  While going into the details of recommendations of t he Inter-Ministerial Committee it 
may be noted that all the State/UT authorities were communicated about the decision that all 
marriages solemnized in India should be compulsorily registered as per a uniform pro -forma for 
registration containing informatio n of social security number, passport particulars, ID Card/ 
Labour Card etc. to build a proper identification and tracking system.  The Committee find that 
only few States have given response to this decision and very little has been done in this regard.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that MOIA should take up the matter particularly with the State 
Governments at the highest level where more number of such cases are reported so that the 
registration of marriages containing all desired information is imple mented at the earliest.  If the 
uniform pro-forma has not been finalized so far, it should be finalized without any further delay 
in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice and supplied to those States.  The Committee 
should be informed about the progress in this regard on quarterly basis.   
 
21. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“As already stated, 25 State Governments   and 6 Union Territories have reported that it 
is being done.” 
 
22. The Committee have been informed that 25 states and 6 Union Territories have 
reported that the compulsory registration of marriages is being done.  However, from the 
reply of the Government, it is not clear whether the States have started implementing the 
decision of making registration of marriages solemnized in those states as per uniform pro-
forma prepared by MOIA in consultation with those states and Ministry of Law and 
Justice or with some other method . The Committee, therefore, desire that the Governm ent 
should ensure that registration of all NRI marriages solemnized in India should 
compulsorily be registered as per the finalized uniform  pro-forma for registration 
containing specific information  about the couples to bu ild a proper identification and 
tracking system.  The Committee should be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
23. The Committee had noted that there was an agreement that litigations in such cases 
should be taken up by fast track courts within the scope of the existing family courts along with a 
mechanism for regular m onitoring of such cases. In that  regard, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
had issued circulars to ensure that FIRs in such marriage disputes/ problems should be registered 
without any delay.   But the Committee  had found  that the State Governments of U.P. and 
Andhra Pradesh only ha d forwarded tho se communications to their judiciary  for appropriate 
action.  The Committee, had therefore, desire d that the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs/NCW should ensure  an early implementation of that  decision in all the States/UTs in 
conjunction with the Ministry of Law & Justice.  The Committee had desired to be informed 
about the progress and achievements made in that regard. 
 
 

10 
 
24. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
 “Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) is pursuing the matter with the 
Department of Justice, M/o Law and Justice.” 
 
25. The Committee find that the Ministry has submitted a stereo type reply without any 
reference of the exact response of each state Government to the circular issued by Ministry 
of Home Affairs to the stat e Governments asking them to ensure that FIRs in such 
marriage disputes should be registered without any d elay because  in Committee’s view , 
this is the first important step in the legal processes if the Government wants to support the 
affected women of such marriages.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that  MOIA must 
not only pursue the department of Law & Justice but also the Home Ministry so that all the 
State Governments & UTs  initiate a prompt action on the guidelines issued by MHA and 
the objective of bringing such cases under the fast t rack courts and regular monitor ing is 
achieved appropriately.  The Committee should be informed about the outcome of such 
efforts made by MOIA.  
 
(Recommendation No. 10 & 13)) 
 
26.     The Committee had also ob served that as agreed, serving of notices, summons and 
enforcement of maintenance orders were to be made part of the Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaties (MLAT) especially with USA, UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand where the 
problem of desertion of Indian  women by overseas Indians is acute. The issue was still under 
examination in the CPV Division in the Ministry of External Affairs.  The Committee had 
desired that it should to be expedited and reported back to this Committee within three months‟ 
time. 
 
27. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has submitted the following action taken reply:  
 
“MOIA has written to its Missions in these five countries to facilitate meetings with the 
concerned State Departments in these countries. Based on this proposal, dates for meeting 
were received from the Canadian Government. However as the dates proposed wer e falling 
during the Winter session of Parliament, alternate dates have been requested.  
 
 Our Missions in the other concerned countries are also being pursued for initiating 
consultations in this regard.” 

11 
 
 
28. The Committee had further note d that the Inter -Ministerial Committee had agreed that 
appropriate bilateral agreements w ould be considered with foreign countries with a view to 
protect the interests of Indian women  victims of overseas Indian marriages. It was suggested that 
a team of of ficers from Ministries of External Affairs, Law and Justice, Women and Child 
Development and Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should visit USA, Canada, UK, Australia 
and New Zealand to hold discussions on the issue with the concerned local authorities a nd 
determine the clauses which could be incorporated in the proposed agreements to assist the 
affected Indian women.  The Committee we re surprised to note that the feasibility  report of 
bilateral agreement wa s still pending and no satisfactory pr ogress had been made so far.  The 
views of territorial divisions of the concerned Ministries had also not been obtained till date. The 
Committee had, therefore, desire d that a matter should be taken at the appropriate diplomatic 
level for an early finalization of the clauses to be incorporated in the proposed agreement.   
 
29. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
 
“It is relevant to state that even in the past, a team of MOIA officials had gone to USA 
for generating awareness and publicity about the launch of the scheme and consultations 
with NGOs/Women‟s Organizations for taking their views on addressing the problems of 
failed / fraudulent NRI Marriages.  
In compliance of this recommendation, MOIA has again written to its Missions in 
these five countries to facilitate meetings with the concerned State Departments in these 
countries. 
  
 Based on this proposal, dates for meeting were also received from the Canadian 
Govt. However as the dates proposed were falling dur ing the Winter session of 
Parliament, alternate dates have been requested.  
 
          Our Missions in other concerned countries are also being pursued for facilitati ng 
consultations in this regard.” 
 
 
30. The Committee are not satisfied with the progress made so far in the direction of 
finalizing the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLAT) with USA, UK, Canada, Australia 
and New Zealand which is very important to protect the interests of Indian women victims 
of Overseas marriages in these countrie s.  The Committee, therefore, desire that MOIA 
should pursue the matter with the Indian Missions seriously so that consultations conclude 
in the shortest possible time and the  agreements are finalized at the earliest .  The 
Committee should be informed regularly about the progress made in that regard. 
 

12 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 
31. The Inter Ministerial Committee had also decided t hat information Brochure in that  
regard should be prepared by experts having knowledge of Private International Law on the 
working of the relevant Hague Conventions and procedures that was to be followed by the 
general public regarding serving of notices, summons etc. to the parties staying abroad foll owed 
by launching a campaign to make the general public and also the  concerned officers aware of 
those provisions. But the Committee  had noted that no further progress ha d been made so far in 
that regard after sending a reference to the Department of Legal  Affairs, Ministry of Women and 
Child Development and NCW.  The Committee, had therefore, desired that initiatives should be 
taken by MOIA to expedite the matter along with Coordinating Agency and Committee should 
be informed about the progress made in that regard. 
 
32. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have submitted the 
following status: 
 
“To update the Information Brochure, suggestions were sought from the concerned 
Ministries and Agencies. 
 
In this regard reminder has been issued to concerned Ministries and the item will be 
further taken as agenda in the next Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee Meeting is 
being scheduled for the end of February 2013.” 
 
 
33. The Committee are surprised to note that too much time is being taken in  
preparation of Information Brochure with valid information on Private International Law 
on the working of the relevant Hague conventions and notices, summons etc. to be issued to 
the involved parties staying abroa d.  Moreover, there is no mention of any participation of 
experts having knowledge of private International Law on the working of the relevant 
Hague conventions and procedures  in preparation of the Brochure .  The Committee , 
therefore, desire that b rochure should be prepared/updated  on the basis of the suggestions 
received from the concerned Ministries/Agencies/experts at the earliest.  
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
34.   The Inter-Ministerial Committee was also in agreement over the decisions that States/Union 
Territories should pass on information regarding court orders against accused NRIs to 
Emigration Authorities to prevent such people from leaving India against court orders. That 
decision was conveyed to all Chief Secretaries of State/Union Territories and Ministry of Home 

13 
 
Affairs.  Circulars in the matter were issued to all State Governments/UTs. But, the decision was 
not being implemented on ground level.  The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should en sure 
that implementation of that decision started immediately.   
 
35. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
 
”State Governments have been requested again in the 6 th Annual Consultation Meeting 
with States Governments held in Delhi on 20th -21st September 2012, in Delhi. 
 
     This is being pursued actively with the State Governments.”  
 
36. From the reply of the Ministry, it is evident that the State Governments have not 
been taking initiatives to pass on the court order against any accused NRIs to the 
Emigration Authorities to prevent their escape.  The Committee do not find any specific 
reason for not implementing the decision as conveyed to the State Governments.   The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should not  restrict itself only in writing and 
reminding the state Governments in the matter but they should pursue the matter until all 
the States start implementing the decisio n of the Int er-Ministerial Committee in that  
regard. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
37.          The Committee had observed that all the decisions taken by the Central Government on 
the issues relating to NRI marriages were being conveyed to the State Governments for further 
action but the response of the State Governments was not very enthusiastic.  The victims residing 
in different parts of a particular State were also not able to follow their cases by visiting the state 
capital frequently.  The Committee,  had therefore, desire d that, the State Governments of the 
states from where more number of people reside abroad and the problem of desertion is acute, 
should be asked to appoint/nominate nodal officers at district level f or a regular monitoring of 
such cases and also for the benefit of such victims. The Committee had also desired that names, 
addresses and phone numbers of such nodal officers should be made available on the website of 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and  the National Commission for Women and also be 
included in all the printed regional language pamphlets. 
 
38. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“These have been reiterated to the State Governments in the 6 th Annual Consultation 
Meeting with State Governments held on 20th -21st September 2012 in Delhi. 
 
     This is being pursued actively with the State Governments.” 

14 
 
39. In the reply given by the Ministry , there is a reference of conveying the views of the 
Committee to the State Government s during the Annual consultation meeting with the 
State Governments held in September but , surprisingly there is no mention of response 
from any State Government on the issue  of the appointment of Nodal Officers at the 
State/District levels where the cases of NRI Marriages are maximum and t he cases of 
desertion are acute.   Such approach of the Ministry in the matter may not be treated as an 
active persuasion on their part .  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the M inistry 
should seriously take up the matter at the highest level for appointment of  Nodal Officers 
particularly in those States where NRI marriages are largely prevalent and desertion is 
acute.  This information should properly be notified on the sites of MOIA and NCW so that 
the victims do not face difficulty following their cases  at the nearby location .   The 
Committee desire to be updated on the progress made in this regard.             
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
          
40. The Committee we re not satisfied with the initiatives taken by the Missions/Posts and 
Passport Issuing Authorities regarding impounding and revocation of passports of the offending 
NRI husbands.  The Committee  had felt that a significant help must  be provided to the affected 
women through an effective implementation of the provisions of Section 10 (3) h of the passport 
Act, 1967.   The Committee  had, therefore, strongly recommend ed that the Passport Authorities 
should be asked to play a pro-active role in such matter and use their discretion under this section 
by taking immediate action to impound/revoke the passport of such e rring passport holders if it 
was brought to their notice that the passport holder who had  been issued warrant or summons 
was not cooperating with the court by presenting himself before it as desired. 
 
41. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“The matter is being pursued with MEA.” 
 
 

15 
 
42. The Committee are anguished to note that the Ministry has not been able to pursue 
the Ministry of External Affairs to ensure impounding and revocation of passports of erring 
grooms by the Passport authorities/ Missions/Posts by issuing strict instructions to them for 
effective implementation of the provisions of Section 10(3)h of the Passport Act, 1967 . The 
Committee, therefore, desire that  MOIA should actively pursue the matter with MEA so 
that under the instructions of MEA the Passport authorities can start using their discretion 
under Section 10(3)h of the Passport Act, 1967 without any further delay.    
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
43.          The Committee had found that the financial assistance under the scheme of MOIA was 
for defraying initial legal expenses of docu mentation and preparatory work for filing the case by 
empanelled NGO etc. only.  It d id not even include lawyers‟ fees w hich supposed to be met by 
the NGOs who had on their panel the lawyers who rendered such services pro bono.  It was more 
surprising to note that the rehabilitation of women in distress had still not been made a part of the 
recently revised scheme of MOIA.  In such cases, the deserted women require d shelter and other 
urgent assistance for their s ustenance and only then they could  think abou t taking any legal 
action against the err ing husbands.  The Committee had  a clear view that the temporary 
assistance being provided to them as emergency measure through Indian Workers Resource 
Centre and through Indian Community W elfare Fund in the Mission s did not serve the purpose 
of those abandoned women who had  to undertake a long legal fight in a foreign country.  The 
Committee had, therefore, desire d that the provisions for rehabilitation and counseling of such 
women should also be incorporated under the ambit of the revised scheme under which, the 
Indian embassies should be empowered to provide crisis assistance and support to such brides in 
distress outside India through appropriate mechanism.  They should also be directed to extend all 
necessary legal and monetary support and shelter as per their requirement.  
 
44. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
 
“Presently 27 Indian Women‟s Organizations/Indian Community Associations/NGOs in 
7 countries, namely, USA, Qatar, Australia, Canada, Bahrain, New Zealand,  and UK are 
empanelled with Indian Missions / Posts abroad  to provide legal/financial assista nce to 
Indian women deserted by their overseas spouses.  
 
Missions also provide crisis assistance and support to such Indian women in distress.” 
 
45. The Committee express their concern over the such cool response of  the Ministry on 
their suggestion for inclusion of provision s for counseling and rehabilitation of women in 
distress as a part of the existing scheme of MOIA.  The Committee’s basic intent was that 

16 
 
Indian Missions concerned should first of all help the deserted/ abandoned Indian women 
physically and mentally, thereafter, the financial and legal assistance along with all possible 
help for their stay at that place should be provided till they reach their home town safe and 
sound.  Only with s uch endeavor, the MOIA can save the already tormented women from 
running to various quarters for help in the foreign land where she is deserted.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the welfare schemes of MOIA should be made more 
practical by incorporating the provisions of rehabilitation and counseling under the ambit 
of the scheme along with  financial empowerment to Embassies/Missions to  provide such 
need based assistance. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 
46. The Committee were of the opinion that apart from various efforts being made by 
Missions/Posts to help  the victims of NRI marriages, there wa s a need to develop a mechanism 
for quick tracking of concerned NRIs/PIOs in a case of desertion.  The Committee had, therefore, 
desired that Missions/Posts should be provided separate funds for location of such perso ns 
through agencies available for s uch purposes.  Missions/Posts might also undertake that  work 
involving reputed NGOs and other linguistic civil societ y organizations, which had  their 
branches or official links in other prominent countries. Assistance o f these NGOs/Civil societies 
might also be taken in verifying the antecedents of groom(s) and get their suggestion for any 
proposed NRI marriage. Their volunteers in the different cities across the globe should also be 
asked not only to help the victims, but  also support in tracing the whereabouts of such grooms. 
To make that effective, the Ministry and NGOs must have a holistic approach to extend a helping 
hand to victims of desertion and also to prevent such repetition.  
 
47. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have only stated as 
under: 
 
 “The recommendation has been noted.” 
 
 
48. The Committee are not at all happy with the vague reply of the Ministry with 
regard to development of a  mechanism for quick tracking of the concerned NRI marriage 
defaulters in case of desertion/abandonment.  The Committee’s intention is to make use of 
the infrastructure of the Indian  Missions abroad for tracking  or isolating the named 

17 
 
defaulters of NRI marr iages by their direct help or through the Indian Societies/ 
Organizations or  through the  foreign NGOs or directly through the employer s of the 
defaulters. 
 The Committee , therefore, desire that such mechanism should be developed with 
support of MEA so that antecedents of prospect ive grooms could be verified before the 
marriage or in case of desertion , the tracking of such defaulter grooms is possible with the 
help of our Embassies/Mis sions abroad. The Committee would like  to be apprised of the 
latest developments in this regard  along with the details of separate funds allocated to the 
Missions/Posts for that purpose.  
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
49. The Committee had felt that defending a matrimonial battle abroad sitting in India is an 
impossible task.  Moreover, issue of visa wa s also very difficult and time -taking.  The 
Committee had, therefore, desired that such foreign missions in India should also be requested to 
simplify the procedure for quick issuance of visa to deserted women to enable them to contest 
the proceedings filed by NRI/PIO husband in a foreign land.  These M issions might  also be 
requested to introduce a system of cross check, when a NRI/PIO husband wants to cancel 
sponsorship of his sp ouse„s visa.  The Committee had  a view that cancellation should not be 
permitted as long as dependency of the aggrieved woman continues as per Indian law s o as to 
enable her to continue to stay and contest proceedings in the foreign land without being deported 
and thus deprived of the opportunity to contest the case.  Simultaneously, efforts should be made 
for providing extended residence permits or permanent residence status to the abandoned spouses 
so that they might be able to fight the legal battle.  
  
50. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
  
“This is being pursued with MEA.”  
 
 
51. The Committee are not satisfied with the stereotype reply of the Ministry stating 
that the matter regarding simplification of procedure for quick issuance of visa s to 
deserted women is being pursued with MEA, because such victims have to run from pillar 
to post for getting visa for reaching the destined foreign land for participating in the legal 
proceedings until settlements and it requires support from the authorities.  The Committee, 

18 
 
therefore, strongly reiterate that MOIA must seriously follow up the matter with the MEA 
for the simplification of visa procedure and speeding up of issuance of visa to such women.  
Simultaneously, the matter of extending or permanent residence status to  
deserted/abandoned Indian spouses at  the place of the legal wrangle until final settlement 
of the case should also taken on  priority basis and in case of such NRI/PIO husband  wants 
to cancel sponsorship of his spouses’ visa, a system of cross check should also be introduced 
with immediate ef fect.     Because without such support system for deserted/abandoned 
women, the other elements of support system would fall apart. 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 
52. The Committee had observed that over the years, the problems of Indian women trapped 
in fraudulent marriages with overseas Indians were increasingly reported in electronic and print 
media.  As a matter of fact, a ny such abandoned women is isolated in an alien land far away 
from her home, inevitably facing constraints of language, communication, lac k of knowledge of 
local criminal justice, police and legal system, lack of support network of friends and family to 
turn to, lack of immediate and readily available monetary support and a place to take shelter in.  
The Committee had, therefore, desire d that complaint and counseling desks should be set up in 
Indian Missions abroad with professional counseling to help the victims espec ially in countries 
where there was a higher incidence of such cases.  The Committee also desire that such persons 
should be ap pointed as Counselors who speak the language of the majority or NRIs/PIOs 
residing in that particular country.  Such Missions m ight also be directed to prepare a list of 
NGOs, Linguistic Civil Society Organizations which might provide help/assistance in knowing 
the credentials of the grooms before marriage or in tracking the NRIs/PIOs in cases of desertion.  
Such list should be made available on the website of MOIA and MEA and also in printed form to 
the newly wed women arriving in that country 
 
 
53. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“Details of empanelled NGOs are available on the website of MOIA. The website is 
updated regularly.” 
 
54. The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry has not taken the spirit of the 
recommendation and seriousness of the issue and has submitted an evasive reply without 
any action or effort on their part in the direction of setting up a complaint & Counse ling 

19 
 
desk for help of such women victims at all those  Indian Missions where there is a higher 
incidence of such cases. The question of engagement of NGOs that are empanelled and 
displayed on the websites comes as a secondary help depending on the setting u p of this 
Complaint & Counseling Desk at the Mission.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate that 
such desks should be created  at the Indian Mission s where there is more possibility of 
occurrence of such cases to guide and help the ill -fated women in the con straints of  
language,  communication, knowledge of local justice and legalities  and availability of 
funds for self sustenance  at one place .  The Committee also desire that the list of 
empanelled NGOs  should be expanded by adding the details of linguistic  civil society 
organizations particularly to provide the assistance in knowing the credentials of the 
grooms before marriage or tracking the NRIs/PIOs in cases of desertion.           
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
 
55. The Committee had observed that MOIA had  brought out a guidance booklet on 
„marriages to overseas Indians‟ which contained  information of safeguards available to women 
deserted by their spouses, legal remedies available, authorities that c ould be approached for 
redress of grievances.  Similarly,  a pamphlet entitled „thinking of the marriage  of your daughter 
with NRIs‟ had  also been brought out by the Ministry highlighting the precautions to be taken 
before entering into marriage alliance.  The Committee had found  that implementation of 
safeguards and social measures need to be addressed earn estly.  In Committee‟s view that  could 
be done by creating social awareness, counseling and tackling violations and implementations of 
safeguards, institutional and other arrangements.   
 
 The Committee had fou nd that these materials we re published mainly in English and 
Hindi and a few in regional languages.  The Committee  had, therefore, desire that for an 
effective campaign to educate the people in this regard, awareness material should be published 
in all the  major regional languages like Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Punjabi, Gujarati 
etc. pertaining to the States from where more NRIs are settled abroad and that  should be widely 
circulated through the State Governments for better awareness.  The Committe e had also desired 
that for an effective awareness, the printed materials should be made available at Passport 
Offices so that when a passport is dispatched or handed over to young women, the pamphlet 
about marriages to overseas Indians goes along with the  new passport.  Similarly, th ose 
pamphlets should be widely distributed to the migrants at the time of immigration clearance at 
PoE Offices. Missions should also distribute these pamphlets invariably to those who report them 
on arrival after marriage. 
 

20 
 
56. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“In compliance of the Recommendation of the Committee, the Booklet on Marriages to 
Overseas Indians has been got translated into Malayalam and Tamil. This is now being 
updated before printing and distribution.” 
 
57. The Committee are happy to note that in response to the their recommendation,  the 
Ministry has got translated the booklet ‘marriages to overseas Indians’ in two important 
regional languages i.e. Malayalam and Tamil .  The Committee, h owever, desire that after 
updating, these booklets should be printed and widely distributed in concerned States.  
Simultaneously, the work relating to translation and printing of the booklet s in remaining 
regional languages l ike Telugu, Marathi, Punjabi and Guajarati etc. should also be 
completed on priority basis so that awareness through booklets is widely spread 
particularly in those States from where more such cases are reported.  
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
58. The Committee had observed that NCW we re not able to follow up the cases of 
abandoned NRI brides due to non -availability of information about the erring spouses domiciled 
abroad.  The Committee  had, therefore, desired that as a part of consular protection obligation, 
Foreign Embassies, Missions and Consulates in India should mandatorily furnish all the relevant 
data to NCW or to aggrieved spouses about erring spouses of NRI marriages who were 
domiciled in for eign countries.  For that, the Committee had  desired that some directives be 
framed by the Ministry of External Affairs in conjunction with the MOIA and Ministry of 
Women and Child Development to provide meaningful consular assistance to the abandoned 
NRI brides.  The Committee had also desire d that such foreign missions of the country from 
where more such cases are reported should create dedicated desks of officers exclusively to 
provide proper assistance to such spouses in distress. 
 
 
59. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“MEA is being actively pursued in this regard.” 
 
60. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the reply of the Ministry because they 
have not provided any detail s about the outcome of the initiatives taken by MOIA/ MEA 
under the consular protection  obligation asking the foreign E mbassies, Missions and 
Consulates in India to provide data about erring spouses of NRI marriages domiciled in 
those countries.  The Committee treat this support from Embassies/Missions/Consulates as 
the most important one for the deserted spouse or  the agencies supporting such spouses.  
The Committee , therefore, desire that through MEA, MOIA must ensure to make such 

21 
 
consular assistance mandatory so that the MOIA or NCW become able to follow up the 
cases of affected NRI brides in getting complete authentic information about erring spouses 
through foreign Embassies/Missions/Consulates particularly of the countries where such 
cases occur frequently.   
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
61. The Committee  had noted that the most important difference wa s that the recourse to 
justice wa s constrained by the fact that NRI  marriages were governed not only by the Indian 
legal system but also by the far more complex private International laws involving the legal 
system of the other country.  The Committee  had felt an urgent need of a comprehensive law to 
tackle the problems related to NRI marriages.  The Committee  had, therefore, strongly 
recommended that the Government should enact a comprehensive legislation and/or suitab ly 
amend existing legislation for the protection of women against malicious NRI marriages.  A 
special NRI matrimonial law that dealt  comprehensively with marriage, divorce, maintenance, 
child custody and related issues would provide the distressed and aban doned brides with much 
needed remedial armour.  Amending current laws and introducing new rules and regulations 
would help victims of NRI marriages reclaim their fundamental rights to property, equality in 
marriage, the protection of family, freedom from i nhuman or degrading treatment and above all, 
dignity.  The Committee had also desired that more reciprocal bilateral treaties, especially with 
countries with large number of Indians who continue to be not covered for automatic 
enforcement of foreign decree s under Section 44 and 44A of CPC m ight be worked out with 
such countries. 
 
62. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“Regarding a Special NRI Matrimonial Law, the matter has been referred to the 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice for action. 
 
Regarding reciprocal bilateral treaties the matter is being pursued with Min istry of 
External Affairs (MEA).” 
 
63. The Committee find that the matter  relating to Special NRI Matrimonial Law has  
simply been referred to the Ministry of Law & Justice.  T he Committee, however, feel that 
considering the need of the hour, the  MOIA should actively  follow the issues with the 
Ministry of Law & Justice  to set a stage so that  an appropriate Law comes into place.  
Simultaneously, sincere efforts should also be made to pursue the MEA to conclude 
reciprocal bilateral treaties especially with the countries with large number of Indians. The 
Committee desire to be up dated on the further developments on both the issues on regular 
basis.    

22 
 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
64.           The Committee had noted that few states facing problems of NRI marriages had made 
the registration of marriages compulsory.  The Committee were happy to note that in view of the 
directions of Hon‟ble Supreme Court and recommendations of Committee on Empowerment of 
Women and Law Commiss ion, the Government of India had  introduced „The Registration of 
Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012‟ in Rajya Sabha .  That  amendment provide d for 
compulsory registration of marriages without affecting in any manner the State Law making 
provisions for compulsory registration of marriage in their respective  States.  The proposed Bill 
would provide the registration of marriages of all persons who are citizens  of India belonging to 
various religious denominations and be beneficial to women, as the registration certificate would 
provide evidentiary value in matrimonial and maintenance cases and prevent unnecessary 
harassment meted out of them.  It w ould also provide evidentiary value in the matters of age of 
parties, custody of children and the right of children born out of such marriages.  No doubt, the 
initiatives of Government w ould supplement the efforts of the State Governments.  The 
Committee had, however, desired that certificates of NRI marriages issued by the States or under 
the proposed Act must include the security number of the foreign home of the NRI husband 
along with the passport number and brief relevant details.  The Committee had further desired 
that to make it more effective, the photocopy of the valid passport of the NRI husband should be 
pasted in the marriage register maintained with the authorities before marriage certificate is 
actually issued to the parties and pasting of mandatory certific ate of ma rriage on the wife‟s 
passport might  certainly provide a documentary evidence and proof of her marriage on being 
abandoned.  That should also be ensured that no NRI marriage is registered without the presence 
of bride and bridegroom. Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should take necessary initiatives to 
ensure the implementation of these recommendations with the concerned authorities and State 
Governments as well. 
 
65. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“This is being pursued actively with the State Governments and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs.” 
 
66. The Committee note that the M OIA has started pursuing the matter of compulsory 
registration of al l NRI marriages with the State Governments and t he Ministry of Home 
Affairs. Considering the gravity of the recommendation made by the Committee, the 
Ministry should play a proactive role in finalizing the provisions and starting the actual 
implementation thereof in all the States.  The Committee wants to be apprised regularly on 
the developments made in this matter until it is put into practice by the State Governments 
under the Guidance of the Ministry of Home Affairs.   
   
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
67.          The Committee had noted that India had become a party to the Hague Conference on  
Private International Law and wa s also a party to other conventions which facilitate d to bridge 
the two legal systems to which the NRI husband and wife belong ed by providing appropriate 

23 
 
civil procedure acceptable to both jurisdictions.  MOIA had  also strongly recommended that 
India should become a party to „Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child 
Abduction 1980‟ and „Convention on International Recovery of Child Support and other forms 
of family mai ntenance 2007‟.  But joining tho se two conventions require d necessary 
implementing legislations.  The Committee  had, therefore, strongly recommend ed that Ministry 
of Women and Child Development should prepare the implementing legislations on priority 
basis in consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of  Law and Justice so 
that decks were cleared to become a party to these two Conventions. 
 
68. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“This Recommendation is under active consideration of Ministry of Women and Child 
Development.” 
 
69. The Committee note that for clearing the decks to become a party to two important 
international Conventions named ‘Convention on the Civil A spects of Intern ational Child 
Abduction 1980’ and ‘Convention on International Recovery of Child Support and other 
Forms of Family Maintenance 2007’, the Ministry of Women and Child Development has 
been actively considering the preparat ion of necessary implementing legislations.  But, it 
requires to be expedited because without implementing these legislations India will not 
become a party to these two important Conventions.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
that MOIA should pursue the matter with Ministry of Women and C hild Development and 
Ministry of Law & Justice vigorously so that the main hurdle  in joining these Conventions  
is removed at the earliest.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the developments taking 
place in this regard.                                      

24 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No.1) 
              NRI marriages involve the union of a non -resident Indian man who was born outside 
India or has migrated to another country and a resident Indian woman.  But, in search of better 
resources for better life of their daughters, the families overlook the potential dangers posed by 
this type of impulsive match -making which often results into a variety of grim consequences.  
These women ar e abandoned in a foreign country with absolutely no support of sustenance, 
mean of returning home and often without even legal permission to stay on.  Others find 
themselves a victim of ex -parte divorce from a court abroad without their consent.  Some wive s 
are brutally battered, abused, malnourished, confined and forced to flee or forcibly sent back to 
India.  There are also NRI marriage stories of children being abducted or forcibly taken away 
from their mothers. 
 
 The Committee note with a grave concern that the problem of fraudulent/sham marriages 
have increased manifold and the problem faced by Indian women engulfed in such non -
committal marriages with Overseas Indian bridegrooms have not only awakened the Indian 
parents and public in general, but have sensitized the Indian Government also. The Committee 
find that in the name of complexity of the matter and involvement of international protocol and 
jurisdiction issues and role of State Governments, the Ministries/organization of the Central 
Government have not paid the desired attention to develop a system to support the abandoned 
women. The Committee feel that providing legal, financial and other required assistance to the 
victims and the sensitization  of various authorities in foreign land as well as l ocal authorities 
including concerned Ministries/Departments, Embassies and State Governments particularly the 
police are very vital in such situation.   Considering the sensitivity of the issue, the Committee 
desire that concerted efforts from all concerne d quarters of the Government of India should be 
made to address the issues relating to NRI marriages.   
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation has been noted. 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 

25 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
         While going into the details of the agencies dealing with the issue of NRI marriages, the 
Committee find that various Ministries of the Government of India like Overseas Indian Affairs, 
External Affairs, Women and Child Development and Home Affa irs and also the National 
Commission for Women, the Human Rights Commission, State Governments, State 
Commissions for Women are also concerned with the issue of providing timely relief to the 
victims of such marriages.  The Committee are, however, constrai ned to note that in absence of 
any defined coordination mechanism amongst the various agencies, no satisfactory results have 
come out so far.  It is more disturbing to observe that MOIA being the nodal Ministry for all 
matters relating to Overseas Indians and the National Commission for Women (NCW) being the 
nominated coordinating agency at the national level to receive and process all the complaints 
related to Indian Women deserted by overseas Indian husbands, are working independently for 
the same cause w ithout the desired coordination with each other.  No doubt, they are creating 
awareness but using separate methods and materials MOIA extends financial and legal assistance 
through Missions/Posts abroad in the countries where there are large number of case s of 
desertion/divorce by NRI husbands, whereas NRI Cell of NCW helps in facilitating action on the 
complaints of such woman victims by coordinating with the relevant agencies.  MOIA also 
forwards the complaints received in the Ministry in this regard to t he State Governments/NCW 
and other Ministries for appropriate action.  The Committee does not approve this state of 
confusion where the victims of such marriages have to approach different agencies for different 
kind of assistance.  The aggrieved women nee d immediate and respectable solution to their 
problems.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs, Ministry of External Affairs and NCW in coordination with other agencies should 
develop an effective mechanism to provid e a single window timely  solution to the problems 
of affected women.  The Committee further desire that an inter -ministerial Coordination 
Committee should be set up for better monitoring  of the welfare measures being undertaken 
in this regard.  The Committ ee also desire that Ministry of External Affairs should issue a well -
framed practice directions or protocol in conjunction with MOIA and Ministry of Women and 
Child Development directing the embassies and foreign missions to provide meaningful consular 
assistance to such unfortunate abandoned NRI brides. 
Reply of the Government 
 In compliance of the recommendation of the Committee, an Inter -ministerial 
Coordination Committee(IMCC)  consisting of officials from M/o External Affairs , National 
Commission for Women, M/o Woman & Child Development, M/o Law & Justice and M/o 
Home Affairs was constituted on 21.8.2012. 
 
 First meeting of the IMCC was held on 10.9.2012 under the Chairmanship of the 
Secretary, MOIA and all the recommendations of the Parliamentary Stan ding Committee were 

26 
 
discussed in detail for their implementation.   Next meeting to review the progress is scheduled 
for the end of February 2013. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V) dated 4th February 2013 
 
(Recommendation No.  3) 
         The issue of multiple marriages is also a major area of concern for all.  Several cases of 
contracting multiple marriages have come to the notice of the Committee.  This all happens due 
to non -availability of information about such erring husbands  or habitual NRI offenders who 
contract multiple marriages.  The Committee, therefore, desire that to prevent such incidents, the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in conjunction with respective State Governments should 
maintain separate effective link o n the website of the Ministry containing all the pamphlets 
relating to NRI marriages and other relevant information along with the details of such erring 
NRI husbands and habitual NRI offenders who enter into multiple marriages.  The Committee 
are confiden t that availability of such information on website will certainly act as a major 
deterrent and more importantly a source of information/caution to general members of public to 
prevent them from marrying a dishonest NRI groom, who is already guilty of escap ing from the 
clutches of law after contracting multiple marriages on the Indian soil.  The Committee also want 
that for the benefit of the people of all regions of the country whole information should be 
available in all major regional languages in one link. 
Reply of the Government 
 The website of MOIA contains the relevant information on the scheme and assistance 
provided by MOIA. The information is updated from time to time. 
 In the 6 th Annual Consultation meeting with State Governments held on 20 -21 
September 2012, the participating State Government officials were further sensitized and 
requested to upload the details of such grooms on their websites. 
 
                                 F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
  

27 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee, however, have a strong view that if we are actually serious enough to 
help the people, we have to make sincere efforts to prevent them from being trapped into such 
net and not afte r they have had problems.  The Committee, also feel that in addition to 
publication of pamphlets and other material more has to be done by NCW on awareness front.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Women and Child Development should 
sensitize the young generation on these issues by organizing seminars in colleges and high 
schools, particularly in Girls Schools/Women‟s Colleges.  The Committee expects that 
administrations of the Universities or high schools would be persuaded through Stat e 
Governments and Ministry of the Human Resource Development to facilitate such efforts. 
Reply of the Government 
 In compliance of this recommendation MOIA has organized two debates as follows: 
  (i)  In association with Women‟s Studies and Development Cen tre, University of Delhi   
a debate was organized in the Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies , University of Delhi 
on 24.9.2012; 
  (ii) In association with the Centre for Study of Indian Diaspora, University of Hyderabad, 
a debate was organized in the University of Hyderabad Campus on 6.10.2012. 
  Both these debates received enthuastic response from the students in the two Universities 
and were also covered by the media. Thus the events succeeded in generating a lot of awareness. 
 Similarly, NCW org anized a National Seminar in collaboration with Punjab Police to 
address the problems relating to NRI/Overseas marriages in Jalandhar, Punjab on 30 th May 2012 
wherein NCW publications in Punjabi language were widely circulated.  
 In an attempt to provide a vailable legal and other remedies to Indian women trapped in 
such marriages NCW has published an informative booklet “Abandoned Indian Women 
Trapped in NRI Marriages” in English, Hindi and Punjabi. 
       NCW is making efforts to publish  information broch ure and booklets  on the subject in 
regional languages of different states. NCW has written to the concerned State Governments to 
take the initiative to jointly publish it in the regional language of the concerned States. Kerala 
Police and Punjab police are circulating this informative brochure in the regional languages. 
      NCW has widely circulated its publications on NRI marriages namely “Nowhere Brides -
A report on NRI Marriages”; “Problems relating to NRI Marriages -Dos and Don‟ts”; and 
booklet  “Abandoned Indian Women Trapped in NRI Marriages”, in several workshops and 
seminars conducted by NCW all over the country. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 

28 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
       The Committee observe that an Inter -Ministerial Committee was constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, MOIA consisting of Members from various Ministries to study the 
problems relating to marriages of Indian women with Overseas Indians.  The  recommendations 
of the Sub-Committee were adopted on 7 th July, 2008. The Committee also observe that most of 
the decisions / recommendations of the Inter -Ministerial Committee relating to NRI marriages 
have actually not been implemented by the concerned M inistries/State Governments/UTs after 
receiving the communications from the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon MOIA to take up each recommendation seriously and follow up with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments and State Governments for an early implementation of the 
recommendations adopted by the Inter -Ministerial Committee and submit a report to the 
Committee within three months.   
Reply of the Government 
  The following recommendations of the Inter -Ministerial Committee set up in 2008 have 
already been implemented: 
(i) Enhancing the quantum of assistance under the Scheme for providing 
legal/financial assistance to Indian women deserted by their overseas spouses 
from US$1000 in February, 2007 when the scheme was lau nched, to US$1500 
w.e.f. 5th October, 2009. 
(ii) National Commission for Women has been designated as the Coordinating agency 
at the national level to receive and process all complaints relating to Indian 
women deserted by their overseas Indian husbands. 
(iii) The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in its judgement dated 14 th February, 2006 in the 
case of Seema vs. Ashwani Kumar had directed that marriages of all persons who 
are citizens of India belonging to various religions should be made compulsorily 
registrable in their respective States.  
Legislative Department has received compliance reports from 25 State 
Governments   and 6 Union Territories in this regard.   
 
        F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V) dated 4th February 2013 

29 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
          The Committee observe that under the Scheme for providing legal/financial assistance to 
Indian women deserted by their Overseas Indian/foreigner husbands, the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs provides financial assistance meant for defraying i nitial costs of documentation 
and preparatory work for filing the cases by empanelled NGOs who have lawyers on their panel 
who render such services pro bono  (free of charge).  During the course of discussion on the 
scheme, the Committee had observed that t here were several provisions which created hurdles 
in the implementation of scheme and welfare of victims. The Committee are pleased to note that 
taking a note of the views expressed by the Committee, the Scheme was revised during the 
course of examination itself incorporating several important modified provisions.  In response to 
the suggestion of the Committee, the amount of legal/financial assistance has been enhanced 
from US $ 1500 to US $ 3000 per case for developed countries and US $ 2000 per case for  
developing countries.  Moreover, as per the revised provisions, financial assistance would be 
provided by the heads of Indian Missions/Posts Overseas directly to the applicant‟s legal 
counsel empanelled to work for the concerned Indian Mission/Posts.  Thu s, now the Head of 
Missions/Posts has discretionary powers for disbursement of assistance to meet the need of the 
assistance seeker. The Committee are hopeful that utilization of the fund will now improve after 
giving the discretionary power to HOMs/HOPs t o provide assistance directly to the applicant‟s 
legal counsel empanelled with the Indian Mission/Post where there are no empanelled NGOs.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that MOIA should appropriately enhance the 
fund allocation assessing th e requirement for that purpose during the current financial year 
onwards and ensure that through better implementation of the scheme as many needy Indian 
women get help as possible with available funds under the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Utilization of funds under the Scheme has already shown improvement as during the 
current financial year a sum of Rs 25 lakhs approximately has already been spent in first quarter 
of the year itself. 
 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
  

30 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
 
           The Committee are pained to note that since inception of the scheme, despite large 
number of cases being reported, a very small amount is being allocated by MOIA the 
Missions/Posts for providing assistance to needy Indian women deserted by their overseas Indian 
husbands or facing divorce proceedings in a foreign country.  Out of this meager allocation, a 
very small percentage ranging from two per cent to ten percent only is being spent by the 
Missions/Posts.  As a result, since 2006 -07, only 82 w omen have got some financial assistance 
out of the total 377 complaints received in Missions/Posts abroad till the year 2011.  The 
Committee do not agree with the justification given by the Ministry that a majority of such 
claims are handled at the level o f counseling where advice is given and legal position is 
explained to the concerned person or they are put in touch with NGOs, Welfare Organizations 
and Indian Associations working in those areas who then further take on the cases.  The 
Committee treats th is approach of Missions/Posts abroad as disappointing conveying the 
impression of escaping their responsibility by merely referring such victims to other agencies 
without rendering necessary help.  Considering sensitive and emotional nature of cases, the 
Committee expect that Missions/Posts should adopt a sympathetic attitude towards the deserted 
and needy women and they should not treat these cases as part of bureaucratic routine.  The 
Committee express concern at the meager level of utilization of funds a llocated for the purpose 
and desire that Missions/Posts should give every type of required assistance to the women who 
register complaints with them.  The Missions should also keep a regular track and take required 
follow up action on the complaints received from all the sources under intimation to the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs or National Commission for Women from where the case has been 
forwarded to them.  The Committee should also be apprised about the improvement in fund 
allocation and disbursement for this purpose under the revised Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
     MOIA has provided Rs.75 lakhs for this Scheme in the current financial year and utilisation 
of funds under the Scheme has already shown improvement as a sum of Rs 25 lakhs 
approximately has already been spent in the first quarter of the year itself. 
 
     In addition to this, NCW has taken initiatives for more active linkage with NGOs and 
community organizations overseas that can extend help to deserted Indian women in foreign 
land. 
 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V) 
 

31 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
            The Committee observe that MOIA has brought out a guidance booklet on „marriages to 
overseas Indians‟ which contains information of safeguards available to women deserted by their 
spouses, legal remedies available, authorities that can be appro ached for redress of grievances.  
Similarly, a pamphlet entitled „thinking of the marriage of your daughter with NRIs‟ has also 
been brought out by the Ministry highlighting the precautions to be taken before entering into 
marriage alliance.  The Committee  find that implementation of safeguards and social measures 
need to be addressed earnestly.  In Committee‟s view this can be done by creating social 
awareness, counseling and tackling violations and implementations of safeguards, institutional 
and other arrangements.   
 
 The Committee find that these materials are published mainly in English and Hindi and a 
few in regional languages.  The Committee, therefore, desire that for an effective campaign to 
educate the people in this regard, awareness material sho uld be published in all the major 
regional languages like Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Punjabi, Gujarati etc. pertaining to 
the States from where more NRIs are settled abroad and this should be widely circulated through 
the State Governments for bett er awareness.  The Committee also desire that for an effective 
awareness, the printed materials should be made available at Passport Offices so that when a 
passport is dispatched or handed over to young women, the pamphlet about marriages to 
overseas Indians goes along with the new passport.  Similarly, these pamphlets should be widely 
distributed to the migrants at the time of immigration clearance at PoE Offices. Missions should 
also distribute these pamphlets invariably to those who report them on arrival after marriage. 
Reply of the Government 
 In compliance of the Recommendation of the Committee, the Booklet on Marriages to 
Overseas Indians has been got translated into Malayalam and Tamil. This is now being updated 
before printing and distribution. 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 The Committee feel that the more people are made aware of pitfalls of NRI marriages, 
the more cautious they will be when a stranger comes asking for a daughter‟s hand in marriage.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that to target the larger possible audience, 
awareness of cultural, social and legal aspects of NRI marriages needs to be publicized via all 
Media outlets including regional TV Channels and we bsites.  Awareness Programmes should be 
run principally in rural areas where the most vulnerable brides and their families reside.  NGOs 
and state Government agencies should also be involved to  launch an extensive campaign to 
educate unwary communities about the potential dangers of NRI marriages. 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As already stated in reply to Recommendation No. 6, MOIA and NCW are organizing 
Seminars/Debates for awareness generation in Colleges on the “Pros and Cons of marrying an 
Overseas Indian” so that at that young age itself there is awareness among girls about the pluses 
and minuses, including the possible difficulties that can arise on account of various reasons such 
as  misrepresentation  of facts relating to the correct marital status of t he potential groom, his 
correct profession, income etc., thereby helping the young girl students familiarize themselves 
with this issue. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 

33 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
            The Committee observe that National Commission for Women (NCW) has been 
nominated as the Coordinating agency at the national level to receive and process all the 
complaints related to Indian women deserted by their Overseas Indian husbands.  Ac cordingly, a 
„NRI Cell‟ was launched in NCW to render assistance to victims of NRI marriages and it has 
been assigned almost all the responsibilities starting from lodging of complaints to providing all 
possible legal and financial assistance, networking w ith national and international NGOs, 
coordination with all concerned Ministries/State Governments, analysis of legal treaties and give 
advice to the Government, encouragement/support for enactment of new legislation, 
management of laws of other countries etc.  The Committee are, however, anguished to note that 
there is no separate demarcated staff for the NRI Cell and no specific budget has been allocated 
for this Cell.  Without any fund, this Cell is not in a position to provide any financial assistance 
to victims of such marriages.  The Committee deplore the casual approach of the NCW in 
handling such sensitive and important issue where in the name of disposal, only 30 cases stand 
closed since inception, against 813 received complaints.  On the ground, NCW  is giving the 
support to the victims simply by following up the cases by sending correspondence to the 
concerned agencies and follow up with reminders.  As a matter of fact, the victims are not 
getting any support in the matter due to poor response from Missions/Posts or State Governments 
on the cases forwarded to them.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of 
Women and Child Development should provide sufficient number of separate staff for NRI Cell 
of NCW along with adequate separat e fund allocation from the current year itself to enable the 
NCW in handling a very important and sensitive responsibility assigned to them relating to 
abandoned and aggrieved women.  The Committee also desire that NCW in consultation with 
Ministry of Over seas Indian Affairs and other agencies, should hold regular review meetings 
with an objective to improve the response from Missions/Posts and State Governments so that 
maximum number of victims get quick and timely response and help from the designated 
coordinating agency. 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Two Coordinators (one to look into complaints and other to look into related Policy 
matters), a Counselor, a Research Assistant and a typist are assigned to deal with the work of the 
NRI Cell of NCW.  
  In the NCW, 30 cases closed out of 813 cases received does not reflect that only 30 cases 
have been taken up out of 813 complaints received. 
 NRI Cell of NCW takes up 100% complaints registered with it and takes suitable action 
on each and every complaint regist ered. The complaints which have not been closed have been 
taken up for suitable action and are considered pending for various reasons.  
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
         When the girls married to NRIs either with their own high flying wishes or with the wishes 
of their parents are deserted, they face the trauma of failed marriage as it leads to a lot of 
economic, social and psychological problems.  Economic helple ssness and lack of 
communication with the husband and at the same time non -receipt of money coupled with 
problems created by in -laws makes her prey for exploitation.  In Committee‟s view, there is an 
urgent need of rehabilitation of such affected women by giving them some vocational training, if 
needed, or financial assistance for education, counseling and consultancy.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the National Commission for Women being the coordinating 
agency in the matter and their i nvolvement in the welfare of women should incorporate these 
activities as essential responsibilities of NRI Cell.  The Committee also desire that Ministry of 
Women and Child Development should apportion sufficient fund from the head of welfare of 
women for  this purpose and NCW should be strengthened by providing sufficient number of 
experts capable to handle these responsibilities.  The Committee further desire that the awareness 
material prepared by the Ministry should contain all the details relating to s uch facilities 
available with NCW for the benefit of such unfortunate girls and their parents. 
Reply of the Government 
  As far as NCW‟s mandate is concerned, the Commission is a recommendatory body for 
matters pertaining to women‟s rights. Hence there are no schemes administered by NCW 
including any specific scheme to provide safe rehabilitation of women deserted by NRI 
husbands. As per its mandate NCW gives advice and recommendations to the Government on 
any policy or issue relating to the NRI marriages, as it does for other areas of concern.  
 

36 
 
  Also in the NRI Cell of NCW there is a provision for a counselor who provides  help in 
the form of pre -counselling to the prospective Indian bride marrying a NRI/PIO spouse or post -
counselling to the deserted Indian women by NRI/Overseas spouses, when approached. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
            The Committee, however, find that the financial assistance under the scheme is for 
defraying initial legal expenses of documentation and preparatory work for filing the case by 
empanelled NGO etc. only.  It does not even include lawyers‟ fees w hich are supposed to be met 
by the NGOs who have on their panel that lawyers who render such services pro bono .  It is 
more surprising to note that the rehabilitation of women in distress has still not been made a part 
of the recently revised scheme of MOI A.  In such cases, the deserted women require shelter and 
other urgent assistance for their sustenance and only then they can think about taking any legal 
action against the erring husbands.  The Committee have a clear view that the temporary 
assistance be ing provided to them as emergency measure through Indian Workers Resource 
Centre and through Indian Community Welfare Fund in the Missions does not serve the purpose 
of these abandoned women who have to undertake a long legal fight in a foreign country.  T he 
Committee, therefore, desire that the provisions for rehabilitation and counseling of such women 
should also be incorporated under the ambit of the revised scheme under which,  the Indian 
embassies should be empowered to provide crisis assistance and su pport to such brides in 
distress outside India through appropriate mechanism.  They should also be directed to extend all 
necessary legal and monetary support and shelter as per their requirement.  
Reply of the Government 
 Presently 27 Indian Women‟s Organ isations/Indian Community Associations/NGOs in 7 
countries, namely, USA, Qatar, Australia, Canada, Bahrain, New Zealand,  and UK are 
empanelled with Indian Missions / Posts abroad  to provide legal/financial assistance to Indian 
women deserted by their overseas spouses.  
      Missions also provide crisis assistance and support to such Indian women in distress. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
           The Committee are of the opinion that apart from various efforts being made by 
Missions/Posts to help the victims of NRI marriages, there is a need to develop a mechanism for 
quick tracking of concerned NRIs/PIOs in a case of desertion.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that Missions/Posts should be provided separate funds for loc ation of such persons through 

37 
 
agencies available for such purposes.  Missions/Posts may also undertake this work involving 
reputed NGOs and other linguistic civil society organizations, which have their branches or 
official links in other prominent countri es. Assistance of these NGOs/Civil societies may also be 
taken in verifying the antecedents of bridegroom(s) and get their suggestion for any proposed 
NRI marriage. Their volunteers in the different cities across the globe should also be asked not 
only to help the victims, but also support in tracing the whereabouts of such grooms. To make 
this effective, the Ministry and NGOs must have a holistic approach to extend a helping hand to 
victims of desertion and also to prevent such repetition.  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation has been noted. 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 The Committee observe that over the years, the problems of Indian women trapped in 
fraudulent marriages with overseas Indians are increasingly reported in electronic and print 
media.  Any such abandoned women is isolated in an alien land far away from her home, 
inevitably facing constraints of language, communication, lack of knowledge of local criminal 
justice, police and legal system, lack of support network of friends and family to turn to, lack of 
immediate and readily available monetary support and a place to take shelter in.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that complaint and counseling desks should be set up in Indian Missions abroad 
with professional counseling to help the victims especially in countries where there is a higher 
incidence of such cas es.  The Committee also desire that such persons should be appointed as 
Counselors who speak the language of the majority or NRIs/PIOs residing in that particular 
country.  Such Missions may also be directed to prepare a list of NGOs, Linguistic Civil Soci ety 
Organisations which may provide help/assistance in knowing the credentials of the grooms 
before marriage or in tracking the NRIs/PIOs in cases of desertion.  Such list should be made 
available on the website of MOIA and MEA and also in printed form to the newly wed women 
arriving in that country 
Reply of the Government 
         Details of empanelled NGOs are available on the website of MOIA. The website is 
updated regularly. 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
  

38 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
          While going into the details of recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee it may 
be noted that all the State/UT authorities were communicated about the decision that all 
marriages solemnized in India should be compulsorily registered as per a uniform pro -forma for 
registration containing information of social security number, passport particulars, ID Card/ 
Labour Card etc. to build a proper identification and tracking system.  The Committee find that 
only few States have given response to  this decision and very little has been done in this regard.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that MOIA should take up the matter particularly with the State 
Governments at the highest level where more number of such cases are reported so that the 
registration of marriages containing all desired information is implemented at the earliest.  If the 
uniform pro-forma has not been finalized so far, it should be finalized without any further delay 
in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice and supplied to  those States.  The Committee 
should be informed about the progress in this regard on quarterly basis.   
Reply of the Government 
 As already stated, 25 State Governments   and 6 Union Territories have reported that it is 
being done. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
         The Committee also note that there was an agreement that litigations in such cases should 
be taken up by fast track courts within the scope of the existing family courts along with a 
mechanism for regular monit oring of such cases. In this regard, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
had issued circulars to ensure that FIRs in such marriage disputes/ problems are registered 
without any delay.   But the Committee find that the State Governments of U.P. and Andhra 
Pradesh only have forwarded these communications to their judiciary for appropriate action.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs/NCW should ensure an 
early implementation of this decision in all the States/UTs in conjuncti on with the Ministry of 
Law & Justice.  The Committee may be informed about the progress and achievements in this 
regard. 
 

39 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) is pursuing the matter with the Department 
of Justice, M/o Law and Justice. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
           The Committee also observe that as agreed, serving of notices, summons and 
enforcement of maintenance orders are to be made part of the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties 
(MLAT) especially with USA, UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand where the problem of 
desertion of Indian women by overseas Indians is acute. The issue is still under examination in 
the CPV Division in the Ministry of External Affairs.  It should to be expedited and reported 
back to this Committee within three months‟ time. 
Reply of the Government 
 MOIA has written to its Missions in these five countries to facilitate meetings with the 
concerned State Departments in these countries. Based on this proposal, dates for meeting were 
received from the Canadian Government. However as th e dates proposed were falling during the 
Winter session of Parliament, alternate dates have been requested.  
 Our Missions in the other concerned countries are also being pursued for initiating 
consultations in this regard. 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V) 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 The Inter Ministerial Committee had also decided that information Brochure in this 
regard may be prepared by experts having knowledge of Private International Law on the 
working of the relevant Hague Conventions and procedures that is to be followed by the general 
public regarding serving of notices, summons etc. to the parties staying abroad followed by 
launching a campaign to make the general public and also the concerned officers aware of the se 
provisions. But the Committee note that no further progress has been made so far in this regard 
after sending a reference to the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and NCW.  The Committee, therefore, desire that initiat ives should be taken by 
MOIA to expedite the matter along with Coordinating Agency and Committee should be 
informed about the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
         To update the Information Brochure, suggestions were sought from  the concerned 
Ministries and Agencies. 
 In this regard reminder has been issued to concerned Ministries and the item will be 
further taken as agenda in the next Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee Meeting is being 
scheduled for the end of February 2013. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
         The Inter -Ministerial Committee was also in agreement over the decisions that 
States/Union Territories should pass on information regarding court orders against accused NRIs 
to Emigration Authorities to prevent such people from leaving India again st court orders. That 
decision was conveyed to all Chief Secretaries of State/Union Territories and Ministry of Home 
Affairs.  Circulars in the matter were issued to all State Governments/UTs. But, it seems that the 
decision is not being implemented on gro und level.  The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
should ensure that implementation of this decision starts immediately.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 State Governments have been requested again in the 6th Annual Consultation Meeting 
with States Governments held in Delhi on 20th -21st September 2012, in Delhi. 
     This is being pursued actively with the State Governments.  
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
           The Committee further note th at the Inter -Ministerial Committee had agreed that 
appropriate bilateral agreements will be considered with foreign countries with a view to protect 
the interests of Indian women  victims of overseas Indian marriages. It was suggested that a team 
of officers from Ministries of External Affairs, Law and Justice, Women and Child Development 
and Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should visit USA, Canada, UK, Australia and New 
Zealand to hold discussions on the issue with the concerned local authorities and d etermine the 
clauses which could be incorporated in the proposed agreements to assist the affected Indian 
women.  The Committee are surprised to note that the feasibility report of bilateral agreement is 
still pending and no satisfactory progress has been made so far.  The views of territorial divisions 
of the concerned Ministries have also not been obtained till date. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that a matter should be taken at the appropriate diplomatic level for an early finalization of 
the clauses to be incorporated in the proposed agreement.   
 

41 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is relevant to state that even in the past, a team of MOIA officials had gone to USA for 
generating awareness and publicity about the launch of the scheme and consultations with 
NGOs/Women‟s Organizations for taking their views on addressing the problems of failed / 
fraudulent NRI Marriages.  
 In compliance of this recommendation, MOIA has again written to its Missions in these 
five countries to facilitate meetings with the concerned State Departments in these countries. 
  Based on this proposal, dates for meeting were also received from the Canadian Govt. 
However as the dates proposed were falling during the Winter session of Parliament, alternate 
dates have been requested.  
          Our Missions in other concerned countries are also being pursued for facilitating 
consultations in this regard, 
        F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
(Recommendation No. 14) 
          The Committee observe that all the decisions taken by the Central Government on the 
issues relating to NRI marriages are being conveyed to the State Governments for further action 
but the response of the State Governments is not very enthusiastic .  The victims residing in 
different parts of a particular State are also not able to follow their cases by visiting the state 
capital frequently.  The Committee, therefore, desire that, the State Governments of the states 
from where more number of people reside abroad and the problem of desertion is acute, should 
be asked to appoint/nominate nodal officers at district level for a regular monitoring of such 
cases and also for the benefit of such victims. The Committee also desire that names, addresses 
and phone numbers of such nodal officers should be made available on the website of Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs and the National Commission for Women and also be included in all 
the printed regional language pamphlets. 
Reply of the Government 
 These hav e been reiterated to the State Governments in the 6 th Annual Consultation 
Meeting with State Governments held on 20th -21st September 2012 in Delhi. 
     This is being pursued actively with the State Governments. 
 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  

42 
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
        
         The Committee are not satisfied with the initiatives taken by the Missions/Posts and 
Passport Issuing Authorities regarding impounding and revocation of passports of the offending 
NRI hus bands.  The Committee feel that a significant help may be provided to the affected 
women through an effective implementation of the provisions of Section 10 (3) h of the passport 
Act, 1967.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Passport A uthorities should 
be asked to play a pro -active role in such matter and use their discretion under this section by 
taking immediate action to impound/revoke the passport of such erring passport holders if it is 
brought to their notice that the passport hol der who has been issued warrant or summons is not 
cooperating with the court by presenting himself before it as desired. 
Reply of the Government 
 The matter is being pursued with MEA.  
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 The Committee feel that defending a matrimonial battle abroad sitting in India is an 
impossible task.  Moreover, issue of visa is also very difficult and time -taking.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that such foreign missions in India should also be requ ested to simplify the 
procedure for quick issuance of visa to deserted women to enable them to contest the 
proceedings filed by NRI/PIO husband in a foreign land.  These Missions may also be requested 
to introduce a system of cross check, when a NRI/PIO hu sband wants to cancel sponsorship of 
his spouse„s visa.  The Committee have a view that cancellation should not be permitted as long 
as dependency of the aggrieved woman continues as per Indian law so as to enable her to 
continue to stay and contest procee dings in the foreign land without being deported and thus 
deprived of the opportunity to contest the case.  Simultaneously, efforts should be made for 
providing extended residence permits or permanent residence status to the abandoned spouses so 
that they may be able to fight the legal battle.  
Reply of the Government 
 This is being pursued with MEA.  
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
 
 
 

43 
 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
 The Committee observe that NCW are not able to follow up the cases of abandoned NRI 
brides due to non -availability of information about the erring spouses domiciled abroad.  The 
Committee, therefore, also desire that as a part of consular protection obligation, Foreign 
Embassies, Missions and Consulates in India should mandatorily furnish all th e relevant data to 
NCW or to aggrieved spouses about erring spouses of NRI marriages who are domiciled in 
foreign countries.  The Committee, therefore, desire that some directives be framed by the 
Ministry of External Affairs in conjunction with the MOIA a nd Ministry of Women and Child 
Development to provide meaningful consular assistance to the abandoned NRI brides.  The 
Committee also desire that such foreign missions of the country from where more such cases are 
reported should create dedicated desks of officers exclusively to provide proper assistance to 
such spouses in distress. 
Reply of the Government 
MEA is being actively pursued in this regard. 
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
             The Committee understands that Marriages to overseas Indians are like any other 
marriages and may go through the same ups and downs.  The Committee, however note that the 
number of fraudulent marriage cases is increasing and problem is not con fined to Punjab and 
Kerala alone but also a number of cases are being reported from other parts of the country.  
Nature and dimension of such incidents vary but the central issue is failed or fraudulent NRI 
marriages,  But, the most important difference is  that the recourse to justice is constrained by the 
fact that these marriages are governed not only by the Indian legal system but also by the far 
more complex private International laws involving the legal system of the other country.  The 
Committee feel an urgent need of a comprehensive law to tackle the problems related to NRI 
marriages.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should enact a 
comprehensive legislation and/or suitably amend existing legislation for the protection of women 
against malicious NRI marriages.  A special NRI matrimonial law that deals comprehensively 
with marriage, divorce, maintenance, child custody and related issues would provide the 
distressed and abandoned brides with much needed remedial armour.  A mending current laws 
and introducing new rules and regulations would help victims of NRI marriages reclaim their 
fundamental rights to property, equality in marriage, the protection of family, freedom from 
inhuman or degrading treatment and above all, dign ity.  The Committee also desire that more 
reciprocal bilateral treaties, especially with countries with large number of Indians who continue 
to be not covered for automatic enforcement of foreign decrees under Section 44 and 44A of 
CPC may be worked out with such countries. 
 
 

44 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Regarding a Special NRI Matrimonial Law, the matter has been referred to the 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice for action. 
 Regarding reciprocal bilateral treaties the matter is being pursued w ith Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA).  
                                   F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
(Recommendation No. 26) 
             The Committee strongly believe that registration of a marriage provides a valid 
evidence/proof of such alliance and can work as a very strong deterrent for bigamous marriages.  
A few states facing problems of NRI marriages have made the regist ration of marriages 
compulsory.  The Committee are happy to note that in view of the directions of Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court and recommendations of Committee on Empowerment of Women and Law 
Commission, the Government of India has introduced „The Registration o f Births and Deaths 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012‟ in Rajya Sabha recently.  This amendment provides for compulsory 
registration of marriages without affecting in any manner the State Law making provisions for 
compulsory registration of marriage in their respecti ve States.  The proposed Bill will provide 
the registration of marriages of all persons who are citizens of India belonging to various 
religious denominations and be beneficial to women, as the registration certificate would provide 
evidentiary value in ma trimonial and maintenance cases and prevent unnecessary harassment 
meted out of them.  It will also provide evidentiary value in the matters of age of parties, custody 
of children and the right of children born out of such marriages.  No doubt, the initiat ives of 
Government will supplement the efforts of the State Governments.  The Committee, however, 
desire that certificates of NRI marriages issued by the States or under the proposed Act must 
include the security number of the foreign home of the NRI husba nd along with the passport 
number and brief relevant details.  The Committee further desire that to make it more effective, 
the photocopy of the valid passport of the NRI husband should be pasted in the marriage register 
maintained with the authorities bef ore marriage certificate is actually issued to the parties and 
pasting of mandatory certificate of marriage on the wife‟s passport may certainly provide a 
documentary evidence and proof of her marriage on being abandoned.  This should also be 
ensured that no NRI marriage is registered without the presence of bride and bridegroom. 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should take necessary initiatives to ensure the 
implementation of these recommendations with the concerned authorities and State Governments 
as well. 
Reply of the Government 
 This is being pursued actively with the State Governments and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 
                                     F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  

45 
 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
           The Committee note that India has become a party to the Hague Conference on Private 
International Law and is also a party to other conventions which facilitate to bridge the two legal 
systems to which the NRI husband and wife belong by providing  appropriate civil procedure 
acceptable to both jurisdictions.  MOIA has also strongly recommended that India should 
become a party to „Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction 1980‟ and 
„Convention on International Recovery of Chil d Support and other forms of family maintenance 
2007‟.  But joining these two conventions require necessary implementing legislations.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Women and Child Development 
should prepare the implementin g legislations on priority basis in consultation with the Ministry 
of External Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice so that decks are cleared to become a party 
to these two Conventions. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Recommendation is under active consid eration of Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. 
F.No.OI-19019/02/2010-DS-I(Vol.V)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
09 May,  2013                                                                                          Chairman,                
 19 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)                            Standing Committee on External Affairs 
  

46 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 9TH MAY, 2013  
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
3. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
6.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
7. Dr. Bhola Singh 
8. Dr. Girija Vyas 
9. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Dr. Karan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri. U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
 
 

47 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken 
by Government on the recommendations contained in the 15 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of 
the Commit tee on “Problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages : Scheme for 
providing legal/financial assistance/rehabilitation to Indian Women deserted by their 
Overseas Indian spouses”.  The Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, 
if any, for in corporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor 
modifications.  
4.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the Chairman to 
finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the suggestions made by the Members 
and present the same to  the Hon‟ble Speaker and subsequently to both the Houses of the 
Parliament after the commencement of the next session.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

48 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                                27 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,3,6,7,16,21,22,23  
 Total-09 
Percentage:  33.34% 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government replies. 
Recommendation Nos. - NIL 
Total- 00 
 Percentage: 0% 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
Recommendation No. 4,5,17,18,20 
Total- 05 
 Percentage: 18.51% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. – 8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,19,24,25,26, 27 
Total-13 
Percentage: 48.15% 
 
 
                                                                 
 