 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2012-13] 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2012-2013) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
18 
 

 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2012-13] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on14th March, 2013 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14th March,, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2013/Phalguna,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. 101_ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2012-2013………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (v)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           17 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       27 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            28 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………               31 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                               33  
held on 12.03.2013……………………………………………… 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                          35   
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….        
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2012-2013) 
 
Sl.No. Name of Member 
   1.       Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
                    Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  
3.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
4.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
5.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
6.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
7.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
8.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
9.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
10.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
11.  Shri M.B. Rajesh  
12.  Shri J. Ramesh  
13.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
14.  Shri Elangovan T.K.S.  
15.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18. Dr. Girija Vyas 
19.  Shri Sultan Ahmed * 
20.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari @ 
21. Vacant $ 
                                     
                Rajya Sabha 
  
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Shri D. P. Tripathi  
31 
 
Smt. Ambika Soni# 
(iii) 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Shri A. Sivanandam  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Vikas Gachli  - Executive Assistant 
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Manish Tewari ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his appointment of as Minister of State w.e.f . 28.10.2012 and Shri 
Sultan Ahmed is nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012. 
 
@ Dr. Shashi Tharoor ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his appointment of as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 and Shri 
Inder Singh Namdhari is nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012 . 
 
$ Shri Nama Nageswara Rao ceased to be Member of the Committee 
consequent upon change of nomination to Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 
13.12.2012.  
 
#  Smt. Ambika Soni has been nominated to the Committee vice Dr. M. S. 
Gill w.e.f. 27 th December, 2012 who has been nominated to the 
Committee on Urban Development w.e.f. the same date. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 12-13) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 18th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 13th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Gr ants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Affairs for the year 2012-13. 
 
2. The 13th Report was presented on 8th May, 2012. The Action Taken Replies of 
the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were 
received on 6th  January, 2013 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 12th March, 2013. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given 
at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 13th  Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
12 March,  2013                                                                       Chairman,                 
21 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(v) 
                                                 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their 
Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2012.  
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in the report.  These have 
been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2,3, 4, 5,6,8, 9,10,11,12,13,14,15 &16  
 Total-15 
 
 (ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
        NIL 
Total- 00 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Total- 01 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
NIL 
Total-00 
 
  

2 
 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for which only interim replies have been given by 
the government should be furnished within three months of  the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their observations/recommendations. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
 
 5.   The Committee had noted that the Budget Allocation of MOIA for the year 2012- 
13 is Rs. 114.77 crores comprising Revenue Section as Rs. 94.77 crores and Rs. 20.00 
crores as Capital Section. The Budget Estimates for the year 2011 -12 was Rs. 81.00 
crores which was kept at the same level at Revised Estimates (RE) stage and Rs. 41.23 
crores only were spent up to January 31st 2012 . The Committee had observed that 
amidst the trend of lower expenditure even than Revised Estimates during the last 
several years, it was very pleasing to le arn that for the first time the Ministry was 
perhaps be enable to spend hundred percent of BE and RE during the year 2011 -12. 
But the Committee were still not satisfied with the trend of expenditure being made in 
each quarter of the Financial Year. The Com mittee had observed that during the last 
quarter of the year 2011-12, Rs. 41.41 crores were to be spent out of the total BE/RE of 
Rs. 81 crores. The Committee were also not convinced at all with the reasons given by 
the Ministry stating that due to mandate  of the Ministry, the maximum expenditure was 
being made in the last quarter of the financial year. The Committee had suggested that 
since all the other activities/schemes of the Ministry except PBD are continuous 
activities, the expenditure and settlement  should also be evenly distributed as far as 
possible during each quar ter of the year. The Committee had therefore, desired that by 
regular monitoring of the progress of the schemes/programmes, the Ministry should 
ensure that there was no accumulation of e xpenditure at the end of the financial year. 
The Committee  had also desire d that as far as possible, the media awareness 
programmes should be scheduled equally during each quarter of the year with regular 
settlement of Bills. The Committee  had further desired that the expenditure booked by 

3 
 
Ministry of External Affairs/Missions/Posts and other agencies should also be obtained 
on regular basis for an early settlement during each quarter. The Committee had 
expressed their hope that by those measures the issue of unevenly spread expenditure 
of the Ministry during each quarter of the year might be resolved appropriately. 
 
6. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 ―The observation has been noted.‖ 
 
 
7. The Committee had made certain observation s about the trend of 
expenditure shown by the Ministry during last several years and had suggested 
some methodology to avoid such trend of making maximum expenditure during 
the last quarter of the financial year.  But in their reply, the Ministry has simply 
conveyed that the observations made by the Committee have been noted.  The 
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry towards the procedure 
to be followed in communicating the replies to the recommendations of  the 
Committee where it is clearly mentioned that  the replies should be 
comprehensive and not inconclusive, vague or couched in genera l terms like 
noted or accepted etc.  Despite such specific directions, the MOIA has been 
submitting the maximum number of replies in the similar vague and inconclusive 
terms using the similar phrases.  The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry 
should provide comprehensive, conclusive and clear replies to the 
recommendations made by the Committee in future.  On the same lines, the 
Committee would like to be informed about the initiatives taken by the Ministry in 
maintaining the evenly spread expenditure during each quarter of the year and 
the outcome thereof.  The Committee would specially like to know about the sum 
allocated and released and spent in each quarter of the year along with  
explanation if there is any gap in allocation and actual expenditure in any quarter.  
The Committee should also be apprised about the status of settlement of bills of 
media awareness programmes and settlement of bills relating to expenditure 
booked by MEA / Missions / Ports and other agencies which were mentioned as 
the main factors responsible for uneven expenditure of the Ministry during the 
last financial year.   

4 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
8. The Committee  had observed that the approval of building plan of P ravasi 
Bhartiya Kendra (PBK) was  delayed on one or the other pretext for a very long period 
and only after a repeated persuasion , the construction work of PBK has  now been 
awarded to the contractor on firm rates. The progress of the project, both ph ysical and 
in financial terms was  reviewed by a Committee at least once in every month at the 
project site. The Committee had expected that the work relating to PBK would be 
completed within the fixed time frame of 24 months  and had desired to be updated on 
the progress made with regard to PBK on a regular basis.  
 
The Committee were however, not satisfied with the efforts made by the Ministry 
regarding establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBB) in states. The Ministry ha d 
simply written to the States and was awaiting their replies. The  Committee had 
therefore, recommended  that the Ministry should play a proactive role and make 
concerted efforts in consultation with the State Governments at the high est level so that 
the scheme to construct PBBs in the States takes a shape at the earliest. 
 
9. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
―All out efforts are being made to ensure that the work relating to PBK is 
completed within the fixed time frame.  The progress of the project, both physical and in 
financial terms is regularly reviewed.  
Regarding the establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBB) in the States, 
the observation has been noted.‖ 
  
10. The Committee are happy to note that through regula r review of the 
progress of the project , the Government has been trying to ensure that the work 
relating to  Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra  (PBK) is completed within the fixed            
time- frame.   The Committee, however, are not satisfied with the approach of the 
Ministry in the direction of establishing Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawan s in the states .  
In their reply , the Ministry have not given any information about the response of 
the state  Governments and the progress made so far in this regard.  The 
Committee endorse the concept of setting up of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans in the 
states to provide under one roof, the Migrate Resources Centres, Protector of 
Emigrants (PoEs) offices  Counseling and predeparture orientation and space for 
state level Pravasi Association s.  But perhaps due to lack of clear cut policy and 
proposals of the Central Government, a reluctant approach is being shown by the  

5 
 
states in this regard .  The Committee, therefore,  reiterate that the Government 
should come out with a structured scheme with clear cut demarcation of 
participation of the Central Government and the State Government in setting up 
of these Bhawans and prepare a time -bound programme in consul tation with the 
concerned state Governments and take up the matter at the highest level  so that 
the concept could get a definite shape  in the shortest possible time. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
11. As observed by Committee  the Ministry had  made some efforts to get land or 
office space for existing PoE offices in Government owned buildings. PoE offices at 
Chennai, Hyderabad and Jaipur were working in a rented building owned by the State 
Governments. PoE offices at Mumbai and Cochin were still working in private buildings. 
The Committee were , however, pained to learn that even after a lapse of several 
months, the Ministry had  not received any proper response from State Governments or 
Urban Development Ministry except in one case where  they had succeeded in getting 
office   accommodation for PoE office at Thiruvanant hapuram, In t hat context, the 
Committee had reminded the Ministry about the suggestion given by them during on -
the-spot visit of PoE Offices, wherein the Ministry was asked to explore the possibilities 
to shift/place the PoE offices either in the Airport premises or any nearby places to the 
Airport for the benefit of e migrant workers. The Committee had , therefore, desired that 
the matter should not be delayed further and should be taken up sincerely at the level of 
Minister of Civil Aviation/Urban Development Minister or concerned Chief Ministers to 
finalize the proposal of land or space to accommodate the remaining PoE Offices on 
priority basis. 
 
12. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
 
―The Ministry, after due consideration, feels that POE offices should be easily 
accessible to the emigrant workers, as they need this clearance before making their 
travel plans.  Offices within or near the airports may be difficult to access.  The status of 
action taken on the Standing Committee‘s recommendation in each case is as under:‖  
 
(i) POE, MUMBAI  
 
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs ( MEA) on 
30.12.2010 for providing accommodation to house the POE office at Mumbai in its 
newly constructed building for Regional Passport Officer (RPO) at Bandra Kurla 
Complex. The MEA on 20.01.2011 informed that the completion of the construction of 
the ne w building is likely to take three more years and that the decision of allotting 
space will be taken after the RPO office is shifted to the newly constructed building.  
Further, Secretary, MOIA has on 29.04.2011, also written to the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Maharashtra. However, no response has been received so far.  
Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 

6 
 
12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation of POE office in the Government 
building under the control of Estate office at Mumbai.   
 
The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the 
matter with Chief Minister, Government of Maharashtra for allotting land for constructing 
MOIA‘s own building or office space in a government -owned building to accommodate 
POE office at Mumbai. 
   
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also 
requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development for allotting office space for the 
POE office in a Central Government owned bui lding at Mumbai. Protector General of 
Emigrants (PGE) has reminded the Principal Secretary, Urban Development 
Department (I), Govt. of Maharashtra on 6th Dec., 2012. 
 
(ii) POE, CHENNAI 
  
 Secretary, MOIA, wrote on 15.04.2011 to the Chief Secretary, Governm ent of 
Tamil Nadu for allotment of a plot of land identified by MOIA in the K.K. Nagar, Chennai 
for constructing its own building.  This was followed up by a D.O. letter dated 
18.04.2011 from Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs to the Chief Ministe r, 
Government of Tamil Nadu to direct to the concerned authorities for allotment of the 
said plot of land.  However, the response from the Government of Tamil Nadu is still 
awaited. Further, Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urb an 
Development Government of India on 12.07.2011 for providing space for 
accommodation for POE office in the Government building under the control of Estate 
office at Chennai.  
  
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the 
matter with Chief Minister, Government of Tamil Nadu for allotting land for constructing 
MOIA‘s own building or office space in a government owned building to accommodate 
POE office at Chennai. 
  
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 20.12.20 11 has also 
requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development for allotting office space for the 
POE office at Chennai in a Central Government owned building. PGE has reminded the 
Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt. of Tamil Nadu on 6th Dec., 2012. 
 
 (iii) POE, COCHIN 
  
 Secretary, MOIA has taken up the matter with Chief Secretary, Government of 
Kerala for allotting a plot of land measuring 1000 sq.m. in Cochin  to house its POE 
office.  Further, Secretary MOIA also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation for POE 
office in a Government building under the control of Estate office at Cochi n.  The 
Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the matter with 
Chief Minister, Government of Kerala for allotting land for constructing MOIA‘s own 

7 
 
building or office space in the government owned building to accommodate POE off ice 
at Cochin. 
   
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also 
requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development for allotting office space for the 
POE office at Cochin in a Central Government owned building.  PGE has reminded the 
Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt. of Kerala on 6th Dec., 2012. 
(iv) POE, HYDERABAD 
  
 Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 29.04.2011 has written to the 
Chief Secretary, Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting a piece of la nd measuring 
about 1000 sq.m. at Hyderabad for constructing its own building to accommodate its 
field offices functioning in Hyderabad.  In response the Principal Secretary (Revenue), 
Government of Andhra Pradesh has directed to the Collector of Hyderabad for 
examining the proposal.  Further, Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation 
for POE office in a Government building under the control of Estate office at Hyderabad.   
  
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the 
matter with Chief Minister, Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting land for 
constructing MOIA‘s own building or office space in a government owned building to 
accommodate POE office at Hyderabad. The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian 
Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development 
for allotting office space for the POE office at Hyderabad in the Central Government 
owned building.  PGE has reminded the Principal Secretary to Govt. Municipal 
Administration & Urban Development Authority, Secretariat, Hyderabad on 6 th Dec., 
2012. 
 
13. The Committee observe that  despite repeated persuasion by the 
Committee,  the Ministry  has not been able to get suitable office spaces for the 
PoE offices at Mumbai, Chennai, Cochin and Hyderabad.  The matter was taken 
up at Chief Minister and Urban Development Minister level during 2011 and after 
that no concerted effort seem to have been made to obtain/shift  space or land to 
house the present PoE offices.    During the year 2012 the Ministry has written 
another reminder letter only to the concerned  states Governments without 
undertaking any other follow -up action .  The Committee also note that the 
Ministry has not taken any initiative to explore the other alternative suggested by 
the Committee and find any suitable space in the areas adjoining airports to place 
these offices for the benefit of emigrants.   
 The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterate  that the Ministry should continue to  
renew the efforts at the highest levels in the State Governments or the Ministry of 

8 
 
Urban Development  or Ministry of Civil Aviation to obtain the suitable office 
space which is easily accessi ble and convenient for housing PoE offices at 
Mumbai, Chennai, Cochin and Hyderabad for  appropriate handling of the 
continuously growing quantum of Emigrant workers.   
 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 
14. The Committee had expressed their concern ov er the lack of seriousness 
showed by the Ministry by not making any allocation of even a single rupee for 
construction/purchase of buildings of PoE offices during the year 2012 -13. Surprisingly, 
no fund had been kept to establish the three new PoE offices at Jaipur, Rai Bareilly and 
Guwahati. The Committee had taken a serious view to note that on one side, the 
Ministry ha d stated that they were making all possible efforts to purchase space or 
accommodate existing PoE offices in Government buildings and they  were also 
committed to establish three new PoE offices during the current year itself  but on the 
other side, there was  no Budgetary provision for that purpose. The Committee had 
desired that the Ministry should make all sincere efforts to show their commi tment to 
complete the work relating to establishment of the PoE offices at the earliest and 
provide sufficient fund for that purpose at RE stage.  
              
 The Committee had also observed  that a significant number of Posts were 
vacant in all the exis ting eight PoE offices and the three new PoE offices also required 
staff. Though, applications had  been called from Ministrie s through circulars but there 
was very poor response. The Committee,  had  therefore, desired  that if there was no 
proper response f rom the employees of other Ministries in joining PoE offices, the 
Ministry should try other options to fill up the vacancies in PoEs in the shortest possible 
time so that the emigrant workers did  not face more difficulty. The Committee  had 
desired that the new PoE offices should be provided with the staff required to handle 
work load and smooth functioning of these offices and the Ministry should explore the 
possibilities of opening new PoE Offices at places like Dehradun to cater to the needs of 
the people residing at difficult hilly areas. 
 
 
 
 
15. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
 
‖Budget allocation for construction/purchase of buildings for POE offices is made 
when a proposal for acquiring land/building is under consideration of the Ministry.  Since 

9 
 
no proposal for acquiring land/building was under consideration  when BE 2012-13 was 
prepared, no funds were sought. 
 
 POE office at Jaipur has already started funct ioning in a building provided 
by the Rajasthan Govt.  Adequate funds for salary and the office expenses etc. have 
been sought in the Revised Estimate (RE).‖ 
 
 
As regards the opening of new office at Guwahati, the State Govt. has been 
requested to provide suitable accommodation.  As soon as suitable accommodation is 
made available, action will be initiated for opening of the new POE office at Guwahati.   
As regards the filling up of vacancies in the existing POE offices, it is stated that 
vacancies are circulated to the various Ministries/Departments for forwarding the names 
of interested candidates. If no proper response is received for filling up the vacancies, 
outsourced staff is appointed in the POE office so that the emigration workers do not 
face any problem.  Incidentally, i t is stated that emigration clearance is given on the 
same day to the workers as per the Rules.‖  
 
16. The Committee observe that no allocation has been sought by the Ministry 
even at RE stage for the construction  or establishment of the old and new  PoE 
Offices during the year 2012 -13.  This simply shows very casual approach on the 
part of the Government as they do not look confident and determined for  getting 
the land or space for shifting old PoE offices at important places like Mumbai, 
Chennai, Cochin and Hyderabad or to establish new offices at Jaipur , Rai Bariely 
and Guwahati.   The Committee are of the opinion that as the matter of allocation 
of land or office space is already predominantly placed with the State 
Governments and the Ministry of Urban Development and they have been 
recently reminded by the PGE in December, 2012, they should have been 
prepared appropriately by putting a  certain amount of allocation for 
establishment or construction of these PoE offices at  RE stage.  The Committee 
do not support such casual approach of the government because even if they get 
the office space/land for PoE of fices  any time during the current financial year, 
they may not be able to start the work due to lack of  any allocation  for th at 
purpose. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should not stop making 
efforts to obtain land or space for PoE offices on the plea of non-availability of 
funds, rather they should show their determination to conclude the deals during 
the current year itself so that they can get sufficient funds at BE stage for the 

10 
 
establishing /shifting of PoE offices during the year 2013 -14.  The Committee also 
remind that the Ministry should certainly explore the possibility of  opening PoE 
offices at places like Dehradun to cater the needs of the people residing in 
difficult hilly areas on priority basis.   
 
 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
17. The Committee  had noted that over 25 million Overseas Indians reside d in 
around 189 countries of the world who claimed to be the second largest Diaspora in the 
world. But, unlike other countries like China, USA, etc. India had not been able to 
estimate the exact number of Indian Diaspora residing outside India. In the Committee‘s 
view, for better functioning and appropriate policy framing of the newly created Ministry 
for Indian Diaspora, the first and foremost work was to take initiatives to estimate the 
actual number of  Indians living outside India and p reparation of a database in that  
regard. It was unfortunate that the Ministry created for handling all the matters  relating 
to Overseas Indians had no authentic data of its own and they ha d to depend upon the 
estimates projected in Internation al documents. The Committee had  been regularly 
asking the Ministry to ta ke necessary initiatives in that  regard but ti ll date the Ministry 
had not come out with  any concrete solution. The Committee were not convinced with  
the problems/difficulties showed  by the Ministry based on the responses from 
Embassies/Missions/Posts or the hurdles of rules of some countries. The work could be 
undertaken on priority basis ap pointing a task force or selecting the a gencies having 
expertise in the  field. The Committee had also strongly recommend ed that necessary 
funds for that purpose could be obtained from the Finance Ministry at RE stage in view 
of importance and urgency of the matter. 
 
18. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
 
 ―It may not be feasi ble to compile exact data base of the entire Indian Diaspora 
residing outside India due to the sensitiveness of the country concerned and the People 
of Indian Origin (PIOs) —who are citizens of that country -themselves. The number of 
PIOs is based on the estimates made by the Indian Missions, and sufficient as inputs for 
policy issues.  
 In so far as Indian passport-holders are concerned, data on emigration clearance 
given to the Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) category is available with this 
Ministry. In so far as non -ECR category is concerned, the data of Non -Resident Indians 
(NRIs) leaving the country or returning, each year, is available with the Government.  
  

11 
 
 Data on Indian passport -holders who have over -stayed abroad —having, for 
example, initially gone on tourist visas—is not available. 
  
 Estimates made by the Indian Missions cover all the above categories and, as 
stated, are sufficient as policy input. 
  
 The Ministry humbly submits that it is of the considered view that in view of the 
above, a separate study may neither be feasible, not affordable.‖ 
 
 
19. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government stating 
that it is not feasible for them to compile a database of the entire Indian Diaspora 
residing outside India based on grounds such as the sensitiveness of the 
countries concerned and the People of Indi an origin themselves. The Committee 
are dismayed to observe that without making the desired efforts, the Ministry has 
shown their inability in collecting and compiling  such authentic data have and a 
clear view that  without proper estimations and adequate data in this regard  the 
policy decisions an d various programmes  of the Ministry  will certainly fall short 
of the expected results . If other countries having larger Overseas Diaspora have 
successfully compiled the similar data then why can’t we take s imilar  initiatives 
to prepare an authentic data base for Indian Diaspora .  The Committee have a 
clear view that only the available data about the ECR passport holders and non -
ECR category only may not serve the objectives of the formation of the MOIA. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should take all possible 
initiatives to compile the data of Indian Diaspora within three months and apprise 
the Committee of the progress made in this regard.  The Committee believe that   
the formation of t he Diaspora data -base with near exact figures  it  would be 
proved that the MOIA have been sincerely guided by their key policy imperatives 
thriving towards the much wanted Institutional a rrangements for the benefit s of 
the Overseas Indians and India as such.   
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
(Recommendation 9) 
20. The Committee had noted with happiness  that the Ministry was organizing ‗Know 
India Programme‘ (KIP) with the aim of creating awareness about the phenomenal 
transformation taking pla ce in India and the country‘s progress from just a destination 
for culture, heritage and art to an emerging powerhouse in the global economic system. 
The Committee had also observe d that the Ministry  had proposed to launch another 
programme called ‗Study India Programme‘ (SIP) in addition to ‗Know India Programme‘ 
(KIP). SIP was to be held twice a year with the enhanced Budgetary provision under the 
budgetary head of know India Programme  (KIP). The duration of SIP  was to  be four 
weeks in comparison to three weeks of KIP. No doubt,  those programmes provided a 
forum for students and young professionals of Indian origin to bond with contemporary 
India in real terms and also share their views, expectations and experien ces in their 
ancestral country. The Committee had also felt that the participants of the KIP and SIP, 
apart from the visit programme and study modules, m ight be entrusted with and 
educated about all the schemes and programmes of the Ministry and the initia tives 
taken by the Ministry with respect to Overseas Indians, PIOs and NRIs for a multiplying 
effect on the Overseas Indians in the International scenario. 
21. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
  
 The participants of KIP interact with the officers of the Ministry, when they are 
briefed about all the schemes and programmes of the Ministry.  If possible, they also 
call on the Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs. 
 
22.  The Committee observe that the re are routine courtesy Calls and  limited 
meetings of the  enrolled overseas Indian youth s with the Officers of the Ministry 
and the Minister under ‘Know India Programme ’ (KIP) and ‘Study India 
Programme’ (SIP).  In Committee’s view such meetings may not be sufficient for 
the visiting overseas Indian youth s to establish permanent connections with the 
modern day India.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the participants of KIP 
and SIP should be extensively educated about all the programmes and sc hemes 
of the Ministry  of Overseas Indian Affairs  so that they are encouraged to go and 
get in touch with maximum number of youths of Indian Origin and propagate the 
Brand India.  
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
23. The Committee had noted that with an objective to make higher education in 
India accessible to the children of overseas Indians and publicize India as an education 
hub, the Ministry under the ‗Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC)‘ ha d 
been providing 100 scholarships every year for undergraduate courses. The Committee 
had also noted that the Ministry had lately increased the scholarship amount from US $ 
3600 per studen t per annum to US $ 5000 but had  kept the number of scholarships at 

13 
 
the level of 100 for the last several years. The Committee were surprised to note that 
the allocation for that scheme under BE 2012-13 had been reduced to Rs. 5 crores from 
the allocation of Rs. 5.44 crores in BE 2011 -12. The scholarship amount was increased 
but the allocation was reduced to a lower level. 168 students had submitted applications 
for the year 20 11-12 and 175 applications had been received for 2010 -11 batch. That 
showed that more students had been showing their interest in getting education i n India 
and the number of scholarships being offered after the revision in scholarship amo unt 
the number of aspirants would  certainly increase. The Committee  had, therefore, 
strongly recommended  that the Ministry should appropriately increase the number of  
scholarships as well as the allocation at RE stage so that the interested students may 
be provided with maximum number of scholarships to study in India under the Scheme. 
 
 
 
24. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
  
―The matter of increasing allocation will be taken up at the appropriate time in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance.‖ 
 
 
 25. The Committee  are not satisfie d with the vague and inconclusive reply 
given by  the Government which does not show any determination of the 
Government to increas e allocation for the Scholarship Program me for Diaspora 
Children (SPDC).  The Committee feel  that the SPDC is one of the most 
prestigious and popular welfare program mes of MOIA and a lot of overseas 
Indian Youths and Diaspora Youths are showing interest in getting higher and 
quality education from India.   But the present number of scholarships under this 
programme does not  commensurate with its demand and popularity  of the 
scheme.   T hat is why t he Committee  had recommended for an increase in  the 
amount and number of this scholarship after taking into consideration the cost of 
living and quantity  of aspirants.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation in this regard and desire that Government should come out with 
concrete revisions in this regard on priority basis and apprise the  Committee 
accordingly.   
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
26 The Committee had  been regularly discussing on several occasions about the 
coordination be tween MOIA and MEA. This became  very important particularly in the 
emergencies like global natural calamities/political crisis etc. where Indian nationals are 
stranded and immediate and deliberate rescue and relief is required in such emergent 
situation. The Committee were aware that MEA came into action through Missions/Posts 
and took care of such immediate and emergent situations in the country where the crisis 
arose. But the Committee had observed that almost nothing was left to be done by the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs after bringing the Indian citizens in India as happened 
in the case of evacuation from Libya. Th e Ministry of Overseas Affairs are the nodal 
Ministry in the matters relating to NRIs and PIOs. The Committee  had, therefore, desired 
that the MOIA must work in close association with MEA while dealing with such situations. 
Since, evacuation like situation or need for assistan ce to people of In dian origin might  
arise in several other countries facing political crisis, some budget allocatio n for handling 
such situation could be kept with MOIA. 
 
 
27. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
 
―The observation has been noted.‖  
 
 
28.  The Committee are not at all satisfied with the response of the Ministry with 
regard to their recommendation  regarding the role of MOIA in hand ling the 
emergent situations arising before Indian Nationals in the countries facing 
political crisis/calamities etc .  The Committee had a clear intention that MOIA 
being the Nodal Ministry in the matter pertaining to NRIs and POIs , should play a 
defined role in coordination with MEA for the help and welfare /rescue of stranded 
Indians in the countries facing such emergent situations. As  on date, MOIA has 
no defined role  in  such areas.   The Committee had, therefore, desired that with 
a specific and defined  role of MOIA and MEA a  better coordination mechanism 
might be established and both the Ministries could  execute  in tandem.  But the 
Ministry has neither clarified their intention nor informed about  any initiatives 
taken or being taken in that direction.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
required measures sh ould be taken by the MOIA in consultation with MEA and  
apprise the Committee about the developments on the suggested lines in future. 
 
 

15 
 
 (Recommendation No.16) 
 
29. The Committee had observed that during August 1991 to Dec 2010 the NRI 
investment accounted for Rs.29,347 crores. Keeping in mind the large Diaspora and 
sustainable growth of Indian economy despite the Global financial meltdown, the 
Committee had looked forward to a higher rate of healthy investments by NRIs in India. 
The Committee had recommended that Financial Services Division of the Ministry must 
work on some targets on yearly basis to attract NRI investment in India using all 
opportunities including PBDs. For such  purpose, MOIA could have also consulted and 
deliberated with all the concerned Ministries/Departments/Agencies particularly with the 
Ministry of Commerce for chalking out a comprehensive plan to attract more and more 
investments in the fields where FDI have been allowed by the Government. The 
Committee had also desire d that some more special incentives, tax benefits and 
exemptions, early start up of business and single window documentation facility could 
have been provided to attract higher NRI investments. 
 
 
30. The Ministry of Overseas Indian affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under:   
 
 ―Although Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs does not directly deal with policies 
related to investment by NRI‘s in India and Foreign Direct Investments, it is r epresented 
in the Foreign Investment Promotion Board that is serviced by the Department of 
Economic Affairs and Board on Special Economic Zones that is serviced by the 
Department of Commerce. MOIA is also consulted by the Ministry of Finance and the 
Department of Commerce on policies pertaining to investment by Overseas Indians. 
MOIA is also kept informed of all matters relating to Overseas Indians. 
  
 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has established an organization, namely 
Overseas Indian facilitati on Centre (OIFC) in 2007, to facilitate potential NRIs and 
overseas corporate bodies of overseas Indians that desire to invest in India. OIFC has 
organized several Investment and Interactive Meets/Road shows in different countries 
and also organized ‖marke t place‖ during Pravasi Bhartiya Divas in India. An electronic 
portal has also been launched by the Ministry to reply to the queries of potential 
overseas investors by OIFC and its knowledge partners to promote and facilitate 
economic engagement by Overseas Indians. The annual PBDs and regional PBDs also 
provide a platform for facilitation of investment by overseas Indians.‖ 
 
 
31.  The Committee are aware that MOIA is not directly concerned with the  
policies relating to Foreign Direct Investment but , they cannot deny their 
important role in presenting the needs of NRIs in the policy framing system with a 
view to protect their  interests in making investmen ts in the land of their  origin.  
NRIs may not be treated like other  foreign investors.  They certainly deserve 
some special concessions because they are not only the investors but their 

16 
 
investments also involve their feelings and  considerations for welfare of the 
country of their ancestors.  They deserve  liberal legal and procedural policies .  
The Committee, therefore, desire that with an objective to protect the interests of 
NRIs, MOIA should play a proactive role during the consultation process with 
concerned policy framing Ministries.  The Committee are surprised to note that 
MOIA has not been able to uti lize the opportunity of PBD for the purpose of 
attracting NRI investments whereas with similar meets, huge NRI investments are 
being finalized by the states  every year .  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
PBD platform should be appropriately used to attract and finalize more NRI 
investments and the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre ( OIFC) should develop a 
better coordination with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce to 
develop it as a single window facilitation Centre for NRIs.   The Committee should 
be informed from time to time about the efforts being made by the Ministry and 
the achievements made in this regard. 
 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
2. The Committee note that as against the demand of Rs. 162.99 crores during 
2012-13, only Rs. 114.77 crores has been allocated at BE stage. The Committee also 
observe a visible jump in BE is on account of just two major items i.e. Pravasi Bhartiya 
Kendra and e -Migrate Project. But actually, the Ministry has been allocated less funds 
and as such it has gone down. The Committee further observe that this curtailment in 
allocation for many important flagship schemes and projects of the Ministry like 
Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children, Overseas Indian Centres, Indian Council of 
Overseas Employment and even the lower allocation than the desired for construction 
of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra will hamper the activities of the Ministry. The Ministry has to 
observe more realistic Budgetary projections, ensure judicious quarterly utilization of 
funds well within the BE allocation and thereafter take up the matter with Finance 
Ministry from beginning to obtain the required funds at RE stage. In the absence of this 
strategy programmes/projects will suffer due to downward revision and that will 
ultimately deprive the beneficiaries of the intended benefits. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation has been noted and the matter will be taken up with the Finance 
Ministry to obtain required fund at the RE stage. 
 
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 2 of 19)  
 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
3. The Committee observes that in BE 2012 -13, as against the proposed provision 
of Rs. 49.79 crores under Revenue Head the Ministry of Finance has agreed to an 
allocation of Rs. 38.10 crores only. As a consequence, out of the total cost of E -Migrate 
project of Rs. 92.67 crores, only Rs. 20.00 crores have been earmarked for the year 
2012-13, which does not seem sufficient for timely implementation of the project. The 
Ministry has accepted that while distributing the balance provision, the Budget 
Expenditure in many object Heads has been kept at the same or lower level even than 
the last year making it inadequate to meet the expenditure on the items under these 
heads. The Committee note that a Master Service Agreement (MSA) has been signed 
between the Government of India and the implementing agency of the project in 

18 
 
December, 2011 and the e - Migrate project is scheduled to be completed within 58 
weeks from the date of signing the agreement. The Committee are happy to note the 
Ministry has set up Project Management  Unit (PMU) headed by a Director level officer 
to the Government of India and a Steering Committee headed by Secretary, MOIA has 
also been constituted for monitoring the progress of the project. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that MOIA should  make all possible efforts to obtain the 
balance amount vital for implementation of the e -Migrate project by presenting the case 
based on actual progress and realistic projections at the RE stage so that 
implementation of this important project does not su ffer due to paucity of funds. 
Similarly, all possible efforts should be made to obtain the required funds for other 
Object Heads at RE stage. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The observation has been noted and the matter will be taken up with the Finance 
Ministry to obtain required fund at the RE stage. 
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 3 of 19) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
4. The Committee observes that the approval of building plan of Pravasi Bhartiya 
Kendra (PBK) was delayed on one or the other pretext for a very long period and only 
after a repeated persuasion the construction work of PBK has now been awarded to the 
contractor on firm rates. The progress of the project, both physical and in financial terms 
is reviewed by a Committee at least once in every month at the project site. The 
Committee now can expect that the work relating to PBK would be completed within the 
fixed time frame of 24 months. The Committee desire to be updated on the progress 
made in this regard on a regular basis.  
The Committee are however, not satisfied with the efforts made by the Ministry 
regarding establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBB) in  states. The Ministry has 
simply written to the States and awaiting replies. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should play proactive role and make concerted efforts in 
consultation with the State Governments at the high level so that th e scheme to 
construct PBBs in the States takes a shape at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 

19 
 
 
All out efforts are being made to ensure that the work relating to PBK is 
completed within the fixed time frame.  The progress of the project, both physical and in 
financial terms is regularly reviewed.  
Regarding the establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBB) in the States, 
the observation has been noted.  
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 4 of 19)  
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 
5. The Committee observe that the Ministry has made some efforts to get land or 
office space for existing PoE offices in Government owned buildings. PoE offices at 
Chennai, Hyderabad and Jaipur are rented in a building owned by the State 
Governments. PoE offi ces at Mumbai and Cochin are still working in private buildings. 
The Committee are, however, pained to learn that even after a lapse of several months, 
the Ministry has not received any proper response from State Governments or Urban 
Development Ministry except in one case where for PoE office at Thiruvanant hapuram, 
they have succeeded in getting office   accommodation. In this context, the Committee 
would also like to remind the Ministry about the suggestion given by them during on-the-
spot visit of PoE Offices, wherein the Ministry was asked to explore the possibilities to 
shift/place the PoE offices either in the Airport premises or any nearby places to the 
Airport for the benefit of emigrant workers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
matter should not be delayed further and should be taken up sincerely at the level of 
Minister of Civil Aviation/Urban Development Minister or concerned Chief Ministers to 
finalize the proposal of land or space to accommodate the remaining PoE Offices on 
priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry, after due consideration, feels that POE offices should be easily 
accessible to the emigrant workers, as they need this clearance before making their 
travel plans.  Offices within or near the airports may be diff icult to access.  The status of 
action taken on the Standing Committee‘s recommendation in each case is as under:  
  
  

20 
 
 
(i) POE, MUMBAI  
 
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs  (MEA) on 
30.12.2010 for providing accommodation to house the POE office at Mumbai in its 
newly constructed building for Regional Passport Officer (RPO) at Bandra Kurla 
Complex. The MEA on 20.01 .2011 informed that the completion of the construction of 
the new building is likely to take three more years and that the decision of allotting 
space will be taken after the RPO office is shifted to the newly constructed building.  
Further, Secretary, MOI A has on 29.04.2011, also written to the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Maharashtra. However, no response has been received so far.  
Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 
12.07.2011 for providing space for accom modation of POE office in the Government 
building under the control of Estate office at Mumbai.   
 
The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the 
matter with Chief Minister, Government of Maharashtra for allotting land for cons tructing 
MOIA‘s own building or office space in a government -owned building to accommodate 
POE office at Mumbai. 
   
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also 
requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development for allotting o ffice space for the 
POE office in a Central Government owned building at Mumbai. Protector General of 
Emigrants (PGE) has reminded the Principal Secretary, Urban Development 
Department (I), Govt. of Maharashtra on 6th Dec., 2012. 
 
 
(ii) POE, CHENNAI 
 
 Secretary, MOIA, wrote on 15.04.2011 to the Chief Secretary, Government of 
Tamil Nadu for allotment of a plot of land identified by MOIA in the K.K. Nagar, Chennai 
for constructing its own building.  This was followed up by a D.O. letter dated 
18.04.2011 from Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs to the Chief Minister, 
Government of Tamil Nadu to direct to the concerned authorities for allotment of the 
said plot of land.  However, the response from the Government of Tamil Nadu is still 
awaited. Further, S ecretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban 
Development Government of India on 12.07.2011 for providing space for 
accommodation for POE office in the Government building under the control of Estate 
office at Chennai.  
  
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the 
matter with Chief Minister, Government of Tamil Nadu for allotting land for constructing 
MOIA‘s own building or office space in a government owned building to accommodate 
POE office at Chennai. 
  
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also 
requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development for allotting office space for the 

21 
 
POE office at Chennai in a Central Government owned building. PGE has reminded the 
Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt. of Tamil Nadu on 6th Dec., 2012. 
 
 
(iii) POE, COCHIN 
 
 Secretary, MOIA has taken up the matter with Chief Secretary, Government of 
Kerala for allotting a plot of land measuring 1000 sq.m. in Cochin to house it s POE 
office.  Further, Secretary MOIA also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation for POE 
office in a Government building under the control of Estate office at Cochin.  The 
Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the matter with 
Chief Minister, Government of Kerala for allotting land for constructing MOIA‘s own 
building or office space in the government owned building to accommodate POE office 
at Cochin. 
   
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also 
requested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development for allotting office space for the 
POE office at Cochin in a Central Government owned building.  PGE has reminded the 
Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt. of Kerala on 6th Dec., 2012. 
 
(iv) POE, HYDERABAD 
  
 Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 29.04.2011 has written to the 
Chief Secretary, Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting a piece of land measuring 
about 1000 sq.m. at Hyderabad for constructing its own building to accommodate its 
field offices functioning in Hyderabad.  In response the Principal Secretary (Revenue), 
Government of Andhra Pradesh has directed to the Collector of Hyderabad for 
examining the proposal.  Further, Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, 
Ministry of Urb an Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation 
for POE office in a Government building under the control of Estate office at Hyderabad.   
  
 The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, on 20.12.2011, took up the 
matter with Chief M inister, Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting land for 
constructing MOIA‘s own building or office space in a government owned building to 
accommodate POE office at Hyderabad. The Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian 
Affairs on 20.12.2011 has also requ ested the Hon‘ble Minister for Urban Development 
for allotting office space for the POE office at Hyderabad in the Central Government 
owned building.  PGE has reminded the Principal Secretary to Govt. Municipal 
Administration & Urban Development Authority, Secretariat, Hyderabad on 6 th Dec., 
2012. 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 7 of 19) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 

22 
 
10.  The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has conducted a study report 
on ‗Impact Study on Know India Programme‘ through CII for analysis of performance of 
the programme and is exploring the possibilities to improve the quality of the 
programme. The Committee observe that recommendations of this study suggests an 
improvement in all the areas of the programmes viz pre -arrival, registration, arrival and 
departure assistance, programme scheduling, infrastructure and services and 
programme content also . The Committee, therefore, desire that these suggestions 
should be implemented from the next programme itself. The Committee also desire that 
the participants should not be restricted with the visit of only one participating State 
associated with a partic ular programme rather, they should be given an opportunity to 
take a view of diverse and heterogeneous Indian community representing different 
regions languages, cultures and faiths of present India. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Noted for compliance.    
 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
12. The Committee observe that the India Development Foundation of Overseas 
Indians (IDF -OI), a not -for-profit scheme Chaired by the Minister of MOIA has been 
established to serve as a credible single window to lead Overseas Indian Philanthropy 
into India‘s so cial development efforts and aims to provide a transparent and effective 
platform for volunteering, sharing knowledge, skills, expertise and social 
entrepreneurship along with contributions. It is being registered as a not -for–profit 
charity in US, Canada,  Europe (UK and Germany), Gulf and APAC region (Australia 
and New Zealand) that will be organically linked to IDF -OI India. The trust will partner 
with international, national and State level NGOs as well as Panchayati Raj institutions. 
The Committee obser ve that IDF -OI is in the process of short listing NGOs. The 
Committee, therefore, specifically cautions that the NGOs only with an established track 
record of being genuine in implementing various schemes/projects funded by the 
Government of India should b e selected for the purpose of implementation of the 
projects in a selfless manner in specific area of expertise. The selection of NGOs with 
credible and excellent track record only can inspire the faith and attract the contributors. 
The Committee are aware  that a large number of Overseas Indians are interested to 
invest in social sector but they usually hesitate in doing so looking the ground reality 
and prevalent work culture in India. Therefore, there is a need to channelize Diaspora 
philanthropy. The Com mittee also desire that through wide publicity, the Trust should 
first convince and then persuade the prospects with an assurance of safe and genuine 
handling of their contributions in the country of their origin. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

23 
 
 
IDF-OI has developed a Credibility Assessment Framework for short listing 
recognized and credible International, National and State -level NGO‘s with an 
established track record of implementing philanthropic projects in Health Care, 
Education, Self Help Groups  for women and sustainable livelihood. 
 
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 15 of 19)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 
13. The Committee are pleased to note that the Government has approved the 
proposal of setting up of a Pension and Life Insurance Fund (PLIF) for Overseas Indian 
Migrant workers in the ECR countries. The Scheme has been recently launched. Under 
the scheme, the  Ministry encourages the migrant workers with limited work years 
abroad to save for their old age, return and resettle through this scheme by making 
voluntary co-contribution. The Committee, however, have an apprehension that under 
the provision of voluntary contribution unskilled or semi-skilled workers may refrain from 
contributing to this scheme of Government of India without being convinced with the 
modalities/procedures of reaching or getting back the maturing amount. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that all the arrangements should be made for wide publicity. 
Awareness material containing information, frequently asked question (FAQ) in English, 
Hindi and in major Regional Languages relating to this scheme should be prepared and 
made available to the  workers at the stage of emigration clearance with immediate 
effect. Simultaneously, our missions/posts abroad should be provided with the same 
material for spreading awareness amongst the workers already working Overseas. The 
Committee also desire that po ssibilities should be explored to make the contribution 
mandatory so that the objectives of the scheme are achieved in a better way and every 
worker‘s life becomes happy and secure on return to India. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has made necessary arrangements for the wide publicity of PLIF 
Scheme.  Awareness material containing information, frequently asked questions (FAQ) 
in English, Hindi and in major Regional Languages relating to this scheme have been 
prepared which would be made avai lable to the workers at the stage of emigration 
clearance.  These materials would be provided to Indian Missions/Posts abroad for 
spreading awareness amongst the workers already working overseas. 

24 
 
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
          (Page 16 of 19) 
 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
14. The Committee were  surprised to note that even after the repeated 
recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry had  not been able to fill up the vacant 
posts in the Ministry and Po E offices. The Committee had expressed their concern to 
note that since eight years of the  establishment, the Ministry was still struggling to get 
its sanctioned strength of staff and functioning without  its own cadre. The Ministry was 
also not able to get proper response through the circular in other Ministries to fill the 
vacancies of PoE offices. In such situation, the vacancies in the existing PoEs and new 
PoE offices may not be filled up. The Committee once again reiterate d that the matter 
relating to staff should be continuously pursued with the M inister of Home Affairs and 
Minister of DOPT so that the issue of filling up the vacancies in the Ministry and PoE 
offices and creation of separate cadre was to be  resolved at th e earliest. The Ministry 
were also requested to apprise the Committee about the steps being taken to obtain the 
additional staff for the proposed new PoE offices at Jaipur, Guwahati and Rai Bareilly. 
 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 As regards vacancies in the POE offices, the vacancies are circulated to all the 
Ministries/Departments.  If adequate response is not received, the vacancies are filled 
up by outsourcing the staff by the respective POEs, including new POE offices.  
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 17 of 19) 
 
   
      
           
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 

25 
 
 
15. The Committee has been regularly discussing on several occasions about the 
coordination between MOIA and MEA. This becomes very important particularly in the 
emergencies like global natural calamities/political crisis etc. where Indian nationals are 
stranded and immediate and deliberate rescue and relief is required in such emergent 
situation. The Committee is aware that the MEA, comes into action through 
Missions/Posts and takes care of such immediate and emergent situations in the country 
where the crisis arises. But the Committee observe that almost nothing is left to be done 
by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs after bringing the Indian citizens in India as 
happened in the case of evacuation from Libya. The Ministry of Overseas Affairs is the 
nodal Ministry in the matters relating to NRIs and PIOs. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the MOIA must work in close association with MEA while dealing with such situations. 
Since, evacuation like situation or need for assistance to people of Indian origin may arise 
in several other countries facing political crisis, some budget allocation for handling such 
situation should be kept with MOIA. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation has been noted.  
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C  
(Page 18 of 19) 
 
         
Recommendation No.16 
 
16. The Committee observes that during August 1991 to Dec 2010 the NRI 
investment accounted for Rs. 29,347 crores. Keeping in mind the large Diaspora and 
sustainable growth of Indian economy despite the Global financial meltdown, the 
Committee looks forward to a higher rate of healthy investments by NRIs in India. The 
Committee recommend that Financial Services Division of the Ministry must work on 
some targets on yearly basis to attract NRI investment in India using all opportunities 
including PBDs. For this purpose, MOIA should also consult and deliberate with all the 
concerned Ministries/Departments/Agencies particularly with the Ministry of Commerce 
to chalk out a comprehensive plan to attract more and more investments in the fields  
where FDI is allowed by the Government. The Committee also desire that some more 
special incentives, tax benefits and exemptions, early start up of business and single 
window documentation facility should be provided to attract higher NRI investments. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Although Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs does not directly deal with policies 
related to investment by NRI‘s in India and Foreign Direct Investments, it is represented 
in the Foreign Investment Promotion Board that is serviced by the Department of 

26 
 
Economic Affairs and Board on Special Economic Zones that is serviced by the 
Department of Commerce. MOIA is also consulted by the Ministry of Finance and the 
Department of Commerce on policies pertaining to investment by Overseas Indi ans. 
MOIA is also kept informed of all matters relating to Overseas Indians. 
  
 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has established an organization, namely 
Overseas Indian facilitation Centre (OIFC) in 2007, to facilitate potential NRIs and 
overseas corporate bodies of overseas Indians that desire to invest in India. OIFC has 
organized several Investment and Interactive Meets/Road shows in different countries 
and also organized ‖market place‖ during Pravasi Bhartiya Divas in India. An electronic 
portal has also been launched by the Ministry to reply to the queries of potential 
overseas investors by OIFC and its knowledge partners to promote and facilitate 
economic engagement by Overseas Indians. The annual PBDs and regional PBDs also 
provide a platform for facilitation of investment by overseas Indians.  
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 19 of 19)  
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
 
                 
     CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
        The Committee note that the Budget Allocation of MOIA for the year 2012 - 13 is 
Rs. 114.77 crores comprising Revenue Section as Rs. 94.77 crores and Rs. 20.00 
crores as Capital Section. The Budget Estimates for the year 2011 -12 was Rs. 81.00 
crores which was kept at the same level at Revised Estimates (RE) stage and Rs. 41.23 
crores only were spent up to January 31st 2012. Amidst the trend of lower expenditure 
even than Revised Estimates during the last several years, it is very pleasing to learn 
that for the first time the Ministry would perhaps be able to spend hundred percent of BE 
and RE during the year 2011 -12. But the Committee are still not satisfied with the trend 
of expenditure being made in each quarter of the Financial Year. The Committee 
observe that during the last quarter of the year 2011 -12, 41.41 crores were to be spent 
out of the total BE/RE of Rs. 81 crores. The Committee is also not convinced at all with 
the reasons given by the Ministry stating that due to mandate of the Ministry, the 
maximum expenditure is being made in the last quarter of th e financial year. Since all 
the other activities/schemes of the Ministry except PBD are continuous activities, the 
expenditure and settlement should also be evenly distributed as far as possible during 
each quarter of the year. The Committee, therefore, de sire that by regular monitoring of 
the progress of the schemes/programmes, the Ministry should ensure that there is no 
accumulation of expenditure at the fag end of the financial year. The Committee also 
desire that as far as possible, the media awareness programmes should be scheduled 
equally during each quarter of the year with regular settlement of Bills. The Committee 
further desire that expenditure booked by Ministry of External Affairs/Missions/Posts 
and other agencies should also be obtained on regul ar basis for an early settlement 
during each quarter. The Committee hope that by these measures the issue of unevenly 
spread expenditure of the Ministry during each quarter of the year may be resolved 
appropriately. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 
 The observation has been noted. 
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 1 of 19) 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee expresses their concern over the lack of seriousness shown by 
the Ministry by not making any allocation of even single rupee for construction/purchase 
of buildings of PoE offices during the year 2012 -13. Surprisingly, no fund has been kept 
to establish the three new PoE offices at Jaipur, Rai Bareilly and Guwahati. The 
Committee take a serious view to note that on one side, the Ministry has stated that 
they are making all possible efforts to purchase space or accommodate existing PoE 
offices in Government buildings and they are also committed to establish three new PoE 
offices during the current year itself but on the other side, there is no Budgetary 
provision for that purpose. The Committee desires that the Ministry should make all 
sincere efforts to show their commitment to complete the work relating to establishment 
of the PoE offices at the earliest and provide sufficient fund for that purpose at RE 
stage.  
              
 The Committee also observes that a significant number of Posts are va cant in all 
the existing eight PoE offices and the three new PoE offices also require staff. Though, 
applications have been called from Ministries through circulars but it seems that there is 
very poor response. The Committee, therefore, desires that if th ere is no proper 
response from the employees of other Ministries in joining PoE offices, the Ministry 
should try other options to fill up the vacancies in PoEs in the shortest possible time so 
that the emigrant workers do not face more difficulty. The Comm ittee also desire that 
the new PoE offices should also be provided with the staff required to handle work load 
and smooth functioning of these offices and the Ministry should explore the possibilities 
of opening new PoE Offices at places like Dehradun to c ater to the needs of the people 
residing at difficult hilly areas. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Budget allocation for construction/purchase of buildings for POE offices is made 
when a proposal for acquiring land/building is under consideration of the Ministry.  Since 
no proposal for acquiring land/building was under consideration  when BE 2012-13 was 
prepared, no funds were sought. 
 
 POE office at Jaipur has already started functioning in a building provided 
by the Rajasthan Govt.  Adequate funds for salary an d the office expenses etc. have 
been sought in the Revised Estimate (RE). 
 F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C   
                                      (Page 8 of 19)  
Recommendation No.7 

29 
 
 
 The Committee note that as a result of different waves of migration driven by 
mercantilism, colonialism and now, globalization over 25 million Overseas Indians 
reside in around 189 countries of the world which is claimed to be the second largest 
Diaspora i n the world. But, unlike countries like China, USA, etc. India has not been 
able to estimate the exact number of Indian Diaspora residing outside India. In 
Committee‘s view for better functioning and appropriate policy framing of the newly 
created Ministry for Indian Diaspora, the first and foremost work is to take initiatives to 
estimate the actual number to Indians living outside India and preparation of a database 
in this regard. It is unfortunate to observe that the Ministry created for handling all the  
matters relating to Overseas Indian has no authentic data of its own and they have to 
depend upon the estimates projected in International documents. The Committee have 
been regularly asking the Ministry to take necessary initiatives in this regard but ti ll date 
the Ministry has not come out with any concrete solution. The Committee are not 
convinced with the problems/difficulties shown by the Ministry based on the responses 
from Embassies/Missions/Posts or the hurdles of rules of some countries. As 
recommended earlier, the work should be undertaken on priority basis appointing a task 
force or selecting the agencies having expertise in this field. The Committee also 
strongly recommend that necessary fund for this purpose should be obtained from the 
Finance Ministry at RE stage in view of importance and urgency of the matter. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It may not be feasi ble to compile exact data base of the entire Indian Diaspora 
residing outside India due to the sensitiveness of the country concerned and  the People 
of Indian Origin (PIOs) —who are citizens of that country -themselves. The number of 
PIOs is based on the estimates made by the Indian Missions, and sufficient as inputs for 
policy issues.  
  In so far as Indian passport -holders are concerned, dat a on emigration 
clearance given to the Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) category is available with 
this Ministry. In so far as non -ECR category is concerned, the data of Non -Resident 
Indians (NRIs) leaving the country or returning, each year, is availab le with the 
Government.  
 Data on Indian passport -holders who have over -stayed abroad —having, for 
example, initially gone on tourist visas—is not available. 
  
 Estimates made by the Indian Missions cover all the above categories and, as 
stated, are sufficient as policy input. 
  
 The Ministry humbly submits that it is of the considered view that in view of the 
above, a separate study may neither be feasible, not affordable.  
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 10 of 19) 
Recommendation No. 9 
 

30 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry is organizing ‗Know India 
Programme‘ (KIP) with the aim of creating awareness about the phenomenal 
transformation taking place in India and the country‘s progress from just a destination 
for culture, heritage and art to an emerging powerhouse in the global economic system. 
The Committee also observe that the Ministry propose to launch another programme 
called ‗Study India Programme‘ (SIP) in addition to ‗Know India Programme‘ (KIP). SIP 
will be held twice a year with the enhanced Budgetary provision under the budgetary 
head of know India Programme (KIP). The duration of SIP will be four weeks in 
comparison to three weeks of KIP. No doubt, these programmes provide a forum for 
students and young professionals o f Indian origin to bond with contemporary India in 
real terms and also share their views, expectations and experiences in their ancestral 
country. The Committee also feel that the participants of the KIP and SIP, apart from the 
visit programme and study mo dules, may be entrusted with and educated about all the 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry and the initiatives taken by the Ministry with 
respect to Overseas Indians, PIOs and NRIs for a multiplying effect on he Overseas 
Indians in the International scenario. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The participants of KIP interact with the officers of the Ministry, when they are 
briefed about all the schemes and programmes of the Ministry.  If possible, they also 
call on the Hon‘ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
      (Page 12 of 19)  
  

31 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 
 The Committee note that 10,29,131 number of OCI cards have been issued to 
the people of Indian origin by February, 2012. During the year 2011 -12 there was a 
proposal of issuing 2.45 lakh OCI cards whereas, during the year 2012-13 only 2,30,000 
more cards are proposed to be issued with a Budget of Rs. 1.45 crore. The Co mmittee, 
therefore, desire that when there is every possibility of more demand of these cards 
after the proposed merger of OCI card and PIO card schemes, the target and outlay 
should be revised appropriately at RE stage so that maximum number of people can get 
the benefit during the year 2012 -13. The Committee also find that there is a proposal to 
merge OCI card and PIO card schemes. The Bill moved by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
in this regard has already been examined by the Standing Committee on Home Aff airs 
and Report has also been submitted. The Committee, therefore, desire that MOIA 
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs so that suitably amended Bill 
incorporating the suggestions of the Committee on Home Affairs is brought before t he 
Parliament at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Bill has been presented in the Rajya Sabha on 8th Dec., 2011 and is pending 
at present with the Rajya Sabha.  
 
 
 
 
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 11 of 19) 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
11. The Committee note that with an objective to make higher education in India 
accessible to the children of overseas Indians and publicize India as an education hub, 
the Ministry under the ‗Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC)‘ has been 
providing 100 scholarships every year for undergraduate courses. The Committee also 
note that the Ministry has recently increased the scholarship amount from US $ 3600 
per student per annum to US $ 5000 but has kept the number of scholarships at the 
level of 100 for the last several years. The Committee are more surprised to note that 
the allocation for this scheme under BE 2012 -13 has been reduced to Rs. 5 crores from 
the allocation of Rs. 5.44 crores in BE 2011 -12. The scholarship amount has thus been 

32 
 
increased but the allocation has been reduced to a lower level. This year 168 students 
have submitted applications for the year 2011 -12 and 175 applications have been 
received for 2010 -11 batch. This shows that more students have been showing their 
interest in getting education in India and than the number of scholarships being offered 
after the revision in scholarship amount the number of aspirants will certainly increase. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should appropriately 
increase the number of scholarships as well as the allocation at RE stage so that the 
interested students may be provided with maximum number of scholarships to study in 
India under the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter of increasing allocation will be taken up at the appropriate time in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance.  
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 14 of 19)  
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee are surprised to note that even after the repeated 
recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry has not been able to fill up the vacant 
posts in the Ministry and PoE offices. The Committee expresses their concern to note 
that since eight years of the establishment, the Ministry is still struggling to get its 
sanctioned strength of staff and functioning without its own cadre. The Ministry is also 
not able to get proper response through the circular in  other Ministries to fill the 
vacancies of PoE offices. In such situation, the vacancies in the existing PoEs and new 
PoE offices may not be filled up. The Committee once again reiterate that the matter 
relating to staff should be continuously pursued with  the Minister of Home Affairs and 
Minister of DOPT so that the issue of filling up the vacancies in the Ministry and PoE 
offices and creation of separate cadre is resolved at the earliest. The Ministry should 
also apprise the Committee about the steps bein g taken to obtain the additional staff for 
the proposed new PoE offices at Jaipur, Guwahati and Rai Bareilly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As regards vacancies in the POE offices, the vacancies are circulated to all the 
Ministries/Departments.  If adequate re sponse is not received, the vacancies are filled 
up by outsourcing the staff by the respective POEs, including new POE offices.  
F.No.H-11021/13/2012-P&C 
(Page 17 of 19) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         ANANTH KUMAR, 
12th March, 2013            Chairman,  
Phalguna, 21, 1932 (Saka)       Standing Committee on External Affairs, 
    
 
 

33 
 
                                            
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 12TH MARCH, 2013  
  
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
Sl.No  Name  
MEMBERS 
(LOK SABHA) 
2. Shri Jose K. Mani  
3.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
4.  Shri J. Ramesh  
5.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
6. Dr. Girija Vyas 
7.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
9.  Dr. Karan Singh  
10. Shri D. P. Tripathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken 
by Govt. on the recommendations contained in the 13th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 
2012-13. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
 
4.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the Chairman to 
finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the suggestions made by the Members 
and present the same to Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

35 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                      16 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2,3, 4, 5,6,8, 9,10,11,12,13,14,15 &16  
. 
 Total-15 
 
Percentage:  93.75% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. - NIL 
Total- 00 
 
 Percentage: 0% 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Total- 01 
 
 Percentage: 06.25% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. - NIL 
Total-00 
 
Percentage: 0% 