 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
                             FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  2 
 

 
 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 3rd December, 2009   
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd December, 2009      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2009 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
      PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ………………  (iii)  
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………  (iv)   
PART-I 
 
 
I. Implementation of the Committee‟s Recommendations….  1  
II. Budgetary Allocation…………………………………………. ..     2  
III.  Establishment Strength…..…………………………………..…          7 
IV. International Cooperation…………………………………..…..  11  
A. Myanmar………………………….………………...........  14  
B. Bhutan……………………..…………..………………..…  15  
C. Sri Lanka……………….……………………………..…..  17 
D. Bangladesh…………………………………………..…..  19 
E. Nepal…………...............………………………………....  20 
F. Afghanistan…………………………...…………………..  22 
G. Eurasian Countries……………………....……………....  26 
H. Aid to Disaster Relief………………………………….…... 27 
I. South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.  28  
 
V. Passport and Visa Services……………………………………… 33 
VI. Indian Council for Cultural Relations……………………………. 36 
VII. International Engagements……………………………………….. 40 
A. IBSA(India-Brazil-South Africa)…………………………… 40  
B. IRC (India-Russia-China)……..……………………………. 41 
C. Joint Statement on the Advancement of the Strategic and  
Global Partnership between India and Japan……………… 42 
D. Agreement on the Development of Peaceful Uses of 
Nuclear Energy………………………………………………... 43 
E. Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India                            
Pipeline Project…………………………………..…………….. 44 
F. South Asia……….…………………………………………….. 44 
 
VIII. Others ………………………………………………………………….. 45  
A. Agreement on Social Security with the Kingdom 
of Belgium………………………………………..…  45  
B. Legal Counselling/Assistance to Indian Workers in Gulf. 46 
C. Racial Attacks on Indians Living Abraod……………………. 47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
PART II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 51  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held……………  62 
on 23.10.2009. 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held…………….  64 
            on 30.11.2009 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(2009-2010) 
  
Smt. Sushma Swaraj – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
    Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
11. Shri Digvijay Singh 
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
13. Smt. Supriya Sule 
14. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
15. Shri Takam Sanjoy  
16. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
17. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
                           Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil 
24. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
25. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
28. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
29. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
30. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey  - Executive Officer 
5. Ms. Kiran Bhargava  - Executive Assistant 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
          I, the Chair person of the Standing Committee on External Affairs, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Second 
Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (200 9-2010) on Demands for Grants 
(2009-2010) of the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs on 23rd October, 2009. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 30th 
November, 2009. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 23rd October, 2009 and 
30th November, 2009 are given in Annexure I and II to the Report. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of External Affairs for 
placing before them the material and information which they desired in connection with 
examination of the Demand s for Grants (2009 -2010).  The Committee also wish to express 
their thanks in particular to the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
appearing before the Committee and placing their considered views before them. 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI         SMT. SUSHMA SWARAJ, 
30th  November, 2009                                     Chairperson,  
9 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)               Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
  
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
 The 20 th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs on Demands 
for Grants of Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2008 -2009 was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 16.04.2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.04.2008. The Report contained 
15 recommendations/ observations.   
 
1.2 In compliance of Direction 73 -A of the Directions by the Speaker, the Minister 
of State for External Affairs made a statement in Lok Sabha on 17 th  December, 2008 
giving the status of implementation of the recommendations made by the Commi ttee 
in their 20 th Report (14 th L.S.).  An analysis of the Ministry‟s statement showed that 
the Government had accepted all the 15 recommendations.  Out of these, 09 
recommendations were implemented by the Government, 05 recommendations were 
under process of implementation and one recommendation was to be implemented. 
 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken replies received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on the above mentioned Report, the Committee presented their 22 nd Action 
Taken Report to the Houses on 18th December, 2008.   The Committee in their 22 nd 
Action Taken Report have commented on the Action Taken reply furnished by the 
Ministry in respect of recommendation No. 4, 6, 9,10,11,15 contained in the 2 0th 
Report.  Final Action Taken Statement on the c omments contained in the 22 nd Action 
Taken Report has been received from the Ministry and will be laid in the Parliament. 
 
1.4 Regarding the status of implementation of the recommendation the Foreign 
Secretary during the course of evidence informed the Committee that: 
“We have taken note of all the previous recommendations and 
observations made by the Standing Committee on External Affairs and it 
gives me great pleasure to report to you that the Government has taken 
steps to imp lement most of these recommendations.  They have also 
formed an important element in the formation of our budget.” 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER II 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
 The Foreign Policy of India aims at establishing a peaceful extended 
neighborhood and a supportive international environment.  Such an environment can 
ensure accelerated economic development of India and help in safeguarding India‟s 
national security.  The function of the Ministry of E xternal Affa irs is to execute this 
Foreign Policy of India to ensure that the designated objectives are achieved. 
 
2.2 The budget of the Ministry has traditionally  been a Non - Plan one.  The P lan 
component has generally been small, however, it has been increasing over the years. 
 
2.3 The total Demand s for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2009-10 are for 6293.00 crore which is 2 4.31% more than BE 2008 -09 and 8 .38% 
less than RE 2008 -09. Out of the BE 2009 -10 of Rs . 6293.00 crore,  Rs. 5664.00 
crore is under Non-plan and Rs. 629.00 core is under Plan. 
 
2.4 The Non -plan component of the BE 2009 -10 is Rs. 5664.00 which is more 
than BE 2008-09, Rs. 4483.00 crore and less than RE 2008-09, Rs. 6418.42 crore. 
 
A.  Overall Budgetary Proposals 
 
 
2.5 The Total Budgetary Allocation for the MEA  during the last 4 years along with 
RE for the respective years including Actual & shortfall in utilization of RE is as 
follows: 
                                                                                          (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Increase 
at RE Stage 
Shortfall in 
Utilization of RE 
2005-06 3928.00 4182.00 4089.00 254.00   93.00 
2006-07 3695.00 4095.00 3949.00 400.00 146.00 
2007-08 4433.00 4783.00 4572.39 350.00 210.61 
2008-09 5062.00 6868.42 - 1806.42 - 
2009-10 6293.00     
 
2.6 It is evident from the table above  that the initial budgetary allocations during 
the last 4 budget years were raised at RE stage.  The actual utilization were, 
however, less than the increased allocation made at RE stage resulting in shortfall in 
utilization of funds every year.  The revised allocation made during 2008 -09 is Rs. 

3 
 
1806.42 crore more than the allocation made at BE stage.  When asked to 
categorically explain the shortfall in utilization of the Revised Estimates (RE) over the 
years and the steps that have been/ are being undertaken by Ministry of Extern al 
Affairs to arrest this trend, the Ministry in written reply has stated that: 
 
“Efforts have always been made to ask for budget allocations based on 
realistic assessment of the requirement of  funds. In order to ensure full 
utilization of the funds allocated for various activities/projects, an 
Expenditure Monitoring Committee (EMC) under the Chairmanship of 
the Foreign Secretary has been set -up for regular monitoring of 
expenditure and utilisat ion of the budget allocation of the Ministry. The 
EMC reviews expenditure plans of all concerned Divisions of the Ministry 
each quarter on regular basis for all the ongoing Plan and Non -Plan 
schemes / programmes to examine the expenditure pattern of the 
Ministry at the end of each quarter to oversee whether targets set in 
percentage for each quarter was being utilized as planned. During the 
year 2008-09, the EMC has regularly reviewed the expenditure pattern 
of the Ministry. Spending Units found lagging beh ind in the utilisation of 
their budget allocation were requested to increase their pace of 
expenditure”. 
 
 2.7 On being asked as to when the Expenditure Monitoring Committee (EMC) was 
set up and the number of times the Committee has met and its recommendation and 
impact in respect of proper utilization of budgetary a llocation, the Ministry in post -
evidence reply has stated as under: 
 “The Expenditure Monitoring Committee (EMC) was set up in August 
2003 as an institutional mechanism for regular mo nitoring of the 
utilization of budgetary allocations of the Ministry.  
 
The EMC meets every quarter of the financial year to review the actual 
utilization of funds by various spending Divisions of the Ministry during 
the preceding quarter vis -a-vis their a pproved budgetary allocation. The 
recommendations/suggestions of the EMC for various spending 
Divisions include (a) Need for evenly spreading of expenditure 
throughout the year, (b) Need to anticipate excess/savings in a time -
bound manner. The identified s avings under various heads of account 
are re -appropriated and utilized for augmentation of those in need of 
additional funds so as to avoid any surrender of funds. In case the 
utilization of budgetary allocations by the concerned Divisions is below 
the tar get, the reasons are examined in detail with a focus on the 
feasibility of increasing the pace of expenditure to achieve the desired 
target.” 
 

4 
 
2.8 When asked about the expenditure as on 31.3.2009 for the year 2008 -09, the 
Ministry stated that:  
 “The total expenditure as on 31.01.2009 for the year 2008 -09 was Rs. 
6,745.90 crore, which was 98.21% of RE 2008 -09 of Rs. 6,868.42 
crore”.  
 
2.9 Over the years , it is observed that in spite of being unable to fully utilise the 
revised allocation, huge enhancement is  sought at RE stage.  In its justification , the 
Ministry stated that: 
“A unique feature of this Ministry is that the bulk of its outlays are on 
projects and programmes which are to be implemented in foreign 
countries. The BE and RE are framed on the basis of the various 
commitments made at the political level. It is often found that political 
and security developments in the recipient state influence the progress 
of our proposed projects. This makes it imperative that there is 
consultation with the sovereig n government on the other side to reac h 
mutually acceptable agreement…It has to be noted that the Ministry has 
to deal with sovereign governments and operate in foreign environments 
where our effective control is limited. While every attempt is made to 
negotiate the terms of the project and obtain agreement between the 
parties, because of the very nature of operating in foreign environments 
where the effective control of the Indian side is limited, there exists the 
potential for time and cost overruns as well as unspent provision made in 
the budget.”   
 
2.10 The Ministry was also asked about the reasons that necessitated considerable 
enhancement of 35.68% of budgetary allocation for the year 2008 -09 at RE stage  
and its justifications thereof. The Ministry in their written reply has stated that:  
“The main reasons for seeking an increase in RE 08 -09 were the 
following: 
 
 Payment of India‟s Assessed Contribution of US$ 95.6 million and 
India‟s Voluntary Contribution of US $ 100 million to SAARC Development 
Fund (SDF) offered by our Prime Minister during the 12th SAARC Summit 
in Islamabad in January 2004 and approved by the Cabinet subsequently.  
 
 Standby Credit Facility of Rs. 300 crore extended to Bhutan.  
 
 Standby Credit Facility of Rs. 500 crore extended to Maldives. 
 
 Implementation of recommendations of 6th Pay Commission, 
anticipated increase in Foreign Allowance, opening of new Posts, increase 
in tuition fees, cost of travel, cost of goods and services, cost of medical 
treatment and hospitalization and depreciation in the value of the INR vis-
a-vis US Dollar.” 

5 
 
 
2.11 The Ministry was asked to explain the reasons for considerable reduction at 
RE stage in Plan allocation and substantial enhancement under the Non -Plan 
Allocation at RE stage.  The Ministry in their written reply has stated that: 
“The reason  for considerable reduction at RE stage in Plan allocation 
was the reduced requirement of funds for various projects being 
implemented in neighbo uring countries particularly in Nepal and 
Myanmar. The off -take of Loans to Bhutan was also at a lesser level 
than projected at BE level.” 
 
2.12 Under the Sub -head „Plan‟, Rs.629.00 crore have been allocated under  the 
Revenue Section. However, Z ero allocation is made under Capital Section under th e 
Sub-head „Plan‟.  While furnishing the reasons for zero allocation, the Ministry replied 
as under: 
“The Capital Section under the Head Plan mainly caters to the 
Loans/Advances being extended to the neighbo uring countries. During 
the time of preparation o f BE 2009-10, no proposal for payment of Loan 
was under consideration and therefore the allocation under this Head is 
zero”. 
 
2.13 On being enquired about total projected Demands for Grants for the year 
2009-10 of the Ministry , the representative of the Ministry informed  during the 
evidence, as under:  
“We had projected a Demand for about Rs. 7 ,400.00 crore, but what we 
got was slightly less (Rs. 6 ,293 crore), but there is not too much gap in 
it.” 
 
2.14 The total proposed outlay under Plan head for the year 2009 -10 is stated to be 
Rs.1,274.70 crore but only Rs. 629.00  crore has reportedly been appro ved.  In this 
context, the Committee desired to know whether  it will be feasible for the Ministry to 
fulfill all its commitments/ targets with lesser allocation, the Ministry replied as under: 
“As of now, it appears that the Ministry will be able to fulfill its 
commitments with the Plan funds allocated in BE 2009 -10.  In case it is 
felt that additional funds would be required, the Planning Commission 
would be approached at the  RE stage for higher allocation and it seems 
that none of the planned projects would be affected due to lower 
allocation”. 
 
2.15 On being enquired about the effect of Government of India‟s austerity drive on 
the Ministry, the representative from the Ministry of External Affairs, during the 

6 
 
evidence submitted that there has been a 10 percent and 5 percent cut on the Non -
Plan. While elaborating on the issue, it was further stated that: 
“(We) soon will be having our R evised Estimate meeting in the first week 
of November. There we will come to know whether this 5 percent cut has 
been absorbed and then we are given a higher requirement at the RE 
stage or not.  Every year the Finance Ministry ann ounces this cut.  At the 
RE stage sometimes it is absorbed and sometimes it is not.  So, we live 
with that once we come to know how much they are going to give us at RE 
stage.” 
 
2.16 During the course of evidence, Members of the Committee deliberated upon 
the current contours of Indian Foreign Policy and reflected upon the need to re -orient 
India‟s foreign policy and adoption of new ideas in its conduct, in light of the global 
scenario and new challenges in the immediate neighborhood.  
 
2.17 To p roject India abroad , audio-visual media is a very effective  medium.  
However, as per Outcome Budget 2009 -10, under the Head „Schemes/Programme‟ 
and Sub head „Advertising & Publicity‟, no provision has been made for „documentary 
films made on Missions‟ request for  effective projection of India among International 
Media‟.   While dwelling upon the reasons thereof, the Ministry stated as under: 
“PD Division has been regularly making doc umentary films on requests 
from and in coordination with  our missions.  Provision for making such 
documentaries is included within the overall budget of PD Division. [PD 
Division‟s budget is included unde r Advertising and Publicity].  An 
allocation of Rs.17.25 crores in the Current Financial Year has been made 
for effective projection o f India abroad through audio -visual publicity, 
which includes making of documentaries.” 
 
2.18 During the course of the evidence, while further replying to Me mbers query on 
Ministry‟s budget on International P ublicity, the Foreign Secretary informed the 
Committee that: 
“In terms of publicity budget of the Foreign Ministry, I could concede that 
the amount that w e have for publicity is fa r too less in terms of what we 
should be doing on the ground in the projection of our public diplomacy, 
for our cultural projections.  We have only Rs. 22 crore for advertising and 
external publicity out of our total budget of Rs. 6200 crore.” 
 
2.19 The Foreign Secretary further submitted that: 
 
“…In addition to that, when every Mission makes their annual budgetary 
plan, they are given an allocation for publicity which is Rs. 31 crore.  If you 
add Rs. 22 crore to this, it will make Rs. 53 crore.”  

7 
 
CHAPTER III 
ESTABLISHMENT STRENGTH 
 
The Committee in its 20 th Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2008 -09 
during 14th Lok Sabha had urged the Ministry that there should be no further delay in 
deciding the proposed expansion of the cadre strength, keeping in view Ministry of 
External Affairs‟ enlarged role and responsibilities brought about by India‟s increasing 
international engagements. 
 
3.2 While dwelling upon the issue  during the evidence, the Foreign Secretary 
stated that: 
 
“…The issue of expansion of the Indian Foreign Service in terms of 
augmentation of the Officers and Staff strength is very much a point of  
concern for us and we have, in fact, obtained Cabinet approval for the 
expansion of the service both in terms of th e numbers of officers being 
inducted into the service as also provision for some lateral entry because 
at the middle to little beyond middle level we  do have a shortage of 
officers to man the various positions.” 
 
3.3   During the evidence, representative from the Ministry informed that the 
present officer strength is around 628 and after the approval given by the Cabinet , it 
would go up to  1,014 over a period of 10 years. While further elaborating on the 
issue, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs stated that: 
 
“It is not really possible to add them at one go.  We also have a structure 
into the cadre.  There will be recruitment. Our recruitment is going up to 30 
Indian Foreign Service probationers whom we will be taking now through 
the UPSC system.  That in itself involves an increase of over 150, over ten 
years because you can not take them all at one go.  Similarly, the total 
expansion involved is 314 posts of officers and 200 posts of staff and we 
are concentrating between the levels of Under Secretary and Director 
which is the key level at which we have missing people.” 
 
3.4 During the evidence, it was further stated that most shortage is there in terms 
of the junior level - Under Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Director and same applies 
in the Mission at th at level and although the Ministry is expanding,  the Heads of 
Mission are going to be limited. 
 
 
 

8 
 
3.5 In the process of expansion of IFS cadre, the importance of training in view of 
the evolving international scenario and the diversification in the work profile  of the 
Ministry cannot be undermined. In its reply regarding sectoral allocations under the 
Head - „Training‟, the Ministry stated as follows: 
 
“Under this head of account provision is made for anticipated expenditure 
on the activities of the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) which includes 
Professional Courses for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD), basic professional 
training courses and in -service training programmes for Foreign Service 
officers etc. 
 
Funds amounting to Rs. 2.33 crore were surrendered in RE 08 -09 as 
some of the courses planned were deferred till the financial year 2009 -10.  
BE 2009-10 has been fixed at Rs. 9. 82 crore to take care of the regular 
activities and the deferred ones.” 
 
3.6 In this context, the Ministry was asked to provide details of courses deferred 
and the reasons therefor e, the Ministry in its post-evidence reply has furnished as 
under: 
“The 45 th Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD),  which was 
scheduled to be held in April -May, 2008 had to be advanced to January -
February, 2008 (during financial year 2007-08). Part payment pertaining to 
expenditure on 45 th PCFD was made in 2007 -08 and t he rest of the 
payments were made in the financial year 2008-09.  
 
In addition, provision of Rs. 1.75 to 2 .00 crore was kept for Mid -Career 
training programme for Joint Secretary level officers, which was scheduled 
to be held in January-February, 2009 (dur ing financial year 2008 -09) was 
deferred to April, 2009 (during the current financial year 2009 -10) due to 
administrative reasons.” 
  
3.7 During the evidence the Committee raised the ir concerns regarding non-
availability of interpreters from Hindi to various foreign langu ages and vice versa .  
Dwelling upon the issue, the Foreign Secretary acknowledged that: 
 
“We need to develop that cadre of interpreters in Hindi who can do this 
because diplomatic terminology and language s is such….We have 
developed the skill of interpreting in other foreign languages.  In fact, we 
have one Chinese language Interpreter in the Ministry, who is equally 
proficient in Hindi.  So, he is doing it from Hindi to Chinese and Chinese to 
Hindi.” 
 
 

9 
 
3.8 While further responding to q ueries raised by the Committee , the Foreign 
Secretary added that: 
“…The propagation of Hindi and the level of usage of Hindi in the Ministry, 
we are constantly stressing and also propagation of Hindi abroad, as part 
of what the ICCR does through its cultur al centres is very important. The 
publication of the material is done in Hindi…But interpreting in Hindi 
requires higher skill and we need t o develop that level of skill. We will pay 
special attention to it by putting it on the agenda.”   
 
3.9 In light of long pending proposal with the Ministry to appoint interpreters from 
Hindi language to foreign language s instead of English language to foreign 
languages at present, the Ministry was asked to elaborate upon the  steps that have 
been taken to appoint interp reters from Hindi language to foreign languages and the 
development made so far in thi s regard.  The Ministry in post -evidence reply has 
stated as under: 
“In 2003, following instructions from the PMO and EAM, the Ministry has 
undertaken a major exercise to  assess the availability of interpreters from 
Hindi to foreign languages.   In this context, Territorial Divisions as well as 
Hindi Section in the Ministry were asked to compile lists of private 
interpreters from Hindi to different foreign languages, and vi ce versa, who 
could be used during incoming visits of foreign dignitaries.   Similarly, 
Missions abroad were also asked to identify the availability of individuals 
who could be used for interpretation between Hindi and the local 
languages.  Many of the Miss ions were able to identify private individuals 
with such bilingual ability, even if they did not have formal training in 
interpretation.  As a result of this exercise, the Ministry has been able to 
build up a fairly comprehensive database of individuals who can be used 
for such interpretation, both in India and abroad.   
 
In addition to the above, MEA also has a small in -house cadre of 
Interpreters, who are recruited through the UPSC.   These interpreters 
serve both at headquarters of the Ministry, as well as  in some of the 
Missions and Posts abroad.   Due to the limited number of posts available 
in the cadre, only the major international languages are represented in the 
cadre.  However, almost all of the internal interpreters of the Ministry have 
a working kno wledge of Hindi, and they can be used for interpretation 
between Hindi and the foreign language they have learnt.  
 
As such, there are no educational or training facilities in India that 
specifically teach interpretation between Hindi and foreign languages.   
Such interpretation/translation courses that exist are only between English 
and other foreign languages.   In order to formally recruit individuals with 
academic qualifications for interpretation between Hindi and foreign 
languages, the existence of such educational facilities is a pre-requisite.” 

10 
 
 
3.10 While taking note of over all state of affairs,  the Ministry was asked that in the 
era of globalization does the Ministry feel the need to redefine the role of the Ministry 
of External Affairs with a view to provide new look to every aspect being dealt  by the 
Ministry especially in the field of manpower and resources , including proper 
infrastructure so as to ensure  quick disbursal of humanitarian aid  etc. and if so, can 
the Ministry set a time -frame within which this could be made possible while 
underlining the need for carrying out such drastic change in the system.   
 
3.11 The Ministry in its post-evidence reply furnished as under: 
 
“Ministry has been making all possible efforts to improve 
infrastructure f acilities both at the Headquarters as also in Indian 
Missions abroad. During the recent past, several steps have been 
taken for better upkeep of office space and to provide modern 
furniture to offices of the Ministry. Some offices have been 
completely remodeled on modern lines. Efforts are also underway to 
upgrade the equipment in all offices subject to budgetary constraints. 
During the last financial year, special allocation of Rs.39 crores was 
made for improvement of infrastructure facilities in consular and visa 
wings in our Missions abroad. Taking advantage of this allocation, a 
large number of our missions have taken steps to upgrade 
infrastructure facilities wherever possible. Steps were also taken to 
relocate some of our missions to better premises ke eping in view 
their space and functional requirements.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
 
 
 Promoting economic and technical cooperation with other developing countries 
has acquired a new dimension in India‟s relationship with other countries and regional 
groupings.  This has acquired greater importance in India‟s Foreign Policy particularly 
due to the strong economic growth process at home that has made it more viable and 
also provided India‟s emerging sectors an opportunity to enter  markets hitherto 
unexplored.  Increased budgetary allocation to financial and economic cooperation is 
thus a reflection of this aspect. 
 
4.2 An important feature of the sizeable chunk of the Ministry‟s outlay is in 
designing and implementation of projects  and programmes in other countries.  
However, the p rogress of such projects is conditioned by the internal political and 
security developments in the recipient countries. It needs to be noted that the Ministry 
has to deal with Sovereign Governments and ope rate in an external environment 
where Ministry‟s effective control is limited. 
 
4.3 The Ministry was asked to furnish a detailed note on the role and responsibility 
of the Ministry in identification and execution of the Projects in various countries.  The 
Ministry in its written reply has informed as under: 
 
 “The nature, requirement and purpose of each project being varied, 
the process of their identification and execution also varies. Some 
projects are executed on humanitarian groun ds and, in order to 
promote good will for India , some may be identified on strategic 
considerations and accordingly executed. Many projects are also 
selected by the Ministry based on the value addition they bring to the 
community where the projects are being executed , which also 
provide India an opportunity to showcase its skills, technology and 
human resource capacities that she has developed over the course 
of years. 
 
 The projects are identified in consultation with the Missions and the 
host government, where required. Th ereafter the process of their 
execution also varies depending on the nature of project. In most 
cases, they are executed through Indian companies and in some 

12 
 
cases, under the supervision of the Indian consultant, through local 
companies. 
 
It has been India ‟s endeavour to act in conformity with the best aid -
effectiveness principles, taking fully into account the local 
government priorities, in co -ordination with other donors, using local 
sub-contactors and material as practical, and with miniscule 
proportion of budget on security and salaries (unlike the case of other 
donor countries i.e. USAID, DFID, EC, WB, ADB, etc. where these 
components constitute as high as 65% of the overall budget).” 
 
4.4 The proposed outlays and approved outlays for Annual Plan 2009-10 for 
various schemes of Ministry of External Affairs are as under: 
    
       (Rs. Crore)   (Rs. Crore)  
Name of the Scheme Annual Plan (2009-10) 
Proposed outlay 
Annual Plan (2009-10) 
Approved outlay 
Punatsangchu-I  
Hydero electric 
Project (Bhutan) 
500.00 239.00 
Construction of four 
Integrated check 
posts along selected 
India-Nepal Border 
(Nepal) 
30.00 15.00 
Five cross border rail 
link between India and 
Nepal 
14.00 8.00 
Development of Road 
infrastructure in the 
Terai Region of Nepal 
100.00 40.00 
Naumere Hydro 
electric Project in 
Nepal 
9.00 5.00 
Transmission Line 
Project from Pul -e-
Khumi to Kabul 
(Afghanistan) 
70.00 35.00 
Kaladan Multimodal 
Transit Project 
(Myanmar) 
137.00 25.00 
Mangdhechu HEP 
(Myanmar) 
170.00 80.00 
Punatsangchhu-II  
HEP(Myanmar) 
90.00 40.00 
 

13 
 
4.5 The table indicates that there has been substantial difference between the 
amount of Proposed outlays and Approved outlay s. On being asked about the 
reasons for lesser allocations in Approved o utlay during the year 2009 -10 for the 
projects in the above mentioned countries and  its impact on these international 
projects being executed by Ministry of External Affairs , the Ministry in its reply has  
stated that: 
 “Bhutan 
 
Punatsangchhu-I HEP is being implemented under the Plan budget of the 
Ministry of External Affairs for which funds are allocated by the Planning 
Commission. This Ministry had projected requirement of Rs. 500 crores 
(Plan Loan of Rs. 300 crores and Plan Grant of Rs. 200 crores) for 2009 -
10 based on the recommendation o f the Punatsangchhu -I Hydropower 
Authority (PHPA). Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 239 crores as 
Plan Grant and no fund under Plan Loan for the project. 
 
PHPA has now revised the requirement of funds for the project for this 
financial year to Rs. 548.90 crores. Therefore, an amount of 60% 
(Percentage of Plan (Loan) for the project) of Rs. 548.90 crores = Rs. 
329.34 crore has been requested from the Planning Commission for CFY 
to meet the fund requirement for the project. 
 
Nepal 
 
Pursuant to CCS‟s d ecision, all the Plan expenditure on the border 
infrastructure have been put in the Non plan category. There is no 
expenditure envisaged on these projects under the Plan. 
 
In year 2008-09, an amount of Rs. 7.71 crores was spent towards the cost 
of the Detailed Engineering Survey (DES) of the Jogbani – Biratnagar 
(2.25 Cr) and the Jayanagar – Bardibas (4.4 Cr) Rail links.  
 
Afghanistan 
 
The approved project cost for the Transmission Line Project from Pul -e-
Khumri to Kabul and a sub station at Kabul is Rs .478.72 Crore.  The 
original project has been completed in February 2009  and commissioned 
in May 2009. As per final expenditure projection by PGCIL, the executing 
agency, a savings of Rs.73 Crore was expected. 
 
A proposal for setting up of two additional s ub-stations as add -on to the 
original project is under consideration of the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC).  The revised project cost including fresh proposals 
would be Rs.504.76 Crore.   The savings out of the present project was 
proposed to be utili zed for the construction of two additional sub -stations.  

14 
 
Accordingly, MEA has proposed for making provisions of Rs.70 Crore and 
Rs.79 Crore under BE 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively. 
 
As the proposal on revised project cost was under submission to EFC, th e 
approved BE 2009-10 has been curtailed by the competent authority, with 
the understanding that it would be augmented at RE stage, if required. 
 
The construction of two additional substations (at Charikar and Doshi) 
would be completed in two years and Min istry proposes to augment the 
approved outlay during 2009-10 at RE stage so that implementation of the 
project is not affected.   
 
Myanmar 
 
As the Agreement between MEA and IWAI, the Project Development 
Consultant was signed on 19 March 2009, payment of Rs 2.945 Cr was 
made to IWAI as first installment of 10% of Project Development 
Consultant fees in 2008-09.  
 
During the current financial yea r 2009-10 the BE for the Kaladan Multimodal 
Transit Transport Project is Rs. 25 Cr against the proposed outlay of Rs. 137 
Cr. The Project Development Consultant Inland Waterways Authority of India 
(IWAI), has intimated that it has anticipated following exp enditure for year 
2009-10. 
 
(i) Upgrading of Inland Waterways Transport (IWT)        = Rs.  28.59 Cr. 
(ii) Project Development Charges to IWAI         = Rs.   8.85   Cr. 
                         ------------------------------------ 
           Total     = Rs. 37.44 Cr” 
A.   Myanmar 
 
4.6 The Ministry of External Affairs ha d informed the Committee that under „Aid to 
Myanmar‟ in BE 2008 -09, Rs. 41.00 crore was earmarked.  However, it was 
substantially reduced to 5.00 crore at RE 2008 -2009 stage.  In BE 2009 -10, Rs. 25 
crore is earmarked, due to substantial  reduction in the requirement for meeting t he 
expenditure on Kaladan Multim odal Transit Transport Project in Myanmar in the 
current financial year.  On being asked to furnish the details regarding its current 
status and anticipated timeframe for its completion, the Ministry stated that: 
 
“BE of Rs.41 Cr earmarked in 2008-09 for the Project could not be utilized, 
as the Agreement between MEA and  Inland Waterways Authority of India 
(IWAI), the Project Development Consultant was signed on 19 March, 
2009. Subsequently, the RE was reduced to Rs. 5 Crore. The payment of 
Rs 2.945 Cr was made to IWAI as first installment of 10% of Project 
Development Consultant fees in 2008-09.“ 

15 
 
 
4.7 While further elaborating upon the current s tatus of the Kaladan Multimodal 
Transit Transport Project, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“IWAI along with the potential contractors have visited site in Myanmar. 
The detailed survey and the assessment of DPR ha ve been conducted 
in collaboration wit h the Myanmar Survey Department. The actual work 
is expected to start by end of the financial year 2009-10.” 
 
 
Time Frame for Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project 
 
Project Acrivity 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Upgradation of 
Port and 
Waterway 
Projected 
year of 
starting of the 
project 
Project under 
implemen-
tation 
Project under 
implementation 
Projected year 
of the 
completion of 
the project 
 -- 
Construction 
of Road from 
Kaletwa to 
India-
Myanmar 
Border 
  Projected year 
for starting of 
the project. 
Project under 
implementation
. 
Projected 
year of the 
completion 
of the 
project. 
 
The upgradation of port and waterway will span over four years. The 
activities of mobilization of dredgers, sea dredging will start in 2009 -10. 
River dredging sof t material will take place in 2010 -11 & 2011 -12. The 
actual construction of port and IWT terminals at Sittwe and Construction of 
IWT terminal at Setpyitpyin (Kaletwa) will start in 2009-10 and will be over 
by 2012-13.  
 
Construction of Road from Kaletwa to India-Myanmar border will start from 
the year 2011-12, as the first two years will be utilized for the construction 
of road in Indian Territory. The project will be completed in three years”.   
 
 
B.   Bhutan 
 
4.8 The Committee observed that under the new schemes, the Approved Outlays 
for Mangdhechu Hydroelectric Project and Punatsan gchu-II Hydroelectric Project in 
Bhutan is Rs. 80 crore and Rs. 40 crore respectively.   The Ministry was asked to  
furnish the details of these projects viz total cost, timeframe  etc. W hile elaborating 
upon the current status of the projects and whether schedule for completion of these 

16 
 
projects have been prepared and adhered , the Ministry in its written reply stated as 
under: 
 
“The DPR of Mangadechu is under submission to the Ministry of Power for 
its approval by National Hyderoelectric Power Corporation Limited 
(NHPC). The Royal Government of Bhutan has already approved the 
DPR. As per the DPR, the total cost of the project is Rs. 3111.55 crores 
and is expected to be completed by 2016. 
 
The schedule for the completion of the project is 2010 -16. Work on the 
project is expected to commence in January 2010 following Cabinet 
approval.” 
 
4.9 While in case of Punatsangchhu-II HEP, the Ministry stated that:  
 
“The DPR of Punatsangchhu -II is being finalized by Water and Power 
Consultancy Services (WAPCOS) Ltd. in consultation with the RGOB and 
is expected to be submitted for approval to MoP in September 2009. As 
per the DPR, the total cost of the project is  Rs. 4230 crores and is 
expected to be completed in 2016.  
 
The schedule for the completion of the project is 2010 -16. Work on the 
project is expected to commence in January 2010 following Cabinet 
approval”.  
 
4.10 The Committee further enquired about the steps taken to ensure timely 
completion of the above-said projects.  The Ministry in post-evidence reply has stated 
as under: 
 
“The Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) have approved the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) of Mangadecchu Hydro -electric Power projec t, 
which is now being examined by GOI. As per the DPR, the total cost of the 
project is Rs.3,111.55 crores and is expected to be completed by 2016.  
Pre-construction activity on the project is expected to commence in 
January 2010.  The project would be imp lemented under the Inter -
Governmental Authority model. The implementation Agreement for the 
project will be initialized with the RGoB after the DPR is approved. 
 
The schedule for the completion of the project is 2010-16.   
 
The DPR of Punatsangchhu -II has been prepared by WAPCOS Ltd. in 
consultation with the RGoB and has been submitted for approval to the 
Ministry of Power, Government of India in October 2009.  As per the DPR, 
the total cost of the project is Rs.4,230.00 crores and is expected to be 
completed in 2016.  Pre -construction activity on the project is expected to 
commence in January 2010.  The project would be implemented under the 

17 
 
Inter-Governmental Authority model.  The Implementation Agreement for 
the project would be initialized with the RGoB after the DPR is approved 
by both sides.” 
 
4.11 According to Annual Report 2008-09, the Government of India has extended a 
standby credit facility of Rs. 300 crore to the Government of Bhutan this year.  The 
Ministry was asked to elaborate upon the reasons therefor, besides stating the 
number of countries that have received such treatment in the last three years.   The 
Ministry informed that: 
“The Prime Minister of Bhutan, during his visit to India in July 2008, had 
requested for grant of Standby Credit Facility (SCF) by GoI to overcome 
its balance of payment (BOP) problems and to meet its outstanding Rupee 
payments… 
 
Given the small size of Bhutan‟s economy, the Rupee outflow from Bhutan 
is substantial. In addition, Bhutan  has commenced loan repayments for 
Tala hydropower project since January 2008 at the rate of Rs. 263 crores 
per year which has also reduced the rupee reserves otherwise held by 
RGoB. 
 
An Intergovernmental Agreement for implementation of the SCF was 
negotiated in New Delhi on October 22, 2008 whereby GoI agreed to 
extend Rs. 300 crores SCF to RGoB through the State Bank of India. It 
was mutually agreed to charge 5% interest on the outstanding credit and a 
commitment charge at the rate of 0.25% per annum on t he unutilized 
amount. The interest and commitment charge shall be recovered from or 
debited to the account of the RGoB at the end of every quarter. The 
amount of the credit shall be utilised only for making payments within 
India. The amount advanced on acc ount of the SCF shall be repaid within 
a period of six months from the date on which the amount or the first 
installment thereof is drawn and credited. The credit arrangement shall be 
extended automatically for a period of six months each time and will 
remain in force for a total period of sixty months. 
 
Besides Bhutan, a Stand -by Credit Facility (SCF) of Rs. 500 crore was 
extended to Maldives during the financial year 2008 -09. In the last three 
years, SCF was not extended to any other country”. 
 
 
C.   Sri Lanka 
  
4.12 The Ministry was asked to furnish a detailed note on the efforts being made by 
Government of India for extending humanitarian assistance and reaching political 

18 
 
solution to evolve a stable political system in Sri Lanka. In its written reply the Ministry 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Government of India has emphasized that with the end of military 
operations, the time has come to focus attention on issues of relief, 
rehabilitation, resettlement and re -conciliation including a lasting political 
settlement. India has expressed readiness to work with the Sri Lankan 
Government to participate in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
northern Sri Lanka and in restoring normalcy in Sri Lanka. We have pressed 
Sri Lanka to speed up the process of rehabilitat ion of displaced civilians to 
their original areas of habitation. Government of Sri Lanka has committed to 
resettling the bulk of the IDPs to their original homes within 6 months.  
 
India has also offered to assist in the reconstruction and rehabilitation 
phase. An amount of Rs. 500 crores has been allocated in the Union 
Budget”.  
 
4.13 The Committee further desired the Ministry to specify the total amount of 
humanitarian assistance been provided by Government of India to the Government of 
Sri Lanka so far and to elaborate upon the monitoring mechanism to ensure its 
optimal utilization.  The Committee further desired to know about the efforts that are 
being made by Government of India to ensure the wellbeing and rehabilitation of 
Internally Displaced P eople in Sri Lanka.  The Ministry in post -evidence reply h as 
stated as under: 
“The projects are dully vetted and approved by the competent 
Authority. Project Monitoring Committees have been  setup which 
also includes representatives from Finance Division amongst 
others. Our High Commission at Colombo also closely monitors the 
projects and bills are vetted to ensure that proper mile stones are 
achieved before passing of the bills.  
 
Government of India has emphasized that with the end of military 
operations, the time has come to focus attention on issues of relief, 
rehabilitation, resettlement and re -conciliation in Northern Sri 
Lanka. India has expressed readiness to work with the Sri Lankan 
Government to participate in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
Northern Sri Lanka , ensuring the well being and rehabilitation of 
IDPs and in restoring normalcy in Sri Lanka.  
 
India has been providing urgent relief assistance to civilians 
affected by  the conflict in Northern Sri Lanka… Today, our 
humanitarian effort is transitioning from a predominantly relief 
initiative to a broader focus involving rehabilitation and 

19 
 
reconstruction of the North and East. A full range of projects 
including in infrastr ucture development are currently under 
consideration and in varying stages of planning and finalisation. 
These include areas like local infrastructure, transport sector, 
livelihood schemes, education, agriculture etc. 
 
A 10 -member delegation comprising DMK , Congress and VCK 
Parliamentarians from Tamil Nadu visited Sri Lanka from 10 -14 
October 2009, when they also visited IDP camps in Vavunia. India 
has strongly urged the Government of Sri Lanka to quicken the 
pace of resettlement and adhere to identified ti me frames. 
Resettlement started on 5th August, 09 and as on 3 rd November, 09 
about 100,000 people are reported to have been resettled. 
 
India is committed to assisting the process of rehabilitating the IDP 
population in Northern Sri Lanka and reconstructin g the war -
ravaged areas to facilitate a return to normalcy and a stable peace.” 
 
D.   Bangladesh 
4.14 The Annual Report of Ministry of External Affairs states that India took several  
initiatives, many unilaterally in order  to bring India and Bangladesh  closer. The 
Ministry sated that: 
“.. recent initiatives, along with our efforts to increase connectivity within 
the SAARC region, while reiterating our commitment to promoting our 
relations and supporting Bangladesh economically, give considerable 
opportunity to business community from Bangladesh in the Indian market. 
These unilateral gestures have been welcomed by Bangladesh and have 
helped India to strengthen ties with Bangladesh. Both the Government 
and the business community have appreciated them as the tra de balance 
was heavily in India‟s favour.” 
 
4.15   The Ministry informed that t he extensive disaster relief assistance provided 
by India to Bangladesh have been welcomed and appreciated by the government and 
the people of Bangladesh  and has helped to reinforce the traditional bonds of 
friendship and s trengthen the ties between the P eople of India and Bangladesh.  
While further elaborating upon the projects being undertaken by India in Bangladesh, 
the Ministry stated that: 
“India is undertaking the following projects: 
 
 Rehabilitation of 11 cyclone affected villages in Bangladesh at a cost 
of Rs 26,41,80,128/- 
 Construction of Kalbhaban for faculty of Music and Theatre 
University of Dhaka 

20 
 
 Construction of new Rath for the Dhamrai temple for the annual rath 
yatra  
 Higher Secondary and Under -graduate Scholarships for wards  of 
muktijodhas (annually approxTaka 2 crore) 
The above mentioned projects while promoting the traditional bonds of 
friendship between the People of India and Bangladesh also reinforce the 
cultural linkages that has been another cornerstone of our bilateral ties.”  
 
E.   Nepal 
 
4.16  India is a major ally of Nepal and provides all kind of aid to Nepal .  In this 
context, the Ministry was asked to provide detailed information regarding financial aid 
being provided to Nepal and various Projects being executed.  The Ministry stated as 
under: 
“Government of India is currently undertaking about 343 projects in all the 
75 districts of Nepal including 30 large projects/intermediate projects and 
308 small projects (schools, hospitals, small roads etc.) with a total outlay 
of over NRs.2,500 crore (over INRs.1,550 crores) through our Embassy 
in Kathmandu. 
 
  A snapshot of the number of projects being handled by the EC wing 
is as follows: 
 
No. of projects as on Small Large & 
intermediate 
Total 
31.3.04 16 10 26 
31.3.05 56 22 78 
31.3.06 100 24 124 
31.3.07 174 26 196 
31.3.08 247 28 275 
31.8.09 285 29 314 
 
Small Development Projects Scheme:  
 
The projects are implemented through local bodies of GON viz. District 
Development Committee (DDC), Municipality, Divisional office of 
Department of Urban Development and Building Construction (DUDBC). 
Embassy of India does not release funds directly to th e beneficiary 
organisation. Funds are released to the local body of GON in the district 
in four installments based on progress reports received from the local 
body. An overseeing committee consisting of executing agency (DDC 
etc.), concerned district offic e (education, health etc.), local community 
leaders, and beneficiary organisation is constituted to ensure quality and 
timely implementation of the project. Implementation of the project is 
closely monitored by Economic Cooperation Wing of the Embassy 
through on site inspection by the officials.”   

21 
 
The Ministry further furnished: 
 
 “Projects identified during Visit of Prime Minister of Nepal to India: 
 
1 MoU regarding 
continuation of Indian 
grant assistance for the 
Goitre control 
programme in Nepal 
The MoU was signed on 22 nd August 
2009 during the visit of PM of Nepal to 
India. Discussions on modalities for the 
implementation of the grant assistance 
are being discussed with GON.  
2 Bagmati Civilisation 
Project 
A technical team would be visiting 
Nepal to study the Bagmati Civilisation 
Project. 
 
Financial Status of River Training Projects/Embankments under Indian Grant 
Assistance: 
 
S.No
. 
Projects Fund required in NRs crores 
in 2009-10 
  NRs in crore 
1 Bagmati (as per 2001)  
 Bagmati (as per 2008) 13.27 
2 Lalbakeya-I(inclusive of NEC 
breach closure) 
 
 Lalbakeya-II(as proposed) 14.27 
3 Kamala (as per 2006) 17.06 
4 Khando (as proposed) 10 
 Total 54.6 
  (IRs. 34.12 crores) 
  Other Projects under Indian Grant Assistance 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Projects Indian grant 
(Indian 
Rupees in 
crores) 
Status 
1. Devighat 
Hydropower 
Project 
15.00 Under implementation, scheduled 
to be completed by May,2010 
2. Central 
Depositary 
System(CDS) 
  9.20 Announced during the visit of 
Prime Minister of Nepal to India 
from August 18-22,2009 
3. Gagan River 
Embankment 
Project 
  5.33  The implementation will be 
undertaken after the updated DPR 
is submitted by GoN. 
 Total  29.53  

22 
 
4.17 In the detailed break up of expenditure under the sub -head „Aid to Nepal‟ 
the Ministry in its written reply has stated that: 
 
“In Nepal, a steep rise in expenditure is anticipated during the current 
financial year on (i) Integrated Development of selected border check 
posts, (ii) Implementation of five cross border rail links between India 
and Nepal (iii) Development of road infrastructure in Terai region of 
Nepal (iv)  construction of embankment on Kamla, Bagmati, L albakya 
and Khando River, and (v) Naumere Hydro Electric Project.” 
 
4.18 In view of the anticipated steep rise in expenditure during the current 
financial year on various projects in Nepal the Ministry was asked to state whether 
the Ministry has chalked out any time bound plan to start and complete these 
projects.   The Ministry in post-evidence reply has stated that: 
 
“Government of India‟s financial aid to Nepal is aimed at assisting a 
friendly neighbour in its socio -economic development and generating 
goodwill for India. We have undertaken projects in areas of 
infrastructure, health, water resources, rural and community 
development, education, etc. 
 
During the visit of Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal to India in 
August 2009 the two Governments agreed upon a number of projects 
with Government of India assistance covering interalia border 
infrastructure, vocational education training, health, etc. 
 
For every project implemented in Nepal, the relevant 
authorities/Ministries in India are consulted. The projects are 
undertaken after preparation of a Detail Project Report (DPR), which is 
examined and approved by both  countries. For each project, a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is signed between the two 
Governments. Timelines for implementation of projects are specified in 
the MoU and the DPR. Project Monitoring Committees with 
representatives of the Government of India and Government of Nepal 
are established to monitor the implementation of the project in 
accordance with the MoU and the DPR. Due to the fluid political 
situation in Nepal it is not always possible to strictly adhere to the given 
time frames. Neverthe less, all efforts are made to implement the 
project expeditiously.” 
 
F.   AFGHANISTAN 
 
4.19 Notwithstanding a significant deterioration in the security situation, impinging 
directly on India with the attack  on its Embassy in Kabul in July 2008, India has 

23 
 
remained at the forefront of international efforts to assist Afghanistan in building a 
stable, democratic and pluralistic society. 
 
4.20 The Ministry in its Annual Report 2008 -09 has stated that  in implementation 
of India‟s pledged commitments in Afghanistan, progress has been made in a range 
of areas. In this context, the Ministry was asked to  furnish a detailed note on the 
projects being carried out by India under „Aid to Afghanistan‟.   The Ministry in written 
reply stated as under: 
“Despite daunting logistical and security challenges , two  major GOI -
funded infrastructure projects – construction of 218 km road from Zaranj 
to Delaram in Nimroz province in Southern Afghanistan and the 
construction of 220 KV Transmission Line from Pul -e-Khumri to Kabul 
together with sub -station in Chimtala – have been completed. 
Construction of Afghanistan's new Parliament building , a symbol of the 
common commitment of both countries to pluralism and democra cy, is 
also going on as per schedule.  
 
Our assistance programme in Afghanistan is being substantially 
enhanced further by a 35% increase in scholarships for college students 
and others coming to India.  In response to a request from the 
Government of Afghanistan the number of annual scholarships has been 
increased from 1000 to 1350.  This July, 675 Afghans will join colleges in 
India as against 500 last year. 
 
During President Karzai‟s visit in January 2009, the Government of India 
further pledged 250000 tones of wheat aid to Afghanistan to help it to tide 
over the current food crisis. 
 
India has undertaken projects virtually in all parts of Afghanistan, in a 
wide range of sectors, … (that) have been identified by the Afghan 
government as priority areas for reconstruction and development.  All the 
projects are undertaken in partnership with the Afghan government, in 
total alignment with the Afghanistan National Development Strategy and 
with focus on local ownership of assets. 
 
India‟s commitment to Afghanista n‟s reconstruction and development 
remains unwavering. This has particularly been re -emphasized after the 
7/7 attack on the Indian Embassy, in the aftermath of which PM stated 
categorically that India would not be deterred by such attacks and that we 
would continue with renewed commitment our political, economic and 
developmental engagement in Afghanistan”. 
 
4.21 India‟s projects can be divided into four categories viz. 
 
(a)  Major infrastructure projects,  
(b)  Humanitarian assistance, 

24 
 
   (c)  Education and capacity development and  
(d)  Community-based, small development projects in vulnerable border 
areas, in the fields of agriculture, rural development, education, health, 
vocational training, etc. 
 
  
4.22 As per the Outcome Budget 2009 -10, with a view to make India‟s 
contribution towards Afghanistan‟s democracy, the work in respect of construction of 
Parliament Building was taken up.  Original construction cost was Rs. 296.45 crores.  
It was revised to Rs. 337.58 crore. However, approval of the Cabinet was obtained on  
6th November, 2008 for a revised cost estimates of Rs. 710 crore.  In this context, the 
Ministry was asked to explain the reasons behind massive cost escalation  and the 
steps undertaken to ensure the completion of this Project within stipulated time of 36 
months.  The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“CPWD, the executing agency, submitted the preliminary cost estimate of 
the project on January 6, 2006 for Rs. 296.45 crores as per standard 
guidelines. The Commit tee on Non -Plan Expenditure(CNE),MOF, 
recommended the project for approval by the Cabinet at an estimated 
expenditure of Rs 296.45 crores on 29 th May, 2006. In July & August, 
2006, GOA gave certain new requirements for the proposed Afghan 
Parliament Building and also suggested some basic changes in the 
conceptual plans. The Master Plan and the architectural drawings were  
accordingly modified taking in to account the additional requirements and 
changes suggested by Afghan Government. The Afghan Governme nt 
approved the modified plan in December, 2006. 
 
CPWD submitted the modified preliminary cost estimates of the project in 
January, 2007 for Rs. 337.58 crores as per standard guidelines based on 
the modified drawings and incorporating extra cost implicatio ns on 
account of additional requirements and changes. The Afghan 
Government also requested CPWD to design and plan the Executive 
Block of the Parliament Building  (to be funded by the Afghan side) 
thereby further revising the project cost to Rs. 338.58 crores. The Cabinet 
approved the proposal on 30 th January, 2008 and allowed CPWD to 
proceed with the tendering process and to revert to the Cabinet for 
approval of the firm estimates after opening of the tenders. 
 
Tenders for the project were opened on 7 th February, 2008.. (However) 
finally only two agencies submitted  their bids. Therefore with the 
recommendations of Special Works Board(SWB) and approval of Cabinet 
the project was awarded… 
 

25 
 
Thus the wide differences between estimated costs and actual bids 
received are on account of the peculiar and extraordinary conditions in 
Afghanistan and different threat perceptions of tendering parties.”   
 
4.23 The Ministry was further asked whether the Government has initiated sincere 
efforts to check further cost escalat ion for the construction of Parliament Building in 
Afghanistan. The Ministry replied in affirmation.  With regards to query on the steps 
taken to ensure completion of this proje ct within stipulated time frame and check 
further cost escalation, the Ministry stated in its post-evidence reply has stated that: 
 “A full -fledged team of CPWD comprising technical and supervisory 
officers and staff has been stationed at Kabul to ensure speedy 
completion of the project;  
 
Funds are released promptly to CPWD so that there are no delays in the 
execution of the project; and  
 
A Project Review and monitoring committee under the chairmanship of 
Joint Secretary  (PAI) has been constituted. The Committee quarterly 
reviews the proje ct to ensure timely completion of the project as per 
already fixed targets. The Committee convenes review and coordination 
meetings as and when required to expedite physical progress of the 
project and give directions for resolving related issues as well a s 
problems, if any, causing hindrance to the physical progress of works”.    
 
4.24 The Committee took serious note of the deteriorat ing security scenario in 
Afghanistan.  In this context, the Ministry was asked to elaborate upon  the measures 
being undertaken by Government of India to ensure safety of Indians working in 
Afghanistan an d the local population working o n India sponsored projects in 
Afghanistan.  The Ministry in its reply stated as under: 
“The deterioration in the security situation in Afghanista n has adversely 
affected the security environment for Indians working in that country. 
Government of India (GoI) is in constant touch with the Government of 
Afghanistan (GoA), which has assured that it will take all the steps necessary 
to provide security to Indians in Afghanistan. GoA has provided local security 
for our major projects.  Indian nationals registered with the Embassy are being 
regularly advised about the prevailing security scenario in the country through 
security advisories.  These advisorie s outline the precautions that need to be 
taken for their own safety and security during their movements within the 
country for work related activities”. 
 
4.25 A major chunk of the budgetary allocation is utilized for grants in aid/loans 
etc. to other coun tries.  Security of personnel deployed in Indian projects/India 

26 
 
sponsored International projects has emerged as a major area of concern . W hile 
emphasizing the security concerns , the Ministry was asked whether it paid attention 
to the safety of the se people in the countries receiving aid and loans etc. and if so, 
the mechanism thereof.  The Ministry in its  post-evidence reply further elaborated 
that: 
“The executing agencies of various projects in Afghanistan are providing 
security arrangements at proj ect sites. The expenditure on this account has 
been included in the over all cost of the projects.  
 
We are not aware of any security threats to Indian nationals/local people 
working in the Indian assistance projects  in Nepal and Bhutan.   Project 
implementing agencies take necessary safety precautions for the personnel 
working on the projects. 
 
Bureau of Security in the Ministry closely monitors the security related 
requirements of our missions abroad. Based on their inputs, Establishment 
Divisions provides  necessary approvals for improvement of security , 
physical as well as electronic. Hiring of additional security guards has also 
been allowed in some places. While selecting location of new missions, 
security requirements are given due consideration. Simila rly some missions 
have been relocated for security consideration”  
 
G.    Eurasian Countries 
 
4.26 Through international cooperation, India has been expanding and diversifying 
its engagement with different parts of the world. While elaborating upon India‟s 
strategic vision of its relations with Eurasian countries the Ministry in its reply  
submitted that: 
 “….India values  its strategic Partnership with Russia and is 
committed to taking forward this relationship in diverse field.  India 
views itself as a significant development partner involved in capacity 
building in Central Asia.  India is interested to develop the friendly ties 
it has with Ukraine, Belarus, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia in 
various field including in capacity building and skill formation.” 
 
2.27 According to the brief for examination of Demands for Grants , the head „Aid 
to Central Asia‟ caters to the expenditure on aid and assistance projects in countries 
in Central Asia.  It was informed that the nomenclature of  this Head has been 
changed to Eurasian Countries from current financial year 2009 -10 onwards.  The 
allocation in BE  2009-10 is higher than  the allocation of BE  2008-09 for meeting 
expenditure on various projects.  While furnishing details about the Varzob -I 

27 
 
Hydroelectric Project in Tajikistan, along with its estimated cost and anticipated date 
of completion, the Ministry stated that: 
 
“During the visit of former Prime Minister to Tajikistan in November 2003, 
a grant of US$ 5 million was announced  to execute developmental 
projects.  Tajikistan expressed interest in utilization of the said grant for 
rehabilitation of the Varzob -I hydropower project.  A feasibility study was 
conducted jointly by BHEL and NHPC which indicated that the 
replacement of t he power generating units and modern control systems 
at Varzob -I would cost approximately US$ 10.24 million at May 2004 
price.  Subsequently, another grant of US$ 8 million was approved by PM 
and announced during the visit of the President of Tajikistan, M r. E. 
Rakhmon to India in August 2006.  BHEL and NHPC were identified as 
implementing agencies for the project and NHPC would serve as a 
coordinator for the implementation.  The final cost of the project is Rs. 
74.20 crore, inclusive of Rs. 1 crore towards  expenses for Project 
Coordination Committee. 
 
An MoU in this regard was signed by these companies with Barki Tajik, 
the implementing agency from Tajik side, in December 2006.   Another 
MoU between Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, and the  
Ministry of Energy and Industry, Government of Tajikistan, was also 
signed in August 2007.  After the recommendation of the proposal by the 
Committee on Non Plan Expenditure (CNE) on 25 June 2008, approval of 
EAM was obtained to implement the Varzob -I pro ject.  A tripartite 
Agreement by MEA has been signed with the implementing companies 
on 12th August, 2008. 
 
The project was formally launched on 29 th August, 2009 by Petroleum 
Minister Shri Murli Deora during his visit for Shanghai Cooperation 
Organisation (SCO) and is expected to be completed in 34 months. 
 
India‟s involvement in the hydropower sector of Tajikistan would convey 
India‟s commitment to Tajikistan and provide another poi nt of substantive 
interaction. Central Asia is a part of India‟s strategic  neighbourhood, 
involvement in such a project would convey a very positive message of 
commitment to the region and will raise India‟s profile and presence in the 
region. “ 
 
H.   Aid to Disaster Relief 
 
4.28 India has also been in the forefront towards responding to the humanitarian 
challenges encountered by many countries from natural disasters.  India has taken 
the lead in dispatching urgently needed aid for disaster relief  and extended 

28 
 
rehabilitation support to the countries affect by natural disaster s, as and when 
required.  
4.29     The Sub-head „Aid to Disaster Relief‟ provides for humanitarian/relief 
assistance to countries hit by natural calamities. While furnishing the break up of 
expenditure under this head, the Ministry stated that: 
“In the financial year 2008-09, humanitarian assistance was extended 
by GOI to several countries affected by natural calamities including 
relief material worth Rs. 18.62 crore to China for earthquake affected 
Sichuan Province.  It is proposed to earmark BE 2009 -10 of  Rs. 40 
crore to meet the requirement for providing immediate relief 
assistance to affected countries and to review the position at RE 
stage.” 
 
4.30 However, the Committee noted that under the subhead „Aid to Disaster 
Relief‟ BE 2008-09 was pegged at Rs. 58.67 crores, BE 2009 -10 at Rs. 40.00 crore.  
The Ministry was asked to state the reasons for reducing allocation and also to 
elaborate upon the process to estimate allocation under this sub-head.  The Ministry 
stated in their post-evidence reply stated as under: 
“This sub -head provides for Disaster relief to countries hit by natural 
calamities. The allocation under this sub -head at BE stage is an 
estimate since it cannot be assessed precisely due to obvious reasons. 
The requirement is reviewed at RE stage keeping in view the offers 
made by GoI towards disaster relief to countries affected by natural 
calamities. The budget allocation in BE 2009 -10 has been kept at Rs. 
40 crore to meet the requirement for providing immediate relief / 
assistance to affected countries. It would be re -assessed while 
preparing RE 2009-10.” 
 
I. South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
 
4.31 In the brief note on Demands for Grants for 2009-2010, it was submitted that a 
phenomenal enhancement of 627.48% under the head 'International Cooperation' to 
Rs 1015.56 crore at RE 2008 -09 stage was due to payment of India's Assessed 
Contribution of US$ 189.9 Million and India's Voluntar y Cooperation of US$ 100 
Million to SAARC Development Fund and other Govt. of India's commitment made at 
the highest level. In this context, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The contributions both assessed and voluntary made by the Government of 
India amounting to 189.9 Million, were given to SAARC Development Fund as 
part of our international commitment and obligation as a Member State of the 

29 
 
SAARC. The funds are then utilized under supervision of the SAARC 
Secretariat that is housing the Temporary Cell of the SAARC Development 
Fund.” 
 
4.32 The Charter of SAARC Development Fund has been ratified on 27.10.2008. In 
this context, the Ministry was asked to update the Committee upon the progress been 
made so far for its implementation.  The Ministry stated that: 
 
“The main features of the SAARC Development Fund are as follows: 
 
The SAARC Development is an umbrella financial institution for SAARC 
Projects and Programmes, established to promote the welfare of the 
people of SAARC region and to accelerate economic growth, social 
progress and poverty alleviation in the region. 
 
As part of its asymmetric commitment to SAARC, India has fully 
transferred its voluntary as well as assessed contribution to the SAARC 
Development Fund and till date is the only country to do so.  Other 
member states have committed to transfer their funds before the 16 th 
SAARC Summit.   
 
SDF is pivotal in transforming SAARC from decl aratory to 
implementation.  It is operational out of the temporary cell of the SAARC 
Secretariat pending completion of its permanent premises in Bhutan.  
 
 The 5 th Meeting of the SAARC Development Fund Board has finalized 
the terms and conditions of the CEO of the SDF Secretariat and his staff.  
The meeting also finalized the guidelines for procurement and 
preparation of Project proposal and furnishing of progress reports.  
 
 It was also decided that the 6 th Meeting of the SAARC Development 
Fund Board would finalize the time schedule for operationalization of the 
infrastructure and economic windows of SDF”. 
 
4.33 The M inistry was further asked if SDF has become operational  and any 
charter for utilization has been signed/agreed upon and whether any project has been 
identified so far. The Ministry in its post-evidence reply has stated as under: 
 
 The 29 th SAARC Council of Ministers (New Delhi, December 7 -8, 
2007) endorsed the recommendations of the 34 th Session of the 
SAARC Standing Committee authorizing the SAARC SG to set up a 
temporary cell at the SAARC Secretariat to function as the Interim 
Secretariat using services of consultants from each member state to 
operationalise the Fund from available funds to implement identified 
projects.  The Council also directed that the SAARC Development 
Fund should start funding Projects before the next session of the 

30 
 
Council.  The Secretariat of the SAARC Development Fund is 
expected to be inaugurated by the 16 th SAARC Summit in Thimphu 
on April 28-29, 2010.   
 
 Therefore, the SDF Cell became operational after the meeting of the 
29th Council of Ministers.  Its Charter was signed at the 15 th SAARC 
Summit (Colombo, August 2-3, 2008).   
 
 At present, two regional projects are under implementation out of the 
Social Window of the SAARC Development Fund, namely, (a) A 
project on Women‟s Empowerment through establishment for t rade 
facilitation centres for home -based workers in SAARC countries; 
and (b) A project on Maternal & Child Healthcare, including 
Immunisation on establishing neo -natal units and newborn corners 
in primary healthcare centres in SAARC member states.   
  
 A third regional project on provision of solar cookers for rural women 
recommended by the SAARC Finance Ministers will be examined by 
the 6 th SAARC Development Fund Board (Thimphu, November 24 -
25, 2009) for funding out of the Social Window as well.”   
 
 
4.34 The Committee observes that o ver the years, India has made huge 
contribution to SAARC and its variou s institutions. In this context , the Ministry was 
asked to  state as to how far India has  been able to achieve its stated strategic 
objectives and whether the outcome is in tune with the proportion of  India's financial 
contribution.  The Ministry in its written reply has furnished that: 
 
“India‟s strategy to discharge its role in an asymmetric and non - 
reciprocal manner has paid rich dividends, as SAARC has  
metamorphosed from declaratory to implementation stage. A vibrant 
SAARC has ensured that the decisions on economic development are 
sovereign state led instead of being led by multilateral donors.  SAARC 
effectively has complemented India‟s bilateral engag ements with her 
neighbours to ensure a peaceful neighbourhood and reinforcing India‟s 
objective of peaceful neighbourly co -existence.     The newly dynamic 
SAARC is also able to engage non -SAARC actors for regional 
cooperation on its own terms.  India‟s ac tive engagement within SAARC 
has catalysed the birth and functioning of institutions such as the SAARC 
Development Fund Secretariat (Interim Cell, Kathmandu), South Asian 
University (Project Office, New Delhi), SAARC Arbitration Council 
Secretariat (Islama bad) and the South Asian Regional Standards 
Organisation Secretariat (Dhaka).  Consequently SAARC cannot be 
stated to be held hostage to specific bilateral relations that India has with 
one or another member state.  Interaction between people within SAARC 
through cultural and trade activities has increased as also their 
movement.  Awareness about trade potentials including services has also 

31 
 
increased reflected in the fact that growth of trade under SAFTA has not 
slackened despite the global economic recession.    
 
The relative political fluidity of India‟s neighbors within the region has also 
increased their dependence on SAARC for regional engagement and 
cooperation. With flagship projects like the SAARC Development Fund, 
South Asian University and the SAAR C Food Bank operational and with 
the increasing interdependence of sub -regional and regional projects, 
SAARC is finally trickling down as a service provider from its conceptual 
premises. It is therefore in our interest to continue with our strategy of 
active engagement with SAARC.  Furthermore, SAARC‟s new 
momentum has diluted the interference in India‟s region through other 
parallel South Asian processes being driven by multilateral agencies.    
 
The outcome of our engagement in SAARC is therefore, fully i n tune with 
our financial contributions”. 
 
 
4.35 During the evidence , while responding to the concerns of the Members of 
the C ommittee on the current external environment , the Foreign Secretary stated  
that:   
“…the neighborhood environment and the  reactions to India, it is true that 
some relationships are particularly challenging and the challenge level and 
the difficulty level has gone up ….. in the last decade or more.  I think, the 
openings, the opportunities for us exist and it is the closeness , the 
connectivity, the linkages that we share with our neighbours which no 
other country in the world to supplant completely…… 
 
…..We are going to expand the range of activities and the policy initiatives 
that we take and the degree of engagements with th ese countries, that is 
something all the neighboring countries Joint Secretaries, deal with on the 
a day to day basis.  It is a continuing and constant focus for us.” 
 
4.36 In context of the current political scenario in South Asia, the Ministry was 
asked to elaborate up on Government of India's assessment regarding role and 
progress of SAARC in the next 5 years  and whether India foresee implementation of 
various SAARC Agreements in a time bound manner.  The Ministry stated that: 
 
 “The role of SAARC  in the next 5 years is set to expand substantially. 
With the active engagement of the Government of India in strengthening 
institutions within SAARC and funding its various activities, the 
organization will see a slew of new and vibrant regional institutions taki ng 
shape-- the South Asian University in New Delhi, the SAARC Museum of 
Textiles and Handicrafts in New Delhi, the SAARC Regional Standards 
Organization in Dhaka, SAARC Arbitration Council in Pakistan, the 

32 
 
SAARC Development Fund Secretariat in Thimphu, SAA RC Cultural 
Centre in Srilanka etc. This process of building new regional institutions 
and strengthening the already existing ones will no doubt have an impact 
on the future of the organization. This is also going to be coupled with 
more regional and sub -regional projects funded and implemented under 
the aegis of the SAARC Development Fund. With most countries in the 
region having weak economies, SAARC will attain the contours of the 
premier regional organization committed to economic betterment of the 
people in the south Asian region. 
 
     SAARC Agreements are expected be implemented in a time bound 
manner in the near future”.   
 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
PASSPORT AND VISA SERVICES 
 
 The Ministry has been taking a number of measures to make the processing 
and issue of passport simpler and quicker for the comfort and convenience of the 
public.  The Passport Seva Projec t is expected to result in issuance  of new passport 
within three days after police verification and of all other passport services in one day.  
As per the Annual Report of MEA 2008-09, the pilot project was expected to begin at 
Chandigarh and Banglore by July-August 2009.  However, it has been reported in the 
newspapers that this ambitious Projec t might be delayed. In this context, the Ministry 
was asked to confirm the veracity of the newspapers reports and to furnish details on 
the Project, its current status, projected date of completion and implementation.  The 
Ministry in written reply has stated as under: 
 “There has been a delay in the launch of Pilot  Project of the Passport 
Seva Project due to various factors ...The launc h of pilot sites is 
expected in on 1st October 2009 at Bangalore (covering the whole of 
Karnataka) and Chandigarh (covering parts of states of Punjab & 
Haryana and the UT of Chandigarh ).  The project is scheduled to be 
rolled out throughout the country in three waves and expected to be 
completed during 2010”.  
 
5.2 The Ministry was asked whether the Pilot Project with centers in Chandigarh 
and Bangalore have actually become functional, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“No.  Civil and electrical works have been completed in the  Passport 
Seva Kendra (PSK) build up in Bangaluru  and Chandigarh but all the 
PSKs are expected to be ready at both places by end October 2009.”  
 
 
5.3 During the course of evidence, Committee expressed their concern over the 
delay on Passport Seva Project (PSP) and desired to know the star ting date  and 
current status of the Project . W hile clarifying upon the current situation,  the 
representative of Ministry submitted to the Committee that: 
 
“The Pilot Phase of the Project is (was) scheduled to start from 
October 1 st.  It is likely to start on November 13 th.  We are going 
through the software testing and publication.  We start the Project with 
software and if we close down almost immediately that would be a 
disaster.  We verify the software in Banglore, the Pilot Phase of the 

34 
 
Project on stream is scheduled i n November in Banglore and 
Chandigarh.  Then, we will roll out as part of the first phase of the 
Project.   We expected to go on-screen.” 
 
5.4 The Ministry was further asked as to how it will ensure that this project is not 
delayed any further and When will this project be  actually launched. The Ministry in 
its post-evidence reply has stated as under: 
 
“Ministry has been striving to see that the Project is not delayed any 
further.  Setting up of Data Centre, Disaster Recovery Centre, Network 
Operations Cent re, Central Passport Printing Facility and PSKs at Pilot 
locations (Bengaluru and Chandigarh) has been completed. The software 
developed by the Service Provider (M/s. Tata Consultancy Services ) is 
under testing by the 3 rd Party Audit Agency (3PAA).  According to the test 
results, M/s TCS needs to fix the defects after which application software 
has to be certified by 3PAA following which trial runs would be conducted 
before pilot launch.  Ministry has taken steps under the  contract to ensure 
that the Service Provider adheres to agreed timelines. 
 
As the 3 rd Party Audit Agency Testing is still on and as the software 
development is an external dependency, the date can be given after the 
testing and time required for the repair of bugs in the software.”   
 
 
5.5 In context of the Passport Seva Project, Ministry was also  asked if  any 
feasibility study was conducted to ensure compatibility of the new software with the 
existing P assport Information Service System on the Net (PISON Network). The 
Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Entire database available on PISON is being migrated to the 
Passport Seva Portal which is entirely new software being developed 
by the Service Provider which will be owned by the Ministry of 
External Affairs.” 
 
5.6 Another ambitious project of the Ministry is the issuan ce of e -passport also 
known as Bio-metric Passports.  In this context, the Ministry was asked to furnish an 
updated note on the progress made so far on th is Project.  The Ministry in its written 
reply has furnished as under:  
 
“India is a member of the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on Machine 
Readable Travel Documents (MRTD) Panel in the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) and has implemented the ICAO guidelines 
on Machine Readable Travel Documents.   

35 
 
 
 In accordance with the ICAO guidelines to incorporate biometrics d ata in 
the Machine Readable Travel Documents, India has also decided to 
upgrade its existing passports to electronic category of e -passports.  
Accordingly a pilot project for issue of e -passports in the category of 
Official and Diplomatic e -passports has a lready been launched on 25 th 
June 2008.  Based on the experience gained through the pilot phase of 
issuance of e-passports in the diplomatic and official categories, issue of 
e-passports in the ordinary category will be taken up in the near future, 
for whi ch the Ministry of External Affai rs has drawn up a programme 
for full roll out of e -passports in the ordinary category, most likely by the 
end of the year 2009.” 
 
5.7 The Ministry was further asked about the fate of passport holders after the 
launch of e-passports in the country and if it would be optional to have either ordinary 
or e-passport. The Ministry in its post-evidence reply stated as under: 
 
“As the e-passports are not mandatory, the existing passport holders need 
NOT immediately shift to e-Passports after its launch.” 
 
5.8 The Ministry was further asked if any linkage has been established between 
the new Passport Seva Project and the project for issuance  of Biometric pass port in 
India. The Ministry in its post-evidence reply has stated as under:   
“Passport Seva Project envisages capture of biometrics (fingerprints) 
of all those who apply at Passport Seva Kendras.  These biometrics 
will be incorporated into the chip embedded in e -Passports.  Training 
has already been imparted to officials in the CPV Division with regard 
to personalization of e -Passports in case of Diplomatic and Official 
category. Training for officers in the Central Passport Organization for 
personalization of e-Passports will be conducted nearer to the full roll 
out of e-Passport. 
The Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited 
(SPMCIL) is responsible for procurement and production of biometric 
passports which is currently under implementation.  Whenever the e -
booklets are made available by SPMCIL the e -passport project will be 
fully rolled out.  “ 
 
  

36 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS 
 
The primary objective of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations is to 
establish, revive and strengthen cultural relations and mutual understanding between 
India a nd other countries.  With the specific purpose of projection of India‟s soft 
power, there has been substantial increase in grant to ICCR from Rs.85 crore during 
RE 2008-09 to Rs.168.50 crore during BE 2009 -10. In this context, the Ministry was 
asked to furnish   the reasons for increase in grant to ICCR and whether any blueprint 
has been prepared for its optimal utilization. The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“The annual grant of ICCR from MEA has been increased from Rs.85 
crores during RE 2009 to Rs. 93.5 crores in BE 2009 -10, reflecting a 
10% increase over the previous year.  However, in addition, a sum of 
Rs. 75 crores has been allocated to ICCR in 2009-10 for projection of 
“India‟s Soft Pow er” overseas.  A detailed 7 -Point Plan has been 
drawn up by ICCR which includes establishment of 15 new Indian 
Cultural Centres overseas, establishment of new Chairs abroad, 
grant of Fellowships to foreign scholars/academicians 
studying/researching in Indi a, organization of major Indology 
conferences, financial assistance to NGOs abroad which are 
promoting Indian culture and creation of world class website for 
ICCR.  The sum of Rs. 75 crores is to be spent over a period of two 
years from 2009 -10 to 2010 -11.  As part of the „Expansion Plan‟ 
number of major Festivals of India will be organized abroad including 
the on going Festival of India in Russia. 
 
Considerable progress has been made in implementing all aspects of the 
7-point plan”. 
 
6.2 While replying to the queries of the Committee regarding India‟s soft power 
during the course of evidence, the Foreign Secretary submitted as under: 
“First about the soft power aspect of the Indian diplomacy , it is 
absolutely vital that we utilize our extensive soft power, our 
civilization strength, to project the idea of India, when it comes to 
addressing the foreign audiences.. (But) people have to be engaged, 
and we can engage people only through the projection of soft power.  
There is a tremendous reaction which is posit ive for India when it 
comes to doing such activities.  That is why the ICCR works to 

37 
 
project our soft power  through the setting up of our Cultural C entres 
abroad, in various countries.” 
 
6.3 While further elucidating upon the issue, representative from Min istry stated 
that: 
“After we were provided Rs. 75 crore by the Finance Minister in his 2008 -
09 Budget, ICCR has drawn up a very comprehensive six point plan for 
utilizing those resources. One of the most important aspects of the plan is 
to create/set up ne w cultural centres,  while identifying new venues we 
have looked at the countries with whom we have very important 
relationship, essentially in an effort to contextualise our cultural diplomacy 
with our overall thrust on foreign policy.” 
 
6.4 While further elaborating upon the new initiatives by ICCR  the Ministry in its 
post-evidence reply stated as under: 
“Initiatives which have been taken with R s.75 crores additional funds allocated 
to ICCR for “projection of india‟s soft power” 
  
i) Fellowship Scheme:  
 
Under its Expansion Plan, the Search Committee constituted by the Council 
decided to award 30 Fellowships to authors, academics, writers and 
outstanding foreign scholars who are interested in subjects pertaining to Indian 
culture and I ndian studies. Several nominations have been/are being received 
from our Missions abroad, and the affiliation of seven Fellows with their 
preferred universities/Institutes/Think Tanks has already been confirmed and 
implemented in the new academic year.  Co uncil has also decided to offer 
some of these Fellowships to foreign scholars of Buddhism. Our Missions in 
countries with large Buddhist populations have been approached for 
nominations.  
 
ii) Indology Conferences Abroad: 
 
To enhance and strengthen Indian Studies in foreign Universities, the Council 
has decided to organize a series of Conferences abroad on Indology and 
contemporary Indian issues.  Some Conferences could focus on evolution of 
Buddhism in India. Countries from  Central Asia, East Europe, South -East Asia 
and the SAARC Region have been identified as venues for these Conferences. 
Most of them are now in an advanced state of preparation, and are scheduled 
to take place between September 2009 and June 2010, beginning  with Sofia 
(Bulgaria) and followed closely by Almaty (Kazakhstan) and St. Petersburg 
(Russia). In addition, Council organized, in collaboration with Charles 
University, Prague, an International Conference on Pandanus – “Nature in 
Indian Literature, Art, Myth, Ritual”, in June 2009. 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
iii) Chairs: 
 
In addition to the Council‟s 31 existing Chairs (19 Long-term and 12 Short-term) 
in Universities around the world, 30 new Chairs (7 Long-Term + 23 Short-Term) 
have been approved under the Council‟s „Expansion Plan‟. 
We have also initiated action on 18 additional new proposals from Netherlands, 
USA, Mauritius, Canada, Indonesia, Denmark, Ireland, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, UK, 
South Korea, Armenia, Russia, Slovenia, Germany, Greece, Croatia and 
Turkmenistan. In the last  3-4 months, MOUs have been signed with several of 
these Universities, while drafts are under various stages of negotiation with the 
rest.  
 
iv) Festivals: 
 
1) Year of India in Russia 
 
The Council is coordinating various activities being organised by vario us 
ministries/ departments/ organizations for the Year of India in Russia, which 
was inaugurated on 31 st March, 2009 in Moscow as part of the reciprocal 
bilateral agreement. 
 
On its part, the Council is committed to sending approximately 40 groups to 
Russia during the Year 2009. Special presentations have already been 
organized for the Inaugural Ceremony in Moscow on March 31, 2009, and to 
coincide with Rashtrapatiji‟s recent visit to Russia, on September 3. Another 
major event has been scheduled for t he Closing Ceremony in early December, 
2009.  
 
2. Other Festivals of India proposed to be held in the coming months 
 
i) Indian Festival in China 2010 
ii) Indian Festival in France 2010 
iii) Indian Festival at Kennedy Centre, Washington and other US Cities in 
March-April 2011 
iv) Indian Festival in Canada in 2011 
v) Days of Indian Culture in Saudi Arabia and Days of Indian Culture in 
Oman during the month of October, 2009  
vi) Days of India in Argentina in November, 2009 
vii) Days of India in Indonesia in November, 2009  
viii)      Days of Indian Culture in Iran in March 2010 
 
Several other mini festivals are planned, mainly in Commonwealth countries, to 
publicize the forthcoming Commonwealth Games in Delhi in October 2010. 
 
v)  Financial Support to Cultural Organizations Overseas:  
 

39 
 
As part of the 6 -point Expansion Plan, the Screening Committee constituted by 
the Council and headed by President, ICCR short -listed 19 organizations which 
are promoting Indian Culture abroad.  These organizations would be given 
financial support through the respective Missions. Additional requests are being 
received from various Missions, which would be considered during the course 
of the year.  
  
vi) Indian Cultural Centres Abroad:  
 
In addition to the already existing Indian Cultural Centres abroad, 15 new 
venues were identified under the Council Expansion Plan for the establishment 
of new Cultural Centres for the promotion of India‟s soft power. Considerable 
progress has been registered on this front during the CFY. The new Centres in 
Bangkok and Tokyo were inaugurated during September, 2009. Property for 
the Cultural Centre in Kuala Lumpur was acquired on lease in July 2009, and 
the Centre is likely to become operational by November 2009. 
 
Possible venues for our Centres in Washington and Paris have been located 
and are under consideration. Detailed proposals have also been received and 
are being processed for new Cultural Centres in Abu Dhabi, Budapest, Prague, 
Ho Chi Minh City, Sao Paolo and Lagos. The first three are likely to materialize 
soon.” 
 
 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT 
 
India‟s partnership with the major powers has become deeper and stronger as 
it is expanding the scope and depth of economic and strategic interaction with 
different countries, groupings and regions.  
 
A. IBSA (India-Brazil-South Africa) 
 
7.2 IBSA (India -Brazil-South Africa) has emerged as a vital platform for India‟s 
engagement across the continents. W hile elucidating upon Government of India‟s 
vision regarding IBSA, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
 
 “India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) is a unique Forum which brings 
together on one platform three dynamic developing country democracies 
from three different continents with common principles and values which 
in itself is exemplary. All three countries a re developing nations, plural, 
multi-cultural, multi-ethnic, multi-lingual and multi-religious.  
 
Cooperation in IBSA is on three broad fronts: first, as a forum for 
consultation and coordination on significant political issues, e.g., the 
reform of the UN and its Security Council, WTO negotiations, civilian 
nuclear cooperation, climate change, terrorism etc.; second, trilateral 
collaboration on concrete areas/projects, through sixteen working groups, 
for the common benefit of the three countries; and third,  assisting other 
developing countries by taking up projects in the latter. India, Brazil, and 
South Africa are also members of the important G20 and NAMA -11 
groupings of WTO and among the five Outreach countries invited to the 
G8 Summits (since 2003).  
 
IBSA‟s success has a strong demonstration effect, as it shows, most 
vividly, the feasibili ty of South -South Cooperation beyond the 
conventional areas of exchange of experts and training.”  
 
7.3 On being enquired about the efforts being made to come up with  
comprehensive strategy for building international coalition on the issue of 
environment and global climate change in wake of latest rounds of talks for evolving 
Post-Kyoto mechanism, the Ministry stated that: 
 

41 
 
“With regard to the issues of environment and  global climate, the 
importance of coordination and of strengthening IBSA dialogue and 
consultations on issues under negotiation in the UNFCCC and its Kyoto 
Protocol have been reiterated amongst the three countries. At the 6 th 
IBSA Ministerial Meeting held  on 1 September 2009 in Brasilia, the 
importance of continuing participation and close cooperation in the run-up 
to the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen was underlined, 
with a view to enabling the full, effective and sustained implementation of 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) now, up 
to, and beyond 2012. Also, the need to fully implement the commitments 
under the Convention in accordance with its principles, especially that of 
common but differentiated responsibilities and r espective capabilities 
were underscored.” 
 
7.4 The Ministry was further asked whether there is any move to evolve a 
common strategy within these countries to protect and preserve traditional and 
indigenous knowledge and prevent attempts of Biopiracy and Bioprospecting, t he 
Ministry in its written reply has furnished that: 
 
“It was also agreed at the September, 2009 Brasilia Ministerial to 
reinforce the crucial importance of reaching a common understanding 
and a universal agreement on effective measures to  prevent biopiracy 
and further recognize the value of genetic resources and of traditional 
knowledge associated with their use, as a means to promote sustainable 
development. In this regard, stress was laid on the commitment to the 
conclusion by 2010 of th e negotiations within the framework of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) of a legally binding international 
regime on access to genetic resources, and the fair and equitable sharing 
of the benefits arising from the utilization of such resources,  their 
derivatives and/or associated traditional knowledge”. 
 
 
B.   IRC (India-Russia-China) 
 
7.5 According to the Ministry of External Affairs Annual Report 2008-09, India is 
ready to play a significant role in the recently established forum namely IRC (India -
Russia-China).  While elucidating the importance of the forum the Ministry stated as 
under: 
“The India -Russia-China Trilateral provides a f orum to discuss political 
and economic issues of strategic significance. In the past, the three 
Foreign Ministers have met several times on the sidelines of major 
multilateral events, as also four times in stand -alone format. Joint 
Communiqués issued at th e end of these stand -alone meetings reflect 

42 
 
shared desire to exert coordinated efforts in tackling issues of common 
concern such as terrorism, proliferation of WMDs, drug trafficking and 
related trans-border crimes etc. The Forum also provides a vital plat form 
for discussions and exchange of views on various regional and 
international issues. 
 
India considers this to be an important Forum both globally and 
regionally.  India, Russia and China are linked to each other by ties of 
high level political interact ion, trade and a growing relationship in diverse 
fields.  This is a forum where different forms of mutually important 
trilateral cooperation are discussed”.   
 
C. Joint Statement on the Advancement of the Strategic and Global   
Partnership between India and Japan  
 
7.6 India has signed Joint Statement on the Advancement of the Strategic and 
Global Partnership between India and Japan and come up with Joint Declaration on 
Security Co -operation between India and Japan.   In this context, the Ministry was 
asked abo ut India‟s strategic perception of Japan and its role in India‟s role at the 
global level and in the South East Asia region, the Ministry replied that: 
 
“These documents reflect the common perceptions of the two sides on a 
range of issues, and provide for a comprehensive framework for the 
enhancement of all -round cooperation between the two countries. 
Through these, the two sides have pledged to develop relations as an 
essential pillar for the future architecture of the region.  Japan is a major 
Asian nation with which we share common values and interests, similar 
perceptions of the evolving environment in the region and the world and a 
common commitment to democracy, open society, human rights and the 
rule of law. The two are partners with a mutual stake in  each other's 
progress and prosperity. We share with Japan a common commitment to 
a comprehensive reform of the United Nations, including expeditious 
forward movement towards a genuine reform of the Security Council, so 
as to make it more representative, c redible and effective, and a desire to 
pursue this through G -4 and bilateral consultations, among others. We 
have a common interest in the safety of transport and sea lines of 
communications and a common commitment to fight against terrorism 
and transnational crimes. 
 
On global issues, the two sides are committed to sharing of experiences 
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, capacity -building in disaster 
prevention and management and ensuring maritime safety, maritime 
security and protection of marine environ ment. On the wider strategic 
context, cooperation with Japan in energy efficiency and conservation 
sector, and the development of a comprehensive cooperation in the coal 
and power sectors, are in India‟s developmental interests. 

43 
 
 
The documents signed in October 2008 also provide for information 
exchange and policy coordination on regional affairs in the Asia Pacific 
region with Japan. We have both committed to bilateral cooperation 
within multilateral frameworks in Asia, in particu lar the East Asia Summit, 
ASEAN Regional Forum and ReCAAP processes. We both support the 
East Asia Summit as an open, inclusive, transparent and Leaders' led 
forum to promote cooperation on issues of common interest and to 
deepen regional economic integration towards the progressive realization 
of an East Asia Community”. 
 
 
D.  Agreement on the Development of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
 
7.7 Government of India and the Government of the French Republic have signed 
Agreement on the Development of Peaceful U ses of Nuclear Energy on 30.09.2008.  
The Ministry was asked whether the  Agreement has been ratified, the Ministry stated 
as under: 
 
“On 30 th September 2008, India and France signed a cooperation 
Agreement on the Development of P eaceful Uses of Nuclear Ener gy.  
The Bilateral Agreement is awaiting completion of procedures on the 
French side for entry into force of the Agreement.” 
 
7.8 The Ministry was further asked if there are any plans to enter into such 
agreements with other countries, the Ministry replied that: 
 
“India and the US signed Agreement on Cooperation Concerning 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy in October 2008. An Agreement on 
Cooperation in Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy was signed with 
Namibia during the visit of the President of Namibia to Ind ia from 30 
August – 3 September 2009. Agreements on civil nuclear cooperation are 
under discussion with several other countries including Russia, Canada, 
Kazakhstan, Republic of Korea, and Mongolia”. 
 
7.9 The Committee further desired to know whether India  has allocated sites for 
construction of nuclear pl ants by some foreign companies. The Ministry in its post -
evidence reply has stated as under: 
 
“On October 16, 2009, Government announced that in furtherance of the 
implementation of bilateral civil nuclear  cooperation agreement with France, 
Russia and USA, it has designated the following sites for setting up Light 

44 
 
Water Reactor (LWR) based nuclear power plants in cooperation with the 
countries concerned: 
 
France - Jaitapur (Maharashtra)                                           
Russia - Kudankulam (Tamil Nadu), Haripur (West Bengal)                                     
USA - Chhayamithi Virdi (Gujarat), Kovvada (Andhra Pradesh) “ 
 
 
E.   Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Pipeline Project 
 
7.10 To enlarge India‟s engagement with the world regarding ensuring India‟s 
energy security Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Pipeline P roject is an 
important initiative. In this context, the Committee asked the Ministry to furnish 
current status of the project. The Ministry  in its post -evidence reply has  stated as 
under: 
“India became a formal member of TAPI pipeline project during the tenth 
steering committee meeting in Islamabad on 23 -24 April 2008. 
Subsequently India participated in the 3 rd and 4th Technical Working Group 
meetings in Ashgabat. The 1680 Km, 56 inch in diameter pipeline will 
supply 30 bcm gas out of which 14 bcm will be supplied to India. The 
US$7.6 billion project is expected to be completed by 2014 -15 with GAIL 
(India) Ltd being nomina ted as the Indian nominee for off -taking the Indian 
portion of gas. Price of gas, transit and transport payments, setting up of 
consortium are yet to be decided. The 11 th Steering Committee is to be 
hosted by India which is being coordinated by the Asian D evelopment 
Bank. The ADB is awaiting Turkmenistan to complete certain 
documentation relating to international energy audit of their gas reserves.” 
 
 
F.   South Asia 
 
7.11 Terrorist attack in Mumbai on 26 th November 2008, has significantly altered 
the geo -politics of the region.  In this context, the Ministry was asked to elaborate 
upon the impact of 26/11 on India‟s South Asia Policy. The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“With regard to India‟s South Asia Policy in SAARC and the impact of 
26/11, as per the principles of the SAARC Charter, bilateral and politically 
contentious issues are outside the ambit of the SAARC Charter.  As 
SAARC is the only South Asian organization recognized by its member 
states for economic cooperation to bring the fruits of development to the 
South Asian people, there was no change with regard to India‟s 
asymmetric/non-reciprocal commitment to SAARC.  With regard to the 
Mumbai attacks , the  SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of  
Terrorism was invoked by India to Pakistan.  The terrorist attack in 

45 
 
Mumbai on 26/11 has had an undesirable impact on Indo -Pak relations 
and led to a pause in the composite dialogue. However, our policy 
towards other neighbours in South Asia are on stand alone basis and not 
impacted by our relations with Pakistan.  
 
 
7.12 The Ministry was further asked whether there were any perceptible changes 
with regard to India‟s Foreign Policy at the global level also, the Ministry stated that: 
 
“India‟s Foreign Polic y aims at safeguarding country‟s enlightened self -
interests.  For this certain parameters like our commitment to good 
neighborly relations, a non -aligned world view and a belief in the 
multilateral world, are followed.    The primary task of our foreign po licy 
has been to promote and maintain a peaceful and stable external 
environment including in the South Asia, which facilitates to achieve our 
developmental goals. 
 
Hence, in the context of Mumbai terrorist attack on 26/11, there has not 
been any perceptible change with regard to India‟s foreign policy.  On the 
other hand, Government constantly monitors the prevailing situation and 
any arising exigencies in order to ensure that our foreign policy principles 
are readjusted/tailored to the requirements of the day”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
OTHERS 
 
 
With India‟s growing economic integration with the world , India‟s strength in 
terms of availability of young and highly s killed professional workforce is  widely 
acknowledged.  Most countries have an umbrella social security system mandated by 
law. However it , is important  to secure the long term economic interest of Indian 
citizens.  
  
A.  Agreement on Social Security with the Kingdom of Belgium 
 
8.2 As a new beginning, India has entered into „Agreement on Social Security with 
the Kingdom of Belgium.  In this context, the Ministry was asked to mention its date of 
implementation and elaborate upon its m ain provisions and whether there are any 
plans to reform do mestic laws particularly Income Tax law to provide full benefit to 
the beneficiaries, the Ministry stated that: 
       
“The India -Belgium Social Security Agreement (SSA) has entered into 
force from 1 September 2009. 
 
The Agreement stipulates that those wor king on a short -term contract of 
upto 60 months are exempted from social security contributions in the 
host country provided they continue to make social security payments in 
their home countries.  
 
Those who live and work for periods longer than 60 months  and make 
social security contributions under the host country laws will be entitled to 
the export of the social security benefits should they relocate to the home 
country/a third country on completion of their contract or on retirement. 
 
The above benefit s shall be available even when the Indian company 
sends its employees to Belgium from a third country. 
 
The self employed Indians in Belgium  would also be entitled to export of 
social security benefit on their relocation to India. 
 
 
No. As per the informa tion available from MOIA, the Ministry has not 
given any thought to this aspect of the social security provision.” 

47 
 
 
8.3 The Ministry was further asked if there are any plans to enter into such 
agreements with other countries particularly with USA and West European countries, 
where large number of expatriates go for working for smaller duration. The Ministry 
replied in affirmation and stated that: 
 
(a)    SSAs have been signed with Belgium, France, Germany (called 
Social Insurance- for detached workers only) Switzerland. 
 
(b)   Negotiations completed, but SSA to be signed with Netherlands, 
Czech Republic, Luxembourg and Norway. 
 
(c)     Negotiations under process with Hungary,  Sweden, Denmark, 
Germany (comprehensive  SSA is being discussed) UK, USA, 
Canada. 
 
(d)     Negotiations being proposed with: Austria, Bulgaria , Cyprus, 
Finland, Greece ,Ireland, Italy, Poland Portugal, Romania, Spain.”     
 
B.  Legal Counseling/Assistance to Indian workers in Gulf  
  
8.4 In the Revenue Section, under the Minor head, „Leg al Counseling/Assistance 
to Indian workers in Gulf, Rs. 30 lakhs have been earmarked in BE 2009 -10.  In this 
context, Ministry was asked to clarify that whether  it is  not the responsibility of 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs  and if  so, what was their  justification for this 
allocation.  The Ministry stated as under: 
 
“It is true that after creation of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, work 
related to welfare of Indian citizens abroad is being handled by them. 
However, Ministry of External Affairs ha s still been receiving a large 
number of references from individuals and various authorities in India 
including judicial authorities, NHRC, NCW, PMO and President 
Secretariat requiring the Ministry of take quick action for the welfare of 
Indian nationals a broad. Work related to welfare of Indian citizens 
primarily includes transportation of mortal remains, deportation of illegal 
immigrants etc. at Government cost. These kinds of cases also get  the 
attention of media. Ministry used to incur expenditure for welfare of Indian 
citizens on case to case basis keeping in view the humanitarian angle. 
However, Ministry incurs such type of expenditure as a last resort where 
there is no other option available including approaching 
employer/relatives/Indian communities etc. with utmost financial propriety 
and economic measures. 
 

48 
 
It is also mentioned that provision of funds allotted under the head „Legal 
Counselling/Assistance to Indian workers‟ are used not only for the 
welfare of Indians living in Gulf countries but Indians living globally. For 
example, during the FY 2008 -09, MEA  incurred an expenditure of 
Rs.34.88 lakhs towards deportation of illegal Indian immigrants from 
Guinea Conakary”. 
 
8.5 In this context, the C ommittee further asked the Ministry as to how far is it 
correct to demand allocations/incur expenditure for the he ad for which they have no 
responsibility and will it not invite audit objections as it is clear breach of demarcation 
of responsibility of various Mi nistries of Government of India. The Ministry in post -
evidence reply stated as under: 
  
“Consular matter is  the primary subject to be dealt with by Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA). However after creation of Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs (MOIA) general matters related to Overseas Indians 
comprising Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Non -Resident Indian s 
(NRIs) were allotted to MOIA. Being consular matters following matters 
inter-alia are the prime responsibility of MEA. 
 
 Relief and Repatriation of and Financial Assistance to Distressed 
Indian nationals. 
 Deportation of Indian Citizens by Foreign Governments. 
 Indian illegal immigrants and their deportation from foreign 
countries. 
 Transportation/cremation/burial of mortal remains in deserving 
cases where there are no other options. 
 
Ministry uses to incur expenditure for above-mentioned welfare measures 
and other consular matters. 
 
 Funds allotted to MEA are incurred by Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad which is under administrative control of MEA, for the purpose 
mentioned above. While incurring the expenditure utmost financial 
propriety is to be kept in mind an d GOI guidelines are followed. 
Accordingly it may not be treated as breach of demarcation of 
responsibility.” 
 
C.   Racial Attacks on Indians Living Abroad 
 
8.6 There have been large number of incidents of racial attacks on Indians living 
abroad especially in Australia. In this context, the Ministry was asked whether the 
Government of India has taken up the iss ue with Government of Australia and 

49 
 
whether the culprits have been identified and follow up action taken against them  by 
the Government of Australia. The Ministry stated that: 
 
 “The spate of attacks on Indian students in Australia since May this year 
has engaged the attention of Govt. of India at the highest  levels.  To 
emphasize the importance, the Govt. places on an early resolution of all 
issues concerning Indian students in Australia, External Affairs Minister 
visited Sydney, Cairns and Melbourne in Australia in the first week of 
August. In his discussions with the Australian leaders both at the Federal 
and State level, EAM discussed all aspects of the various issues 
concerning the safety and security of our students as also the problems 
associated with the closure of a few of the colleges and the resultin g 
hardship to the students.  As a result of this visit, the seriousness and the 
importance of this issue was brought home to the Australian leaders who 
announced immediate short and long -term measures, to address the 
grievances of our students.  The steps undertaken have resulted in a 
visible improvement in the safety and security of our students and have 
also accelerated an entire review of the unscrupulous institutions.  So as 
a result of the pro -active approach undertaken by the Govt., the anxiety 
and concerns of the students and their parents have been addressed to a 
large extent. 
 
8.7 The Committee further desired to be informed about the measures that have 
been undertaken by Government of India to ensure safety and se curity of Indians 
living abroad. The Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
 
“Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have 
issued advisory for Indian students going abroad for education.  
 
Indian Missions/Posts have been making all the possible efforts to ensure 
the safety and security of Indians living abroad including students.  On 
receipt of any such complain Missions/Posts not only take up the matter 
with the local government but also follow up the matter to resolve the 
issue. Missions/Posts also enc ourage Indian nationals to register 
themselves with the Indian Missions/Posts. All consular assistance is 
provided to them by the Missions/Posts. Family of the victim is also 
informed immediately”. 
 
8.8 Inspite of the proactive approach adopted by G overnment of India, a number 
of cases of such racial attacks have occurred.  In this context, the Ministry in its post-
evidence reply have stated as under: 
 
“There have been incidents of attacks on Indian students in 
Australia, particularly in Melbourne and Sydne y.   Most of these 

50 
 
attacks have been opportunistic and only a few attacks have had 
racist elements. 
 
Most of these attacks have taken place in Melbourne in Victoria 
State.  The Premier of Victoria, John Brumby, who had recently 
visited India, has re -assured that any act of violence is 
unacceptable and any act of racially motivated violence or racism 
is completely unacceptable.  His Government shares our concerns 
about the negative implications these incidents may have and has 
recently introduced in the Vict orian Parliament changes to the 
Sentencing Act 1991, to ensure that hatred or prejudice towards a 
victim is taken into account in sentencing.  This amendment would 
send a strong message to the community and offenders that 
crimes motivated by hatred or prej udice will not be tolerated in 
Victoria and will attract tough penalties by the courts.  Also the 
police patrolling has been enhanced and authorities in Victoria 
have been directed to deal with the perpetrators to the full extent 
of the law.  In New South Wales (NSW), the authorities have taken 
up measures like increased patrolling by the police, installation of 
street lights in comparatively dark neighbourhoods and interaction 
with Indian students to have a better understanding of their 
problems.  The Miss ion has not discerned any bias among the 
local authorities against the Indian students. 
 
The present number of Indians living in Australia is estimated at 
240,000.  Besides that there are over 90,000 Indian students in 
Australia, which accounts for over 17 % of the total international 
students in Australia (ranking 2 nd highest after China – 22%).  Out 
of this, almost 70% students are studying in courses in Vocational 
Education and Training (VET), etc., sector and 30% are in higher 
education sector.    
 
Government of India is considering measures to regulate 
enrolment of agents and registration of students prior to departure 
overseas and the pre-departure training proposed to be developed 
and delivered through various agencies. 
 
Following the requests mad e at the highest level by PM and EAM 
and demarches made by the Indian Mission/Posts with Australia, 
the Australian authorities have taken certain steps and announced 
series of measures ... The immediate steps are beginning to have 
effect.  Government is following the efficacy of the measures taken 
on a continual basis and remains deeply engaged with the 
Australian authorities concerned to ensure the safety and security 
of Indian students in Australia.” 
 
  

51 
 
PART-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Committee note that projected BE of Ministry of External Affairs 
(MEA) for the year 2009 -10 was about Rs. 7400 crore, but Ministry has been 
allocated only Rs. 6293 crore.  The Committee are of the view that the 
allocation of funds to the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) are inadequate as 
in the era of globalization, along with the matters related to international affairs 
and diplomacy, the Ministry has to deal with issues related to political, cultural, 
economic and environmental affairs  as well.  The funds provided to MEA 
should be in tune with the Ministry’s multi -dimensional engagement with the 
world.  The Committee, therefore, suggest that sufficient funds for Ministry of 
External Affairs should be provided to match with India’s regio nal and global 
aspirations in the era of new architecture of global power. However, at the 
same time, the Committee would also like to urge the Government for proper 
and full utilization of the already allocated funds. 
 
2. The Committee in their 15 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of MEA on Demands 
for Grants (2007 -08) had commented upon the need to raise the manpower 
strength of the MEA to cope with the expanding role of the Ministry.  In their 
20th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of MEA on Demands for Grants (2008 -09), the 
Committee further reiterated that there should be no further delay in the 
proposed expansion of the cadre strength.  The Committee are of the view that 
keeping in tune with increased arenas of engagements and expanding work -
profile of the Ministry, Min istry’s strength is inadequate and needs to be 

52 
 
augmented at every level.  Further, the Committee are of the view that there is 
immense need to build capacity within the structure of Ministry to deal with 
evolving multi -dimensional nature of diplomacy and i t is equally pertinent to 
diversify the expertise base and linguistic base of diplomats and officials with 
the Ministry.  As the Ministry has informed that Cabinet note has been obtained 
for expansion of services, the Committee desire that the proposal to expand 
the IFS and related cadres should be implemented at the earliest. 
 
3.   The Committee take serious note of the situation arising from the non -
availability of interpretation facility from Hindi language to foreign languages 
and vice versa. Our dignitaries are asked to speak in English instead of Hindi 
for only reason that the interpreter does not know Hindi.  The Committee are of 
the view that this is ludicrous situation.  They are given to understand that 
various proposals for interpretat ion from Hindi language to foreign languages 
and vice versa have been made but nothing concrete has been achieved so far.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary steps should be taken to 
develop a cadre of interpreters for interpretation from Hindi language to foreign 
languages and vice versa without any further delay. 
 
4. The Committee note that the funds provided for International publicity to 
the Ministry and efforts made in this regard are not adequate and there is no 
match in the actual requirement and funds that are provided.  The Committee in 
their earlier Reports had also stressed upon the need for maximizing publicity 
efforts through Missions/Posts.  While emphasizing the importance of external 
publicity, the Committee reiterate that ade quate funds should be provided to 

53 
 
the Ministry for advertising and external publicity and holistic approach should 
be adopted with the use of traditional as well as modern media for projection of 
India to the world in a better way. 
 
5. The Indian Chanceries, Embassies, Missions and Cultural Centres are 
the reflection of India to the outside world and to the Indian citizens in foreign 
countries.  The Committee are of the view that there is a need to diversify and 
increase the number of Embassies and  Missions in various regions of the 
world.  More officials and funds should be provided to Missions and 
Embassies, not only in developed countries but also in countries of Latin 
America and Africa.  In view of the emerging global security scenario, 
modernization of security apparatus for the Indian establishments abroad is 
also pertinent.  The Committee are of the view that Indian Missions and 
Embassies should reflect the 21 st century technology enabled India to the 
world, through the effective use of e -governance and the officials be made 
more efficient, people friendly and delivery oriented. The Committee also desire 
that a dedicated Officer with adequate knowledge of law of the land should be 
appointed in each Chancery, Embassy and Mission to look after t he matter 
related to Indian workers in that country so as to ensure timely redressal of 
their grievances. The Committee further recommend that MEA should issue 
directions to Missions/Posts to act in close coordination with Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affai rs for the w elfare of Indian workers abroad and 
safeguarding the human rights of Indian Diaspora.  
 

54 
 
6. The Committee are appreciative of the multifaceted diplomatic endeavors 
of the Ministry.  However, in view of the current global scenario and the new 
challenges in the immediate neighbourhood, it is essential to incorporate new 
ideas and approaches in conduct of Indian foreign policy.  It is possible only 
when there is a change in the mindset of the persons manning the Ministry, 
Missions and Posts abroad.  A sense of dynamism, welfare and openness will 
have to be inculcated, while dealing with the outside world.  The Committee 
suggest that to cope with the increased areas of engagement, it is pertinent to 
redefine the role of the Ministry. 
 
7. Under the Tec hnical and Economic Cooperation Programme India’s 
developmental partnership and cooperation is manifested through aid and 
loans to the developing countries.  The developing world is witness to various 
competing influences. The Committee are given to unders tand that many 
projects are selected inter -alia on the basis of value addition they bring to the 
community in the aid receiving countries. The Committee also find that aid 
disbursal to recipient countries is often entangled into bureaucratic hassles 
and get delayed inordinately.  Thus the very purpose of aid is defeated.    The 
Committee are of the view that in this backdrop, it is necessary to adopt a 
holistic approach and evolve a comprehensive Aid Policy to achieve long term 
strategic objectives of India’s Foreign Policy. The Committee also suggest that 
the disbursal of aid should be quick enough so as to reach the recipient 
country at the earliest. 
 

55 
 
8. The Ministry has stated that the bulk of its outlays are on projects and 
programme which are to be impl emented in foreign countries.  The BE and RE 
are framed on the basis of the various commitments made at the political level.   
It is often found that political and security developments in the recipient State 
influence the progress of the proposed projects .  It has also been stated that 
the Ministry has to deal with sovereign governments and operate in foreign 
environment where Government of India’s effective control is limited.  The 
Committee are not satisfied with this reply of the Ministry.  The Committe e 
suggest that Ministry should evaluate all aspects before allocating funds for 
any particular project since they understand that the preparation of conducive 
atmosphere for the project is the responsibility of the aid receiving countries 
which is generally done.   Accordingly, time bound action plan should be put in 
place for its early and efficient execution of the project.   
 
9. Kaladan Multimodal Transit Project in Myanmar is an ambitious project 
to assure better connectivity.  The Committee note that t he allocation for the 
same was substantially reduce d during RE 2008 -09 stage.  The Committee are 
not convinced with the reply of the Government that the reduction had to be 
effected due to delay in signing the agreement with the consultant. The 
Committee are of the opinion that had the Government taken care to sign the 
agreement earlier, then the need of making drastic cut at RE stag e would not 
have arisen. The Committee have been informed that actual work will start by 
the end of the year 2009-10.  The Committee suggest that the timeframe should 
be followed scrupulously in respect of the project so that such situation does 
not recur.  

56 
 
 
10. Government of India has extended humanitarian assistance to Sri Lanka 
through various aid and rehabilitation package s.  The Committee expect that 
the aid will be utilized  fully and reaches the targeted population.  The 
Committee are of the view that this is possible only if there is proper 
monitoring. The Committee urge the Government to take measures to devise 
appropriate monitoring mechanism which will not only enable the proper 
distribution of the aid but also ensure rehabilitation and wellbeing of the 
Internally Displaced People in Sri Lanka. 
  
11. The Committee take serious note of the fact that a steep rise in 
expenditure is anticipated during the current financial year in various projects 
in Nepal.  The  Committee understand that the political situation in Nepal is 
mainly responsible for this situation.  The Committee suggest that Government 
should hold negotiations  with the Government of Nepal with a view to redraw 
the timelines for completion of the projects.  The Committee want that these 
timelines are strictly followed and efforts should be made to ensure that there 
is no further cost and time overruns in implementation of these projects. 
 
12. The Committee appreciate India’s efforts in construction of Parliament 
Building in Afghanistan. The Committee consider it a prestigious project which 
could go a long way in cementing the ties between the two countries beside s 
building a better image of India.  However, the Committee are deeply concerned 
to find that this project is facing huge cost and time overrun.  They are of the 
view that this could have been avoided if Government had taken timely 

57 
 
measures.  The Committee  desire that in order to avoid such a situation in 
future, the Government should evolve a mechanism which could ensure the 
completion of the project in a time bound manner. 
 
13. The Committee are of the view that India’s presence in Afghanistan is 
significant particularly, in context of the emerging geo -political situation in 
Pakistan and Afghanistan.  The Committee appreciate India’s continued 
engagement and commitment towards rebuilding of Afghanistan.  However, the 
Committee are gravely concerned about t he security scenario and safety of 
Indian citizens and personnel working on Indian/India sponsored projects in 
Afghanistan.  The Committee are of the view that security concerns hamper the 
efficiency of workforce immensely.  Therefore, the Committee urge u pon the 
Government to strengthen its security apparatus and ensure safety of 
personnel working on Indian projects not only in Afghanistan but also on other 
projects in various countries as well. 
 
14. SAARC Development Fund (SDF) is pivotal in transforming SAARC from 
declaratory to implementation and emerge as a facilitator.  The Committee note 
with satisfaction that SDF has become operational.  Two ambitious projects are 
under implementation and the third one is to be finalized very shortly.  They are 
given to understand that SAARC would see a slew of new and vibrant regional 
institutions taking shape.  Hence, the Committee hope that SAARC would 
provide ample opportunities to the countries of the region to become stake 
holders in each other’s development.  T he Committee further desire that SDF 
projects are executed in a time bound and efficient manner so that it becomes 
a vehicle of development within the SAARC. 

58 
 
 
15. The Committee take serious note of inordinate delay and repeated 
postponement of the launching of Pilot Phase of Passport Seva Project. The 
project was due for launching in July -August 2009 but revised to 1 st October, 
2009.  The Government had assured that pilot phase would be launched on 13th 
November, 2009 in two cities i.e. B engaluru an d Chandigarh.   But the 
Committee are surprised to find that inspite of Government’s categorical 
assurance, the project has  not been launched so far .  The Committee express 
their strong displeasure that despite assurance given to the Committee, it has 
not b een done .  The Committee want that this project should be launched 
without further delay and after due testing and checking of the software and 
taking into account the feasibility and results, the Government may implement 
this project on pan-India basis.  The Committee further hope that through this 
project, the Passport Issuance System in the country will become simpler, 
speedier, public friendly and delivery oriented.  The Committee want that the 
Government should apprise the Committee in this regard. 
 
16. Issuance of e -passport is another ambitious project of the Government, 
which is currently launched as a Pilot Project In respect of official and 
diplomatic passports.  The Committee are given to understand that this project 
will be rolled out in general category also by the end of 2009.  But the 
Committee are surprised to find that e -passports will not be man datory for 
general public.  The Committee  are of the view that owing to huge benefits of  
this service for checking the issuance of fake passports the  Government may 
consider to extend this service to general category as well in a phased manner.  

59 
 
17. Cultural diplomacy is an integral ingredient of Ministry’s overall 
diplomatic endeavours.  Projection of India’s extensive soft power and 
civilizational strength to the global audience will help India to directly engage 
with the people and built up a positive image for India.  The Committee 
appreciate the new initiatives undertaken by Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) such as holding Indology Conf erences, establishment of 
Chairs and opening up of new Cultural Centres abroad etc. There is an urgent 
need to spread the arenas of cultural engagement particularly with the 
countries of Latin America, Africa and South East Asia.  The Committee desire 
that more Cultural Centres should be set up globally besides diversifying the 
activities of the existing ones.  Concerted efforts should be made for promotion 
of Indian studies and India centric studies in various Universities abroad.  
Holistic approach should  be adopted while utilizing the additional allocation 
besides formulation of integrated and futuristic plan for effective propagation 
of India’s soft power abroad. 
 
 
18. The Committee are of the view that in the era of global integration and 
evolving nature of geo-politics, there is immediate need for India to diversify its 
engagement with the world at various levels.  The importance of active 
engagement with the individual countries through bilateral relations and on 
various multilateral forums and re gional groupings cannot be undermined.  
There is an urgent need to build international coalitions to engage with the 
countries on the issues of common concerns. 
 

60 
 
19. In the era of increased international flow of professionals and work force, 
protecting economic interest of its citizen s is important for any country.  The 
Committee welcome  India’s entering into Agreement on Social Security with 
Belgium.  The Committee are of the view that this will secure long term 
economic interest of Indian citizens.  Th e Committee further take note  of 
Government’s efforts for proposed Social Security Agreement with various 
countries and hope that this endeavour is expedited and India should be able 
to enter into such agreements with other countries. 
 
20. The Committee express serious concern over racial attacks on Indians in 
foreign countries particularly, on Indian students in Australia.   The Committee 
are given to understand that there are 2,40,000 Indians living in Australia out of 
which 90 ,000 are students which accou nt for nearly 17 percent of the total 
International students in Australia.  The Committee are further informed that 
Government of India are planning to regulate the enrolment of agents and 
registration of students prior to departure to overseas countries.  The Ministry 
has also stated that following the intervention of Prime Minister of India and 
Minister of External Affairs, the Australian Government has taken up measures 
to diffuse the situation.  The Committee take serious note of this development 
and ob serve that had the Australian Government taken such steps in the 
beginning, the situation would not have been worsened. However, the  
Committee are relieved to learn that the situation in Australia in this regard is 
improving.   The Committee recommend to t he Government to persuade local 
community and local authorities to prevent such incidents in future.  

61 
 
Missions/Posts should also adopt pro -active approach and timely Consular 
Assistance be provided to the victims.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             SMT. SUSHMA SWARAJ, 
30th November, 2009                        Chairperson,  
9 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)             Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
  

62 
 
Appendix - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 23rd OCTOBER, 2009 
 
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Room No. G -074, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Smt. Sushma Swaraj – Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Devidhan Besra 
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5.  Shri Pinaki Misra 
6.  Shri Janardhana Swamy 
7. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
8. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
Rajya Sabha 
 9.  Dr. Karan Singh 
10. Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil 
11. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director  
2. Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs 
 
     S.No. Name (S/Shri)  Designation 
1.  Smt. Nirupama Rao Foreign Secretary 
2.  Shri Ashok Tomar Addl. Secretary (E&SA)  
3.  Shri Virendra Gupta DG, ICCR 
4.  Shri K.S. Bhardwaj Joint Secretary(Projects) 
5.  Shri Satish C. Mehta Joint Secretary(North) 
6.  Shri Y.K. Sinha Joint Secretary(PAI) 
7.  Shri T.S. Trimurti Joint Secretary(BSM) 
8.  Dr. Kheya Bhattacharya Joint Secretary(SAARC) 

63 
 
9.  Shri Rajeev Mishra Joint Secretary(UNES) 
10.  Shri Vinod Kumar Joint Secretary(PD) 
11.  Shri A. Manickam Joint Secretary(CPV) 
12.  Shri Anil Kumar Trigunayat Joint Secretary(GD/HAJ) 
13.  Shri G. Dharmendra Joint Secretary(D&ISA) 
14.  Shri R.N. Prasad Joint Secretary(EW) 
15.  Shri Sibabrata Tipathi Joint Secretary(WANA) 
16.  Shri T.S. Sandhu Joint Secretary(AD) 
17.  Smt. Gaitri I. Kumar Joint Secretary(AMS) 
18.  Shri Asit K. Bhattacharjee Joint Secretary(UNP) 
19.  Shri Sanjay Verma Joint Secretary(ES) 
20.  Shri J.S. Mukul Joint Secretary(TC) 
21.  Shri T.P. Seetharam Joint Secretary(CE) 
22.  Shri S.N. Ray Joint Secretary(Coord) 
23.  Shri Damu Ravi Joint Secretary (LAC) 
24.  Ms. Reenat Sahu Joint Secretary (ITP) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee.  
The Chairperson then drew attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(I) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs in connection with examination of the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2009-2010. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

64 
 
 
 
Appendix-II 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 30TH NOVEMBER, 2009  
  
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room 
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
 
PRESENT 
Smt. Sushma Swaraj  – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Smt. Supriya Sule 
4. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Dr. Karan Singh  
6. Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil 
7. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
8. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
9. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
10. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
11. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3.   Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

65 
 
 At the outset, the Chai rperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 200 9-2010. The 
Committee adopted the same, subject to the following additions/modifications:  
(i) In Recommendation No. 2, the words “…..other cadres…..” should 
be substituted with the words “…..related cadres…..” 
 (ii) In Recommendation No. 5, the following phase to be added at the 
end: 
 “….and safeguarding the human rights of Indian Diaspora”.   
(iii) In Recommendation No. 6, the following line to be deleted: 
“…..The officials should not look like slaves of bureaucratic system 
but remain ready to respond quickly in a corporate like manner.…..” 
 (iv) In Recommendation No. 9, the sentence “…..The Committee are of 
the opinion that the Government should have taken care to sign the 
agreement earlier then the need of making drastic cut at RE stage 
would not have cropped up …..” should be replaced with “…….The 
Committee are of the opinion that had the Government taken care 
to sign the agreement earlier, then the need of making drastic cut at 
RE stage would not have arisen. …..” 
(v) In Recommendation No. 1 4, the word “…..institution…..” should be 
substituted with the word “…..institutions…..” and the word “…..time 
bound efficient manner …..” should be substituted with the word  
“…..time bound and efficient manner …..” 
(vi) In Recommendatio n No. 15 , the sentence s “…..Now the 
Government has assured that pilot phase would be la unched on 
13th November, 2009 in two cities i.e. Bengaluru and Chandigarh.  
The Committee hope that there is no further delay in launch of the 
Pilot Phase. A fter due testing and checking of the software and 
taking into account the feasibility and results, it should be  
implemented on pan-India basis.…..” should be replaced with  
 “…….The Government had assured that pilot phase would be 
launched on 13 th November, 2009 in two cities i.e. Bangaluru and 

66 
 
Chandigarh.  But the Committee are surprised to find that i nspite of 
Government‟s categorical assurance, the project has not been 
launched so far .  The Committee express their strong displeasure 
that despite assurance given to the Committee, it has not been 
done.  The Committee want that this project should be lau nched 
without further delay and after due testing and checking of the 
software and taking into account the feasibility and results, the 
Government may implement th is project on pan -India basis. . …..” 
and  
The following phase to be  deleted at the end  “……on quarterly 
basis” 
(vii) In Recommendation No. 1 7, the word s “…..Centres abroad …..” 
should be substituted with the word “…..Centres…..”  
(viii) In Recommendation No. 20 , the word  “…..the concern…..” should 
be substituted with the word  “…..serious concern…..”  
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report in the light 
of modifications suggested and consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual 
verification of the Report by the Ministry and thereafter, to present the Report t o 
Parliament. The draft Report was then adopted. 
 
 The meeting was then adjourned. 
 