 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the First Report (15th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the 
year 2009-10] 
 
  
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  0 5 
 

FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the First Report (15th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the 
year 2009-10] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2010 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 

COEA NO. 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Pr ocedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2009-2010………………………           (iii  
INTROD8CTION………………………………………………………………          (iv  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….            01  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           10 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s Replies..…       29 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            32 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………           33 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on       36  
05.05.2010……………………………………………….……....   
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
1st Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha ………….………………….       38 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2009-2010) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha* 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
11. Shri Digvijay Singh 
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
13. Smt. Supriya Sule 
14. Smt. Sushma Swaraj 
15. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
16. Shri Takam Sanjoy  
17. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
18. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
19. Dr. Shashi Tharoor# 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar@ 
24. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
25. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
26. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
27. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
28. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
29. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
30. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
31. Shri H.K. Dua $ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Additional Director 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey  - Committee Officer 
5. Shri Manoj Pahuja  - Sr. Exe. Asstt. 
* Shri Yashwant Sinha has been nominated as a Member and appointed as Chairman of 
the Committee w.e.f. 6.1.2010  vice Smt. Sushma Swaraj resigned from the Chairpersonship of 
the Committee w.e.f. 1.1.2010. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 2.3.2010 vice Shri Shivraj V. Patil ceased to be the Member of the 
Committee due to his resignation w.e.f.21.1.2010 
@ Shri Ashwani Kumar ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 9.4.2010 and re -
nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 26.4.2010 
# Dr. Shashi Tharoor has been nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 30.04.2010. 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Stand ing Com mittee on External Affairs (2009 -2010) having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 5th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 1st Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2009-10. 
 
2. The 1st Report was presented to Parliament on  3rd December, 2009. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/obse rvations contained 
in the Report were received on 10th  March, 2010. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 5th May, 20 10. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been 
reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 1 st Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    YASHWANT SINHA, 
05 May, 2010                                                                      Chairman,  
Vaisakha 15, 1932 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

 1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their First 
Report on Demands for Grants (200 9-2010) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 3rd December, 2009. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in the report.  These have 
been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,11,12,13 and 14  
 Total-11 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 9 and 10 
Total- 02 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
-Nil- 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3, 15, 16 and 17 
Total-04 
 

 2 
 
 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for which only interim replies have been given by 
the government should be furnished w ithin three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their observations/recommendations. 
 
A. Budgetary Allocation and Utilization 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee noted that the Budget Estimates for the year 2008 -09 were Rs. 
65 crore and provisional Revised Estimates were pegged  at Rs. 45 crore, which 
reflected that Rs. 20 crore remained unutilized during the year 2008-09, while Rs. 14-06 
crore was unspent during t he year 2007 -08 and the position during 2006 -07 was no 
better which showed that under utilization of funds has become a trend during the last 3 
years. The Budget Estimates for the year 2009 -10 are Rs. 80 crore which was reduced 
to Rs. 72 crore after the cut.  The Ministry has admitted that the shortfall in the financial 
year 2008-09 was on the capital head of account due to non -utilization of the allocation 
made for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK). The Committee recommend ed that the 
comprehensive action plan prepared by the Ministry  should be adhered to properly for 
optimal utilization of funds. All ground work should have been done before hand such as 
approvals for building plan, land use etc. to avoid unnecessary delays as has happened 
in case of PBK. T he Committee  further recommended that the Ministry should pay 
focused attention towards ensuring that there we re no unutilized funds in future as ha d 
been the case during 2006-07 and 2007-08. 
 
6. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“The Budget Estimates for the year 2009 -10 are Rs. 80 crore and the RE 2009 -10 are 
Rs. 60 crore. The Ministry is regularly monitoring scheme implementation to ensure 
optimum utilization of the funds provided. 
The anticipated expenditure during the year 2 009-10, head -wise and 
programme/scheme wise is expected to be as follows: 
 
 

 3 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 BE 2009-10 RE 2009-10  Anticipated 
expenditure 
Major Head - 2052 21.00 20.07 19.24 
- 2061 38.00 37.70 37.75 
-4059(Capital) 21.00 2.23 2.00 
                         Total 80.00 60.00 58.99 
 
7. The reply of the Ministry goes to prove that things have not improved as far 
as management of finances of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs are 
concerned. The Committee are dismayed to find that inspite of putting in place a 
comprehensive Action Plan, things have not moved in positive direction . The 
downsizing of the BE of Rs.80 crores by 25% to Rs.60 crores at RE stage 
indicates that there would have been substantial underutilization of funds at the 
Ministry’s end dur ing the first two quarters  of the Annual Plan 2009 -10. In the 
opinion of the Committee mere assurances of the Ministry regarding regular  
monitoring of scheme implementation to ensure optimum utilization of the funds 
provided will not suffice but it should be supported with concrete action. The 
Committee, therefore,  once again recommend that the Ministry should stop the 
ongoing trend and ensure in future years a well planned, judicious and evenly 
spread allocation of funds so that the drastic cuts at the RE  stages and the 
overall gross und erutilization, year after year, does not become never ending 
trend 
 
B. Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
8. The Committee note d the existence of the Overseas Indian Fac ilitation Centre 
(OIFC), which wa s engaged in the field of providing all information related to investing 
in India that a potential Overseas Indian Investor would need. The queries relating to 
investments across a wide gamut of sectors were supposed to be replied through the 
OIFC Website, including those in respect of Infrastru cture and social sectors.  This 
could be possible only when the Website wa s upgraded and updated regularly to 
provide all kind of information. The Committee fe lt that OIFC wa s not working as a 
single windo w to all investmen t related queries. The Website wa s not updated quite 

 4 
 
often. The Committee desire d that the OIFC be provided all possible assistance by the 
Government in developing a Business networking platform and business directory to 
fulfill its manda te to facilitate Business to Business partnership.  The Committee also 
desired that the Government should evolve a mechanism to collect the information 
about the actual investment coming to India in collaboration with Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry (Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy). 
 
9. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“During PBD -2010 held at New Delhi, Prime Minister inaugurated an online portal of 
OIFC on 8 th January 2010. The electronic portal comprise of seri es of online platforms 
such as an end -to-end information portal for updated information on sector and state 
specific investment opportunities and forthcoming events to invite diaspora‟s 
participation, a comprehensive networking platform for communication a nd group 
formation needs to foster collaborations, an online business directory of verified Indian 
and diaspora businesses, a customized query and solutions platform and an investment 
tool-kit to ease the process of investing into India. OIFC also organize d a market place 
at New Delhi during PBD -2010. One to one meetings were held with the prospective 
investors at the Market place. OIFC is also in the process of developing a mechanism to 
collect the actual information related to investment by Overseas Indians. 
The online networking platform is operational at www.oifc.in and is providing the 
following services to the Overseas Indians: 
 Business to business networking 
 Investment guide 
 Query redressal through knowledge experts 
 Live help centre 
To lead the investment and business engagement of the Indian diaspora with India, 
the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), organized its 4th interactive Market 
Place Forum at the PBD-2010 at New Delhi. 
Focused discussions held on wide ranging investment issues through  
a) Series of engaged Live Chat sessions 
b) Business meetings between delegates participating the PBD 
c) Business meetings between delegates and OIFC knowledge experts 
providing host of financial, taxation and legal services and member states 
d) One-to-one interactions and networking” 
 
10. The Committee note with satisfaction that in pursuance of their 
recommendation, the Ministry have operationalised an online portal of OIFC 
recently in January, 2010. The Committee are sure that b y its interactive nature, 
the portal will be of immense help for the Overseas Indians and will be 
increasingly utilized by them for their various requirements. The Committee also 
welcome the initiatives taken by the Ministry in the direction of developing  the 
mechanism to collect information relating to investment by Overseas Indians.  

 5 
 
The Committee, however, desire that the Ministry should fast track the process 
and complete it in a time bound manner  so that it may contribute as an important 
input in drawing up policies and programmes for Overseas Indians. 
 
C. Legal Assistance to Women facing problems in NRI Marriages  
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
11. The Committee observe d that allocation made for legal and financial assistance 
to Indian women facing problems i n NRI marriages had been increased from Rs. 2 lakh 
in 2008-09 to Rs. 15 lakh in 2009 -10.  The Committee note d that the funds under the 
scheme were allocated to the Indian Missions/Posts abroad based on the projections 
made by them, but 9 Indian Missions ha d failed to utilize the allocated funds under the 
scheme during 2007-08 and 2008-09.  The Committee might be apprised of the reasons 
for under utilization of allocated funds by the Indian Missions under the scheme and the 
impact of the information campaign  to educate prospective brides and their families. 
The Committee further desire d that the Ministry should endeavour to formulate a panel 
of legal experts for such cases within the Ministry as well as in Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad who were familiar with t he legal systems of other countries since many of the 
victims were not familiar with legal systems abroad. 
 
12. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“Reasons for under utilization of allocated funds by Indian Missions under the 
scheme: 
 
 The concerned Indian Missions/Posts abroad   have been requested to explain 
the reasons for under utilization/ non -utilization of funds allocated under the scheme. 
The reasons explained by the Missions/Posts differ from country to country. The 
reasons given by them are summarized below:-  
 
i) The Missions/Posts in Gulf countries have reported that no such request was 
received by them from deserted Indian women seeking financial /legal assistance under 
the scheme.  
 
ii)       High Commission of India,  Canberra , Australia has stated that due to internal 
wrangling in Federation of Indian Associations of Victoria (FIAV), the only one Women 
Association empanelled under the scheme in the country , the cases referred to them 
during the year 2008 -09 could no t be processed thus resulting in under utilization of 
fund. 
 

 6 
 
iii) High Commission of India, Ottawa, Canada has stated that they received 15 
complaints during the last 18 months and in all these cases, the victims did not make 
any request for financial or l egal assistance vis -à-vis her spouse. In one case, the 
matter was settled after counseling. Their experience indicates that the deserted wives 
and her parents are keen about finding the correct/latest whereabouts of the husband 
with the help of the Mission  .Their efforts in locating the husbands are stymied by the 
strict privacy laws prevailing in Canada. 
 
iv)    High Commission of India, London has stated that they have not been able to 
utilize funds earmarked by the Ministry, due to extremely low ceiling fixed in the budget 
for handling each case. U.K is one of the most expensive placed in the world and 
budgetary allocation is barely sufficient even for one hearing of a case. Hence, legal 
firms and /or NGOs have been reluctant to participate in the scheme. 
    
          Consulate General of India, Edinburgh has stated that no NGO has come forward 
to get themselves empanelled with the Consulate as per the prescribed procedure in 
order to avail of the grant facility. 
 
v) EOI Washington:  
The scheme needs publici ty. The eligibility criteria should be relaxed in order to 
ensure that deserving cases get covered under the scheme.  
 
 Consulate General of India, Chicago has stated that all the cases of abuse 
reported are governed by Illinois Domestic Violence Act and t his Act prohibits releasing 
the name of the person, passport number or other documentation like Social Security 
Number etc. In view of the restrictions, the NGOs are unable to reveal the names of the 
beneficiaries to claim for assistance under the scheme. 
 
 Consulate General of India, New York has stated that the cases received by 
them are of consulting nature and the victims has sought their counsel rather than 
financial assistance. 
 
 Consulate General of India, Houston has stated that the NGO empanelled w ith 
them could not disclose the name of the victim citing their inability to do so in view of the 
strict local privacy laws and unwillingness of the victim to allow them to disclose her 
personal details to the Consulate General of India. 
 
 Consulate General of India, San Francisco has stated that in some of the cases 
women have sought divorce to get rid of abusive relationships and therefore, are not 
eligible under the scheme as technically they have not been deserted. In some other 
cases, they are not able to satisfy the requirements of the scheme.  
 
vi)  HCI Wellington has stated that only 4 eligible cases were forwarded by the 
dealing NGOs in 2008-09 and funds were provided.  
 The strict privacy laws prevailing in countries like Canada and USA, the 
exorbitant legal expenses involved in dealing with such cases in country like U.K are 
major obstacles in implementation of the scheme.  
 
 

 7 
 
Impact of information campaign to educate prospective brides and their families: 
 
 The Ministry has brought out information pamphlets in English, Hindi, Punjabi, 
Malayalam and Telugu to make Indian women aware of their rights and responsibilities 
and precautions that could be exercised before entering into marital alliance with 
overseas Indians and about the scheme of the Ministry in this regard. 
 
 The Ministry has brought out a guidance booklet on “Marriages to Overseas 
Indians” in English, Telugu, Hindi, and Punjabi. This booklet contains information on 
safeguards available to women deserted by their NRI spouses, legal remedie s 
available, authorities that can be approached for redressal of grievances, and NGOs 
which can provide assistance.  
  
 The Ministry has launched the publicity cum awareness campaign through audio 
visual advertisements on regional T.V network primarily to cover the States of Punjab, 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The campaign is still continuing in 
Punjab. Print campaign has also been used. 
 
 The pamphlets and Guidance Booklets were circulated to various States from 
where a larger number of such cases are reported for distribution through Village 
Panchayats, Aanganwadis, Self Help Groups, Post Offices, Banks, Railway Stations, 
Airports, Hospitals/Dispensaries etc. to give maximum publicity to the initiative 
undertaken by the Ministry.  
 
MOIA’s endeavour to formulate a panel of legal experts for such cases within the 
Ministry as well as in Indian Missions/Posts abroad : 
 
 Indian Missions/Posts abroad have intimated as under: 
 
i) Consulate General of India, San Francisco: The NGO‟s (empanelled under the 
scheme) are in a better position as they already have their panel of attorneys whose 
services are called on a routine basis in times of need. Finding legal experts with 
approved licences who would consent to work on pro bono basis to deal with such 
cases is going to be very difficult. We have not received any response. 
ii)  Consulate General of India, Sydney:   There are few lawyers in NSW who 
provide free initial legal advice to members of the Indian Community requiring such 
assistance. 
  
iii) High Commission of India, Ottawa:     The lawyers fee in Canada are 
exorbitant for taking up legal cases. They did not have any concrete case needing legal 
assistance necessitating use of panel of legal experts. 
iv) Embassy of Kuwait: The Mission has a pane l of five Kuwaiti Lawyers in 
place to assist the Indian community.  The Mission is operating in its premises a “Legal 
Advice Cell” where to Kuwaiti lawyers and two Indian lawyers provide free legal advice 
between 3-5 PM on all working days on all issues /cases. 
v) Embassy of Washington : Regarding formulation of a panel of legal 
experts in Indian Missions /Posts abroad, it is stated that CLRN, a community of  legal 
resource network on the east coast has been contacted by the Mission and have 
agreed to provi de a network of 350 lawyers in the USA. It is also stated that some 
lawyers are willing to provide low bono and pro bono advice to overseas Indians. 

 8 
 
vi) Consulate General of India, New York: There are five legal experts who 
work with the consulate on pro-bono basis for these issues. 
 This Ministry has also asked from the National Legal Services Authority, New 
Delhi and The Indian Society of International Law, New Delhi  for a list of pro -bono 
lawyers in India who could assist women in cases of transnational abandonment. Some 
names of lawyers who have shown interest to work on pro bono basis have been 
forwarded by them.  
 
 To facilitate maximum utilization of funds by the Indian Missions/Posts abroad, 
the Ministry is exploring all possibilities in consultation  and co -ordination with Indian 
Missions/Posts, NGOs, Indian Women‟s Organization etc to strengthen the “Scheme for 
giving legal /financial assistance to Indian women deserted by their overseas Indian 
spouses” and to create a panel of legal experts.” 
 
13. The Committee  observe that there are various reasons for the 
underutilization of funds under the Scheme . The Committee specifically note that 
in several cases, NGOs have not been showing the interest in participating in the 
scheme to provide legal and finan cial Assistance to Indian women facing 
problems in NRI marriages mainly due to very low budget allocation for handing 
the cases. In some other cases the scheme has failed to take off due to lack of 
publicity, while at some other places the procedural const raints have precluded 
the NGOs from getting enrolled with our Mission concerned. The Committee 
acknowledge that there are genuine difficulties but not insurmountable. They, 
therefore, recommend that ceiling for allocation of funds under this scheme 
should be flexible so that allocations to various Missions are made in a more 
pragmatic way, keeping in view the location specific cost of living  and litigation. 
The Committee also feel that in view of the global reach and spread of the 
scheme, there is a need fo r giving it a very wide publicity so that funds provided 
to our Missions for this scheme are gainfully utilized by the women in distress. 
As regards the procedural constraints, the Committee are of the view that the 
Ministry should obtain from the concerne d Mission the specific clauses in the 
procedure which are coming in the way of empanelment of NGOs and initiate 
remedial measures, wherever feasible, accordingly.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the information given by the Ministry about the number of lawyers 
who are willing to provide low bono and pro bono advice to Overseas Indians in 
USA and Kuwait. The Committee, therefore , desire that the Ministry should check 
the authenticity of the details given by the Embassies in this regard and apprise 
them accordingly. 

 9 
 
D. Investors Interactive Meetings 
 
 (Recommendation No.11) 
 
14. The Committee observe d that Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) had 
planned to organize “Investors interactive meetings” in eight regions showing a range of 
exclusive products and products from India Corporate to Overseas Indian investment in 
real estate, wealth management, health care etc. First such meeting was held in 
November 2008 in Oman. But due to the global financial crisis and sharp decline in 
investor interest acr oss the world, further inves tor meets had  been deferred for  the 
present. The Committee were of the vie w that while the global market wa s recovering 
from recession, Investor Interactive Meets m ight be planned in near future so that India 
could be showcased in better way.  
 
15. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under: 
“The OIFC has planned to organize 4 investor interactive meets during the year 2010 -
11.  
OIFC organized an investment interactive meet at Dubai on 24 th March 2010. About 
120-130 overseas Indian community members participated in the events. The OIFC 
knowledge partners & IIFCL presented about the opportunities of investing in India. 
Four no of investor meets has been planned by the OIFC during 2010 -11 as per the 
following schedule: 
(i) UK – May/June 2010 
(ii)  Malaysia – August 2010 
(iii)  South Africa – during the mini PBD in Sept/Oct 2010 
(iv) During PBD-2011 at New Delhi” 
 
16. The Committee  find that while honouring their recommendation , the 
Ministry has planned 4 investment interactive meets during 2010-11 and one meet 
has already been held recently at Dubai on 24th March, 2010. The Committee while 
commending these initiatives would like the Ministry to plan and execute these 
events with utmost care and meticulousness so that the objectives of th ese 
events are successfully achieved. The Committee would also like to be updated 
on these events and their outcome at regular intervals. 
 

 10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates for the year 2008 -09 were Rs. 65 
crore and provisional Revised Estimates were pegged at Rs. 45 crore, which reflects 
that Rs. 20 crore remained unutilized during the year 2008 -09, while Rs. 14.06 crore 
was unspent dur ing the year 2007 -08 and the position during 2006 -07 was no better 
which shows that under utilization of funds has become a trend during the last 3 years.  
The Committee are of the view that but for this trend, this unspent amount could have 
been utilized somewhere else.  The Budget Estimates for the year 2009 -10 are Rs. 80 
crore which has been reduced to Rs. 72  crore after the cut.   As per the Ministry‟s own 
admission the shortfall  in the Financial Year 2008 -2009 was on the capital head of 
account due to non-utilization of the allocation made for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra 
(PBK).  T he increase in the BE 2009 -10 is primarily due to the expansion of the 
activities of the institutions established for the benefit of the overseas Indian community.  
The Committee are not happy with such state of affairs.  The Committee are of the view 
that budgetary estimates should be realistic as far as possible.  The Committee note 
that the Ministry has prepared a comprehensive action plan for the purpose.  The 
Committee rec ommend that the comprehensive action plan prepared by the Ministry 
should be adhered to properly for optimal utilization of funds.   All ground work should 
have been done before hand such as approvals for building plan, land use etc. to avoid 
unnecessary d elays as has happened in case of PBK.    The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should pay focused attention towards ensuring that there 
are no unutilized funds in future as has been the case during 2006-07 and 2007-08. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Budget Estimates for the year 2009-10 are Rs. 80 crore and the RE 2009-10 
are Rs. 60 crore. The Ministry is regularly monitoring scheme implementation to ensure 
optimum utilization of the funds provided. 
 
The anticipated expenditure during the year  2009-10, head -wise and 
programme/scheme wise is expected to be as follows: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 BE 2009-10 RE 2009-10  Anticipated 
expenditure 
Major Head - 2052 21.00 20.07 19.24 
- 2061 38.00 37.70 37.75 
-4059(Capital) 21.00 2.23 2.00 
                         Total 80.00 60.00 58.99 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 

 11 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee are surprised to find that in spite of their earlier recommendation 
regarding filling up of vacancies in the Ministry expeditiously, 40 posts in Group „B‟ and 
„D‟ and two vacant posts to be filled by Department of Official Languages are still lying 
vacant. Similar situation persists in PoE Offices also. The Committee find it quite 
strange that some posts encadred in the Ministry of External Affairs are also vacant & 
the Ministry of External Affairs has shown inability to provide personnel. The Committee 
further regret to observe that even four years after the creation of this Ministry, they 
have to depend on other Ministries for staff strength. The Committee suggest to the 
Ministry to take up the matter of the vacant posts at the highest level in the Ministry of  
Home Affairs and MEA as well as in the Department of Official Languages to fill up  
these vacant posts immediately. The Committee also suggest that pending formal 
selection of staff and also to cope up with the increased workload, the Ministry may 
recruit qualified temporary staff in Group „B‟ and „D‟ on contract basis through local 
Employment Exchange or on deputation basis. The Committee also recommend to the 
Ministry to take immediate steps for  filling up the required number of vacancies in PoE 
Offices too. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Efforts are on to fill up the vacancies in the Ministr y for its smooth functioning. As 
a result the total number of vacancies of group „B‟ and „D‟ posts in the Ministry are now 
32. Meanwhile, Department of Official Languages has also posted one Jr. Hindi 
Translator in the Ministry. Out of the existing 32 vaca ncies; 6 vacancies are against the 
post of LDC which is now a dying cadre and staff are not available against these post. 
The matter had also been taken at the higher level with the other Ministries. 
 
 The total number of vacancies for group „B‟ and „D‟ th at exist in the PoE offices 
are 23. Of these 15 vacancies are of LDC which is a dying cadre and no staff are 
available against these posts.  For filling up the remaining vacancies on loan basis 
applications have already been invited from different Ministri es/Departments. Selection 
Committee will select the persons shortly and offers for joining will be sent after 
selections are made. 
 Meanwhile, outsourced staffs have currently been deployed against these 
vacancies in the Ministry as well as in PoE offices to ensure that work does not suffer. 
The matter was taken up with the Secretaries of the concerned 
Ministries/Departments. As a result, Department of Official Language has sent a 
nomination for AD(OL) in the Ministry. Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs (M HA) has 
apprised that vacancies in the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs will be filled up as 
soon as the DOP&T nominates more staff to MHA cadre for which the matter has been 
taken up with Secretary (Personnel).  
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee are happy to note that considering the necessity for establishing 
an institutional mechanism for promotion of Overseas Employment, better protection 
and welfare of Overseas Indian Workers and for study of emerging overseas 

 12 
 
employment opportunities, Ministry has set up a Council for Promotion of Overseas 
Employment (CPOE)  which has since been renamed as Indian Council of Overseas 
Employment (ICOE).  The activities have been undertaken/planned for this year as 
developing a labour market assessment in select European Countries by International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), India – European Union Mobility Cooperation and 
design of a pension programme for returning workers are attractive and impressive.  
The Committee are of the view that it should be ensured that activities undertaken by 
the Council (ICOE) are carried out vigorously and all possible efforts should be made in 
this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.   The Indian Council of 
Overseas Employment (ICOE) is carrying out its activities vigorously and all efforts are 
being made to complete its programmes in a time bound manner. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Ministry h as admitted that a key issue in addressing the problems and 
concerns of migrant workers and the Overseas Indian Community is the absence of a 
data base, empirical research and analysis that can support appropriate policy 
decisions. The migrant workers do not have access to Helpline numbers provided in the 
Missions and Posts abroad nor there is any dedic ated officer to help them. The 
Committee are unhappy with sorry state of affairs. The Committee want that Helpline 
numbers and name and telephone numbers of dedicated officer should be prominently 
displayed in the Missions/Posts abroad. Within India, the information containing the 
Helpline numbers and name of nodal officer should be supplied to all State 
Governments/ Chief Secretaries/ District Collectors besi des being circulated among 
Members of Parliament for dissemination at Block and Panchayat levels. This should 
also be done through other means of publicity viz. TV/Radio/Newspapers etc. The 
Committee want to be informed  in this regard at  periodic intervals . The Committee 
further recommend that a comprehensive data base may be prepared at the earliest to 
address the problems and concerns of migrant workers and expectations of the 
Diaspora. 
Reply of the Government 
Community Welfare Wings or Labour Wings have been set up in the Indian Missions 
in the major labour receiving Countries in the Gulf including UAE, Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait and Qatar. The Community Welfare Wings deal with the 
problems faced by emigrant Indian workers in those Countries. The services provided to 
the emigrant workers include the following :  
(i) Registration of labour complaints and necessary follow up action thereon. 
(ii) Grievance Redressal through intervention with the sponsors and recruitment 
agencies, liaison with the local authorities, deportation centres, etc.  
(iii) Provision of accommodation for domestic workers in distress and redressal of 
the Grievances.  
(iv) Provision of counseling to Indian nationals on their problems relating to 
matters of employment, legal, financial, medical etc.  

 13 
 
Wherever dedicated Community Welfare Wings are not functioning in the Missions, 
such tasks are attended to by the Consular Wing of the Mission which deals with the 
Passport, Visa, Consular and other miscellaneous matters.   
Ministry of Overseas  Indian Affairs has also set up a Community Welfare Wing 
headed by a Director level Officer at the Indian Embassy at Abu Dhabi to deal with the 
problems of migrant workers in the region.  
The Missions have been asked to set up Indian Workers Resource Centr e 
(IWRC) which would function as Counseling Centre and Help Desk to mitigate the 
problems of migrant workers and will also operate shelters for distressed emigrants.  
The Committee‟s directions that the Helpline numbers and details of the Officer 
heading the Wings should be prominently displayed in the Missions/ Posts abroad have 
been noted. This would be communicated to the Heads of Missions for compliance. This 
information would also be supplied to all the State Governments and other authorities 
including Members of Parliament and given wide publicity through Media.   
Comprehensive database on emigrants would be developed as a part of the e -
Migrate Project for which RFP has already been issued to select the private 
implementing agency. 
The Missions are being asked to display the names, designation and the Tel No. 
of the officers dealing with the problems of the emigrant workers and intimate  the same 
to the Ministry so that the information may be sent to the State Governments and other 
authorities including the Members of Parliament. 
The Technical Evaluation of the Bids received  in response of the RFP is being 
carried out. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The allocation for Know India Programme (KIP) has been raised from Rs. 87 lakh 
in 2008-09 to Rs. 1.25 crore in 2009 -10. An increase of 43.68% over BE 2008 -09. The 
Committee regret to observe the low level of participation v iz. only 31, 34 and 22 
participants joined the programme during the 9 th , 10 th, and 11 th KIP respectively. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry is now organizing 3 KIPs each 
financial year and up to 40 participants could take part in each of these programmes 
which was restricted earlier to PIOs from a selected list of 32 countries, has now 
opened to PIOs from all countries and it has also decided to reimburse 90% of the total 
cost of air ticket to participants from their country to India and back from 12 th KIP 
onwards instead of 50% of air fare reimbursed earlier. 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry may increase the number of participants 
in the KIPs to be organized every financial year keeping in view the opening of 
programme to PIOs from all countries. The Ministry should also think about introduction 
of more incentives to the parti cipants to make KIP a success in future. The Committee 
recommend that concrete efforts should be put in place to ensure high level of 
participation in KIP. A wait list of desirous participants should be made to replace the 
drop outs. 
 
 
 

 14 
 
Reply of the Government 
With the opening of the KIP to PIOs from all the countries and due importance in 
giving publicity to the programme, the Ministry has received and overwhelming 
response from applicants for the 13 th Know India Programme held in December 2009 – 
January 2 010. The total number of participants in the program was 40 from 16 
countries. A wait list of desirous participants to replace the dropout participants at last 
minute is already in place. 
 For the 14 th KIP, which is going to be held in March -April 2010, MO IA has 
already received 64 applications. 
 The Government is bearing 90% of the international airfare and all expenditure of 
the participants in India. They are also given pre -diem allowance of Rs.100/ - per day 
during their stay in India. The number of part icipants in one group is limited to 40 
keeping in view the limitation of the State Government in hosting huge groups at one 
time and their resources. The number of KIPs has already been increased to 3 in a year 
with participation of 2 State Governments for the program of 21 days. 
 
With the efforts made by the Ministry for maximum participation in the Know India 
Programme (KIP), 39 participants are taking part in the ongoing 14 th KIP. The maximum 
capacity in the KIPs is to accommodate 40 participants. This i s the highest level of 
participation so far in the month of March/April.  
 
(H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No.7 
The Committee are happy to note that the allocation for the Overseas Workers 
Resource Centre (OWRC) has been increa sed, keeping in view the additional services 
to be provided by the OWRC. The Committee observe that since its inception in 
January, 2008 till June, 2009, 15716  calls were received by OWRC Helpline which 
includes 14,684 enquiries, 309 complaints with comple te details and 723 complaints 
with incomplete details. Out of the 309 complaints with complete details, 275 complaints 
have been redressed. The Committee further observe that the popularity of OWRC and 
faith of the people in it, is growing for seeking rele vant information for their benefit as 
well as for registering their grievances. The Committee want that the causes for delay , if 
any, in finally disposing of complaints received by OWRC should be looked into and 
suitable remedial measures be taken to ensur e expeditious action on complaints.  The 
Committee further desire that the Minis try should provide all possible assistance 
required by the OWRC to make their helpline a State of the Art Resource Centre. For 
ensuring the success of OWRC helpline, the Commit tee recommend that the Ministry 
should make vigorous efforts in educating the immigrants about legal immigration 
procedures, the pitfalls of illegal immigration and precautions to be taken during the 
recruitment and overseas employment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs operates the Overseas Workers‟ Resource 
Centre (OWRC), a 24/7 toll free helpline (1800 11 3090) to provide need based 
information and assistance to intending emigrants and the family members of overseas 

 15 
 
workers relating to all aspects of overseas employment. The workers can also access 
the helpline from anywhere in the world at 91 -11-40503090.  With a view to extend the 
services to support the Indian emigrants in the middle -east an international toll free line 
(8 00 0 911 913) is also available for calls from UAE currently.  The complaints or 
grievances received on the toll free helpline are promptly attended to and feed back 
provided to the complainant.  The helpline numbers are disseminated as a part of the 
multimedia awareness campaign organised by the Ministry.   
2. A total of 18201 calls were received from July 2009 to 15 th Feb 2010 by the 
OWRC helpline which included 17664 enquiries, 62 complaints with complete details, 
475 complaints with incomplete details.  Out of the 62 complaints with complete details, 
24 complaints have been solved and the remaining are in the process.  The complaints 
mainly accounted for those against the recruiting agents for not giving promised Job & 
retaining passport & Visa.  The enquiries  mainly centered on authenticity of the 
recruiting agent, foreign employer, procedure to go abroad.   
3. Every complaint received at OWRC is given unique identity number which is 
followed up till it is finally resolved.  While responding to complaints and enq uiries the 
OWRC educates the emigrants about legal emigration procedures and also updates 
them about the status of the recruiting agent i.e. whether such an agent is registered 
under the Emigration Act and advises the emigrant to deal with the agent accord ingly.  
Besides, through awareness campaigns by MOIA, the unskilled workers are informed to 
avoid short-cuts and follow legal ways to go for employment abroad. 
 
4. The Ministry has also set up Migrant Resource Centres (MRCs) at Kochi in 
Kerala and Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh.  The MRCs perform functions similar to that 
of OWRC.  The OWRC trained the personnels from MRC‟s to make them understand 
and learn the functioning of the Call Flow System which in turn helped the emigrants.  
The OWRC team also participate d in a conference held by the International 
Organisation of Migration (IOM), with a view to focus on building up a relationship 
between the MRCs and OWRC with an aim to provide efficient services to the 
emigrants.  
5. In order to make the OWRC a state of the art helpline the Ministry has issued 
and RFP for selection of a new service provider for management of the Centre with 
fresh Terms of Reference (TOR).  Under the new TOR the Centre will be transformed to 
facilitate and provide support services to workers w ho intend to go abroad for 
employment and also act as a single point window source broadly with the following 
objectives: 
 
o Registering, responding and monitoring complaints 
o Collection and dissemination of information on matters relating to 
emigration 
o Grievance redressal forum 
o Knowledge Centre 
o Prepare a strategy along with implementation plan for awareness 
campaign about the role and activities of OWRC. 
 
The process of selection of the new service provider for management of the 
OWRC Centre with the new expan ded scope of work, is in final stages of negotiations 
and finalising the contract. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 

 16 
 
Recommendation No.8 
The Committee observe that allocation made for legal and financial assistance to 
Indian women facing problems in NRI marriages has been increased from Rs. 2 lakh in 
2008-09 to Rs. 15 lakh in 2009 -10.  The Committee note that the funds under the 
scheme are allocated to the Indian Missions/Posts abroad based on the projections 
made by them, but 9 Indian Missions have failed to utilize the allocated funds under the 
scheme during 2007-08 and 2008-09.  The Committee may be apprised of the reasons 
for under utilization of allocated funds by the Indian Missions under the scheme and the 
impact of the information campaig n to educate prospective brides and their families. 
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should endeavour to formulate a panel of 
legal experts for such cases within the Ministry as well as in Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad who are familiar with th e legal systems of other countries since many of the 
victims are not familiar with legal systems abroad. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Reasons for under utilization of allocated funds by Indian Missions under the 
scheme: 
 
 The concerned Indian Missions/Posts a broad   have been requested to explain 
the reasons for under utilization/ non -utilization of funds allocated under the scheme. 
The reasons explained by the Missions/Posts differ from country to country. The 
reasons given by them are summarized below:-  
 
i) The Missions/Posts in Gulf countries have reported that no such request was 
received by them from deserted Indian women seeking financial /legal assistance under 
the scheme.  
ii)       High Commission of India, Canberra , Australia has stated that due to internal 
wrangling in Federation of Indian Associations of Victoria (FIAV), the only one Women 
Association empanelled under the scheme in the country , the cases referred to them 
during the year 2008 -09 could not be processed thus resulting in under utiliz ation of 
fund. 
iii) High Commission of India, Ottawa, Canada has stated that they received 15 
complaints during the last 18 months and in all these cases, the victims did not make 
any request for financial or legal assistance vis -à-vis her spouse. In one c ase, the 
matter was settled after counseling. Their experience indicates that the deserted wives 
and her parents are keen about finding the correct/latest whereabouts of the husband 
with the help of the Mission .Their efforts in locating the husbands are s tymied by the 
strict privacy laws prevailing in Canada. 
iv)    High Commission of India, London has stated that they have not been able to 
utilize funds earmarked by the Ministry, due to extremely low ceiling fixed in the budget 
for handling each case. U.K  is one of the most expensive placed in the world and 
budgetary allocation is barely sufficient even for one hearing of a case. Hence, legal 
firms and /or NGOs have been reluctant to participate in the scheme. 
             Consulate General of India, Edinb urgh has stated that no NGO has come 
forward to get themselves empanelled with the Consulate as per the prescribed 
procedure in order to avail of the grant facility. 
vi) EOI Washington:  
The scheme needs publicity. The eligibility criteria should be relaxed in  order to 
ensure that deserving cases get covered under the scheme.  

 17 
 
 
 Consulate General of India, Chicago has stated that all the cases of abuse 
reported are governed by Illinois Domestic Violence Act and this Act prohibits releasing 
the name of the perso n, passport number or other documentation like Social Security 
Number etc. In view of the restrictions, the NGOs are unable to reveal the names of the 
beneficiaries to claim for assistance under the scheme. 
 Consulate General of India, New York has stated that the cases received by 
them are of consulting nature and the victims has sought their counsel rather than 
financial assistance. 
 Consulate General of India, Houston has stated that the NGO empanelled with 
them could not disclose the name of the victim citing their inability to do so in view of the 
strict local privacy laws and unwillingness of the victim to allow them to disclose her 
personal details to the Consulate General of India. 
 Consulate General of India, San Francisco has stated that in some of  the cases 
women have sought divorce to get rid of abusive relationships and therefore, are not 
eligible under the scheme as technically they have not been deserted. In some other 
cases, they are not able to satisfy the requirements of the scheme.  
vi)  HCI Wellington has stated that only 4 eligible cases were forwarded by the 
dealing NGOs in 2008-09 and funds were provided.  
 The strict privacy laws prevailing in countries like Canada and USA, the 
exorbitant legal expenses involved in dealing with such cas es in country like U.K are 
major obstacles in implementation of the scheme.  
 
Impact of information campaign to educate prospective brides and their families: 
 
 The Ministry has brought out information pamphlets in English, Hindi, Punjabi, 
Malayalam and Telugu to make Indian women aware of their rights and responsibilities 
and precautions that could be exercised before entering into marital alliance with 
overseas Indians and about the scheme of the Ministry in this regard. 
 
 The Ministry has brought out a g uidance booklet on “Marriages to Overseas 
Indians” in English, Telugu, Hindi, and Punjabi. This booklet contains information on 
safeguards available to women deserted by their NRI spouses, legal remedies 
available, authorities that can be approached for re dressal of grievances, and NGOs 
which can provide assistance.  
  
 The Ministry has launched the publicity cum awareness campaign through audio 
visual advertisements on regional T.V network primarily to cover the States of Punjab, 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The campaign is still continuing in 
Punjab. Print campaign has also been used. 
 
 The pamphlets and Guidance Booklets were circulated to various States from 
where a larger number of such cases are reported for distribution through Vi llage 
Panchayats, Aanganwadis, Self Help Groups, Post Offices, Banks, Railway Stations, 
Airports, Hospitals/Dispensaries etc. to give maximum publicity to the initiative 
undertaken by the Ministry.  
 
 

 18 
 
MOIA’s endeavour to formulate a panel of legal experts for such cases within the 
Ministry as well as in Indian Missions/Posts abroad : 
 
 Indian Missions/Posts abroad have intimated as under: 
 
i) Consulate General of India, San Francisco: The NGO‟s (empanelled under the 
scheme) are in a better position as they already have their panel of attorneys whose 
services are called on a routine basis in times of need. Finding legal experts with 
approved licences who would consent to work on pro bono basis to deal with such 
cases is going to be very difficult. We have not received any response. 
ii)  Consulate General of India, Sydney:   There are few lawyers in NSW who 
provide free initial legal advice to members of the Indian Community requiring such 
assistance. 
  
iii) High Commission of India, Ottawa:     The lawyers fee in Canada are 
exorbitant for taking up legal cases. They did not have any concrete case needing legal 
assistance necessitating use of panel of legal experts. 
iv) Embassy of Kuwait: The Mission has a panel of five Kuwaiti Lawyers in 
place to assist the Indi an community.  The Mission is operating in its premises a “Legal 
Advice Cell” where to Kuwaiti lawyers and two Indian lawyers provide free legal advice 
between 3-5 PM on all working days on all issues /cases. 
v) Embassy of Washington : Regarding formulatio n of a panel of legal 
experts in Indian Missions /Posts abroad, it is stated that CLRN, a community of  legal 
resource network on the east coast has been contacted by the Mission and have 
agreed to provide a network of 350 lawyers in the USA. It is also st ated that some 
lawyers are willing to provide low bono and pro bono advice to overseas Indians. 
vi) Consulate General of India, New York: There are five legal experts who 
work with the consulate on pro-bono basis for these issues. 
 This Ministry has also a sked from the National Legal Services Authority, New 
Delhi and The Indian Society of International Law, New Delhi  for a list of pro -bono 
lawyers in India who could assist women in cases of transnational abandonment . Some 
names of lawyers who have shown int erest to work on pro bono basis have been 
forwarded by them.  
 
 To facilitate maximum utilization of funds by the Indian Missions/Posts abroad, 
the Ministry is exploring all possibilities in consultation and co -ordination with Indian 
Missions/Posts, NGOs, Indian Women‟s Organization etc to strengthen the “Scheme for 
giving legal /financial assistance to Indian women deserted by their overseas Indian 
spouses” and to create a panel of legal experts. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 The Committee observe that Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) had 
planned to organize “Investors interactive meetings” in eight regions showing a range of 
exclusive products and products from India Corporate to Overseas Indian investment in 

 19 
 
real estate, wealth management, health care etc. First such meeting was held in 
November 2008 in Oman. But due to the global financial crisis and sharp decline in 
investor interest across the world, further inves tor meets have been deferred for  the 
present. The Committee are of the view that while the global market is recovering from 
recession, Investor Interactive Meets may be planned in near future so that India can be 
showcased in better way.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The OIFC has planned to organize 4 investor interactive meets during the year 
2010-11.  
OIFC organized an investment interactive meet at Dubai on 24 th March 2010. About 
120-130 overseas Indian community memb ers participated in the events. The OIFC 
knowledge partners & IIFCL presented about the opportunities of investing in India. 
Four no of investor meets has been planned by the OIFC during 2010 -11 as per the 
following schedule: 
(v) UK – May/June 2010 
(vi)  Malaysia – August 2010 
(vii)  South Africa – during the mini PBD in Sept/Oct 2010 
(viii) During PBD-2011 at New Delhi 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.12 
 
 The Comm ittee note that a tripartite Project titled „Administration of Temporary 
Contractual Employment Cycle from India and the Philippines  to the United Arab 
Emirates‟ has been approved for implementation among the three Countries.  The 
objective of the pilot Pr oject is to develop best practices in the administration of the 
Temporary Contractual Employment Cycle leading to a framework  for cooperation 
among Asian countries of origin and destination.  The Pilot Project aims to achieve the 
objectives like improving the quality of recruitment and pre -deployment processes, 
providing the workers with appropriate working and living conditions and treatment 
during their employment abroad, preparing the workers for their return at the end of their 
contract; and facilitatin g the return and re -integration of the workers into their home 
countries during the four phases of employment cycle.  The Committee consider it a 
landmark project which can go a long way in ameliorati ng the plight of Diaspora. The 
Committee are of the view  that such type of projects should not be restricted to onl y 
three countries and hence may  be undertaken with other countries too. The Committee 
want that the possibility of such projects being spread to other countries may be 
explored sincerely. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The duration of the tripartite Project titled „Administration of Temporary 
Contractual Employment Cycle from India and the Philippines to the United Arab 

 20 
 
Emirates‟ is for two years. The Ministry would like to assess the success of the Pilot  
Project and the lessons learnt therefrom before embarking on similar projects with other 
labour receiving Countries in the Gulf region.  However, this Ministry is taking up with 
our Embassies to explore the possibility with other labour receiving Countries. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 The Committee note that the information campaign projec t in six selected S tates 
for creation of awareness among the general public about the risk of irregular migration 
is being i mplemented.  This project will address some of the immediate and urgent 
concerns arising out of irregular migration, especially in rural areas.  The Committee 
want that such prestigious campaigns sho uld not be limited only to six S tates.  There is 
no point in ignoring the other areas, so the Committee want that such campaign may be 
spread over to other States. The Committee want to be apprised of the impact of this 
campaign among targeted people and the extent of its success. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The media c ampaign of the Ministry actually covers other States as well since it 
is available on Doordarshan‟s national network and other prominent private TV 
channels. 
The Ministry had commissioned M/s NFDC to conduct a survey to study the impact 
of the media campaign on the target audience. The survey was conducted in four States 
namely Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The key findings are: 
(i) The advertisement campaign has been successful in reaching the target 
audience. Overall 81%  of the target audien ce in the States surveyed had 
seen the advertisements says that they have benefited from the 
advertisements. 
(ii) The advertisement campaign by MOIA had a positive impact in creating 
awareness about the services offered by the ministry among the target 
audience. They are now much more informed about the importance of 
different aspects of immigration like getting services from registered agent, 
getting work visa and emigration clearance. 
(iii) The advertisement campaign has also been successful in raising the 
awareness among the target audience about the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs (MOIA). On an average only 20% of them were aware of 
MOIA before the campaign. But after the campaign the awareness level 
has gone upto 76% 
(iv) Awareness about Pravasi Bhartiya Beema Yoja na has also gone up as a 
result of the campaign. Only 4% of the target audience were aware of the 
yojana before the campaign, now the figure has gone upto 33%. 
(v) The advertisement campaign has also helped in improving the awareness 
about the immigration agen t. Before the launch of the campaign 76% of 
the target audience were not aware that the agent has to be registered 
with MOIA. After the campaign this figure has come down to 37%. 
(vi) The advertisement campaign has also increased the awareness about the 
fee to be paid to the agent. Before the campaign only 12% were aware 

 21 
 
that the fee to be paid to the agent is fixed by the government. After the 
campaign the figure has gone upto 67% 
(vii) The awareness about the legal aspects of the immigration have also 
increased. Bef ore the campaign 62% of the target audience opined that 
one can manage to work abroad by paying some money to the agent. 
After the campaign this figure has come down to 27%. 
 
The Ministry launched the awareness campaign during 2009 -10 for 70 days on 
Doordarshan (National & Regional channels), All India Radio and other private 
national and regional channels. The awareness campaign was also launched in print 
media through DAVP. The awareness campaign theme was on the following issues: 
i) Problems faced by emigrant workers and legal emigration process; 
ii) Problems relating to Indian housemaids overseas; and 
iii) Problem relating to NRI marriages 
iv) Overseas Workers Resource Centre Helpline 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
 The Committee ar e of the view that deliberations and recommendations of the 
third annual conference of the Head of the Missions in the major labour receiving 
countries held in New Delhi to provide an opportunity to the Indian Missions in various 
labour receiving countries  to share their experience in dealing with the labour issues 
amongst themselves and with the Central Government will c ertainly help in  
understanding issues relating to migrant labourers.  The Committee hope that problems 
of workers will be minimized after these recommendations come into force which has 
resulted in formulating necessary policy framework for handling labour migration 
matters in these countries. The Committee want to be informed about the status of 
implementation of the recommendations.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
The recommendations of the 3 rd Annual Conference of the Heads of Missions of Six GCC 
Countries, Jordan, Libya, Yemen and Malaysia held on 27 th -28th November,2008 at New Delhi and 
the Action Taken on the recommendations is indicated as under : 
  Recommendations                                                         Action Taken  
 
Launching of Indian Community 
Welfare Fund (ICWF): 
 
 
Ministry had issued sanction for setting 
up of the ICWF vide letter NO. OI -11-12 
/25 /2007 – US (EP-I) dated 27 th 

 22 
 
The Scheme for the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) 
proposed to be set up in the 
seventeen ECR Coun tries was 
adopted. The ICWF would facilitate 
our Missions to extend a host of 
welfare services for overseas Indian 
workers.  
The Fund to be operated by the HOM 
will be as per the scheme document 
and the sanction orders issued by the 
MOIA with the concurrence of MEA in 
this regard.  The ICWF would be 
effective from January 1, 2009. 
November, 2008. However, Ministry of 
External Affairs insisted o n obtaining 
Cabinet approval for setting up of the 
ICWF before issuing necessary 
instructions for authorizing the HOMs for 
charging fees for Consular Services. 
Subsequently, approval of the Cabinet 
was obtained for setting up ICWF in the 
17 ECR Countries a nd Maldives and the 
Fund has been operationalized vide 
sanction letter dated 12th October, 2009.  
 
Activating the Joint Working Groups 
(JWGs):  
  
The Ministry has signed bilateral 
Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) on labour with the 
Governments of UAE, Ku wait and 
Oman, apart from signing an 
Additional Protocol with Qatar. An 
MoU already exists with Jordan 
signed in 1980. We therefore need to 
negotiate a fresh agreement. Similar 
MoUs have been finalized with 
Bahrain and Malaysia. The Missions 
concerned may coordinate the dates 
for signing these MoUs with the 
respective Governments.  
The Joint Working Groups (JWG) 
which have been set up under the 
MoUs should be activated and 
regular meetings of the JWG should 
be organized to sort out bilateral 
issues on labou r such as model 
contract, minimum wages, 
documentation requirements, labour 
 
The Labour  MOU with Malaysia was 
signed on 3 rd January, 2009 and with 
Bahrain on 17 th June, 2009. The first 
Joint Committee Meeting with Malaysia 
was held on 3 rd March, 2009 at New 
Delhi. The Joint Working Group Meeting 
with Kuwait was held on 13th -14th 
January, 2010.  
 
The Heads of Missions have been 
requested to pursue with the host 
countries for holding the JWG Meetings 
with the remaining Countries at an early 
date.  

 23 
 
dispute redressal, retention of 
passports, substitution of contracts, 
dealing with recalcitrant employers, 
practical solutions to problems of 
exploitation and abuse of workers, 
regulation of intermediaries, sharing 
of experience in manpower 
deployment, exchange of information 
on legislative and administrative 
measures, exchange of labour 
market information, providing welfare 
support services through Indian 
Workers Resource Centres etc.  
A calendar of JWG Meetings may be 
prepared by the HoM‟s. 
 
Operationalising the Office of 
Director, Community Affairs 
(Development) in the GCC Countries: 
 
The Charter of the duties of Director, 
Community Affairs (Development), 
posted in the Overseas Indian Centre 
(OIC) in the UAE and reporting to the 
Ambassador will be finalized short ly 
in consultation with the MEA. This 
Office would be operationalised in 
the first week of January, 2009 to 
render a wide variety of services 
including counseling to the migrant 
workers in legal, medical and 
financial matters.  The Centre would 
act as a Re source Centre for the 
GCC Countries. A similar Centre 
would be set up in Kuala Lumpur, 
shortly.  
 
The Office of Director Community Affairs 
(Development) in UAE has been 
operationlized with the posting of                            
a Director level Officer.  Setting up a 
similar Office at Kuala Lumpur will be 
done after obtaining necessary 
approvals.    
  

 24 
 
Finalization of the Model Contract for 
universal application by the Missions:  
 
The model Work Contract may be 
made applicable to all the ECR 
countries subj ect to the local laws. 
HoM‟s can customize the model 
Work Contract to accommodate 
country specific laws which can be 
enforced through administrative 
instructions. Country specific 
variations in the Work Contract can 
be discussed and finalized in the 
meetings of the Joint Working Group 
set up under the provision of MoUs. 
This should be made effective from 1 
July, 2009. 
 
 
A model Work Contract was circulated 
during the 3 rd HOMs Conference. Heads 
of Missions were requested to ensure 
implementation of the mode l work 
contract in their respective Countries. 
This issue will be discussed during the 
Joint Working Group Meetings and can 
be implemented with the concurrence of 
the host Countries. 
 
 
 
 
Universal Attestation of the Work 
Contract through outsourcing.      
 
The attestation of the Work Contract 
by the Missions should be 
universalized. This would ensure 
creation of a Master Data Register 
and reinforce the legal migration 
process.  The Kuwaiti model of 
attestation of work contract through 
outsourcing can be ad opted and the 
cost of outsourcing can be met from 
 
 
Kuwait and Oman have already 
outsourced the attestation work of the 
Work Contract.  Embassy of India, UAE 
has suggested a Web based Attestation 
Procedure which is under examination. 
The ministry is also proposing an E - 
Governance Project. After approval, the 
same Model is proposed to be 
implemented in all the Missions.  
 
 

 25 
 
the attestation charges to be levied 
from the workers. This facility should 
work on an electronic platform so that 
data collection would be 
instantaneous and verifiable.  This 
arrangement should be 
operationalised by 1 April, 2009. 
 
Establishing Indian Workers 
Resource Centre (IWRC) which 
includes a Help Desk and a 24 X 7 
Help Line in the GCC Countries and 
Malaysia.  
 
Indian Workers Resou rce Centre 
(IWRC) which includes a Help Desk 
and a 24 X 7 Helpline may be made 
functional in the Missions in the GCC 
Countries and Malaysia. This would 
facilitate redressal of the grievances 
of the migrant workers, provide 
information dissemination to 
intending migrants and act as a 
Resource Centre for State 
Governments to interact with, in 
times of distress. A model RFP for 
soliciting proposals for outsourcing 
the Helpline for the IWRC was 
circulated.  HoM‟s will take steps to 
operationalise the IWRC by 1 April, 
2009 
 
 
A Model RFP for soliciting proposals for 
outsourcing the Helpline for the IWRC 
was circulated during the HOMs 
Conference. Kuwait has set up an IWRC 
(now renamed as Indian Workers 
Welfare Centre – IWWC) with a 24 X 7 
Helpline and a Help Desk w.e.f 
09.08.2009. Oman, Bahrain, KSA, Qatar 
and Jordan are having 24 X 7 Helpline 
working from the respective Embassies. 
Approval has been given to the Indian 
Mission in Malaysia to set up an IWRC in 
partnership with local NGOs.  
 

 26 
 
 
 
Operating a Shelter - cum- 
Counseling Centre in the GCC 
Countries through Indian 
Associations / NGOs / Outsourcing:  
  
 The Shelter –cum – Counseling 
Centre should be given attention by 
the HoM‟s. These Centers, apart 
from providing temporary shelter, 
food and medical facilities etc. to the 
runaway workers and housemaids, 
should also provide counseling 
services and legal assistance to the 
distressed workers. The HoM‟s can 
consider management of the Shelter 
Homes in partnership with Indian 
Associations / NGOs or through 
outsourcing to reputed agencies on 
the model of the Shelter Home 
operated by EOI, Kuwait.  HoM‟s will 
take steps to operationalise the 
Shelter-cum-Counselling Centres by 
1 July, 2009 
 
 
A Shelter Home has been set up in 
Kuwait, manned by the Kuwait Union of 
Domestic Labour Offices (KUDLO) 
through outsourcing. CGI, Dubai is 
running a Shelter to accommodate the 
run away housemaids and other destitute 
workers. Similar Shelters have already 
been set up by our Missions in Oman, 
Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Libya.   
Designing and Implementing an on -
site Insurance Programme: 
  
Since the existing PBBY Scheme has 
not proved beneficial to a large 
segment of the migrant workers, 
Indian Council of Overseas Em ployment 
(ICOE) has been asked to work out the 
modalities of a Pension Scheme for 
migrant workers.   

 27 
 
awareness about the scheme has to 
be spread and the procedures 
simplified.  Feasibility of alternative 
Insurance Schemes may be explored 
which would be in conformity with the 
local laws. The Insurance Scheme 
should, in particular, cover cashless 
hospitalization. The premium of the 
Insurance cover can be levied from 
the employers 
Implementation of the Indo -UAE 
Pilot Project on Temporary Labour 
Mobility Partnerships and initiating 
similar Pilot Projects in other GCC 
Countries:  
 
A Brief on the Indo-UAE Pilot Project 
on Temporary Labour Mobility 
Partnerships in three sectors, viz., 
Construction, Health Care and 
Hospitality was circulated. Similar 
Pilot Projects can be initiated in 
other countries of the region to adopt 
best practices in Labour Migration 
Management.  HoM‟s may explore 
these possibilities in consultation 
with the host Government 
The Indo - UAE Pilot Project is being 
implemented over a period of two years. 
The Ministry would like to assess the 
success of the Pilot Project  and the 
lessons learnt there from before 
embarking on similar projects with other 
labour receiving Countries.   
 
Organizing focused India Investor 
Meets in all the GCC Countries:   
One Investor Interactive Meet was 
successfully organized at Muscat in 
partnership with OIFC on 12 th 
Due to the intervening economic and 
financial crisis which affected the global 
economy, organizing India Investor 
Meets in the Gulf Countries has been 
postponed. It is proposed to organize 

 28 
 
November, 2008. Similar Investor 
Meets may be organized in the other 
GCC countries to attract maximum 
investment from this region. OIFC to 
lay emphasis on developing 
customized products for overseas 
Indian workers to transform th em 
from being mere savers to becoming 
investors.  OIFC will liaise with HoM‟s 
in this regard. 
one Investor Meet in Malaysia during the 
next financial year.    
  
 
(H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 

 29 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF  
THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
The constr uction of PBK in New Delhi is a glaring example of Ministry‟s 
ineptitude where inspite of repeated recommendations by the Committee, they have not 
been able to start the construction work and the ambitious project  of PBK in New Delhi 
has not been materialized as yet.  The Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry‟s 
explanation in this regard and observe that the Ministry was not serious enough in the 
matter and the project has been languishing for the last 4 – 5 years.  
 The Committee desire that all formalities regarding construction of Pravasi 
Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) should be completed within a time frame and the whole 
process of necessary approval w.r.t. design/drawing, obtaining necessary clearance of 
statutory authorities, inviting bids and awarding of contract for the construction of 
building should be completed at the earliest. The Committee feel that this is paramount 
to avoid time and cost overruns. The Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry to 
ensure early construction of PBK by accelerating all the processes involves so that PBK 
becomes functional within the time limit i.e. by the end of 2011. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Concerted efforts are being made to get the requisite formalities (viz:   approv als 
of the design/drawings by the statutory authorities;  inviting bids etc) for the project 
completed at the earliest.  The NDMC, after vetting the drawings, have already 
forwarded the same to the Delhi Fire Service as well as Delhi Urban Arts 
Commission.(DUAC)   The drawings are required to be cleared first by Delhi fire Service 
and thereafter,  by the DUAC.  The Delhi Fire Service, after scrutinizing the drawings, 
had made certain observations which have been replied to/complied with and the 
drawings, after carrying certain modifications, were resubmitted by the Consultant to the 
Delhi Fire Service.  The matter is being pursued with authorities concerned for early 
clearance.  
 
2. It is worthwhile mentioning that the Committee on Non -Plan Expenditure (CNE) , 
in its meeting, held on 6 th August, 2009, while recommending the  PBK proposal  at an 
estimated cost of Rs.107.22 crore has, inter-alia, laid down the condition that MoIA shall 
review the cost estimates given by the NBCC to ensure that the same are reaso nable. 
The CNE had laid such condition on the basis of a note given by the CPWD which 
pointed out that the cost estimates of the PBK project  are  very high and need to be 
reviewed. .  In pursuance of the CNE‟s directions   the matter was examined in 
consultation with the NBCC and the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure 
(DoE) was apprised of the detailed justification given by the NBCC on the cost 
estimation.  DoE has, however, advised this Ministry to consult CPWD with their 
clarification regard ing the cost estimates.  As advised by the DoE, the Ministry 
immediately  took up the matter with the CPWD with detailed clarifications.   The 

 30 
 
observations made by the CPWD  were examined by the NBCC and  necessary 
clarifications/justification on each observation were sent to the CPWD. The CPWD have 
however reiterated their earlier stand saying that the cost of construction projected by 
the NBCC  is much more than the cost of construction of various projects being 
constructed by the CPWD.  CPWD has accordin gly urged MOIA to review the proposed 
estimates. To sort out the issues with CPWD, it is proposed to have a meeting at the 
appropriate level.   
3. The Bill of Quantities(BOQ) to invite tender for the main works has already been 
prepared by NBCC and upon re ceiving the approvals of estimates of the project, the 
tender process to award main work will be initiated immediately by NBCC.   
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
Recommendation No.10 
The Committee observe that there are eight PoE offices in the country and none 
of these offices are functioning from their own premises. The PoE offices of Delhi, 
Chandigarh and Kolkata are functioning from Government buildings whereas the 
remaining offices are functioning from rented premises.  The Committee als o observe 
that the Ministry has not made any proposal in the Demands for Grants (2009 -10) under 
the Head Capital Outlay on Public Works in this regard. The Committee are not satisfied 
with the ministry‟s casual reply in this regard that there is no plan to  construct own 
buildings. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons therefor. This attitude 
of the Ministry has pained the Committee very much. Therefore, Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry to draw a comprehensive and time -bound plan with a dequate 
budgetary support in the coming years and to put regular monitoring mechanism in 
place to gradually accommodate all PoE offices in their own buildings to save huge 
rental outgo of the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by t he 
Ministry in this regard on quarterly basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs fully appreciates the concern of Standing 
Committee of the Parliament, stressing the need of POE offices functioning from their 
own premises.   To procure the land is the main hurdle.  PGE office has made efforts in 
the past to get land but the State Governments have not responded with enthusiasm. 
 
 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs believes that POE offices should be evenly 
distributed in the coun try. In the event of passing of the proposed Emigration 
Management Bill and the setting up of the Emigration Management Authority, the role 
and responsibilities of POE offices will undergo change as they will be increasingly 
engaged in enforcement and moni toring of the functioning of the various recruiting 
agencies.  As such there is a need to set up POE offices at appropriate locations in the 
States of UP, Bihar, Assam, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka in order to 
create a nationwide network.   
 
The State Governments will be asked to allot government land for the POE 
offices – existing as well as proposed one‟s and MOIA will construct the buildings on the 
land allotted by the States after finalizing a uniform structural design. 

 31 
 
 
 Efforts will be made to get the land allotted within the current financial year and to 
complete the construction of the POE offices during financial year 2011 -12.  Therefore, 
a decision has been taken to constitute an Internal Committee in the Ministry for 
identifying the exact requirements of the POE offices in the States and their location and 
space requirement. 
 
An internal committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (MOIA) has been 
constituted to identify the space requirements for the POE offices. The first meeting of 
the internal committee was held on 07.04.2010. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
 

 32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

 33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note the existence of the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre 
(OIFC), which is engaged in the field of providing all information related to investing in 
India that a potential Overseas Indian Investor would need. The queries relating to 
investments across a wide gamut of sectors are supposed to be replied through the 
OIFC Website, including those in resp ect of Infrastructure and social sectors. OIFC is 
mandated to serve as a clearing house for investment related information to potential 
investors besides being a one stop agency f or replying queries and providi ng 
handholding services. This can be possible only when the Website is upgraded and 
updated regularly to provide all kind of information. The Committee feel that OIFC is not 
working as a single window to all investment related queries. The Website is not 
updated quite often. In such a scenario, the ve ry purpose of setting up of OIFC gets 
defeated. The Committee desire that the OIFC be provided all possible assistance by 
the Government in developing a Business networking platform and business directory 
to fulfill its mandate to facilitate Business to Bu siness partnership.  The Committee find 
it extremely important that the OIFC must encourage potential overseas investors to 
invest in India and more importantly – by informing them about incentives to do so. The 
Committee also desire that the Government sh ould evolve a mechanism to collect the 
information about the actual investment coming to India in collaboration with Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry (Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy). 
 
Reply of the Government 
During PBD-2010 held at New Delhi , Prime Minister inaugurated an online portal 
of OIFC on 8 th January 2010. The electronic portal comprise of series of online 
platforms such as an end -to-end information portal for updated information on sector 
and state specific investment opportunities a nd forthcoming events to invite diaspora‟s 
participation, a comprehensive networking platform for communication and group 
formation needs to foster collaborations, an online business directory of verified Indian 
and diaspora businesses, a customized query and solutions platform and an investment 
tool-kit to ease the process of investing into India. OIFC also organized a market place 
at New Delhi during PBD -2010. One to one meetings were held with the prospective 
investors at the Market place. OIFC is also in the process of developing a mechanism to 
collect the actual information related to investment by Overseas Indians. 
The online networking platform is operational at www.oifc.in and is providing the 
following services to the Overseas Indians: 
 Business to business networking 
 Investment guide 
 Query redressal through knowledge experts 
 Live help centre 
To lead the investment and business engagement of the Indian diaspora with India, 
the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OI FC), organized its 4th interactive Market 
Place Forum at the PBD-2010 at New Delhi. 
Focused discussions held on wide ranging investment issues through  

 34 
 
e) Series of engaged Live Chat sessions 
f) Business meetings between delegates participating the PBD 
g) Business meetings between delegates and OIFC knowledge experts 
providing host of financial, taxation and legal services and member states 
h) One-to-one interactions and networking 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
Recommendation No.15 
  The Committee are not convinced at all with the reply of the Government 
regarding amendment of the Emigration Act 1983 as the Government is furnishing 
similar replies for the last 3 -4 years an d no positive result has come out so far. The  
dillydallying attitude of the M inistry in this regard is beyond comprehension. The 
Committee are given to understand that instead of amending the Emigration Act, 1983, 
a new comprehensive Bill namely the Emigra tion Management Bill, 2009 is under 
finalization.  The Committee observe that already undue delay has taken place in this 
regard and there is no point in procrastinating further. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that all formalities regarding t his Bill should be completed at the 
earliest and it should be introduced during the next session of the Parliament positively.  
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for introduction of “The Emigration Management Bill” in the 
Parliament with a view to enact  a new law in place of the existing Emigration Act, 1983, 
has been sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice for vetting and concurrence.  The 
same is awaited.  After the vetting and concurrence of the Ministry of Law has been 
received the proposal will be p laced before the Cabinet for approval before introduction 
of the Bill in the Budget Session of Parliament beginning in February, 2010. 
Ministry of Law has concurred to the proposal.  The proposal has been submitted 
for approval of the Cabinet for introduct ion of the new Emigration Management Bill, 
2010 in the current session of Parliament.  Approval of Cabinet is awaited. 
 (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th  dated……March, 2010) 
Recommendation No.16 
 The Committee understand that setting up of PIO/NRI Universit ies is a 
prestigious task and the Committee are of the view that the issue should be taken up at 
the Government level.  However, the Committee find that the project has now been 
assigned to Private Partner Manipal Academy of higher Educational Trust (MAHET) and 
its advisory board has been constituted to evaluate the Detailed Project Report (DPR). 
The Committee want the Government should keep close monitoring on it.  The MAHET 
should be advised to prepare a transparent and time bound plan for its completion.  A 
legislation to govern the  PIO/NRI University at Bengaluru  should be enacted at the 
earliest to avoid any kind of delay  in its establishment. The Committee also want that 
the PIO University should impart knowledge of all disciplines including arts, cultu re and 
literature. 
 The Committee are also of the view that all formal action for setting up of four 
more PIO/NRI Universities should be taken up at the earliest to ensure the 
commissioning of these projects without any delay.  
  

 35 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per recommendations of the Advisory Board constituted to evaluate the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) submitted by the Manipal Academy of Higher Education 
Trust (MAHET), work is underway to draft a Bill providing a regulatory framework and 
the establishme nt of an empowered authority to licence the setting up of PIO/NRI 
universities in India.  
The subject of establishment of PIO/NRI Universities is under litigation in the 
Hon‟ble High court of Kerala under two Writ Petitions – Writ Petition (Civil) No. 7661  of 
2009 and Writ Petition (Civil) No.5450 of 2008. A ruling on the matter by the High Court 
is awaited after the Court reopens after vacations on 17th May, 2010. 
H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010 
 
Recommendation No.17 
 The Committee appreciate th e efforts being made by the Government to enter 
into social security Agreements with the countries having sizable Indian professional 
workforce to protect the interests of the Indian professionals as well as self employed 
Indians working in the developing countries. The Committee are of the view that such 
agreements will benefit our people and the Indian Government as well. It will not only 
enable workforce to avoid the payment of taxes again and again but will ensure the 
portability of benefits on relocati on to the native country. The Committee recommend 
that the Government should try to make efforts to sign such agreements with USA and 
gulf countries where huge number of Indians are working. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is making efforts to sign S ocial Security Agreement with USA.  Two 
exploratory meetings had already been held with the US and another meeting has been 
proposed to be held in June 2010. As regards the Gulf countries, it is stated that 
Government has already entered into Memorandum of  Understanding with the Gulf 
countries except Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Efforts are also being made to sign 
Memorandum of Understanding with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabian through Diplomatic 
channels. 
An Indian delegation from India will be visiting USA on 1 9th and 20th May 
2010 to discuss the SSA with them. 
  (H.11021/16/2009-P&C dated 10th March, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                           Yashwant Sinha, 
05 May, 2010                                                                        Chairman,  
Vaisakha 15, 1932 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 36 
 
Appendix-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 5TH MAY, 2010  
   
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
Shri Yashwant Sinha – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
4. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
6. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
7. Smt. Supriya Sule 
8. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
9. Shri Shashi Tharoor 
RAJYA SABHA 
10.  Dr. Karan Singh 
11. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
14. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
15. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
16. Shri H.K. Dua 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
 

 37 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting 
of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report 
on Action Taken by Govt. on the recommendations contained in the 
1st Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2009-2010. The 
Chairman in vited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report.   The Members suggested some 
minor modifications.  
 
4.  xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx 
 
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized 
the Chairman to fin alize the Action Taken Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXX Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 

 38 
 
 
Appendix -II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                       17 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,11,12,13 and 14 
 
    Total-11 
Percentage: 64.71% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 9 and 10 
Total-02 
Percentage:11.76% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. Nil 
Total-00 
 Percentage: Nil 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 3,15,16 and 17 
 
Total-04 
Percentage: 23.53% 
 
 