 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2013-14] 
 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2013-2014) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
24 
 

 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2013-14] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20th February, 2014 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
            February, 2014/Magha,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2014 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ( 2013-2014)…… (iii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..         (v)     
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………….      1-26                                                                           
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………......   27-33 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       34 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……..………..   35-36 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………..             37-49 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee                                 
held on 18.02.2014…………………………………………..       50-51 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government  
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….      52   
 
ANNEXURES 
 
        I.         Cost of remittances transfer from Qatar to India ....................      53       
         II.         Cost of remittances transfer from Saudi Arabia to     
India……………………………………………………………….       54     
         III.         Cost of remittances transfer from UAE to India…………........      55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2013-2014) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Member 
   1. Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
                 Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sultan Ahmed  
3.  Shri Anto Antony 
4.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
5.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
6 Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7.  Dr. C.P. Joshi# 
8.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
9.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
10.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
11.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
12.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
13.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
14.  Shri J. Ramesh  
15.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
16.  Shri Elangovan T.K.S.  
17.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
18.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
19.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
                                      
 
                Rajya Sabha 
  
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri Murli Deora 
24.  Shri H.K. Dua 
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Smt. Ambika Soni 
31 Shri D. P. Tripathi  
 
 
 
#  Dr. C.P. Joshi has been nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 
06.01.2014. 
 
(iii) 
 
 

                              
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (2013 -14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 24 th 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 19 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2013-14. 
 
2. The 19th Report was presented to the Parliament on 26th April, 2013. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Report were received on 31st January, 2014. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at the ir sitting 
held on 18th February, 2014. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been 
given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 19 th  Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (15 th Lok 
Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
18th Febraury, 2014                                                            Chairman,                                  
29 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
                                                 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations\observations contained in their Nin eteenth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2013.  
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
on all the observations/recommendations c ontained in the report.  These have been categorized 
as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
   Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11 & 15                             (Total -07) 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
        NIL             (Total- 00) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which reply of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2 & 9                                             (Total -02) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  4,5,8,12,13 & 14.                                       (Total -06) 
 
  

2 
 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies to the recommendation s/observations for 
which only interim replies have been given by the  government should be furnished within 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee had observed that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs had once again 
failed in utilizing the allocation made at the Budget Estimates (BE) stage during the year 2012 -
13, and also on the front of maintaining the even expenditure during each quarter of the year.  
The allocation made to MOIA at BE stage was Rs. 114.7 7 crores which was reduced to Rs. 85 
crores at RE stage and the anticipated final utilization was only Rs. 81.28 crores out of which Rs. 
31.29 crores was spent during the last quarter of the year. The Committee found that perhaps due 
to similar trend of ex penditure, the MOIA had  not been able to develop any faith in getting the 
desired funds of the Ministry of Finance during the year 2013 -14 also and it had  been kept 
almost at the same level of Rs. 115.79 crores as that of the last financial year against th eir 
projected demand of Rs. 186.94 crores.   
The Committee had a clear view that if MOIA was  not able to improve such trend of 
expenditure on various schemes of the Ministry, they might not be able to obt ain any fund at 
Revised Estimates (RE) stage also. The Committee had, therefore, reiterate d that MOIA should 
improve their spending mechanism by instituting strict monitoring of each and every scheme so 
that the Budget allocated for the year 2013 -14 was evenly spent and properly utilized during 
each quarter of the year and they could be in a better position to convince the Ministry of 
Finance while seeking the additional funds at Revised Estimates (RE) stage. 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"The recommendations of the Committee are noted." 
 
7.      The Committee had strongly stressed upon the Ministry, the need to improve its 
spending mechanism by instituting strict monitoring of each and every scheme. The Report 
on the Demands for Grants of the M inistry of Overseas Indian Affairs for 2013 -14 was 
forwarded to the Ministry in April, 2013.  However, the Ministry has taken an inordinate 

3 
 
long time in furnishing action taken replies and as  the same were furnished in January, 
2014, last quarter of the financial year 2013 -14 is going on. The Committee believe that  
certain changes would definitely have been made in the Mi nistry's budget at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage and it is quiet perplexing for the Committee to note that the Ministry 
has failed to furnish any updates on the same in their action taken replies . The Committee 
are further displeased to note the silence of the Ministry as it has only replied that the 
recommendations of the Committee have been noted. By not clearly delineating steps taken 
so far to improve its sp ending pattern, the Ministry have  clearly shown lack of seriousness 
in dealing with the issues at hand. The fin ancial year is almost drawing to  a close and the 
Committee have reasons to believe that the Ministry must have acquired data related to 
funds utilized head -wise an d quarter -wise by this time and the same should  have been 
made available to the Committee.  This would have  enabled the Committee to judge 
whether the Ministry has actually made  serious efforts to improve their spending 
mechanism or not? The Committee therefore, strongly reiterate that the Ministry should 
dissuade from giving incomplete information to the Committee and furnish the replies 
containing the complete and latest inform ation to show its efforts and sincerity on such an 
important issue. The Committee would also like to know the results of their efforts to 
improve the spending mechanism during each quarter of the year and also whether they 
could be able to get additional f unds at RE stage by convincing the Ministry of Fin ance 
through their performance.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
8.    The Committee had observed that the e -Migrate Project had  been considerably delayed 
due to non -achievement of several milestones in time. The allocation for th at project was 
reduced from Rs.  22.00 crores to Rs. 2.19 crores at RE stage and only Rs. 1.26 crores was spent 
on the project during the year 2012 -13. During 2013-14 the project had been allocated a fund of 
Rs. 3.40 crores only which did not seem sufficient for development and implementation of the 
project in a timely man ner. The Committee had also observed  that the e -Migrate project  was 
planned to be impl emented in a phased manner over three years and as per contract with TCS, 
„Go-Live‟ of the project was expected on 9 th February, 2012.  However, „Go-Live‟ of the project 
had been delayed and the project was then supposed to be completed  by the end of August, 2013 
at the earliest as c ommitted by MOIA during oral evidence. The Committee  had, therefore, 

4 
 
desired that the Ministry must ensure to meet its new deadline for the completion of major 
milestones of the e -Migrate of the project such as Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) and Wide 
Area Network (WAN) and establish „Go -Live‟ on time by obtaining the desired fund at Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage so that the project wa s rolled out at the earliest without any further delay 
particularly due to paucity of funds. 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"The 'Go-Live' date is now fixed for March ,2014. Funds will be obtained at RE 
stage, if required." 
10. The Committee had expressed their anguish at the continuous delay in the launch of 
e-migrate project  by shifting deadlines . The Committee believe that  the project has the 
potential to change the entire landsc ape of migration in the country by facilitating the 
process at various stages.  However, due to one reas on or the other, the project had  
witnessed inordinate delays in its final roll out. As per the information furni shed by the 
Ministry, the 'Go -Live' date has now been fixed for March, 2014 and the Committee  can 
now expect that the deadline is adhered to. Further, the Committee are aghast to note that 
the Ministry simply informed the Committee about the change in dead line for the 'Go -
Live' date and no other details of their commitment to roll out the project has been 
furnished. The Ministry has not furnished any reasons for another shifting of deadline for  
the project. The Ministry's two line reply is not acceptable to  the Committee, given the 
enormity of the issue at hand. The Ministry has again failed to furnish details of the funds 
allocated to the project at the Revised Estimate (RE). The Committee take a serious note of 
such casual approach of the Ministry  and desire that concerted efforts should be made to 
complete and roll out e-migrate project on time without any further shift in deadlines. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard on a quarterly 
basis. 
  (Recommendation No. 3) 
11. The Committee had observed that the amount of Rs. 1.00 crore was allocated to the 
Ministry under the sub -head „International Conferences/Meetings‟ including expenditure for 
entertainment of dignitaries and facilitate policy formulation on various is sues related to 
Ministry.  But only Rs. 21.79 lakhs were spent by the Ministry on conferences and Rs. 9.50 lakhs 

5 
 
for entertainment/hospitality purpo ses during the year 2012 -13. The Ministry had also failed to 
organize the scheduled Conference and spent only 30 percent the allocation made at Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage under that head. All that showed the lack of foresightedness and sensibility 
on the part of the Ministry in chalking out the schedule of conferences/meetings on the issues 
which require review/detailed discussion of the schemes/programme of the Ministry in the lig ht 
of international situation. The Committee had, therefore, desire d that Ministry should prepare a 
programme schedule of such seminars/conference to be organized during a financial year well in 
advance with pronounced objectives and make the expenditure accordingly.  The Committee 
further desired that the Ministry should also ensure that the expenditure on such activities was 
justified and outcomes of these deliberations were proportionate to the amount spent on these 
seminars/conferences. 
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"Noted" 
13. The Committee had interalia recommended that the Ministry should prepare a 
detailed programme schedule incorporating the estimated expenditure on scheduled 
seminars/conferences to be held during the year. It appears to the Committee that the 
Ministry has not heeded to the recommendation of  the Committee as it has furnished just a 
one word reply, without giving the revised estimate s allocations and the spending made 
under the head  so far  or the details of the seminars/conferences held /planned to be held  
during the year 2013-14. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should convey the 
tangible outcomes of the various seminars/conferences on which  money has already been 
spent or is  proposed to be spent  in order to enable the Committee to establish the 
proportionality of cost and benefits. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
14. The Committee had noted that the deadline for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra 
(PBK) had then  been extended from Ap ril, 2013 to Dece mber, 2013.  The Committee had  
expected that the Ministry would stick to the new  deadline, as the civil work had  already been 
completed and finishing work like f looring, false ceiling etc. was in progress. However, the 
Committee had  not been informed about the development made so far in the direction of 

6 
 
establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBB) in States.  The Committee had strongly 
favored the concept, but were not satisfied with the efforts being made by the Government in that 
regard. 
  The Committee had, therefore, reiterated that the Ministry should come out with a clear 
cut objective and policy regarding establishment of PBBs in States and should impress upon the 
Diaspora specific States for their participation in the project through an allotment o f land for that 
purpose. An early completion of the PBBs in the states that would not only commemorate the 
landmark events / ideals and glorious past of the community / society emitting from that very soil 
highlighting the importance of the specific cultur e an d language of the State but w ould also 
accrue financial and material benefits from the willing NRIs and PIOs and would open  new 
grounds for reinforcing bonds with their grassroots and the new generation.    
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
 "The Ministry is in the process of preparing a scheme to promote setting up of 
Pravasi Bharitya Bhavans in the States. This will require consultation with 
stakeholders and approvals of the respecti ve competent authorities. After such 
approval is obtained, the scheme shall be notified." 
 
16. The Committee had urged the Ministry to expedite the setting up of Pravasi 
Bharitya Kendra (PBK) in Delhi and Pravasi Bhartiya B hawans (PBBs) in various States . 
The Pravasi Bharti Kendra (PBK) was scheduled to be inaugurated in December, 2013, but 
the Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry has not found it necessary to furnish 
any details about the status of PBK.  
Further, t he Ministry has submitted that they are  in the process of preparing a 
scheme to promote setting up of Pravasi Bhar tiya Bhawans (PBBs) in the States and that it 
will require consultation s with stake holders and approvals of the respective competent 
authorities. Regretfully, the Ministry has not furnished any  details of the policy in this 
regard and the  blue print of the scheme  to the Committee , which should have been 
conceptualized and publicized  by now. The Committee believe that s atisfactory response 
from the State Governments can only be evinced when the contours of the broad policy 
outlines are clearly delineated to them in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desire that 

7 
 
MOIA should pronounce the policy and pu rsue the matter with concerned S tates for an 
early notification of the scheme. 
      (Recommendation No. 5) 
17. The Committee had observed that the PoE offices at Chennai, Hyderabad and Jaipur were 
housed in a rented building  owned by the State Governments.  PoE office, Thiruvanantapuram 
had recently got its office space of its own b ut PoE, Mumbai and PoE, Cochin were still 
functioning from private buildings.  The new PoE offices at J aipur, Rai Bareli and Guwahati 
were also on the anvil but without office premises of their own. Surprisingly, „no allocation‟ 
was made during the year 2012 -13 for the purpose of establishing/shifting the PoE offices, and 
it was status-quo again during 2013-14.    
The Committee had failed to understand the approach of the Ministry in that matter when 
in their replies they had asserted that they were making all possible efforts to purchase space for 
accommodating the existing  PoE offices but on the o ther hand not a single rupee had  been 
allocated for the purposes of construction/shifting of PoE offices . The Committee did  not 
approve the approach of the Ministry in the matter and had desired that the matter must be  
diligently taken up with the authorities concerned , such as the Minister of Civ il Aviation/Urban 
Development Minister and concerned  Chief Ministers and finalize the proposals of land or 
space purchase or lease for  accommodating these PoE offices on priority basis during the year 
in 2013-14. MOIA might have also coordinated with MEA to locate/open their PoE offices in or 
near RPOs so as to facilitate people for not running to faraway places. Without showing the 
progress in getting the space or land, they might not have been able to augment sufficient funds 
for the same at the R evised Estimates (RE) stage also. The Committee we re also aware that  a 
significant number of Posts we re lying vacant in the PoE offices and had desired that fresh 
initiatives should be taken to fill all the vacant posts in the old as well as the new PoE offices in  
the shortest possible time.   
 
18.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
              
  "The status of action taken on the Standing Committee‟s recommendation, POE -
wise, is as under: -  
 

8 
 
POE, CHENNAI 
 For the space Secretary, MOIA and written letter to Secretary, Urban 
Development on 4 th April, 2011. Subsequently Hon‟ble Minister of Overseas 
Indian Affairs also addressed a letter to Hon‟ble Minister of Urban Development 
on 20 th December, 2011 to provid e the space for the office of POE, Chennai. 
Space in TRANSIDCO building at Guindy, Chennai has been identified, and 
efforts are on to have it allotted for POE office in Chennai. Secretary, MOIA has 
addressed the Chief Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu vi de letter dated 25 th 
March, 2013 and the Protector General of Emigrants has requested the Chairman 
& Managing Director, TRANSIDCO vide letter dated 28th March, 2013. " 
POE, HYDERABAD 
Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has written to the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting a piece of land measuring about 1000 
sq.m. at Hyderabad for constructing its own building to  accommodate its field 
offices functioning in Hyderabad.  In response the Principal Secretary (Revenue), 
Government of Andhra P radesh has requested  the Collector of Hyderabad for 
examining the proposal.  Further, Secretary, MOIA  also took up the matter with 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for 
accommodation for POE office in the Governme nt buildings under the control of 
Estate office at Hyderabad.  The matter has further been taken up with the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh at the level of Protector General of Emigrants. 
POE, JAIPUR 
 Allotment of building was received for POE, Jaipur,  and Ministry has 
furnished the office, and made it functional since 7th January, 2011.  
POE, THIRUVANANTHPURAM 
         With pursuance, Ministry has been able to convince the State Government 
to give POE office, Trivandrum in Norka Central, Thycaud, Triva ndrum.  The 

9 
 
space has been accepted and civil/furnishing work is in progress.  It is expected 
that the office of POE, Trivandrum would shift to the premises by February, 2014.   
POE, MUMBAI  
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs on 
30.12.2010 for providing accommodation to house the POE office at Mumbai in 
its newly constructed building for RPO at Bandra Kurla Complex.  MEA on 
20.01.2011 informed that the completion of the construction of the new building 
is likely to take three more  years and that the decision of allotting space will be 
taken after the RPO office is shifted to the newly constructed building.  Further, 
the Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has also written to the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Maharashtra, but no response  has been received so far.  Secretary 
also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 
12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation for POE office in the 
Government buildings under the control of Estate office at Mumbai.        
Subsequently, the Hon‟ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs took up the 
matter with the Hon‟ble Minister of Urban Development and Hon‟ble Chief 
Minister, Government of Maharashtra vide letter dated   20 -11-2011.  The 
Protector General of Emigrants has al so requested Urban Development 
Department, Government of Maharashtra vide letter dated  6th December, 2012.  
POE, COCHIN 
The matter has been taken up at the level of Secretary, MOIA with Chief 
Secretary and Government of Kerala for allotting a plot of land measuring 1000 
sq.m. in Cochin to house its POE office.  Further, Secretary also took up the 
matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for 
providing space for accommodation for  POE office in the Government buildings 
under the control of Estate office at Cochin.  The Hon‟ble Chief Minister, 
Government of Kerala vide letter dated 19 -06-2012 informed that the District 
Collection, Ernakulum has been directed to locate a suitable spa ce for the office 
of POE, Cochin and the matter has been taken up with him.   

10 
 
POE, RAE BARELI 
         POE office at Rae Bareli has been inaugurated on 15 th May, 20-13 and the 
matter will be taken up with the Ministry of urban Development/State 
Government to provide space for the office.  
POE, GUWAHATI 
The Finance Division has approved opening of POE office Guwahati on 
4th January, 2012. DS (Admn) has written to Dy. Commissioner, Guwahati on 28th 
September, 2011 and Secretary, MOIA to Chief Secretary, Assam  on 18 th May, 
2012 for the office space.  
The Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs had also addressed a letter on 
23rd July, 2013 to the Minister of Urban Development and Parliamentary Affairs 
for providing 5000 sq. ft. of space in Central Government owned  buildings 
located at Mumbai, Hyderabad, Cochin, Chennai, Trivandrum and Rae Bareilly 
for the POE offices. Minister of Urban Development and Parliamentary Affairs on 
7th Nov., 2013 had replied that there is no General Pool Office Accommodation 
available at all the above mentioned locations. However, the requirement of office 
space for POE has been noted and will be considered along with other pending 
requests for General Pool Office Accommodation as and when GPOA becomes 
available at these locations.   
          So far as the allocation of funds is concerned, in case suitable land is made 
available at any point of time during the year 2013 -14, required funds will be 
sought by way of submission of Revised Estimates.  
 With regard to the recommendation to coordinate with MEA to 
locate/open POE offices in or near RPOs  it may be noted that the emigration 
clearance process as stipulated under section 22 of the Emigration Act, 1983 read 
with rule 15 of emigration ( amendmen t) Rules, 2009  involves the verification of 
the employment related documents, viz., the employment contract, demand letter 
and power of Attorney to the recruiting Agents by the POEs from the foreign 
employers or the Indian Missions to satisfy himself abou t the correctness of the 

11 
 
documents.  This takes a considerable time before the applicant is asked to submit 
his passport for emigration clearance.  As such POEs offices should ideally be 
located in the central place of the city limits easily accessible by the public 
transport.  However, the MEA will be requested to provide space as per 
requirement.     
 The posts in different POE offices are filled up by inviting nominations 
from Central Secretariat Services (CSS) and Central Secretariat Clerical Services 
(CSCS) of different Ministries/ Departments. Since adequate numbers of 
applications are not being received these vacancies continue to exist though 
Ministry has again circulated these vacancies by calling nominations. The 
shortage of staff in POE offices has affected functioning of POE offices to a great 
extent. Against the vacant posts, however, in order to mitigate the problems of 
staff shortage against the vacant posts in MOIA and O/o POE outsourcing work is 
resorted to." 
19. The Committee had taken note of the fac t that a number of PoE offices we re being 
run from rented premises and had urged the Ministry to renew efforts to procure their 
own land/building. The Committee are anguish ed to note that the Ministry has failed to 
achieve credible progress in getting suitable office space for its various Po E offices across 
the country. As per the replies furnished by the Ministry, the process of h aving land space 
of its own has shown very little progress vis-à-vis last year in the case of PoE, Chennai and 
PoE, Cochin. No credible progress has been made with regard to the office space at PoE, 
Hyderabad and Po E, Mumbai. Despite the fact that Po E Office at Rae Bareilly was 
inaugurated on 15 th May, 2013, the Ministry is yet to pursue the matter with the agencies 
concerned in the matter of allotment of office space. The Ministry has also failed to submit 
details of the funds allotted for the scheme at the Revised E stimates stage. The Committee 
believe that w ith this pace the Ministry may not be able to procure office premises for its 
various PoE offices and therefore, they strongly urge the Minis try to initiate urgent steps 
towards the same and inform the Committee about the progress made in this regard . The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry has  also not provided any updates of the 
consultations held with the Ministry of External Affairs in this regard. The MOIA should 

12 
 
also sincerely ex plore possibilities in this regard and apprise the Committee about the 
outcome thereof. 
The Ministry has further submitte d that it is resorting to outsourcing some of its 
work in order to mitigate the problems of staff shortage, but the Ministry has failed to 
provide any details of the outsourcing work carried out and its suggested impact on the 
workload. In view of the severe manpower crunch in various PoE offices in the country, the 
Committee, desire that the Ministry should review job requirements, eligibility criteria and 
emoluments in order to attract suitable number of eligible persons to the nominated posts. 
The Committee further desire to be apprised about the same during the action taken stage.  
             (Recommendation No.8) 
20. The Committee has noted that the Ministry had launched the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SP DC) to make higher education in India accessible to the Overseas Indian 
Children along with a vision to popularize India as a better and affordable education destination. 
The Scheme was launched in the year 2006 -07 and 100 scholarships upto US $ 4000 per annum  
were granted to PIO and NRI students.  A total of 568 candidates h ad availed of scholarships 
since inception of the scheme.  The Budget under the scheme had  been enhanced with an 
objective of increase in number and am ount.  The Committee, however, we re dis appointed to 
note that the scholarship amount under the scheme which was enh anced to US $ 5000 last year 
had been reduced to US $ 4000. The Committee , therefore, had strongly recommended that the 
matter of enhancement of the scholarship amount per annum should be considered particularly in 
view of the rising fee structure and cost of board and lodging at the educational premise s. The 
Committee had also reiterated  their earlier recommendation to increase the number of 
scholarships to provide more opportunities to the Diaspora children to study in prime institutions 
of the country . The Committee  had found that very few na tional level  Institutions had been 
incorporated in the list of institutions where these students were admitted.  The Committee  had, 
therefore, desire d that educational Institutions including institutions of national repute such as 
Jawaharlal Lal Nehru University, Delhi Univer sity, IITs and various IIMs might also be brought 
under the scheme in order to provide better and holistic higher educati on facilities to aspiring 
children of Overseas Indians.   
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 

13 
 
"Increase of scholarship amount from existing the US$ 4000 to US$ 5000 keeping 
in view of the rising fee structure and cost of board and lodging at the educational 
premises is under consideration. Since inception of the scheme in 2006 -07, the 
total number of scholarship has remained 100(50 -NRIs and 50-PIOs). These days 
more number of children of overseas Indians are applying for pursuing 
undergraduate courses in Engineering, Science, Law, Management etc. Keeping 
in view that since 2010 onwards all the 100 seats are being availed by the 
candidates, an increase in number of scholarship is under consideration . A 
proposal to the Ministry of Finance for increasing  Budgetary support for BE 
2013-14 has been submitted so that the number of the scholarships may be 
enhanced. Educational Consultants India Limited ( Ed.CIL) are the implementing 
agency for the programme. EdCIL has been requested to incorporate more 
institutions of national repute like JNU, DU, IITs and various IIMs under the 
scheme to accommodate the increased number of aspirants for undergraduate 
courses in Engi neering, Science, Law, Management etc. Presently under SPDC 
scheme, 74 institutions (Arts, Science, Law) having MOUs with EdCIL." 
 
22. In view of the importance of the matter of awarding scholarships to the diaspora 
children, the Committee had found it incumbent to stress on increasing the number of seats 
and the scholarship amount  under the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Childr en 
(SPDC). It will not only go a long way in improving educational and career prospects of the 
diaspora children but wil l also nurture the mutual bond of Indian identity. The Ministry 
has informed that proposals to increase the amount and the number of scholarships are  
under consideration . The Committee desire that decision should be expedited and 
Committee be apprised about the final decision taken. Similarly, the Committee would like 
to know about the new institutions incorporated by EdCIL in the list of institutions where 
the scholarships are awarded in order to expand the ambit of the scheme. The Committee 
desire that this objective should be achieved at the earliest through consultations with the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), if desired. 
 
 
 

14 
 
      (Recommendation No.9)  
23. The Committee were aware that the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), a public 
private partnership of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and Confederati on of Indian 
Industry (CII), had  been established with the objective to facilitate and connect India with the 
Indian Diaspora by promoting overseas Indian investment in India and facilitating business – to - 
business partnership between Indian businesses and Indians residing overseas.  The Committee 
were also happy that the OIFC provided  a wide range of consultative and advisory ser vices in 
key focus areas like Real Estate, Wealth Management, Taxation, legal and Consular etc. and 
provided a host of advisory services to persons of Indian origin (PIOs) and non -resident Indians 
(NRIs).   But the Committee had observed that only one centre of OIFC had been set up in Delhi 
and no other Chapters of the same we re envisaged in the Prominent States or abroad. In 
Committee‟s view th e objectives of the OIFC Trust wa s not getting the right impetus for 
garnering momentum for facilitating large scale foreign Investments by Overseas Indians in the 
near future. The Committee, therefore, did  not want the OIFC to only work like an information 
centre for PIOs/NRIs but also justify their presence by accessibility and maintaining the details 
of flow of NRI  investments in the country by working as a national single window agency for 
Diaspora investment. The Committee, therefore, desire d that the Ministry should also work out 
the possibilities of opening an OIFC Chapter either  in USA or in the UK or  in both and few 
OIFC Offices in the Prominent States which are non-Delhi centric.  
24. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"OIFC carries out, as per its mandate, not only the dissemination of information 
through its business networking portal which has 6 lakh unique visitors, and e -
newsletter that has around 15,000 subscribers; it also reaches out to the 
Diaspora associations from various parts of the world to promote economic 
engagement of Diaspora in India.  OIFC has State partners and it works through 
the Industry department of the State Governments as well as chapters of 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in such States.  The investment regime in 
India with respect to PIO/NRI investment is fairly liberal. The investments are 
automatic in most of the sectors.  Since this work is possible by electronic 
means, opening of offices abroad may not be necessary and would entail 
considerable expenditure." 

15 
 
25.  The Committee are not satisfied with the justification given by the Ministry  for not 
opening other centres  of Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC). It is the considered 
view of the Committee that the mandate of OIFC ma y not be entirely served with just one 
centre at Delhi and through online facilitation alone, in view of the varied needs of the 
diaspora. The Committee understand that the investment regime in India with respect to 
PIO/NRI investment may have been fairly liberalized but the actual procedures in various 
States are still cumbersome and therefore, they  need to be sufficiently facilitated.  The 
Committee opine that NRIs/PIOs are not aware of various intricate steps/procedures  to be 
followed in various S tates and they cannot be expected to directly approach the State 
Governments/ CII local chapters for facilitating their investment needs. In this scenario , 
the Committee find it indispensible to have a single window system in the fo rm of OIFC 
offices in se lected S tates which account for a high proportion of PIO/NRI  exodus. The 
Committee therefore, reiterate that the Ministry must explore the possibility of opening 
OIFC offices in certain prominent S tates, in consultation with these State Gov ernments 
and als o expedite the opening of  OIFC Chapter s in s pecific Countries/R egions having 
substantial PIO/NRI population.  
 
     (Recommendation No.10) 
26. The Committee had noted that the India Center for Migration is a „not for profit‟ Society 
established by MOIA for carrying out research in International Immigration etc.   It also 
envisages to  lead „evidence based‟ work on  international migration to support informed policy 
making and enable strategic interventions for a coherent and harmonised response to the 
transnational movement of people.  The Committee had also note d that a  two year project 
initiative had been undertaken with European Union and Center also planned to work with other 
organizations such as International Organization for Migration (IOM) on Migration Management 
with International Labour Organization (ILO) on labour market information and protection and 
also with UN Women on addressing issues concerning women mi grants.  The Committee, 
however had, strongly recommend ed that all the research findings of ICM projects must be 
converted into workable action plans for the direct benefit of the common Indian 
workers/professionals, irrespective of gender so that the migr ation of a qualitative labour force 
from India takes place all over the world. The Committee had also desire d that the 

16 
 
findings/results of all migration related research must be catered to the multitude of technical 
institutions such Polytechiques, ITIs, I ITs and other technology up -gradation institutions so that 
the actual skill/ technology r equirement of the world market a re interpolated with the theoretical 
content of these Institutions for providing a successful careers to the semi -skilled and fully -
skilled workers that they would generate over years in future.  
27. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"The recommendations of Hon‟ble Committee are noted for compliance." 
 
28. With a view to improve the  quality of manpower being sent by India abroad the 
Committee had recommended that the research findings of the India Centre for Migration  
(ICM) should be converted into workable action plans. While noting the recommendations 
of the Committee for complianc e, the Ministry has not furnished any information on the 
steps taken to comply with the Committee 's recommendation in this regard.  The 
Committee are displeased to note the silence of the Ministry in the matter. With more than 
six months elapsing since the recommendations were made, the Ministry can be justifiably 
expected to prepare workable action plans for better targeting of the immigration of 
qualitative labour force from India. The Ministry has also failed to furnish details of action 
taken with regard to the Committee's recommendation of synergizing the research findings 
of ICM with the course structure/syllabi of various technical institutions such as 
polytechnics, ITIs, IITs in India. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry to 
take suitable steps in the above direction and to immediately apprise them about the same.  
 
     (Recommendation No.11) 
29. The Committee  had noted that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) that is 
operated by the Indian Missions for safeguarding the welfare and protection especially of Indian 
Workers going abroad for providing on-site emergency assistance for the Overseas Indian  
Citizens who are in distress. The Committee were surprised to note that only Rs. 84.16 lakhs had 
been spent during 2012 -13 under this scheme and a small amount of Rs. 5.00 cro res had been 
allocated in BE 2013-14. Such a small relief to a huge number of Diaspora itself was an evidence 
of poor management and unenthusiastic approach of the Ministry towards Overseas Indian 
Workers.  The Committee we re quite sure that with such a big size of Overseas Indian Workers, 

17 
 
the number of workers in distress would definitely be high whi ch were l eft unattended and 
unaddressed. The Committee, therefore, felt that such a meagre amount wa s insufficient to meet 
the objectives specified by the Ministry in the scheme and therefore  had, strongly recommended 
that the funds under this scheme shoul d be enhanced appropriately. The Committee were deeply 
concerned about the naturalization policy (Nitaqat) of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, wherein, 
Out of ten Indian workers one will be substituted by Saudi Arabian Worker, targeting to root out 
all „illega l workers‟ and extra immigrant workers out of the Kingdom of Sa udi Arabia.  The 
Committee felt that if such trend continues in the whole of the Gulf Region and later in other 
parts of the globe,  the Ministry with such low allocation will be under extreme pressure.  The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that all possible efforts should be made by the Ministry 
to not only provide easy passage to all the distressed migrant workers found in the K ingdom of 
Saudi Arabia, but also  to all other Indian workers from the other Middle East country as well.  
The Committee had also desired that the Ministry shall coordinate with the State Governments of 
Punjab, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnat aka in bringing back such migrant 
workers from Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
30.   In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been established in all the 
Indian Missio ns for on -site welfare of emigrants which includes boarding and 
lodging for distressed Overseas Indian workers in household/domestic sectors and 
unskilled labourers; extending emergency medical care to the Overseas Indians in 
need; providing air passage to stranded Overseas Indians in need; providing initial 
legal assistance to the Overseas Indians in deserving cases; expenditure on 
incidentals and for airlifting the mortal remains to India or local cremation/ burial 
of the deceased Overseas Indians in such  cases where the sponsor is unable or 
unwilling to do so as per the contract and the family is unable to meet the cost; 
providing the payment of penalties in respect of Indian nationals for illegal stay in 
the host country where prima facie the worker is n ot at fault; providing the 
payment of small fines/penalties for the release of Indian nationals in jail/ 
detention centre; providing support to local Overseas Indian Associations to 
establish Overseas Indian community Centers in countries that have population of 
Overseas Indians exceeding 1,00,000; and providing support to start and run 

18 
 
Overseas Indian Community based student welfare centers in countries that have 
more than 20,000 Indian students presence.  
2.  Sources of funds for the ICWF are:  
(a)  Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs provides budgetary support for setting 
the ICWF to the extent of Rs. 5 lakh. The MOIA contribution is initially for three 
years or till the period the fund becomes self sustaining, whichever is earlier.  
(b)  Funds raised by the Indian  Missions by levying a service charge  of Rs. 
100 on specified services.  
(c)  Voluntary contribution by the Indian community.  
3.  Therefore, assistance to Indian workers is not from, nor limited to, the  
budgetary provision. The assistan ce provided is from the "Fund" collected by 
various Indian Missions, where the total current balance (as on 31/03/2013) is Rs. 
154 Crores. The ICWF has so far helped out 28,000 emigrants to the tune of Rs. 
39 Crores approximately." 
31. The Committee are constrained to note that while providing the details of the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), the Ministry has not provided any information 
detailing the 28,000 beneficiary emigrants and the amount spent mission/country/region-
wise and the type  of assistance rendered to the beneficiaries and  other relevant spending 
made under ICWF. The Committee further note that t he Ministry has also not provided 
details of the type and level of assistance provided for easy passage of distressed migrant 
workers affected by 'Nitaqat' and similar policies across various kingdoms of Middle East 
and has also not furnished any details of the coordination with the State Governments and 
assistance provided to the distressed workers returning to various States of the country due 
to such  emergent situation. The Ministry has also  failed to give a proper acc ount of the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) spending and the nature of assistance rendered 
to Indian citizen in these countries . The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry 
to provide an updated and comprehensive reply on the subject showing complete picture of 
their role in the matter.  

19 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
32. The Committee had understood that MOIA had  as part of its mandate taken up Labour 
Mobility Partnerships Agreements with various prominent labour importing countries in a 
phased manner.  MOIA is also taking steps to build  the Human Resource Mobility Partnerships 
(HRMPs) with key countries of destination in European Union.  Such mobility partnerships have 
been signed with Denmark, negotiations with similar partnership agreements with Netherlands, 
Australia, France, Poland, the Czech Republic, Norway, Switzerland, Hungary, Sweden, 
Belgium, Romania, Ma uritius and EU are at different stages of conclusion.  During the year 
2012-13 no HRMPs could be concluded. The Committee, however, were not satisfied with the 
pace of negotiations and progress made in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desire d that 
these negotiations should be undertaken as per a particular time -frame and should not linger on 
for several years because these are associated with the welfare of Indian Diaspora.  The 
Committee also desire d that on conclusion of such HRMPs these should be ma de public via 
print/electronic media for the benefit of all the Indian workers. Partnership country-wise booklets 
should also be prepared for circulation amongst the migrating work force of India. 
33. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
 
"Memorandum of Understanding on Human Resource Mobility Partnership 
(HRMP) was signed with Denmark in September, 2009. Negotiations on HRMP 
have been completed with the Netherlands and required approvals for signing the 
MoU have been sought. Negotiations are in progress with EU, France and Poland. 
Draft MoU has been exchanged with Australia, Sweden and Switzerland. While 
Australia and Sweden have subsequently given their own draft Agreement for 
discussions, Switzerland has made significant changes to the dr aft. Draft MoU 
was also forwarded to Belgium, the Czech Republic, Mauritius, Norway and 
Romania. Belgium and the Czech Republic have not responded. Discussions with 
Mauritius are in progress. Norway has indicated that such an Agreement is not 
needed. Negotiations with Romania also have not been constructive. HRMP with 
Denmark is available on the website of the Ministry”. 

20 
 
34. The Committee had recommended that Human Resource Mobility Partnerships 
(HRMPs) with various countries should be undertaken in a time bound manner. The 
Committee are constrained to note that the pace of inking Human Resource Mobility 
Partnerships (HRMPs) with various countries has not shown significant improvement  and 
as on date mobility partnership agreements have been signed only with Denmark and 
negotiations have been completed with Netherlands. Given immense benefits of these 
mobility partnerships, they need to be suitably expedited with a renewed vigor. The 
Committee are dismayed to note the slow pace of  negotiations and desire that the matter 
should be s eriously looked into  particularly the cases where action is pending on our part 
and in the cases where further action is pending on the part of the other party  and should 
be taken up at the highest level in that country for an early conclusion of the negotiations. 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
35. The Committee had noted that remittances by the Indian Diaspora were amongst the 
highest in the world. The foreign exchange reserve of the country is growing every year due to 
high remittance rate by Overseas Indians and the highest contribution in these remittances comes 
from unskilled and semi -skilled Indian Workers employed i n Gulf countries and Malaysia. The 
Committee were astonished to know that MOIA ha d no idea about the quantu m of non-banking 
remittances made by the Indian people despite a large number of remittances were being done 
through these non -banking financial institutions only. The remittance fees of such outside 
institutions are considerably low as compared to  regular banking institutions. Such st range 
situation clearly reflected  the invisibles in the balance of payments with Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI). Those kind of transactions we re indirectly encourag ing Hawala transactions also. The 
Committee had also observed that the cost of remittance throu gh regular banking channels were 
not uniform across various countries and exponentially high which c ould vary from 2 to 21% in 
some of the middle east countries.  The Committee  had, therefore, strongly recommended  that 
the Ministry should consult with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for reducing the cost of remittance 
and should also devise methods for encouraging remittances through regular banking channels.   
At the same time, the Committee we re of the view that the Ministry shou ld make earnest efforts 
to collect the data of overall remittances made by Overseas Indians including through non -
banking institutions.  

21 
 
36. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
 
"Noted. As indicated du ring the examination, a study on remittances 
carried out by the India Centre for Migration (ICM), an organization of this 
Ministry, has since been received.  The report addresses the following four major 
issues: 
(a) Volume of total remittances; 
(b) Cost of remittances transfer; 
(c) Components of the cost; and 
(d) Banking and non banking channels involved. 
2. The important conclusions of the Report are as follows: 
(a) That the cost of remittances has decreased due to emerging competition in 
the remittances market.  I n fact, remittances cost from the UAE to India 
are amongst the cheapest for the region. 
(b) The cost depends on factors that pertain to the country from which the 
remittances is being sent, as the cost of transfer depends on factors such as 
the up-front fee, the exchange rate applied, fee collected at the recipient‟s 
end, if any etc. 
(c) The cost of remittances is also affected by the mode of transfer - whether it 
is by SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Telecommunications) electronic, a draft, cheque etc. 
(d) A number of financial institutions, specially the so called exchange houses 
in the GCC countries, are playing an important role in the remittances 
market.  
(e) An estimated USD 401 billion was sent in form of remittances to the 
developing world, with India being the largest recipient at USD 69 billion 
in the calendar year 2012.  

22 
 
(f) India is followed by China (USD 60 Billion), Philippines (USD 24 
Billion), and Mexico (USD 23 Billion).  Other countries in South Asia in 
the Top ten recipients  including Pakistan & Bangladesh, each receiving 
USD 14 billion in 2012.  
3. Year-wise remittances have been as follows: 
 
S.No. Year Remittances/Private 
Transfers (in USD Million) 
Private Transfer as a 
percentage of Current 
Account Deficit (CAD). 
1 2006-07 30,835  
2 2007-08 43,508  
3 2008-09 46,903 168.0 
4 2009-10 53,636 140.5 
5 2010-11 55,618 121.1 
6 2011-12 66,129 84.6 
 
 4. Country or Origin-wise remittances are as follows: 
Rank Country Amount Remitted to India 
(2012) in Million 
USD 
1 United Arab Emirates 14,255 
2 United States 10,844 
3 Saudi Arabia 7,621 
4 United Kingdom  3,904 
5 Bangladesh 3,716 
6 Canada 3,145 
7 Nepal 2,934 
8 Kuwait 2,673 
9 Oman 2,373 

23 
 
10 Qatar 2,084 
11 Sri Lanka 1,283 
12 Australia 1,245 
13 Singapore 1,113 
14 Bahrain 690 
15 Malaysia 493 
 
5. Some of the prominent means of remittances are as follows: 
(a) Transfer of an Indian Bank through Correspondent Bank (CB) overseas. 
(b) Through the SWIFT network. 
(c) Through Exchange Houses (EH) 
(d) Money transfer Service Scheme (MTSS). 
(e) Transfer through Rupee Drawing Arrangement (RDA). 
 6. Other than the factors mentioned in para 2(b) above, the components of 
cost of remittances are (a) technology used in the transfer (it in turn affects the 
time taken and get reflecte d in cost); (b) number of financial institutions involved 
in the remittance market in a given country, or in given corridor, as this 
competition pushes down costs; and the legislations governing them; © 
administrative and other operational costs; (d) banki ng and other financial 
regulations in both origin and destination countries; (e) remitter‟s preferences and 
urgency; (f) legal status of the remitter; (g) the larger the chain of agents & sub 
agents, the costlier is the transfer (especially in the MTO (Mon ey Transfer 
Operators) market). Interestingly in this mode , the cost is high because the 
transfer is almost instant. 
7. Comparative cost of remittances in some countries is enclosed as 
Annexure 1 to 3. 

24 
 
8. During the examination, “non banking channels” was erroneously 
understood by the Secretary as referring to non formal or “Hawala” channels.  As 
can be seen from the above, if by non banking channels, it was meant alternative 
to formal banks as such, then a number of such channels do exist. 
9. As desired by  the Committee, the issue of collecting better statistics 
country-wise specially from middle -east, has been taken up with the Governor, 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)." 
37. With a view to reduce the cost of remittances, the Committee had stressed to hold 
negotiations with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)  and the Ministry were also asked to 
desire methods for encouraging remittances through regular banking channels . The 
Committee are constrained to note that Ministry has not  taken any specific initiatives/ 
action on their specific recommendation in this regard . The Committee are not satisfied 
with the Ministry's reply which is of too general nature  only referring the findings of the 
Report submitted by the Ind ian Centre for Migration (ICM) about remittances. The 
breakup in percentage of various modes of sending remittances  is also not available. The 
Committee further reiterate that the Ministry should hold consultations with Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) to obtain better statistics country- wise and update the Committee about the 
same and after studying the percentage of sending remittances from each country through 
various modes they should take initiatives to encourage the remittances through regular 
banking channels. The Committee also have a strong view that the Ministry should enter 
into a tie up with some of the Indian Banks in order to ensure that Indian workers abroad 
can transfer money through Indian Ban king Channels or through their C orrespondence 
Bank (CB) in a hassle free manner. 
 
       (Recommendation No.14) 
 
38. The Committee had noted that the Financial Service Division (FSD) of the Ministry was 
the nodal point for facilitating NRI investment.  The Committee were dismayed to note that it 
had no mandate in bringing more investments into India, and the only job of MOIA in promoting 
NRI investment had been limited to dissemination of information  and advisory.  The Committee 
are also surprised to note that the Ministry had no data whatsoever of NRI investments facilitated 

25 
 
through Ove rseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC).  The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that although there we re various other institution which promote d and ke pt track 
of NRI investments in India like Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) but the Ministry  
should work it out with the Ministry of Finance to establish such an institut ion under the 
Ministry which could  work on the lines of FIPB or become the external wing/branch of FIPB  
outside India and it must work in coordination with FIPB to en -route the NRI investments in 
India through FIPB.  The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry must publicize the 
incentives and benefits available to the NRI investors at a large scale throughout the year via 
various channels in foreign countries and must establish a single window system for all the 
queries related to NRI investment.   
39. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"The matter was taken up with the concerned Ministries.  The situation that 
emerges is as follows: 
(i) The current allocation of Business Rule do not envisages a great role for 
MOIA in foreign inv estments including NRI investments, and wants and for 
enhancing the role of MOIA, amendment to the allocation of Business Roles 
would be required. 
(ii) FIPB does not keep a track on NRI  investments almost 87% of foreign 
investments is under direct route, and it  is not come under FIPB at all.  Data of 
total foreign investments is maintained by RBI. 
The above position will be further expanded upon and up -dated, once information 
is received from the other concerned Ministry also." 
(Recommendation No.15) 
40. The C ommittee w ere also  disappointed to note t hat the powers of the Ministry were 
circumscribed which diluted  benefits of having a separate Ministry. The Ministry might  in 
consultation with the Cabinet Secretariat work out coordination mechanisms which will ena ble 
them to play a more empowered role for the fulfillment of the broad aims and objectives of the 
Ministry, particularly facilitating inward remittances and catalyzing investments by Non -
Residents. 

26 
 
 
41. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
"The recommendation has been noted."  
 
42. The Committee  understand that the mandate of the Mini stry is limited as the 
current Allocation of Business Rule s do not envisage a greater role for the Ministry in the 
matter of NRI investments.  But this does not prevent the Ministry from maintenance of 
data and keeping track of NRI investments by them because it is a  major issue regarding 
welfare of NRIs. If the Minis try feels any limitations , they should first initiate the steps to 
expand their mandate through amendments in Allocation of Business Rules to enable them 
to work as single window  system to resolve all the queries related to NRI investments. The 
Committee should also be informed about the conclusion in th is regard  based on  the 
response and information  received from other M inistries. The Committee have a strong 
view that i n light of the rising obligations of ensuring safety and welfare of India ns living 
and working abroad , the Ministry should get empowered suitably for facilitating their 
inward remittances and catalysing investments. 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee observe  that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has once again 
failed in utilizing the allocation made at the Budget Estimates (BE) stage during the year 2012 -
13, and also on the front of maintaining the even expenditure during each quarter of the year.  
The allocation made to MOIA at BE stage was Rs. 114.77 crores which was reduced to Rs. 85 
crores at RE stage and the anticipated final utilization is only Rs. 81.28 crores out of which Rs. 
31.29 crores was spent during the last quarter of the year.  The Commi ttee find that perhaps due 
to similar trend of expenditure, the MOIA has not been able to develop any faith in getting the 
desired funds of the Ministry of Finance during the year 2013-14 also and it has been kept almost 
at the same level of Rs. 115.79 cro res as that of the last financial year against their projected 
demand of Rs. 186.94 crores.  The Committee have a clear view that if MOIA is not able to 
improve such trend of expenditure on various schemes of the Ministry, they may not be able to 
obtain any fund at RE stage also.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that MOIA should improve 
their spending mechanism by instituting strict monitoring of each and every scheme so that the 
Budget allocated for the year 2013 -14 is evenly spent and properly utilized during each quarter 
of the year and they may be in a better position to convince the Ministry of Finance while 
seeking the additional funds at RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
(Recommendation No. 3)  
The Committee observed that the amount of Rs. 1.00 crore was allocated to the Ministry 
under the sub -head „International Conferences/Meetings‟ including expenditure for 
entertainment of dignitaries and facilitate policy formulation on various issues related to 
Ministry.  But only Rs. 21.79 lakhs were spent by the Ministry on conferences and Rs. 9.50 lakhs 
for entertainment/hospitality purpo ses during the year 2012 -13. The Ministry failed to organize 
the scheduled Conference and spent only 30 percent the allocation made at Revised Estimates 
(RE) stage under this head. All this showed the lack of foresightedness and sensibility on the part 
of the Ministry in chalking out the schedule of conferences/meetings  on the issues which require 
review/detailed discussion of the schemes/programme of the Ministry in the light of international 
situation. The Committee, therefore, desired that Ministry should prepare a programme schedule 
of such seminars/conference to be organized during a financial year well in advance with 
pronounced objectives and make the expenditure accordingly.  The Committee further desire d 
that the Ministry should also ensure that the expenditure on such activities was justified and 
outcomes of the se deliberations were proportionate to the amount spent on these 
seminars/conferences. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
The Committee are happy to note that Pension Life Insurance Fund (PLIF) has been rechristened 
as Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Suraksha Yojna (MGPSY).  This has been a noble scheme for 
unskilled and semi -skilled Overseas Indian Workers who can save certain amount for their 
pension and resettlement upon their return to their country of birth.  However, at the same time 
the Committee are also dismayed to note that out of 154 registered subscribers during 2012 -13 
only 45 subscribers were found to be eligible in Kerala where the schem e was launched on Pilot 
basis.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should critically analyze the reasons 
for such low registration and huge rejection including lack of publicity and convincing of the 
prospective beneficiaries and the string ent norms prescribed to avail the benefits under the new 
scheme.  The Committee also observe that enrollment centres for subscribers are at PoE offices 

29 
 
and selected branches of Bank of Baroda only.  The Committee, strongly desire that Ministry 
should make all possible efforts to make the Overseas Indians aware of the scheme. The 
Committee further desire that the norms for registration under the scheme should also be relaxed 
to attract maximum number of subscribers and the number of enrolments centres should  be 
increased considerably. The Committee also observe that an allocation of Rs. 7 crores made for 
implementation of this scheme on all India basis is insufficient and should be enhanced 
appropriately at RE stage.   The Committee further observe that in view of the changed situation 
in Gulf countries, a large number of Indian workers are expected to return back to India during 
the coming months.  In view of this urgent need the Ministry should also prepare a contingency 
plan in consultation with state Governments to help such workers particularly in the state of 
Kerala.   
Reply of the Government 
The following action has been initiated by the Ministry to enhance subscriber registration: 
1. Currently, there are seven Service Providers appointed by Mini stry under MGPSY. This 
will enable Ministry to rollout MGPSY across India and in ECR countries. The process of 
appointment of Service Provider has been kept open on an ongoing basis. 
2. The emigration data will be shared with the appointed Service Provider to  help him to 
identify, educate and enrol subscriber under MGPSY. 
3. The status of passport of ECR category workers gets converted to ECNR on a continued 
overseas stay for a period of three years. Such emigrants have been made eligible to join 
MGPSY. 
4. A large n umber of workers were not able to join MGPSY due to non -availability of 
overseas address proof or KYC documents. Ministry has obtained an exemption from SEBI on 
KYC requirements. This would help the workers to join the scheme.  
5. Subscriber awareness program s across various labour camps in UAE have been 
conducted. So far around 32 such camps have been organized by the Service Provider in UAE. 
Ministry has also developed information education and communication (IEC) material in 
multiple languages towards the publicity and awareness of MGPSY.  
The adequacy of the budget allocated to MGPSY is based on the nu mber of enrolment of the 
overseas Indian worker under the scheme. If there will be need for additional funds, the same 

30 
 
will be sought at the RE stage. A revis ed estimate may be appropriately submitt ed by the 
Ministry at RE stage. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
The Committee observe that the MOIA has conducted 23 know India programmes so far 
and a total of 700 Overseas Indian Youth have participated in these programmes.  But during the 
year 2012-13 out of originally planned five KIPs, only three were organized.  Surprisingly, there 
was very poor response in the last two KIPs. The Committee are unable to understand the 
reasons for failure of the Ministry in attracting more Indian Diaspora Youths in these 
programmes.  It proves that there is an urgent requirement for improvement in KIP and SIP, 
particularly in terms of programme scheduling, infrastructure and programme content.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry should make all efforts in the light of the Impact Study 
made by CII and their own experience in identifying the interested persons and exploring the 
possibilities of tapping the sources other than the Missions so that the ir flagship programme is 
organized properly to bring the Indian Diaspora Youth closer to the land of their ancestors. 
         Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken into consideration the Recommendation of the Standing Committee. 
Based on recommendations of CII on Pre -Arrival, registration, Arrival and departure assistance, 
programme scheduling, infrastructure and programme content, Ministry has been taking steps to 
improve the KIP programme. Further, as desired by the Committee, this Ministry is considering 
writing to Overseas Indian Associations abroad to make the programme more popular for 
increasing the number of interested participants. Overseas Indian associations functioning abroad 
will also be involved for publicity of the Know India Progra mmes (KIPs) among NRIs/PIOs 
abroad. 
  38 candidates had applied in the 24 th KIP and 46 persons for the 25 th KIP. This shows an 
improved trend. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
                                     
                                 
 
 

31 
 
                                      (Recommendation No.10) 
The Committee note that the India Center for Migration is a „not for profit‟ Society established 
by MOIA for carrying out research in International Immigration etc.   It also envisages to  lead 
„evidence based‟ work on  international migration to support informed policy making and enable 
strategic interventions for a coherent and harmonised response to the transnational movement of 
people.  The Committee also note that a two year project initiativ e has been undertaken with 
European Union and Center also plans to work with other organizations such as International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) on Migration Management with International Labour 
Organization (ILO) on labour market information and pr otection and  also with UN Women on 
addressing issues concerning women migrants.  The Committee, however, strongly recommend 
that all the research findings of ICM projects must be converted into workable action plans for 
the direct benefit of the common In dian workers/professionals, irrespective of gender so that the 
migration of a qualitative labour force from India takes place all over the world. The Committee 
also desire that the findings/results of all migration related research must be catered to the 
multitude of technical institutions such Polytechiques, ITIs, IITs and other technology up -
gradation institutions so that the actual skill/ technology requirement of the world market are 
interpolated with the theoretical   content of these Institutions for providing a successful careers 
to the semi-skilled and fully-skilled workers that they would generate over years in future.  
Reply of the Government 
 
          The recommendations of Hon‟ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
The Committee note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) that is operated 
by the Indian Missions for safeguarding the welfare and protection especially of Indian Workers 
going abroad for providing  on -site emergency assista nce for the Overseas Indian Citizens who 
are in distress.  The Committee are surprised to note that only Rs. 84.16 lakhs has been spent 
during 2012-13 under this scheme and a small amount of Rs. 5.00 crores have been allocated in 
BE 2013 -14.  Such a small relief to a huge number of Diaspora itself is an evidence of poor 

32 
 
management and unenthusiastic approach of the Ministry towards Overseas Indian Workers.  
The Committee are quite sure that with such a big size of Overseas Indian Workers, the number 
of workers in distress would definitely be high which were left unattended and unaddressed The 
Committee, therefore , feels  that such a meagre  amount is insufficient to meet the objectives 
specified by the Ministry in the scheme and therefore, strongly recommend that the funds under 
this scheme should be enhanced appropriately. The Committee are deeply concerned about the 
naturalization policy ( Nitaqat) of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, wherein, Out of ten Indian 
workers one will be substituted by Saudi Arabian Worker, targeting to root out all „illegal 
workers‟ and extra immigrant workers out of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  The Committee 
feels that if such trend continues in the whole of the Gulf Region and later in other parts of the 
globe, the Ministry with such low allocation will be under extreme pressure.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all possible efforts should be made by the Min istry to not only 
provide easy passage to all the distressed migrant workers found in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia, but also  to all other Indian workers from the other Middle East country as well.  The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry shall coordina te with the State Governments of Punjab, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka in bringing back such migrant workers from 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
Reply of the Government 
The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been established in all the I ndian Missions for 
on-site welfare of emigrants which includes boarding and lodging for distressed Overseas Indian 
workers in household/domestic sectors and unskilled labourers; extending emergency medical 
care to the Overseas Indians in need; providing ai r passage to stranded Overseas Indians in need; 
providing initial legal assistance to the Overseas Indians in deserving cases; expenditure on 
incidentals and for airlifting the mortal remains to India or local cremation/ burial of the 
deceased Overseas Indians in such cases where the sponsor is unable or unwilling to do so as per 
the contract and the family is unable to meet the cost; providing the payment of penalties in 
respect of Indian nationals for illegal stay in the host country where prima facie the  worker is not 
at fault; providing the payment of small fines/penalties for the release of Indian nationals in jail/ 
detention centre; providing support to local Overseas Indian Associations to establish Overseas 
Indian community Centres in countries that have population of Overseas Indians exceeding 

33 
 
1,00,000; and providing support to start and run Overseas Indian Community based student 
welfare centers in countries that have more than 20,000 Indian students presence. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
The committee was disappointed to note that the powers of the Ministry are circumscribed which 
dilutes benefits of having a separate Ministry.  The Ministry may in consultation with the 
Cabinet Secretariat work out coordination mechanisms which will enable them to play a more 
empowered role for the fulfillment of the broad aims and objectives of the Ministry, particularly 
facilitating inward remittances and catalyzing investments by Non-Residents. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation has been noted. 
 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
-NIL- 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE CO MMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee observe  that the e -Migrate Project has been considerably delayed due to 
non-achievement of several milestones in time. The allocation for this project was reduced from 
Rs.  22.00 crores to Rs. 2.19 crores at RE stage and only Rs. 1.26 crores was spent on the proj ect 
during the year 2012-13. During 2013-14 the project has been allocated a fund of Rs. 3.40 crores 
only which does not seem sufficient for development and implementation of the project in a 
timely manner.  The Committee also observe that the e -Migrate pr oject,  was planned to be 
implemented in a phased manner over three years and as per contract with TCS, „Go -Live‟ of the 
project was expected on 9th February, 2012.  However, „Go-Live‟ of the project has been delayed 
and the project is now supposed to be completed by the end of August, 2013 at the earliest as 
Committed by MOIA during oral evidence.   The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
must ensure to meet its new deadline for the completion of major milestones of the e -Migrate of 
the project such as Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) and Wide Area Network (WAN) and 
establish „Go-Live‟ on time by obtaining the desired fund at RE stage so that the project is rolled 
out at the earliest without any further delay particularly due to paucity of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
The “Go-Live” date is now fixed for March, 2014. Funds will be obtained at RE stage, if required. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.9)  
 
The Committee are aware that the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), a public 
private partnership of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), has been established with the objective to facilitate and connect India with the 
Indian Diaspora by promoting overseas Indian investment in India and facilitating business – to - 
business partnership between Indian businesses and Indians residing overseas.  The Committee 

36 
 
are also happy that the OIFC provides a wide range of consultative and advisory services in key 
focus areas like Real Estat e, Wealth Management, Taxation, legal and Consular etc. and provide 
a host of advisory services to persons of Indian origin (PIOs) and non -resident Indians (NRIs).   
But the Committee observe that only one centre of OIFC has been set up in Delhi and no oth er 
Chapters of the same are envisaged in the Prominent States or abroad. In Committee‟s view the 
objectives of the OIFC Trust is not getting the right impetus for garnering momentum for 
facilitating  large scale foreign Investments by Overseas Indians in t he near future. The 
Committee, therefore, does not want the OIFC to only work like an information centre for 
PIOs/NRIs but also justify their presence by accessibility and maintaining the details of flow of 
NRI investments in the country by working as a na tional single window agency for Diaspora 
investment. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should also work out the 
possibilities of opening an OIFC Chapter either in USA or in the UK or in both and few OIFC  
Offices in the Prominent States which are non-Delhi centric.  
 
Reply of the Government 
OIFC carries out, as per its mandate, not only the dissemination of information through its 
business networking portal which has 6 lakh unique visitors, and e -newsletter that has around 
15,000 subscrib ers; it also reaches out to the Diaspora associations from various parts of the 
world to promote economic engagement of Diaspora in India. OIFC has State partners and it 
works through the Industry department of the State Governments as well as chapters of 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in such States.  The investment regime in India with 
respect to PIO/NRI investment is fairly liberal. The investments are automatic in most of the 
sectors.  Since this work is possible by electronic means, opening of offices abroad may not be 
necessary and would entail considerable expenditure. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee note d that the deadline for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra 
(PBK) had then  been extended from Ap ril, 2013 to December, 2013.  The Committee had  
expected that the Ministry would stick  to the new  deadline, as the civil work had  already been 
completed and finishing work like flooring, false ceiling etc. was in progress. 
 
  However, the Committee had  not been informed about the development made so far in 
the direction of establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans  (PBB) in States.  The Committee 
strongly favored the c oncept, but we re not satisfied with the efforts being made by the 
Government in that regard. 
 
  The Committee, therefore, reiterate d that the Ministry should come out with a clear cut 
objective and pol icy regarding establishment of PBBs in States and should impress upon the 
Diaspora specific States for their participation in the project through an allotment of land for that 
purpose. An early completion of the PBBs in the states that would not only comme morate the 
landmark events / ideals and glorious past of the community / society emitting from that very soil 
highlighting the importance of the specific culture an d language of the State but will also accrue 
financial and material benefits from the willing NRIs and PIOs and would open new grounds for 
reinforcing bonds with their grassroots and the new generation.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry is in the process of preparing a scheme to p romote setting up of Pravasi Bharitya 
Bhavans in the States. This will require consultation with stakeholders and approvals of the 
respective competent authorities. After such approval is obtained, the scheme shall be notified. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
 

38 
 
      (Recommendation No. 5) 
The Committee  observed that the Po E offices at Chennai, Hyderabad and Jaipur were  
housed in a rented building  owned by the State Governments.  PoE office, Thiruvanantapuram 
has recently got its office space of its own b ut PoE,  Mumbai and PoE, Cochin a re still 
functioning from private buildings.  The new PoE offices at Jaipur, Rai Bareli and Guwahati are 
also on the anvil but without office premises of their own. Surprisingly, „no allocation‟ was 
made during the year 2012 -13 for the purpose of establishing/shifting the PoE offices, and it 
was status-quo again during 2013-14.    
The Committee fail ed to understand the approach of the Ministry in this matter when  in 
their replies they had asserted that they we re making all possible efforts to purchase space for 
accommodating the existing PoE offices but on the o ther hand not a single rupee had  been 
allocated for the purposes of construction/shifting of PoE offices . The Committee did  not 
approve the approach of the Ministry in the matter and desired that the matter must be diligently 
taken up with the authorities concerned, such as the Minister of Civil Aviation/Urban 
Development Minister and concerned Chief Ministers and finalize the proposals of land or 
space purchase or lease for  accommodating these PoE offices on priority basis during the year 
in 2013-14. MOIA may have also coordinated with MEA to locate/open their PoE offices in or 
near RPOs so as to facilitate people for not running to faraway places. Without showing the 
progress in getting the space or land, they may not have been able to augment sufficient funds 
for the same at the R evise Estimates (RE) stage also. The Committee we re also aware that  a 
significant number of Posts we re lying vacant in the PoE offices and desire d that fresh 
initiatives should be taken to fill all the vacant posts in the old as well as the new PoE offices in 
the shortest possible time.   
 
Reply of the Government 
  The status of action taken on the Standing Committee‟s recommendation, POE -wise, is as 
under: - 
POE, CHENNAI 
 For the space Secretary, MOIA and written letter to Secretary, Urban Development on 4 th 
April, 2011. Subsequently Hon‟ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs also addressed a letter to 

39 
 
Hon‟ble Minister of Urban Development on 20 th December, 2011 to provide the space for the 
office of POE, Chennai. Space in TRANSIDCO building at Guindy, Chennai has been identified, 
and efforts are on to have it allotted for POE office in Chennai. Secretary, MOIA has addressed 
the Chief Secretary, Govern ment of Tamil Nadu vide letter dated 25 th March, 2013 and the 
Protector General of Emigrants has requested the Chairman & Managing Director, TRANSIDCO 
vide letter dated 28th March, 2013. " 
POE, HYDERABAD 
Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has written to the Chi ef Secretary, Government of 
Andhra Pradesh for allotting a piece of land measuring about 1000 sq.m. at Hyderabad for 
constructing its own building to  accommodate its field offices functioning in Hyderabad.  In 
response the Principal Secretary (Revenue), G overnment of Andhra Pradesh has requested the  
Collector of Hyderabad for examining the proposal.  Further, Secretary, MOIA also took up the 
matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for 
accommodation for POE office in the Government buildings under the control of Estate office at 
Hyderabad.  The matter has further been taken up with the State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
at the level of Protector General of Emigrants. 
POE, JAIPUR 
 Allotment of building was receiv ed for POE, Jaipur, and Ministry has furnished the 
office, and made it functional since 7th January, 2011.  
POE, THIRUVANANTHPURAM 
         With pursuance, Ministry has been able to convince the State Government to give POE 
office, Trivandrum in Norka Cent ral, Thycaud, Trivandrum.  The space has been accepted and 
civil/furnishing work is in progress.  It is expected that the office of POE, Trivandrum would 
shift to the premises by February, 2014.   
POE, MUMBAI  
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of E xternal Affairs on 30.12.2010 for 
providing accommodation to house the POE office at Mumbai in its newly constructed building 
for RPO at Bandra Kurla Complex.  MEA on 20.01.2011 informed that the completion of the 

40 
 
construction of the new building is likely  to take three more years and that the decision of 
allotting space will be taken after the RPO office is shifted to the newly constructed building.  
Further, the Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has also written to the Chief Secretary, Government 
of Maharashtra, but no response has been received so far.  Secretary also took up the matter with 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for 
accommodation for POE office in the Government buildings under the control of Estate office  at 
Mumbai.        
Subsequently, the Hon‟ble Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs took up the matter with 
the Hon‟ble Minister of Urban Development and Hon‟ble Chief Minister, Government of 
Maharashtra vide letter dated   20 -11-2011.  The Protector General of Emigrants has also 
requested Urban Development Department, Government of  Maharashtra vide letter dated 6th 
December, 2012.  
POE, COCHIN 
The matter has been taken up at the level of Secretary, MOIA with Chief Secretary and 
Government of Kerala for allotting a plot of land measuring 1000 sq.m. in Cochin to house its 
POE office.  Further, Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Mini stry of Urban 
Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation for POE office in the 
Government buildings under the control of Estate office at Cochin.  The Hon‟ble Chief Minister, 
Government of Kerala vide letter dated 19 -06-2012 informed t hat the District Collection, 
Ernakulum has been directed to locate a suitable space for the office of POE, Cochi n and the 
matter has been taken up with him.   
POE, RAE BARELI 
         POE office at Rae Bareli has been inaugurated on 15 th May, 20-13 and the  matter will be 
taken up with the Ministry of urban Development/State Government to provide space for the 
office.  
POE, GUWAHATI 

41 
 
The Finance Division has approved opening of POE office Guwahati on 4 th January, 
2012. DS (Admn) has written to Dy. Commissioner, Guwahati on 28 th September, 2011 and 
Secretary, MOIA to Chief Secretary, Assam on 18th May, 2012 for the office space.  
The Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs had also addressed a letter on 23 rd July, 2013 to 
the Minister of Urban Development and Parliamentary Affairs for providing 5000 sq. ft. of space 
in Central Government owned buildings located at Mumbai, Hyderabad, Cochin, Chennai, 
Trivandrum and Rae Bareilly for the POE offices. Minister of  Urban Development and 
Parliamentary Affairs on 7 th Nov., 2013 had replied that there is no General Pool Office 
Accommodation available at all the above mentioned locations. However, the requirement of 
office space for POE has been noted and will be consid ered along with other pending requests 
for General Pool Office Accommodation as and when GPOA becomes available at these 
locations.   
          So far as the allocation of funds is concerned, in case suitable land is made available at any 
point of time dur ing the year 2013 -14, required funds will be sought by way of submission of 
Revised Estimates.  
 With regard to the recommendation to coordinate with MEA to locate/open POE offices 
in or near RPOs  it may be noted that the emigration clearance process as s tipulated under 
section 22 of the Emigration Act, 1983 read with rule 15 of emigration ( amendment) Rules, 
2009  involves the verification of the employment related documents, viz., the employment 
contract, demand letter and power of Attorney to the recrui ting Agents by the POEs from the 
foreign employers or the Indian Missions to satisfy himself about the correctness of the 
documents.  This takes a considerable time before the applicant is asked to submit his passport 
for emigration clearance.  As such POE s offices should ideally be located in the central place of 
the city limits easily accessible by the public transport.  However, the MEA will be requested to 
provide space as per requirement.     
 The posts in different POE offices are filled up by invitin g nominations from Central 
Secretariat Services (CSS) and Central Secretariat Clerical Services (CSCS) of different 
Ministries/ Departments. Since adequate numbers of applications are not being received these 
vacancies continue to exist though Ministry has  again circulated these vacancies by calling 
nominations. The shortage of staff in POE offices has affected functioning of POE offices to a 

42 
 
great extent. Against the vacant posts, however, in order to mitigate the problems of staff 
shortage against the vacant posts in MOIA and O/o POE outsourcing work is resorted to." 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
             (Recommendation No.8) 
 The Committee noted that the Ministry had launched the Scholarship Scheme for 
Diaspora Children (SDPC) to make higher education in India accessible to the Overseas Indian 
Children along with a vision to popularize India as a better and affordable education destination. 
The Scheme was launched in the year 2006 -07 and 100 scholarships upto US $ 4000 per annum  
were granted to PIO and NRI students.  A total of 568 candidates have availed of scholarships 
since inception of the scheme. The Budget under the scheme have  been enhanced with an 
objective of increase in number and am ount.  The Committee, however, we re disappointed to 
note that the scholarship amount under the scheme which was enh anced to US $ 5000 last year 
had been reduced to US $ 4000. The Committee , therefore, strongly recommended  that the 
matter of enhancement of the scholarship amount per annum should be considered particularly in 
view of the rising fee structure and cost of board and lodging at the educational premise s. The 
Committee also reiterated their earlier recommendation to increase the number of scholarships to 
provide more opportunities to the Diaspora children to study in prime institutions of the country.   
The Committee found that very few na tional levels Institutions had been incorporated in the list 
of institutions where these students are admitted.  The Committee, therefore, desire d that 
educational Institutions including institutions of national repute such as Jawaharlal Lal Nehru 
University, Delhi University, IITs and various IIMs may also be brought under the scheme in 
order to provide better and holistic higher education facilities to aspiring children of Overseas 
Indians.   
Reply of the Government 
 
Increase of scholarship amount from existing the US$ 4000 to US$ 5000 keeping in view of the 
rising fee structure and cost of board and lodging at the educational premises is under 
consideration. Since inception of the scheme in 2006 -07, the total number of scholarship has 
remained 100(50-NRIs and 50 -PIOs). These days more number of children of overseas Indians 
are applying for pursuing undergraduate courses in Engineering, Science, Law, M anagement etc. 
Keeping in view that since 2010 onwards all the 100 seats are being availed by the candidates, an 
increase in number of scholarship is under consideration . A proposal to the Ministry of Finance 

43 
 
for increasing Budgetary support for BE 2013 -14 has been submitted so that the number of the 
scholarships may be enhanced . Educational Consultants India Limited ( Ed.CIL) are the 
implementing agency for the programme. EdCIL has been requested to incorporate more 
institutions of national repute like JNU, DU, IITs and various IIMs under the scheme to 
accommodate the increased number of aspirants for undergraduate courses in Engineering, 
Science, Law, Management etc. Presently under SPDC scheme, 7 4 institutions (Arts, Science, 
Law) having MOUs with EdCIL. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 The Committee understood that MOIA had  as part of its mandate taken up Labour 
Mobility Partnerships Agreements with various prominent labour importing countries in a 
phased manner.  MOIA is also taking steps to build  the Human Resource Mobility Partnerships 
(HRMPs) with key countries of destination in European Union.  Such mobility partnerships have 
been signed with Denmark, negotiations with similar partnership agreements with Netherlands, 
Australia, France, Poland, the Czech Republic, Norway, Switzerland, Hungary, Sweden, 
Belgium, Romania, Ma uritius and EU are at different stages of conclusion.  During the year 
2012-13 no HRMPs could be concluded. The Committee, however, were not satisfied with the 
pace of negotiations and progress made in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desire d that 
these negotiations should be undertaken as per a particular time -frame and should not linger on 
for several years because these are associated with the welfare of Indian Diaspora.  The 
Committee also desire d that on conclusion of such HRMPs these should be made public via 
print/electronic media for the benefit of all the Indian workers. Partnership country-wise booklets 
should also be prepared for circulation amongst the migrating work force of India. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Memorandum of Understanding on Human Resource Mobility Partnership (HRMP) was signed 
with Denmark in September, 2009. Negotiations on HRMP have been completed with the 
Netherlands and required approvals for signing the MoU have been sough t. Negotiations are in 
progress with EU, France and Poland. Draft MoU has been exchanged with Australia, Sweden 
and Switzerland. While Australia and Sweden have subsequently given their own draft 

44 
 
Agreement for discussions, Switzerland has made significant changes to the draft. Draft MoU 
was also forwarded to Belgium, the Czech Republic, Mauritius, Norway and Romania. Belgium 
and the Czech Republic have not responded. Discussions with Mauritius are in progress. Norway 
has indicated that such an Agreement is not needed. Negotiations with Romania also have not 
been constructive. HRMP with Denmark is available on the website of the Ministry. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
The Committee note d that remittances by the Indian Diaspora were amongst the highest 
in the world. The foreign exchange reserve of the country is growing every year due to high 
remittance rate by Overseas Indians and the highest contribution in these remittances comes from 
unskilled and semi -skilled Indian Workers employed  in Gulf countries and Malaysia. The 
Committee were astonished to know that MOIA ha d no idea about the quantum of non -banking 
remittances made by the Indian people despite a large number of remittances were being done 
through these non -banking financial in stitutions only. The remittance fees of such outside 
institutions are considerably low as compared to  regular banking institutions. Such strange 
situation clearly reflects the invisibles in the balance of payments with Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI). These ki nd of transactions are indirectly encourag ing Hawala transactions also. The 
Committee had also observed that the cost of remittance throu gh regular banking channels were 
not uniform across various countries and exponentially high which c ould vary from 2 to  21% in 
some of the middle east countries.  The Committee , therefore, strongly recommended  that the 
Ministry should consult with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for reducing the cost of remittance 
and should also devise methods for encouraging remittances thro ugh regular banking channels.   
At the same time, the Committee we re of the view that the Ministry should make earnest efforts 
to collect the data of overall remittances made by Overseas Indians including through non -
banking institutions.  
 
 
 

45 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Noted. As indicated during the examination, a study on remittances carried out by the India 
Centre for Migration (ICM), an organization of this Ministry, has since been received.  The 
report addresses the following four major issues: 
(e) Volume of total remittances; 
(f) Cost of remittances transfer; 
(g) Components of the cost; and 
(h) Banking and non banking channels involved. 
2. The important conclusions of the Report are as follows: 
(a) That the cost of remittances has decreased due to emerging competition in  the 
remittances market.  In fact, remittances cost from the UAE to India are amongst the cheapest for 
the region. 
(b) The cost depends on factors that pertain to the country from which the remittances is 
being sent, as the cost of transfer depends on fact ors such as the up -front fee, the exchange rate 
applied, fee collected at the recipient‟s end, if any etc. 
(c) The cost of remittances is also affected by the mode of transfer - whether it is by SWIFT 
(Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications) electronic, a draft, cheque etc. 
(d) A number of financial institutions, specially the so called exchange houses in the GCC 
countries, are playing an important role in the remittances market.  
(e) An estimated USD 401 billion was sent in form of rem ittances to the developing world, 
with India being the largest recipient at USD 69 billion in the calendar year 2012.  
(f) India is followed by China (USD 60 Billion), Philippines (USD 24 Billion), and Mexico 
(USD 23 Billion).  Other countries in South Asi a in the Top ten recipients including Pakistan & 
Bangladesh, each receiving USD 14 billion in 2012.  
3. Year-wise remittances have been as follows: 
 

46 
 
S.No. Year Remittances/Private 
Transfers (in USD Million) 
Private Transfer as a 
percentage of Current 
Account Deficit (CAD). 
1 2006-07 30,835  
2 2007-08 43,508  
3 2008-09 46,903 168.0 
4 2009-10 53,636 140.5 
5 2010-11 55,618 121.1 
6 2011-12 66,129 84.6 
 
 4. Country or Origin-wise remittances are as follows: 
Rank Country Amount Remitted to India 
(2012) in Million 
USD 
1 United Arab Emirates 14,255 
2 United States 10,844 
3 Saudi Arabia 7,621 
4 United Kingdom  3,904 
5 Bangladesh 3,716 
6 Canada 3,145 
7 Nepal 2,934 
8 Kuwait 2,673 
9 Oman 2,373 
10 Qatar 2,084 
11 Sri Lanka 1,283 
12 Australia 1,245 
13 Singapore 1,113 
14 Bahrain 690 
15 Malaysia 493 
 

47 
 
5. Some of the prominent means of remittances are as follows: 
(a) Transfer of an Indian Bank through Correspondent Bank (CB) overseas. 
(b) Through the SWIFT network. 
(c) Through Exchange Houses (EH) 
(d) Money transfer Service Scheme (MTSS). 
(e) Transfer through Rupee Drawing Arrangement (RDA). 
 6. Other than the factors mentioned in para 2(b) above, the components of cost of 
remittances are (a) technolog y used in the transfer (it in turn affects the time taken and get 
reflected in cost); (b) number of financial institutions involved in the remittance market in a 
given country, or in given corridor, as this competition pushes down costs; and the legislatio ns 
governing them; © administrative and other operational costs; (d) banking and other financial 
regulations in both origin and destination countries; (e) remitter‟s preferences and urgency; (f) 
legal status of the remitter; (g) the larger the chain of age nts & sub agents, the costlier is the 
transfer (especially in the MTO (Money Transfer Operators) market). Interestingly in this mode, 
the cost is high because the transfer is almost instant. 
7. Comparative cost of remittances in some countries is enclosed as Annexure 1 to 3. 
8. During the examination, “non banking channels” was erroneously understood by the 
Secretary as referring to non formal or “Hawala” channels.  As can be seen from the above, if by 
non banking channels, it was meant alternative to forma l banks as such, then a number of such 
channels do exist. 
9. As desired by the Committee, the issue of collecting better statistics country -wise 
specially from middle-east, has been taken up with the Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
       (Recommendation No.14) 
 
 The Committee note d that the Financial Service Division (FSD) of the Ministry was the 
nodal point for facilitating NRI investment.  The Committee were dismayed to note that it had no 
mandate in bringing more investments into India, and the only job of MOIA in promoting NRI 
investment had been limited to dissemination of information and advisory.  The Committee were 
also surprised to note that the Ministry ha d no data whatsoever of NRI investments facilitated 
through Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC).  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed 
that although there are various other institution which promote and keep track of NRI 
investments in India like Foreign Investment Promot ion Board (FIPB) but the Ministry should 
work it out with the Ministry of Finance to establish such an institution under the Ministry which 
can work on the lines of FIPB or become the external wing/branch of FIPB  outside India and it 
must work in coordina tion with FIPB to en -route the NRI investments in India through FIPB.  
The Committee also recommend ed that the Ministry must publicize the incentives and benefits 
available to the NRI investors at a large scale throughout the year via various channels in f oreign 
countries and must establish a single window system for all the queries related to NRI 
investment.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter was taken up with the concerned Ministries. The situation that emerges is as follows: 
(i) The current allocation of  Business Rule do not envisages a great role for MOIA in 
foreign investments including NRI investments, and wants and for enhancing the role of 
MOIA, amendment to the allocation of Business Roles would be required. 
(ii) FIPB does not keep a track on  NRI investments almost 87% of foreign investments 
is under direct route, and it is not come under FIPB at all.  Data of total foreign investments 
is maintained by RBI. 
 

49 
 
The above position will be further expanded upon and up -dated, once information is received 
from the other concerned Ministry also. 
[F.NO. H-11021/06/2013-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                ANANTH KUMAR, 
18th February, 2014                                                        Chairman,                
29 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
  

50 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2013-14) HELD ON 18TH FEBRUARY, 2014 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on 18 th February, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee 
Room No.67, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
       PRESENT 
Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  -  In the Chair 
 
        MEMBERS 
         
                  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
5. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
6. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
7. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
8. Dr. Bhola Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
9.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
10. Shri Murli Deora 
11. Shri H.K. Dua 
12. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
13. Shri N.K. Singh 
14. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Ram Raj Rai  -  Director 
       

51 
 
 
2. Hon'ble Chairman (Shri Ananth Kumar) could not attend the sitting of the Committee due 
to some urgent engagement. The Committee therefore, chose Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  to act as the 
Chairperson for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. At the outset, the Chair welcomed the Members to   the sitting of the Committee.  
4. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX. 
5. The Co mmittee then took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 19 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2013 -14. The Chair invited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The Members 
suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted the draft Report with minor 
modifications.  
6.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to f inalize the Reports incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
NINTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                        15 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,3,6,7,10,11 & 15 
 Total-07 
 
Percentage:  46.66% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
NIL 
Total-00 
  
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 & 9 
Total- 02 
 
 Percentage: 13.33% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4,5,8,12,13 & 14 
Total-06 
 
Percentage: 40.00% 
  

53 
 
Annexure - 1 
Cost of remittances transfer from Qatar to India (730 AED) 
Remitting from Qatar to India  
 
Firm Name Firm Type Fee Exchange 
Rate 
Margin (%) 
Total Cost 
Margin (%) 
Doha Bank BANK 15.00 -0.52 1.54 
Xpress Money MTO 17.00 1.17 3.50 
Al Dar Exchange MTO  20.00 0.85 3.59 
Commercial Bank BANK 20.00 0.95 3.69 
Arabian Exchange 
Company 
MTO 20.00 1.47 4.21 
Commercial Bank Bank 25.00 0.95 4.37 
Al Fardan 
Exchange 
MTO 20.00 1.73 4.47 
Speed Remit MTO 15.00 2.68 4.74 
Ezremit MTO 20.00 2.39 5.13 
Ezremit MTO 25.00 2.39 5.81 
Western Union MTO 25.00 4.19 7.62 
HSBC BANK 50.00 3.24 10.09 
HSBC BANK 70.00 3.24 12.83 
BANK AVERAGE  36.00 1.57 6.50 
MTO AVERAGE  20.25 2.11 4.88 
TOTAL AVERAGE  26.31 1.93 5.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F.NO.H-11021/06/2013-P&C  
  

54 
 
Annexure - 2 
Cost of remittances transfer from Saudi Arabia to India (750 AED) 
Remitting from Saudi Arabia to India   
 
Firm Name Firm Type Fee Exchange 
Rate 
Margin (%) 
Total Cost 
Margin (%) 
Express 
Money 
MTO 25.00 0.56 3.89 
Enjaz  Bank  BANK 19.00 1.45 3.98 
Money Gram MTO 22.00 1.26 4.20 
Al-Rajhi Bank BANK 16.00 2.11 4.24 
Tele Money MTO 16.00 2.46 4.59 
Saudi 
American 
Bank 
(SAMBA) 
BANK 25.00 2.11 5.44 
Western 
Union 
MTO 25.00 2.60 5.94 
Bank 
Average 
 20.00 1.89 4.65 
 
MTO 
Average 
 22.00 1.72 4.65 
 
Total 
Average  
 21.14 1.79 4.61 
 
 
 
 
F.NO.H-11021/06/2013-P&C  

55 
 
Annexure- 3 
Cost of remittances transfer from UAE to India (735 AED) 
Remitting from UAE  
 
Firm Name Firm Type Fee Exchange Rate 
Margin (%) 
Total Cost 
Margin 
(%) 
HSBC Bank  0.00 2.38 2.38 
MoneyGram MTO 15.00 0.88 2.92 
Al Fardan Exchange MTO 15.00 1.02 3.06 
Al Fardan Exchange MTO 15.00 1.02 3.06 
UAE Exchange MTO 15.00 1.08 3.12 
Wall St. Exchange MTO 15.00 1.15 3.19 
Lari MTO 15.00 1.15 3.19 
Lari MTO 15.00 1.36 3.40 
Al Ansari MTO 15.00 1.36 3.40 
UAE Exchange MTO 15.00 1.56 3.60 
Al Ansari MTO 15.00 1.63 3.67 
Wall St. Exchange MTO 15.00 2.38 4.42 
Al Fardan Exchange MTO 15.00 2.38 4.42 
Western Union MTO 15.00 2.38 4.42 
Lari MTO 15.00 2.38 4.42 
HSBC BANK 100.00 2.38 15.98 
HSBC BANK  150.00 2.38 22.79 
BANK AVERAGE  83.33 2.38 13.72 
MTO AVERAGE  15.00 1.55 3.59 
TOTAL AVERAGE  27.06 1.70 5.38 
 
F.NO.H-11021/06/2013-P&C  
 
 
 