 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2011-12] 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 12 
 

 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report  
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2011-12] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24th April, 2012 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th April, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
03 April, 2012/14 Chaitra,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. 93_ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2011-2012………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (v)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           19 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       30 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            31 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………               33 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                               38  
held on 03.04.2012……………………………………………… 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                          40   
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (15th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….        
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-12) 
 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
Sl.No.  Name  
       
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
                                     (iii)  
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
27.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
30.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
31. Vacant# 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
4. Shri A. Sivanandam - Under Secretary 
___________________________________________________________ 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao  nominated to the Committee on External Affairs 
w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee   due  to  expiry  of term of 
Dr. Karan Singh, Member Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 27.01.12 and re -nominated to 
the Committee w.e.f. 02.02.2012. 
 
# Shri Sreegopal Vyas, Member Rajya Sabha  ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  
the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of his term  w.e.f. 02.04.12. 
 
 (iv) 
 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 11-12) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 12th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 9th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Affairs for the year 2011-12. 
 
2. The9th Report was presented on 29th August, 2011. The Action Taken Replies of 
the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were 
received on 27th March, 2012. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 3rd April, 2012. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 9th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 5th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        ANANTH KUMAR, 
03  April,  2012                                                                       Chairman,                 
14 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(v) 
                                                 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with 
the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in their Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 29th August, 2011. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in 
the report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3,6 , 8-13 and 15 
 Total-09 
 
 (ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Total- 01 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply  of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Total- 01 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,4  and 7 
Total-04 
 

2 
 
 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for which only interim replies have been 
given by the government should be furnished within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their observations/recommendations. 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
5. The Committee had noted that the Budget Esti mates of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2011 -2012 wa s Rs. 81 crores.  Similar 
allocation was made at BE stage during 2010 -2011 which was subsequently 
reduced to Rs. 73 crores at Revised Estimates (RE) stage and the actual 
expenditure during 2010 -2011 had remained at Rs. 72.80 crores.  The 
Committee had also noted that as against a demand of  Rs. 155 crores during 
2010-2011, Rs. 81 crores  were allocated by the Finance Ministry and similarly 
against the demand of  Rs. 149.26 crores, the MOIA had again been allocated 
Rs. 81 crores only at BE 2011 -2012 stage. The Committee were not 
convinced with the justification given by the Ministry for such trend of 
allocation stating that at the time of consideration of budget grants the Ministry 
of Fi nance had considered the expenditure incurred till the end of second 
quarter of the previous year whereas the major expenditure of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs was incurred during the 3rd and 4th quarter in respect 
of their schemes such as OCI c ard, ICWF and holding of PBDs. The 
Committee were of the clear view that the Ministry had  utterly failed to justify 
the trend of expenditure being made during each quarter of previous year and 
their projection before Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, th erefore, had 
desired that the Ministry should make regular, proper and judicious reviews 
and develop an efficient monitoring mechanism so that genuine and realistic 
projections could be placed before the Ministry of Finance at BE and RE stage 
so that all the programmes activities were implemented without any downward 
revision, ultimately depriving the beneficiaries of the intended benefits.  The 

3 
 
Committee had desired that there was a need for rescheduling the expenditure 
in each quarter of a financial year for better f und allocation.  The Committee 
were relieved in  noting that after concerted efforts of the Ministry the Building 
Plans of Parvasi Bhartiya Kendra had been approved with a revised estimates 
of Rs. 79.19 crores and that the work had  started i n Ap ril, 2011.  The 
Committee had then expected that the construction of PBK was to be 
completed within the fixed time frame of  24 months.  The Committee had 
desired that the proposed Monitoring Committee to monitor of the progress of 
the project in terms of physical and financial achievements should be 
constituted immediately to avoid cost and time over run in executing the 
project. As regards the proposed scheme of setting up of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Bhawans in the States, the Committee had desired that it shoul d be further 
explored sincerely  with State Governments who had  concern for the NRI 
affairs/emigration.  The Committee  had desired to be informed, from time to 
time, about the progress made in that regard.  
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“As desired by the Committee, the Ministry is already taking regular reviews of 
trend of expenditure. Consequently, percentage of expenditure vis -à-vis the 
Budget allocation is improving every year.  
 The construction of PBK which commenced from April, 2011 is likely to 
be completed within a period of two years (i.e. by April, 2013). A Committee 
headed by Joint Secretary in MOIA and consisting Director (Fin.), and 
representatives of the NBCC monitors physical and financi al achievement of 
the project to avoid cost and time over run. 
 In so far as setting up of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans in the States is 
concerned, the matter will be taken up with to examine the project in terms of 
allocation of land and other logistics.” 
    
 

4 
 
7. The Committee do not agree with the claim made by the Ministry 
that due to regular reviews of trend of expenditure , the percentage of 
expenditure vis-à-vis the Budget allocation is improving every year.  As a 
matter of fact, during the period of last five years, in all the years except 
2008-09, BE of the Ministry was revised downwards and actual utilization 
was even lower than RE.  In 2008 -09, the BE of Rs. 65.00 crores was 
revised to Rs. 45.00 crores and the Revised Estimates could be actually 
utilized by the end of the year .  From the available expenditure details, it 
is evident that the Ministry has been able to spend  Rs. 39.77 crores only 
upto January 31, 2012 against the Budget allocation of Rs. 81.00 crores 
made during 2011 -12.  The Committee, the refore, reiterate that through 
more regular proper and judicious reviews , the Ministry should impro ve 
their monitoring mechanism so that the trend of expenditure improves 
further. 
 The Committee further hope that all the initiatives will be taken by 
the Committee formed by the Ministry to monitor physical and financial 
achievements of the PBK project and the project  will be completed 
without any cost and time overrun .  The Committee also desire  that 
sincere efforts should be made by the Ministry for setting  up of Pravasi 
Bhartiya Bhawans in the states finalizing the projects in terms of 
allocation of land and other logistics.  The Committee should be 
informed from time to time about the progress made in both the projects. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
8. The Committee were not happy with the efforts made by the Ministry for 
acquiring land for construction of PoE Offices for the convenience of 
emigrants.  Over Rs. 1 crores we re being paid every year towards rent for 
these premises,  when despite best efforts made by P oE at Kerala, Chennai 
and other places no tangible result had  come and the Government wa s just 
paying huge rent month after month.  The Committee had desired that the 
matter should not be left at the lower level and it sh ould be taken up with the 
concerned Chief Minister by the Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs and the 
Committee had desired to be posted with the progress in the  matter regularly. 

5 
 
The Com mittee were not satisfied with the  allocation of meagre amount of    
Rs. 20 lacs only under the  Head for  purchase/construction of PoE Offices 
because that did not show the determination of the Ministry in purchasing land 
for constructing PoE Offices.  The Committee, there after, had desired that the 
Government sho uld make sincere efforts in that  direction and  ensure 
augmented allocation at RE or supplementary Demands for Grants stages for 
that purpose.   
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“Five POE offices, i.e., Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Trivandrum and Coc hin 
are housed in private buildings taken on rent.  The issue of allotment of land , 
or space in Government buildings to accommodate these five POE offices has 
been taken up with the State Governments of Maharashtra, Chennai, Andhra 
Pradesh, and Kerala, the  states in which the POE offices are functioning from 
private building s.  The status of action taken on the Standing Committee‟s 
recommendation in each case is as under: -  
POE, MUMBAI  
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs on 
30.12.2010 for providing accommodation to house the POE office at Mumbai 
in the newly constructed building for RPO at Bandra Kurla Complex.  MEA on 
20.01.2011 informed that the completion of the construction of the new 
building is likely to take three  more yea rs and that the decision of allotting 
space will be taken after the RPO office is shifted to the newly constructed 
building.  Further, the Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has also written to the 
Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, but no response has  been 
received so far.  Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation for 
POE office in Government buildings under the control of  the Estate office at 
Mumbai.  This matt er has again been taken up with the Government of 
Maharashtra.  
 

6 
 
 
POE, CHENNAI 
 
 It is stated that Secretary MOIA on 15.04.2011 has written to the Chief 
Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu for allotment of a plot of land identified 
by MOIA in K.K. Nagar, C hennai for constructing its own building.  This was 
followed up by a D.O. letter dated 18.04.2011 from Hon‟ble  Minister MOIA to 
the Hon‟ble Chief Minister, Government of Tamil Nadu for direction to the 
concerned authorities for allotment of the plot of land.   
 The Revenue Department, Government of Tamil Nadu has forwarded 
the letter dated 15.04.2011 from Secretary, MOIA to the District Collector, 
Chennai for necessary action.  However, the response from the Government 
of Tamil Nadu is still awaited.  Furt her, Secretary also took up the matter with 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development Government of India on 12.07.2011 
for providing space for accommodation for POE office in the Government 
building under the control of Estate office at Chennai.  This matt er has again 
been taken up with the Government of Tamil Nadu. 
 
POE, TRIVANDRUM  
 
 MOIA has succeded in getting office accommodation for POE office at 
Trivandrum from the Government of Kerala.  The Government of Kerala, 
NORKA (B) Department vide their G.O. (Rt.) No.283/2011/NORKA dated 
31.08.2011 has allotted space for re -locating the Office of POE, Trivandrum in 
their newly constructed building at Thycaud, Trivandrum.  The POE, 
Trivandrum office will start functioning as soon as the wooden fixures and 
partitions etc. are fixed in the new office premises.  
 
POE, COCHIN 
 The matter has been taken up at the level of Secretary, MOIA with 
Chief Secretary, Government of Kerala for allotting a plot of land measuring 
1000 sq.m. in Cochin to house its POE office.  Fu rther, Secretary also took up 

7 
 
the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for 
providing space for accommodation for POE office in the Government 
buildings under the control of Estate office at Cochin.  This matter has again 
been taken up with the Government of Kerala. 
 
POE, HYDERABAD 
 Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has written to the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting a piece of land measuring about 
1000 sq.m. at Hyderabad for constructing its own building to accommodate its 
field offices functioning in Hyderabad.  In response the Principal Secretary 
(Revenue), Government of Andhra Pradesh has requested the Collector of 
Hyderabad for examining the proposal.  Further, Secretary also took up the 
matter with Se cretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for 
providing space for accommodation for POE office in the Government 
buildings under the control of Estate office at Hyderabad.  This matter has 
again been taken up with the Government of Andhra Pradesh.” 
 
10. The Committee observe that the Ministry has taken some  
initiatives in the form of writing letters to the concerned State 
Governments and the Ministry of Urban Development on the issue of 
allotment of land or space in Government buildings to accom modate the 
five PoE offices situated at Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Trivandrum 
and Cochin .  B ut even after a lapse of several months , they have not 
received any proper response from any agency except in one case where 
they have succeeded in getting office accommodation for PoE office at 
Trivandrum.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need of making 
more concerted efforts  for getting space to house other PoEs.  
In this context, the Committee would also like to remind the advice of the 
Committee during on the spot visits of PoE offices asking the Ministry to 
explore the possibility to shift/place the PoE offices either in the Airport 
premises or any nearby places  for the benefit of emigrant workers . The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the matter s hould not be delayed 

8 
 
more and should be taken up with the Minister of Civil Aviation  or Urban 
Development Minister or concerned Chief Ministe r appropriately to 
finalize the proposal  of land  or space to accommodate the remaining 
four PoE Offices on priority basis. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
11.  The Committee had regrettably noted that despite their 
recommendation made in Third Report (15 th LS)  expediting filling up the 
vacant posts in MOIA, the position ha d not improved at all but on the contrary 
the number of employees ha d further gone down   from 155 to 146.  As per 
information ma de available to the Committee, as against the sanctioned 
strength of 195, at that time only 146 employees/persons were in position in 
the Ministry.  The Ministry wa s awaiting the final reply from DOPT in regard to 
creation of a  separate cadre for MOIA and after completing of process, the 
Ministry was supposed to in a better position to take all the requisite measures 
to fill up those vacant posts. As regarding filling up of vacancies in PoE offices, 
the Committee had noted that MOIA intend ed to place the matter before the 
Cabinet after the Ministry of Finance clear ed the proposal.  The Committee 
had felt that the shortfall in manpower was affecting the working of the Ministry 
particularly in the execution of various schemes/programmes at their  hand 
and, therefore, had strongly recommend ed MOIA to earnestly take up the 
matter with DOPT and the Ministry of Finance to get an early requisite 
clearance in the matter relating to MOIA and creation of posts in PoE Offices 
respectively.  The Committee had asked to be apprised of the efforts made by 
the MOIA and the outcome thereof. 
 
12.  The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“The Ministry is making  all possible efforts to fill up the vacant posts. 
Communications have been made at the appropriate levels. In a meeting held 
with at Joint Secretary Level ,  Ministry of Home Affairs has assured to fill  up 
most of the vacancies of UDCs/Assistant in a near future. Some of the posts of 

9 
 
the Assistants have since been filled up. Proposal for opening of three POE 
offices has got approval from Ministry of Finance. The office of the POE Jaipur 
was inaugurated by the HMOIA on 7 th January, 2012. The process for ma king  
the remaining two POE office at Guwahati and Rai Bareilly functional is under 
process. The Cadre separation issue is also being taken up vigorously with 
DOPT (CS Division).” 
 
13. The Committee are surprised to note that even after making all 
efforts, the Ministry has not been able to fill up the vacant posts in the 
Ministry and PoE offices.  It is a matter of serious concern to observe 
that even after a lapse of eight long years since establishment of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, the Ministry has not been able to get 
its full sanctioned strength of staff in position and the Ministry is still 
functioning without its own cadre. The Ministry has also not clearly 
stated any specific reason for the delay in getting staff for the Ministry 
and PoE Offices and also any specific problem  being faced by them  in 
creation of separate cadre.   The Committee therefore, desire that the 
matter should be taken up with the Minister of Home Affairs and Minister 
of DOPT so that Ministry gets its full sanctioned strength of staff as well 
as a separate cadre at the earliest.  The Ministry should also apprise the 
Committee about the steps being taken to obtain the additional staff for 
the proposed new PoE offices at Jaipur, Guwahati and Rai Bareily. 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
14.  The Committee had noted that ever since the Overseas Citiz enship of 
India (OCI) Scheme had  been made operational, a t otal number of 7,57,740 
PIOs had been registered as OCIs.  The Committee had happily noted that in 
response to the recommenda tions of the Committee [(3rd repo rt (15th  LS)] 
the Ministry had  approached 25 Indian Missions which handle d the largest 
number of Persons of Indian Origins and the overseas Indians with a view to 
collecting more detailed information for data base about ov erseas Indians. 

10 
 
Those missions had  been asked to start the process of compilation of a 
database with better survey and statistics.  The Committee had also found that 
MOIA intended to merge OCI c ards and PIO cards schemes and we re then 
engaged in consultati on with the Ministry of Home Affairs  as those schemes 
came under t he visa regime of India.  In that  context, the Committee  had 
wanted that the issu e of merger of two schemes needed  to be extensively 
deliberated upon and the viewpoint of the Committee might also be considered 
before taking any final decision in the matter.  The Committee had further 
desired that all steps should be taken by the Ministry/Missions abroad to 
encourage more and more overseas Indians to get tho se cards issued at the 
earliest. The Committee had also desired that the data base about the PIOs 
and overseas Indians should also be compiled in the shortest possible time so 
that the scheme of issuing OCI cards might be operationalised in a time bound 
manner so that the targeted groups were benefited properly.   
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“Now a proposal to merge the PIO Card and OCI Card Scheme has been 
approved by the Cabinet. The salient features of the this merger scheme is 
stated below: 
 The merged Scheme will be called Overseas Indian Card 
Scheme 
  It will enable acquisition of OCI registration by minors, both 
parents of whom are Indian citizens or one parent is an Indian 
citizen 
 It will also grant OCI to the foreign spouse of OCI card holder. 
 To be granted to PIOs up to 4 generation levels, i.e.  PIOs 
whose parents, grand parents or great grand parents had been 
of Indian Origin. 
The OCI Scheme is published by the Ministry and Indian Mission abroad. 
However the Scheme is volunta ry in nature and as on 23/3/2012 on total 
number of 10,59,203 applicants have been issued OCI cards. 

11 
 
 
So far a collection of database of Overseas Indian‟s is concerned, the Indian 
Mission/Posts abroad have expressed their inability to collect an authentic 
information in their respective countries keeping in view the vast magnitude of 
the work individual non availability of a mechanism and in adequate staff at the 
disposal.” 
 
16. The Committee are satisfied to note that by the end of year  2011, 
10,59,203 applicants have been issued OCI cards.  The Committee also 
note that the proposal to merge the „PIO Car d Scheme‟ and „OCI Card 
Scheme‟ has been approved by the Cabinet.  The Committee  appreciate 
the objectives of the merger of schemes and  feel  that this merg er will 
certainly provide a better opportunity to Indian Diaspora to establish  a 
strong association with the country of their origin.       
 The Committee , also note with regret  the inability shown by the 
Indian missions/posts abroad to collect authentic i nformation towards 
the formation of the data  base of the PIOs and  Overseas Indians simply 
on the pretext  of the magnitude of work at hand, non -availability of 
mechanism for collection of data and inadequate staff at the ir disposal.  
The work relating to co llection of authentic data about PIOs and 
Overseas should not be considered as less important.  On their part, the 
Ministry has also not s hown any interest in collection of data.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a task force should be appointed by the 
Ministry for collecti on of the basic data and compilation  followed by 
creation and operation of  the desired data  base about Overseas Indians 
in certain shortest possible time -frame. If required , assistance of local 
Organizations/Associations of Indians may also be taken to collect this 
authentic basic data of immense use in preparation of policies and 
implementation of schemes of the Ministry in better way. 
 
 
 

12 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
17.  The Committee had noted that the Government ha d appointed one 
Consular (Coordinating Officer) each in the Embassy of India, Washington and 
in the Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi on experimental basis.    Considering  that 
as very important and essential step, the Committee had strongly recommend 
that more such appointments shou ld be considered , particularly in the  
Consultates/Missions situated in  Gulf Countries.  The Committee had also 
desired that while considering the appointment of such Consular(s)preference 
should to be given to the persons capable of communicating  in  re gional 
language of the majority of immigrants residing in a particular country.  Such 
consideration were also to be kept in mind while posting the staff in such 
Missions/Posts abroad with a view to providing better services to emigrants. 
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“The Ministry is exploring the possibilities of appointing Counsellor, 
Community Affairs in some of the Gulf Countries where the presence of Indian 
overseas workers is considerable. The Ministry has noted the 
recommendation of the Committee and in due compliance, preference will be 
given to the persons capable to communicate in regional language of the 
majority of immigrants residing in a particular country while appointing such 
Counsellor, Community Affairs/staff attached to the Mission for this purpose.”  
 
19. The Committee are happy to note that after a successful 
experimentation in Washington and Abu Dhabi,  the Ministry has decided 
to  appoint Counsellor (Community Affairs)   in the Gulf countries where 
large number of migrants are present and the possibilities are being 
explored for these appointments in the identified missions/posts.  The 
committee, therefore, desire that these appointments should be made on 
priority basis giving due preference to the persons having proficiency in 
regional language of the majority of migrants residing in that particular 
country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made 
regarding these appointments. 
 
 

13 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
20. The Committee were happy to note that the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs had undertaken a comprehensive e -Governance project on emigration 
with consultancy support from the National Institute for Smart Government 
(NISG), Hyderabad. The Committee had noted that the project wa s awaiting 
approval of the Committee on Non -Plan Expenditure (CNE) after which the 
draft contract was to  be finalized and signed with the Implement ing Agency. 
The Committee had urged the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to expedite  
the approval of the project from CNE  so that the project could be implemented 
by the targeted date of 2012. The Committee had wished to be kept informed 
of the progress of the project from time to time.   In order to create a better 
impression about the M inistry and to develop a feeling of trust in the minds of 
visitors, the Committee had strongly recommend ed that the Ministry should 
explore the feasibility to craft one holistic omnibus website with various links 
containing every possible information perta ining to programmes/schemes 
under the Ministry and other related information at one place so that the 
prospective users may get every type of information/assistance/knowledge by 
pressing one button.  The Committee had desired to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
 
21. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“The e-Migrate Project envisages end to end computerized solution for all the 
processes and sub -processes involved in the emigration system and li nk all 
the key stakeholders on a common e-Migrate application which will be used by 
the workers, the PGE/POEs (or the  proposed Emigration Management 
Authority), the recruiting agencies, the immigration Officials at the airports, the 
employers and the India n Missions abroad. The key modules under the e -
Migrate Project include the employer accreditation module, RA registration 
module, emigrant registration module, enrolment agency module, student 
module and the complaint management module. 
  
 
 

14 
 
 The primary objectives of the Project are: 
(i) To design and implement processes and application for 
emigration ecosystem. 
(ii) To bring changes and technology that result in significant 
improvement in delivery of emigration services. 
(iii) To introduce systems that simplify different  processes in the 
emigration cycle. 
(iv) To establish interfaces among key stakeholders. 
The Project aims to transform emigration into a simple, transparent, 
orderly and humane economic process. It would result in significant 
improvement in the quality of servi ces to emigrant workers since it would 
simplify different processes in the emigration cycle and improve effectiveness. 
The e-Migrate Project would provide a complete and comprehensive electronic 
platform linking all the stakeholders with minimum human inte rvention and 
automatic implementation of the emigration process (as required under the 
Emigration Act, 1983), with real time access to relevant information and data 
to all concerned. It is logical to assume that this project would, to a great 
extend, help reduce corruption, malpractices and irregular migration and 
thereby facilitate legal and orderly migration.  
 
The project involves full automation of POE offices & PGE office, 
phased interlinking with recruiting agents, employers, immigration counters, 
Indian missions abroad, insurance companies and state governments etc and 
integration of labour market information with policy decisions through 
appropriate MIS. The project would develop integrated modules on recruiting 
agent system, emigration clearance sys tem, immigration control system, 
complaint management system, RA rating system and the contract attestation 
system. Smart cards would be issued to the emigrants under the project after 
examining all pros and cons to ensure that the benefits are commensurat e 
with the cost to the emigrant.  
 

15 
 
The Master Service Agreement (MSA) has been signed between the 
Government of India and the Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. (TCS), the 
Implementation Agency of the Project on 30.12.2011. The project is scheduled 
for completion within 58 weeks from the date of signing of the contract. 
 
The recommendation of the Committee for exploring the feasibility to 
craft one holistic omnibus website with various links containing all significant  
information pertaining to programmes/schem es under the Ministry and other 
related information at one place so that the prospective users may get every 
type of information/assistance/knowledge by pressing one  button is under 
consideration.” 
 
 
22. The Committee are happy to learn that a comprehensive e-Migrate 
Project envisaging end to end computerized solution for all the 
processes and sub - processes involved in the immigration system  has 
come in to existence. This will link all the key stakeholders on the 
common e -Migrate application.  The Master Se rvice Agreement (MSA) 
has already been signed.  The Committee hope that the project will be  
completed within the fix time -frame i.e. by the first quarter of the year 
2013.  The C ommittee, however, desire that the Ministry should ensure 
that implementation of the project is not affected adversely due to non-
availability of fund or administrative delays.    
 The Committee are also confident that the efforts being made by 
the Ministry in the direction of crafting a holistic omnibus website with 
various links c ontaining every possible information pertaining to 
programmes/schemes under the Ministry and other related information 
at one place will show the results soon.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
 
 
 

16 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
23.  Ministry had informed that the issues raised by the planning 
Commission regarding Scheme of Skill Upgr adation and Pre -departure 
orientation of Emigrant workers  were being taken up by them with the Ministry 
of Labour & Emplo yment and its agency namely Directorate General of 
Employment & Training (DGET) and National Council of Vocational Training 
(NCVT) for redesigning the scheme. That it was very important scheme for the 
emigrant workers and any delay in taking decisions might hamper the welfare 
of poor workers.   The Committee had, therefore, desired that MOIA should 
geared up the process so that the scheme could be made functional within a 
period of three months.  The Committee had desired to be  apprised of the 
status of scheme from time to time.  
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
“The Ministry through the Indian Council of Overseas Employment (ICOE) has 
submitted a Plan Scheme titled, “SwarnaPravas Yojna” for imparting 
structured skills training to the youth, during the 12th and 13th Five Year Plans 
(2012-22). The Plan Scheme targets overseas employment opportunities in a 
public-private partnership, apart from establishing standards in skill 
development domain.   The Minis try believes the Plan Scheme will position 
India as a preferred source country for skilled and trained workers in select 
sectors in the international labour market, diversify our destination country 
base with a focus on geographies/countries that will expe rience significant 
labour supply gaps & skills shortages and are of strategic interest to India and 
more importantly enable the overseas Indian workers to move up the value 
chain and enhance employability. 
The SwarnaPravas Yojna envisages focusing on speci fic skill sets and 
selecting geographies in which India has a competitive advantage. It proposes 
to hone skilled and structured migration for better employment opportunities 
for 10 million youths between the years 2012-22 by providing globally-relevant 
international qualification that will set standards in curriculum, training and 
assessment leading to universally recognized certification. The Plan Scheme 
aims to seize around 25% global market share of 56.5 million of the projected 
global skilled worker sho rtage by the year 2020.   The proposed Plan Scheme 
will be implemented by consolidating existing institutions to provide skills and 
services in line with global standards by establishing the International Skills & 
Standards Council of India (ISSCI), providi ng support to state governments to 

17 
 
evolve a larger network of existing homeland institutions and by offering a 
Global Employer loyalty. To monitor and sustain the effort, the Plan 
Scheme will establish a robust Skills Portal to support both - Migration 
Information System (MIS) and Labour Market Assessment (LMA) - that are 
critical to this effort .  The Council has also launched a Skill Development 
Initiative in the North East for Potential Migrants from the North-Eastern States 
of India in August 2011. This w ill provide gainful employment opportunities for 
the youth and women from all the eight states of the North -East of India. The 
Ministry is the principal anchor of this project. Under the project, seven 
international vocational qualifications (IVQs) will be  developed with focus on 
short, relevant and effective modules that will help potential migrants in the 
overseas job markets. The IVQs will cover hospitality, healthcare and 
education sectors, training 10,000 youth including women. The project will 
work on the basis of two franchisee and university embedded models which 
will use standard training, testing and certification to increase the effectiveness 
of the proposed framework. This internationally recognised certification will 
ensure that trainees are employable anywhere in the world.” 
  
 
25. The Committee are satisfi ed to note that the Ministry through the 
Indian Council of Overseas Employment has submitted a very ambitious 
revised plan scheme titled “Swarna Pravas Yojna” for imparting 
structured skills t raining to the youth during the plan period 2012 -22.  
This scheme will not only target overseas employment opportunities in a 
public-private partnership, but will also establish standards in skill 
development domain.  The „Swarna Pravas Yojna‟ envisages competitive 
advantages to Indians and the scheme also proposes to provide 
structured migration for better employment opportunities to 10 million 
Indian youths between 2012-22. This  aims at achieving 25% share of the 
Global Market of 56.5 million skilled wor kers shortage projected by the 
year 2020 through the newly formed International Skill & Standards 
Council of India (IS&SCI).  The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry 
should make all efforts to get this ambitious scheme approved at the 
earliest.  The  Committee may be apprised of the progress made 
regarding approval and implementation of the scheme regularly. 
 

18 
 
 The Committee also welcome the launching of Skill Deve lopment 
initiative in the North -East for potential Migrants from the North -Eastern 
states of India.  There was an urgent need of such ini tiative for the 
people of North -Eastern states.  Therefore, now the Ministry being the 
principal anchor of this project should make all possible efforts to 
ensure that the objective of training 10,000  youth i ncluding women of 
North-Eastern states is achieved in a fixed -time frame.  The Committee 
should be informed about the further development in the implementation 
of the project from time to time. 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
The Committee noted that the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) convention is the 
flagship event of the Ministry which is organized every year with a view to 
connect India with its vast Indian Diaspora and to b ring their knowledge, 
expertise and  skills on a common platform. Keeping in line with this objective, 
the 9th PBD Convention was held in New Delhi from 7 to 9 January, 2011. The 
Committee observe that PBD 2011 at New Delhi focused on issues relating to 
health, education and the overseas Indian youth. Sessions were also held on 
investment, inclusive growth, investment opportunities in the North Eastern 
Region, Information, Communications and Entertainment including cultural 
ties, diaspora philanthropy and issues related to overseas Indian in the Gulf. It 
is a matter of satisfaction that organizers have started receiving good 
sponsorship also. However, it is clearly transpired that despite the fact that 
majority of persons of Indian origin and Indian migrants  abroad are labourers 
or semi skilled labourers but they do not participate in the convention due to 
their various constraints. In view of the availability of sufficient finances under 
this head and interest of sponsorers, the  Committee would like that th e 
Ministry should hold mini PBDs on regular basis at overseas locations where 
the Indian migrants are in large number with a view to ensure the active 
participation of labourers or semi skilled labourers overseas to know their 
problems and help them throug h diplomatic system.  Their representatives 
should also be sponsored in main PBDs.  The Committee would also like that 
Ministry should ensure an active participation of Public Representatives by 
inviting the Members of Standing Committee on External Affair s and Members 
of Consultative Committees  of MEA and MOIA in the interactions during the 
PBDs.  In addition, the Committee would like that such important interaction 
should not be treated as annual rituals only.  The issues raised during PBDs 
should seriously be taken up  and in the next PBD the participants should be 
made aware about the initiatives taken by the Government on their 
suggestions. Only such fruitful discussion on permanent mutually beneficial 
issues can bring tangible benefits to target groups. The Committee surprisingly 
observe that PBDs are not actually being used for attracting more knowledge, 
expertise and investments from the Diaspora.  Many of them come here with 
very ambitious plans for their motherland. But in absence of proper welcome , 
guidance and boost from the government side they oftenly go back without 
any achievement.   On the contrary some  State Governments  organized 
similar event on nearby dates and they are successful in attracting huge 
investments.  The Committee, therefore , desire that in order to achieve the 
objectives of mutual benefits, the Government should convince the NRIs and 
also  offer them incentives to attract them to invest in their motherland   during 
such PBDs.  The Committee think that this approach of the Go vernment will 
strengthen the link with the world community permanently. 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As advised by the Standing Committee, Ministry is going to organize 
mini Pravasi Bharatiya Divas later in s eptember, 2012 in the Gulf region 
keeping in view th e contribution  of Indian migrant skilled and semi skilled 
workers living in the Gulf Countries. The Hon‟ble Members of Standing 
Committee on External Affairs and Hon‟ble Members of Consultative 
Committees of MEA and MOIA were invited in the PBD -2012 held at Jaipur 
from 7 -9 January, 2012. The proceedings of PBD -2011 held at Delhi were 
printed by the Ministry wherein salient features of the event with all relevant 
details are stated. During the PBD Convention, business and investment 
related sessions alongwi th State Governments sessions are organized to 
motivate NRIs regarding different kind of incentives available to them for 
investing in India. Ministry has set up an Overseas Indian Facilitation Center 
(OIFC) as a not -for-profit trust, in partnership with C onfederation of Indian 
Industry (CII). The Centre will be a „one stop shop‟ for serving the interests of 
the Overseas Indian community and has the mandate to cover two broad 
areas: Investment Facilitation and Knowledge Networking. OIFC  was also 
engaged with the Diaspora at Pravasi Bhartiya Conventions both during the 
regional PBD hosted in South Africa in October, 2010, and the annual PBD in 
January, 2011 in New Delhi  and PBD 2012 in Jaipur . In an effort to help build 
synergies between businesses in India and South Africa, OIFC organized a 
Business Roundtable in Durban on 1 st October, 2010 on the sidelines of PBD 
Africa, hosted in the region. Over 100 business leaders from India and Africa, 
predominantly from South Africa, attended the Roundtable. Running f or the 
5th   successive year, OIFC organized a Market Place Forum during the 9th 
PBD from 7th to 9 th January, 2011. The Market Place served as a forum to 
connect the Diaspora delegates with OIFC‟s Partners through pre -scheduled 
business meetings. Over 85 b usiness meetings were held with footfalls 
ranging from 700 -800. Shri Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs; 
Shri B K Handique, Union Minister of Development of North Eastern Region 
(DoNER) and Mines; Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda, Chief Minister o f Haryana; 
and, Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal, Deputy Chief Minister of Punjab were some of 
the senior political leaders who visited the OIFC Market Place Pavilion. 
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that on the one side the Ministry is 
contemplating to increase the scholarship from the present limit of US $ 3600 
per student per annum to make the scheme more attractive and on the other 
side an outlay of 5 crores only  has been made at BE 2011 -2012 which was  
Rs. 5.38 crores during the year 2010 -2011.  The Committee do not find any 
possibility of expansion of scheme with reduced allocation.  Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should take all initiatives to obtain the 
required funds at RE stage t o provide the enhanced scholarship to all the 
students studying in India under this Scheme.  The Committee also desire that 

21 
 
Ministry should also conduct a study to know the reasons for not availing the 
scholarship by several selected students and also abou t the withdrawal of 
some students in between the course.  The Committee further desire that on 
the basis of such a study the grievances should be attended properly to  
prevent such withdrawal of students at various stages.  The fact should also 
be kept in mind that allowing withdrawal of student in the middle scholarship 
period is also wastage of public money and at the same time depriving of other 
students who deserve and who need this help to get better education. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Scheme was l aunched by MOIA in 2006 -07 to make higher 
education in India accessible to the children of overseas Indians (NRIs / PIOs) 
from 40 countries with substantial Indian Diaspora population and promote 
India as a centre for higher studies. Under the scheme, 100 scholarships up to 
US $5000/ - per course per annum per student are offered to PIO and NRI 
students (50:50) for undergraduate courses in Engineering, Science, Law, 
Management, etc. Under this scheme, over 387 PIO/NRI students have 
benefited since inception & 100 students have been selected in the current 
batch. 
 
The candidates are selected according to merit and are placed in 
Universities/Institutions against the quota fixed for NRI/PIO students. 
Sometimes overseas students after being selected are not willi ng to take 
admission on account of not getting admission in their first  choice of / college / 
institute. Secondly the reason for withdrawal of some students in between the 
course is either due to poor academic performance or on account of fail ing in 
the e xamination. Otherwise the majority trend of overseas students is to 
complete their courses successfully in India. If any student withdraws in the 
middle of the scholarship period after one year or two year, the vacant slot can 
not be given to other student s after such a long gap of time as per existing 
SPDC Guidelines. Before the beginning of the academic session, 100 
scholarship are given to NRI and PIO students (50 each) on the basis of main 
first list of result for 100 students (Separately 50 for NRI and  50 for PIO) in 
order of merit and subsequent waitlisted panels (till 100 slots are filled up) 
accordingly to give opportunity to other students strictly in order of merit in 
case of dropout from the main first list of result for 100 students.  
 
In view of  the above, EdCIL (implemented by M/s. Educational 
Consultants India Limited (Ed.CIL), an autonomous body under the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development) was requested to send reasons for not 
availing the scholarship by several selected students and also  about the 
withdrawal of some students in between the course. Ed.CIL has informed that 
selected students for SPDC do not join the scheme because of the following 
reasons: (i) good offers from other countries (ii) financial constrains 
(especially PIOs) and (iii) personal reasons. In case of withdrawal from the 
2nd year onwards , often it is not Students who withdraw from the scheme , 
rather Ed.CIL discontinue s their scholarship because of their poor academic 
performance. 

22 
 
So far as getting a higher allocation o f budget under the Scheme is 
concerned, the Ministry is making all out efforts to get a higher allocation 
during the financial year 2.12-13 
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 8.73 crores has been  made in BE 
2011-2012 as compared to Rs. 8.71 crores in BE 2010 -2011 on organizing 
Awareness Campaign/Media Plan Scheme. All the issues covered under the 
awareness campaign particularly relating to welfare of emigrant workers 
including problems relating to  Indian housemaids overseas as well as the 
issues relating to NRI marriages are very important and need regular attention.  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to 
further strengthen their awareness campaign and effectivel y present their 
demands at the RE stage or at the stage of supplementary grants to obtain 
required funds so that the awareness campaign on such important issues 
does not suffer due to paucity of funds at any point of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is making all out efforts to 
strengthen the awareness campaign of the Ministry. To make it more attractive 
to the audience/viewers new video spots are being created through National 
Film Development Corporation (NFDC).  
 
 Accordingly, during RE 2011 -12 an increased allocation of Rs.9.50 
crore and for BE 2012 -13 Rs.10.00 crore has been sought from Ministry of 
Finance under this Head.  
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
The Committee note that  in order to exp and the entrepreneurial ties and 
engage overseas Indians as partners in India‟s progress, an Overseas Indian 
Facilitation Centre, a  not for profit public private initiative of Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and Confederation of Indian Industry  (CII), 
was launched in 2007. With a strong intention to facilitate and bridge the gap 
between the Overseas Indians and India, OIFC has a mandate to cover broad 
areas such as investment facilitation, knowledge networking and ensuring 
business-to-business partnerships in focussed sectors like real estate, wealth 
management, taxation, legal, healthcare, education and infrastructure.  The 
Committee  are satisfied to note that over the years, the OIFC has developed 
a query redressal system, online business netw orking platform, live help 
Centre and many publications on investment for overseas Indians.   The 

23 
 
Committee, however, desire that OIFC should also keep a track of 
investments made by those prospective NRIs who avail the services of OIFC 
so that they may as sess the impact of their activities relating to economic 
engagements of overseas Indians with India. The Committee also recommend 
strongly that from time to time OIFC should arrange to conduct of market 
research and surveys to understand the need of the In dian Diaspora for 
effective engagement with India. The Committee also favour the suggestion of  
setting up of OIFC cell in CII Regional/State Offices in Bangalore, Chennai 
and Mumbai and desire that CII should be persuaded to set up the OIFC Cells 
in these cities at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
the specific steps being taken to give adequate publicity of the Centre so as 
the Diaspora population could make full use of services being dispensed by 
the Centre.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP) keeps a track of 
investment by Overseas Indians in India. To keep a track of overseas 
investment by OIFC, it has to have a continuous interaction with DIPP through 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Aff airs. To conduct market research and surveys 
to understand the need of Indian Diaspora the OIFC has already engaged an 
agency to conduct regional surveys in USA, UAE and Singapore. Survey 
Report will be available next year enabling this Ministry to proceed in this area. 
 
 In so far as creating a OIFC Cell in regional offices of Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII) including Bangalore, Chennai and Mumbai is concerned, 
a decision in principle has already been taken by the Ministry with CII in its 
Governing Council Meeting and is being implemented. 
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the services provided by the new 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre helpline has improved a lot.  The 
Committee welcome the  setting up of content rich website, the facility of walk 
in counseling of OWRC, SMS service to check the status of complaint which 
became functional after 31st December, 2010.  The Committee however note 
that their recommendation to extend the resources t he proposal for additional 
support in three more languages viz. Oriya, Marathi, Gujarati is awaiting 
approval of the Minister, MOIA.  The Committee, therefore, desire that this 
should be approved and implemented without any further delay.  
 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of Hon‟ble Committee to extend the services of 
OWRC in three more languages, viz., Oriya, Marathi and Gujarati has been 
accepted and steps are being taken to implement it.    
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
has undertaken a comprehensive e -Governance project on emigration with 
consultancy support from the National Institute for Smart Government (NISG), 
Hyderabad. The project i s aimed at achieving greater user convenience and 
effective protection and welfare of the emigrant. The subsidiary benefits would 
include greater levels of efficiency, transparency and accountability in the 
emigration system, facilitation of legal emigrati on and prevention of illegal 
emigration. The scheme is expected to automate emigration clearance, 
computerized registration of RAs and employers‟ permits, dispense with 
discretion, mitigate harassment of emigrants and remove corruption.  The 
Committee note that the project is awaiting approval of the Committee on Non-
Plan Expenditure (CNE) after which the draft contract would  be finalized and 
signed with the Implementation Agency. The Committee urge the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs to expedite the a pproval of the project from CNE  so 
that the project could be implemented by the target date of 2012. The 
Committee may also be kept informed of the progress of the project from time 
to time.The Committee observe that there are separate websites relating t o 
various schemes/programmes under the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
available to meet the varied expectations and needs of the diverse Indian 
community but these websites are either inconsistent or having incomplete 
information besides lot of broken  links which creates more confusion than 
solution.  It is, therefore, very difficult for the users, in particular the Overseas 
Indian community, to visit these websites to get the desired information.  In 
order to create a better impression about the Minis try and to develop a feeling 
of trust in the minds of visitors, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should explore the feasibility to craft one holistic omnibus website with 
various links containing every possible information pertaining to 
programmes/schemes under the Ministry and other related information at one 
place so that the prospective users may get every type of 
information/assistance/knowledge by pressing one button.  The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The e-Migrate Project envisages end to end computerized solution for 
all the processes and sub -processes involved in the emigration system and 
link all the key stakeholders on a common e -Migrate application which will be 
used by t he workers, the PGE/POEs (or the  proposed Emigration 

25 
 
Management Authority), the recruiting agencies, the immigration Officials at 
the airports, the employers and the Indian Missions abroad. The key modules 
under the e -Migrate Project include the employer a ccreditation module, RA 
registration module, emigrant registration module, enrolment agency module, 
student module and the complaint management module. 
The primary objectives of the Project are: 
(i) To design and implement processes and application for 
emigration ecosystem. 
(ii) To bring changes and technology that result in significant 
improvement in delivery of emigration services. 
(iii) To introduce systems that simplify different processes in the 
emigration cycle. 
(iv) To establish interfaces among key stakeholders. 
The Pr oject aims to transform emigration into a simple, transparent, 
orderly and humane economic process. It would result in significant 
improvement in the quality of services to emigrant workers since it would 
simplify different processes in the emigration cycl e and improve effectiveness. 
The e-Migrate Project would provide a complete and comprehensive electronic 
platform linking all the stakeholders with minimum human intervention and 
automatic implementation of the emigration process (as required under the 
Emigration Act, 1983), with real time access to relevant information and data 
to all concerned. It is logical to assume that this project would, to a great 
extend, help reduce corruption, malpractices and irregular migration and 
thereby facilitate legal and orderly migration.  
 
 
The project involves full automation of POE offices & PGE office, 
phased interlinking with recruiting agents, employers, immigration counters, 
Indian missions abroad, insurance companies and state governments etc and 
integration of lab our market information with policy decisions through 
appropriate MIS. The project would develop integrated modules on recruiting 
agent system, emigration clearance system, immigration control system, 
complaint management system, RA rating system and the co ntract attestation 
system. Smart cards would be issued to the emigrants under the project after 
examining all pros and cons to ensure that the benefits are commensurate 
with the cost to the emigrant.  
 
The Master Service Agreement (MSA) has been signed bet ween the 
Government of India and the Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. (TCS), the 
Implementation Agency of the Project on 30.12.2011. The project is scheduled 
for completion within 58 weeks from the date of signing of the contract. 
The recommendation of the C ommittee for exploring the feasibility to 
craft one holistic omnibus website with various links containing all significant  
information pertaining to programmes/schemes under the Ministry and other 
related information at one place so that the prospective u sers may get every 
type of information/assistance/knowledge by pressing one button is under 
consideration.  
 [File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 

26 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
The Committee desire the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to make all 
efforts to ensure t hat the Emigration Management Bill is introduced in the 
Parliament at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) administers the 
Emigration Act, 1983, which provides for the regulation of the emigration of 
Indian citizens for employment overseas. The Act provides for the institution of 
the Protector General of Emigrants acting through the Protectors of Emigrants 
as the institutional mechanism to manage the emigration of Indian workers for 
employment overseas. However, in order to better address the problem of the 
exploitation of the emigrant workers and also adapt suitably to the present day 
paradigm in the emigration management, the Ministry has proposed for 
introduction of the Emigration Management Bill, 2011 in the Parliament and 
repeal the existing Emigration Act, 1983.  The proposed Emigration 
Management Bill (EMB) embodies a paradigm shift in the management of 
emigration.  
 
 Some of the sali ent features of the new Bill vis -à-vis  the existing act 
are: 
 
(a) Under t he existing Act the institutional framework responsible for 
regulation of recruitment for overseas employment, regulation of 
departure of emigrants and enforcement of the provisions of the Act 
consists of the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) assisted b y 
various Protectors of Emigrants (POE) in the field. This machinery has 
not been able to fulfil its mandate in a satisfactory manner. With a view 
to create a robust institutional framework to transform emigration into a 
simple, transparent, orderly and hu mane economic process for the 
benefit of all stakeholders and primarily that of the emigrant, the 
proposed EMB seeks to replace the present emigration machinery 
under the PGE with a new statutory and autonomous regulatory 
authority called the Emigration Management Authority (EMA) 
(b) Under the existing Act only those recruiting agents fall within the 
purview of the Act who recruit low -skilled workers. Under the new Bill, 
the entire recruitment industry for overseas employment irrespective of 
the nature of jobs for which they recruit workers will be regulated. 
(c) The existing Act focuses merely on the protection of low -skilled 
emigrants. Under the new Bill it is proposed to extend the legislative 
scope to  capture data  all categories of emigrants (ECR as well as 
ECNR). 
(d) Under the existing law there are no enabling provisions for giving legal 
status to ECR passports that signify vulnerability of certain classes of 
workers. The proposed Bill makes a specific provision for empowering 
the Central Government to lay down the  criteria for ECR passport and 
to notify the specific countries (where emigrants are at greater risks of 
exploitations) as ECR countries  

27 
 
(e) The new Bill defines the terms like ECR emigrants and ECNR 
emigrants to address the vulnerability of ECR emigrants thr ough 
preventive interventions and to facilitate the emigration of ECNR 
emigrants while capturing all the relevant data pertaining to them. 
(f) The proposed Bill has provisions for black listing of overseas employers 
with a view to debar them from future recrui tments in case of their 
indulging in malpractices. 
(g) Under the existing law, the recruiting agents are not permitted to 
employ sub -agents. However, in reality thousands of sub -agents are 
thriving and are regularly employed by recruiting agents to assist them  
in recruiting workers from remote villages and towns of the country. 
Under the proposed bill, only accredited sub -agents can be employed 
by a recruiting agent. This will enable the EMA to monitor the 
performance of the sub -agents and lay down standards fo r their 
performance for improving their capacity. 
(h) The new Bill provides for laying down performance standards, regular 
performance audit and periodical rating of recruiting agencies, 
employers and sub-agents to encourage ethical recruitment practices. 
(i) Under the proposed Bill, the ECNR emigrants will not be required to 
obtain emigration clearance. However, they will be required to register 
with the EMA through an online system giving all relevant particulars 
about their employers and employment, apart from t hemselves. This 
will enable the EMA to maintain the data base on all kinds of workers. 
(j) The provisions of the proposed Bill have been aligned to the e -
Governance model developed by the Ministry.  
Thus from the above, it could be seen that the proposed Bill will 
modernize the legislative framework governing emigration, facilitate legal 
emigration, discourage irregular migration, enhance protection and welfare of 
emigrants, encourage ethical recruitment practices, enable market -friendly 
regulation of recruiters and provide for more deterrent penalties against crime 
such as human smuggling.  
 [File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
As regards Scheme of Skill Upgrdation and Pre -departure orientation of 
Emigrant workers the Planning Commission had observed that the existing 
infrastructure should be utilised rather than working independently on a new 
scheme and the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs might dovetail with any of 
suitable training schemes presently running under the National Policy on S kill 
Development by the Ministry of Labour & Employment. As informed by the   
Ministry the issues are being taken up by them with the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment and its agency namely Directorate General of Employment & 
Training (DGET) and National Cou ncil of Vocational Training (NCVT) for 
redesigning the scheme. This is very important scheme for the emigrant 
workers and any delay in taking decisions may hamper the welfare of poor 
workers.   The Committee therefore desire that MOIA should gear up the 
process so that the scheme could be made functional within a period of three 
months.  The Committee may be apprised of the status of scheme from time to 
time.  

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry through the Indian Council of Overseas Employment (ICOE) has 
submitted a Plan Scheme titled, “SwarnaPravas Yojna” for imparting 
structured skills training to the youth, during the 12th and 13th Five Year Plans 
(2012-22). The Plan Scheme targets overseas employment opportunities in a 
public-private partnership, apart  from establishing standards in skill 
development domain. 
The Ministry believes the Plan Scheme will position India as a preferred 
source country for skilled and trained workers in select sectors in the 
international labour market, diversify our destinatio n country base with a focus 
on geographies/countries that will experience significant labour supply gaps & 
skills shortages and are of strategic interest to India and more importantly 
enable the overseas Indian workers to move up the value chain and enhanc e 
employability. 
The SwarnaPravas Yojna envisages focusing on specific skill sets and 
selecting geographies in which India has a competitive advantage. It proposes 
to hone skilled and structured migration for better employment opportunities 
for 10 million youths between the years 2012-22 by providing globally-relevant 
international qualification that will set standards in curriculum, training and 
assessment leading to universally recognized certification. The Plan Scheme 
aims to seize around 25% global market share of 56.5 million of the projected 
global skilled worker shortage by the year 2020. 
The proposed Plan Scheme will be implemented by consolidating existing 
institutions to provide skills and services in line with global standards by 
establishing the International Skills & Standards Council of India (ISSCI), 
providing support to state governments to evolve a larger network of existing 
homeland institutions and by offering a Global Employer loyalty. To monitor 
and sustain the effort, the Plan Scheme  will establish a robust Skills Portal to 
support both - Migration Information System (MIS) and Labour Market 
Assessment (LMA) - that are critical to this effort 
The Council has also launched a Skill Development Initiative in the 
North East for Potential Migran ts from the North -Eastern States of India in 
August 2011. This will provide gainful employment opportunities for the youth 
and women from all the eight states of the North -East of India. The Ministry is 
the principal anchor of this project. Under the proje ct, seven international 
vocational qualifications (IVQs) will be developed with focus on short, relevant 
and effective modules that will help potential migrants in the overseas job 
markets. The IVQs will cover hospitality, healthcare and education sectors,  
training 10,000 youth including women. The project will work on the basis of 
two franchisee and university embedded models which will use standard 
training, testing and certification to increase the effectiveness of the proposed 
framework. This internatio nally recognised certification will ensure that 
trainees are employable anywhere in the world. 
 [File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
The Committee find from the budget documents that besides concluding 
Labour Welfare and Protection Agr eements with the Gulf countries and 
Malaysia for the benefit of the skilled and semi -skilled workers, the Ministry 
has entered into bilateral Social Security Agreements with Belgium, France, 
Germany, Switzerland, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Hungary, Denma rk, 
Republic of Korea and Norway.  The Ministry is also negotiating and 
concluding bilateral Society Security Agreements with countries in Europe, 
North America and the Asia Pacific for the benefit of Indian professionals. The 
Committee are, however, aston ished to note that MOIA has no role in 
implementation and monitoring mechanism relating to social security 
agreements.  The Committee, therefore, desire that there should be a direct 
role and responsibility of MOIA in monitoring process of social security 
agreements also so that the Ministry may be able to ensure that there is a 
proper implementation of these agreements which are signed with the 
objective of protecting the interests of Indian professionals working abroad. 
The Committee also desire that the negotiations on Human Resource Mobility 
Partnership Agreements with Poland, Czech Republic, Norway, Switzerland, 
Hungary, Sweden and France should be completed within a fixed time- frame.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Social Security Agreement is a multi -ministry endeavour and the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is the nodal Ministry. MOIA is working with 
Ministry of Labour, Employees Provident Fund Organization (EPFO), Ministry 
of Commerce & Industry and Ministry of External Affairs for ensuring smooth  
implementation of Social Security Agreements (SSAs). 
Efforts are being made for early start of negotiation of Human Resource 
Mobility Partnership with Poland, Czech Republic, Norway, Switzerland, 
Hungary and Sweden. The Human Resource Mobility Partnership  negotiation 
with France is in advance stage of finalization.          
 
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 

30 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
Keeping in view with the recommendations made by the High Level 
Committee on the Indian Diaspora (HLCID) and commitment given at the 
highest level, the Govt. had approved the proposal for establishment of a 
PIO/NRI University for the benefit of children of ov erseas Indians.   At the time 
of examination for Demands for Grants 2010 -2011, the Ministry had stated 
that they had identified four cities where PIO/NRI Universities were to be set 
up.  The advisory board constituted for the purpose had also recommended for  
introduction of a separate PIO University Bill for setting  up such a university.  
However, the Committee are surprised to note  that a decision has now been 
taken that the PIO University would be established by a private organization 
under the Innovat ion Universities Bill reportedly being brought by the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development. The Committee are unable to understand 
reasons for delay and change in decision on such an important commitment 
made at the highest level.  It is also not clear w hether the change in decision 
was also made at the same level or at the level of Ministry.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the position in this regard should be clarified properly 
and MOIA should ensure that the PIO University is established as per the 
commitment made to overseas Indian community.  The Committee may like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard at every stage.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The PIO University is proposed to  be established by the Ministry of 
Human Resources De velopment organization under the Innovation 
Universities Act (once it is approved), where the  support to the said University 
would come in the form of research support  and student scholarships. The 
proposed structure of the „Universities of  Innovation‟ wou ld have the 
advantages of a world-class institution.  
 
As regard the reason for delay in setting up PIO University and change 
in decision in the establishment of the said university by Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (MoHRD) instead of MOIA, after e xaming the 
Innovation Universities Bill of MHRD. It was felt that the Innovation Universities 
Bill will have all features to enable setting up of PIO Universities.  
 
 [File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 

31 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that ever since the Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) 
Scheme has been made operational, a total number of 7,57,740 P IOs h ave 
been registered as OCIs.  The Committee are happy to note that in response 
to the recommendations of the Committee [(3rd report (15th  LS)] the Ministry 
have approached 25 Indian Missions which handle the largest number of 
Persons of Indian Origin s and the overseas Indians with a view to collect a 
more detailed data base about overseas Indians. These missions have been 
asked to start the process of compilation of a database with better survey and 
statistics.  The Committee also find that MOIA inten d to merge OCI cards and 
PIO cards schemes and are presently engaged in consultation with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs since these schemes come under the visa regime of 
India.  In this context, the Committee would like that the issue of merger of two 
schemes needs to be extensively deliberated upon and the viewpoint of the 
Committee may also be taken and considered before taking any final decision 
in the matter.  The Committee  further desire that all steps  should be taken by 
the Ministry/Missions abroad to encourage more and more overseas Indians to 
get these cards issued at the earliest. The Committee also desire that the data 
base about the PIOs and overseas Indians should also be compiled in the 
shortest possible time so that the scheme of issuing OCI c ards may be 
operationalised in a time bound manner and target groups are benefited 
properly.   
Reply of the Government 
 
Now a proposal to merge the PIO Card and OCI Card Scheme has 
been approved by the Cabinet. The salient features of the this merger schem e 
is stated below: 
 The merged Scheme will be called Overseas Indian Card 
Scheme 
  It will enable acquisition of OCI registration by minors, both 
parents of whom are Indian citizens or one parent is an Indian 
citizen 
 It will also grant OCI to the foreign spouse of OCI card holder. 
 To be granted to PIOs up to 4 generation levels, i.e.  PIOs 
whose parents, grand parents or great grand parents had been 
of Indian Origin. 

32 
 
 
The OCI Scheme is published by the Ministry and Indian Mission abroad. 
However the Scheme is  voluntary in nature and as on 23/3/2012 on total 
number of 10,59,203 applicants have been issued OCI cards. 
 
So far a collection of database of Overseas Indian‟s is concerned, the Indian 
Mission/Posts abroad have expressed their inability to collect an au thentic 
information in their respective countries keeping in view the vast magnitude of 
the work individual non availability of a mechanism and in adequate staff at the 
disposal. 
 
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates of the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs for the year 2011 -2012 is Rs. 81 crores out of which Rs. 71.80 
crores hav e been allocated towards Revenue Section and Rs. 9.20 crores 
towards Capital Section.  Similar allocation was made at BE stage during 
2010-2011 which was subsequently reduced to Rs. 73 crores at Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage and the actual expenditure durin g 2010-2011 remained 
at Rs. 72.80 crores.  The Committee also note that as against a demand of 
Rs. 155 crores during 2010-2011 Rs. 81 crores  were allocated by the Finance 
Ministry and similarly against the demand of  Rs. 149.26 crores, the MOIA has 
again been allocated Rs. 81 crores only at BE 2011 -2012 stage. The 
Committee are not convinced with the justification given by the Ministry for 
such trend of allocation stating that at the time of consideration of budget 
grants the Ministry of Finance consider t he expenditure incurred till the end of 
second quarter of the previous year whereas the major expenditure of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is incurred during the 3rd and 4th quarter in 
respect of its schemes such as OCI card, ICWF and holding of PBDs. The 
Committee are of the clear view that the Ministry has utterly failed to justify the 
trend of expenditure being made during each quarter of previous year and 
their projection before Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, therefore, once 
again desire  that the Ministry should make regular, proper and judicious 
reviews and develop an efficient monitoring mechanism so that genuine and 
realistic projections could be placed before the Ministry of Finance at BE and 
RE stage so that all the programmes activi ties are implemented without any 
downward revision ultimately depriving the beneficiaries of the intended 
benefits.  The Committee also desire that  there is a need of rescheduling the 
expenditure in each  quarter of a financial year for better fund alloca tion.  The 
Committee are relieved to note that after concerted efforts of the Ministry the 
Building Plans of Parvasi Bhartiya Kendra have been approved with a revised 
estimates of Rs. 79.19 crores  and the work has also started  in April, 2011.  
The Commit tee now expect that the construction of PBK will be completed 
within the fixed time frame of  24 months.  The Committee also desire that the 
proposed Monitoring Committee to monitor of the progress of the project in 
terms of physical and financial achievem ents should be constituted 
immediately to avoid cost and time over run in executing the project. As 
regards the proposed scheme of setting up of Pravasi Bharatiya Bhawans in 
the States, the Committee desire that it should be further explored sincerely 
with State Governments who have concern for the NRI affairs/emigration.  The 
Committee should be informed from time to time about the progress made in 
this regard.  
 

34 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As desired by the Committee, the Ministry is already taking regular 
reviews of trend of expenditure. Consequently, percentage of expenditure vis -
à-vis the Budget allocation is improving every year.  
 The construction of PBK which commenced from April, 2011 is likely to 
be completed within a period of two years (i.e. by Apr il, 2013). A Committee 
headed by Joint Secretary in MOIA and consisting Director (Fin.), and 
representatives of the NBCC monitors physical and financial achievement of 
the project to avoid cost and time over run. 
 In so far as setting up of Pravasi Bhartiy a Bhawans in the States is 
concerned, the matter will be taken up with to examine the project in terms of 
allocation of land and other logistics. 
 [File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
The Committee are not happy with the efforts made so far by the Ministry for 
acquiring land for construction of PoE Offices for the convenience of 
emigrants.  Over Rs. 1 crores are being paid every year towards rent for these 
premises. When despite best efforts made by PoE at Kerala, Chennai and 
other places no tangible result has come and Government is just paying huge 
rent month after month.  Now the Committee desire that the matter should not 
be left at the lower level and it should be taken up with the concerned Chief 
Minister by the Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs and the Committee may, 
therefore, be posted with the progress in this matter regularly. The Committee 
are not satisfied with an allocation of meager amount of Rs. 20 lacs only under 
this Head for purchase/construction of PoE Offices because it does not show 
the determination of the Ministry in purchasing land for constructing PoE 
Offices.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should make 
sincere efforts in this direction and ensure the augmentation of allocation at 
RE or supplementary Demands for Grants stages for that purpose.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Five POE offices, i.e., Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Trivandrum and 
Cochin are housed in private buildings taken on rent.  The issue of allotment of 
land, or space in Governmen t building s to accommodate these five POE 
offices has been taken up with the State Governments of Maharashtra, 
Chennai, Andhra Pradesh, and Kerala, the states in which the POE offices are 
functioning from private building s.  The status of action taken on t he Standing 
Committee‟s recommendation in each case is as under: -  
 
POE, MUMBAI  
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs on 
30.12.2010 for providing accommodation to house the POE office at Mumbai 
in the newly constructed building f or RPO at Bandra Kurla Complex.  MEA on 
20.01.2011 informed that the completion of the construction of the new 

35 
 
building is likely to take three  more years and that the decision of allotting 
space will be taken after the RPO office is shifted to the newly c onstructed 
building.  Further, the Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has also written to the 
Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, but no response has been 
received so far.  Secretary also took up the matter with Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for providing space for accommodation for 
POE office in Government buildings under the control of  the Estate office at 
Mumbai.  This matter has again been taken up with the Government of 
Maharashtra.  
 
POE, CHENNAI 
 
 It is stated that Secret ary MOIA on 15.04.2011 has written to the Chief 
Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu for allotment of a plot of land identified 
by MOIA in K.K. Nagar, Chennai for constructing its own building.  This was 
followed up by a D.O. letter dated 18.04.2011 from Ho n‟ble  Minister MOIA to 
the Hon‟ble Chief Minister, Government of Tamil Nadu for direction to the 
concerned authorities for allotment of the plot of land.   
 The Revenue Department, Government of Tamil Nadu has forwarded 
the letter dated 15.04.2011 from Se cretary, MOIA to the District Collector, 
Chennai for necessary action.  However, the response from the Government 
of Tamil Nadu is still awaited.  Further, Secretary also took up the matter with 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development Government of India on 12.07.2011 
for providing space for accommodation for POE office in the Government 
building under the control of Estate office at Chennai.  This matter has again 
been taken up with the Government of Tamil Nadu. 
 
POE, TRIVANDRUM  
 
 MOIA has succeded in ge tting office accommodation for POE office at 
Trivandrum from the Government of Kerala.  The Government of Kerala, 
NORKA (B) Department vide their G.O. (Rt.) No.283/2011/NORKA dated 
31.08.2011 has allotted space for re -locating the Office of POE, Trivandrum  in 
their newly constructed building at Thycaud, Trivandrum.  The POE, 
Trivandrum office will start functioning as soon as the wooden fixures and 
partitions etc. are fixed in the new office premises.  
 
POE, COCHIN 
 
 The matter has been taken up at the leve l of Secretary, MOIA with 
Chief Secretary, Government of Kerala for allotting a plot of land measuring 
1000 sq.m. in Cochin to house its POE office.  Further, Secretary also took up 
the matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for  
providing space for accommodation for POE office in the Government 
buildings under the control of Estate office at Cochin.  This matter has again 
been taken up with the Government of Kerala. 
 
 

36 
 
POE, HYDERABAD 
 
 Secretary, MOIA on 29.04.2011 has written to the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh for allotting a piece of land measuring about 
1000 sq.m. at Hyderabad for constructing its own building to accommodate its 
field offices functioning in Hyderabad.  In response the Principal Secretary 
(Revenue), Government of Andhra Pradesh has requested the Collector of 
Hyderabad for examining the proposal.  Further, Secretary also took up the 
matter with Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 12.07.2011 for 
providing space for accommodation for POE off ice in the Government 
buildings under the control of Estate office at Hyderabad.  This matter has 
again been taken up with the Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
 
 (Recommendation No. 4) 
 
   The Committee regret to note that despite their recommendation made 
in Third Report (15 th LS) to expedite filling up the vacant posts in MOIA, the 
position has not improved at all but on the contrary the number of employees 
has further gone down   from 155 to 146.  As per information ma de available 
to the Committee, as against the sanctioned strength of 195, at present only 
146 employees/persons are in position in the Ministry.  The Ministry is  
awaiting the final reply from DOPT in regard to creation of a  separate cadre 
for MOIA and  once the process is complete, the MOIA w ould be in a better 
position to take all the requisite measures to fill up these vacant posts. As 
regard filling up of vacancies in PoE offices, the Committee note that MOIA 
intend to place the matter before the Cabinet after the Ministry of Finance 
clear the proposal.  The Committee feel it needless to say that the shortfall in 
manpower affects the working of the Ministry particularly in the execution of 
various schemes/programmes in hand and, therefore, strongly recommend 
MOIA to earnestly take up the mat ter with DOPT and the Ministry of Finance 
to get an early requisite clearance in the matter relating to MOIA and creation 
of posts in PoE Offices respectively.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the efforts made by the MOIA and the outcome thereof. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is making all possible efforts to fill up the vacant posts. 
Communications have been made at the appropriate levels. In a meeting held 
with at Joint Secretary Level ,  Ministry of Home Affairs has assured to fi ll  up 
most of the vacancies of UDCs/Assistant in a near future. Some of the posts of 
the Assistants have since been filled up. Proposal for opening of three POE 
offices has got approval from Ministry of Finance. The office of the POE Jaipur 
was inaugurated by the HMOIA on 7 th January, 2012. The process for making  
the remaining two POE office at Guwahati and Rai Bareilly functional is under 
process. The Cadre separation issue is also being taken up vigorously with 
DOPT (CS Division). 
 [File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 

37 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that the Government has appointed one Consular 
(Coordinating Officer) each in the Embassy of India, Washington and in the 
Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi on experimental basis.    Considering it as very 
important and essential step, the Committee strongly recommend that more 
such appointments should be considered particularly in the  
Consultates/Missions situated in  Gulf Countries.  The Committee also desire 
that while considering  the appointment of such Co nsular(s)preference should 
be given to the persons capable to communicate in  regional language of the 
majority of immigrants residing in a particular country.  Such consideration 
should also be kept in mind while posting the staff in such Missions/Posts 
abroad with a view to provide better services to emigrants. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is exploring the possibilities of appointing Counsellor, 
Community Affairs in some of the Gulf Countries where the presence of Indian 
overseas workers is considerable. The Ministry has noted the 
recommendation of the Committee and in due compliance, preference will be 
given to the persons capable to communicate in regional language of the 
majority of immigrants residing in a particular country while appointing such 
Counsellor, Community Affairs/staff attached to the Mission for this purpose.  
 
[File No. H-11021/55/2011-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                ANANTH KUMAR, 
03  April, 2012                                                                                   Chairman,  
14 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 

38 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 3rd APRIL, 2012  
   
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room 
G-074, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
Sl.No  Name  
MEMBERS 
(LOK SABHA) 
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj  
16.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
17.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
18.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
27.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
30.  Shri Tarun Vijay  
31. Vacant  

39 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K. D. Muley - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on 
Action Taken by Govt. on the recommendations contained in the 9 th Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) of  the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2011 -12. The Chairman invited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. 
The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
4.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report incorporating the suggestions 
made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

40 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE NINTH REPORT OF THE STAN DING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                      15 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3,6,  8-13 and 15. 
 Total-09 
 
Percentage:  60% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which th e Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Total-01 
 Percentage: 06.67% 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply  of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 5  
Total- 01 
 
 Percentage: 06.67% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,4 and 7 
Total-04 
 
Percentage: 26.66% 
 
 
 