 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2010-2011) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
   [Action  taken  on the  recommendations  contained  in  the  Third  Report  (15th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs] 
 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
S 
 
 
E 
 
 
A 
 
 
L 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 

  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Third 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2010-2011] 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2011 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24th February, 2011 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24th February, 2011 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
S 
 
E 
 
 
A 
 
 
L 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
             NEW DELHI 
 
 DECEMBER 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 

COEA No. 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©  2011 by Lok Sabha Secetariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110005 
  

CONTENTS 
                                                                                                                                    PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2010-2011…………                                (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION   ……………………………………………. ………………        (v)                                                                   
CHAPTER-I 
 
Report ……………………………………………………… 
 
    1 
CHAPTER-II Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted 
by the Government……………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s 
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration……………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of Which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited……………………………………………………….. 
 
 
AP P E N D I C E S 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 21 December, 
2010 
 
 
II. 
Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Third Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2010-2011) 
Shri Ananth Kumar  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S.Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
11. Shri Rajapati Sambasiva Rao 
12. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
14. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
15. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
16. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
17. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
18. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
          *19 vacant 
20.       vacant 
21.       vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
          
22. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23. Shri H.K.Dua 
24. Dr. K.P.Ramalingam  
25. Dr. Bharatkumar B. Raut  
26. Dr. Karan Singh  
27. Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
28. Shri Tarun Vijay  
29. Shri Sreegopal Vyas  
        @ 30.        vacant 
31.       vacant 
SERETARIAT 
 1. Shri U.S.Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.K.Jain   - Director 
 3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri D.K.Arora   - Committee Officer 
 5. Ms. Kiran Bhargava  - Executive Assistant 
 
*  Vice Dr. Manda Jagannath resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 4.10.2010 
@  Shri Aswani Kumar ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent his appointment 
as Minister w.e.f. 19.01.2011 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2010 -
2011) having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this 7 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for 
the year 2010-2011. 
2. The 3 rd Report was presented on 20 April, 2010.  The Action Taken 
Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in 
the Report were received on 26 July, 2010. 
3. The committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 21December, 2010.    
4. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been reproduced at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 3 rd Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (15 th 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       ANANTH KUMAR   
21 December,2010                      Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on External Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
their Third Report on Demands for Grants ( 2010-2011) of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20 April,2010.  
   
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  
These have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Recommendation Nos.1,2,3,5,8,10,11,12,13,15,16,17,18 and 19 
         Total - 14 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government reply. 
 
Recommendation No.9 
        Total - 01 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
Recommendation No. 6 
        Total - 01 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited.  
 Recommendation Nos.4,7 and 14 
         Total - 03 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observation for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government should be furnished within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government, which need reiteration or merit comments.   
  

Recommendation (No. 4) 
 
5. The Committee had observed that the process of emigration 
clearance was currently being done through the eight offices of Protector 
of Emigrants (PoEs). All these offices were fu nctioning from rented 
premises. During 2007 -08, Rs. 27.16 lakhs were spent on rent for PoE 
Offices which went upto 70.61 lakhs in 2008 -09 and during 2009-10, they 
had paid Rs. 1.01 crores as rent for these offices. The Committee had 
expressed their concern  over the approach of the Ministry in the matter. 
They were paying huge amount as rent but the matter relating to 
purchase of land/construction of PoE Offices had been put in abeyance 
because the concerned State Governments were not enthusiastic. More 
surprisingly, during 2009 -10, no initiative was taken in this direction 
showing nil expenditure during the whole financial year. An allocation of a 
meager sum of Rs. 20 lakhs for 2010 -11 for this purpose showed the 
reluctance on the part of the Government. The  Committee, therefore, had 
strongly recommended that the Government should finalize the proposals 
to purchase the lands in consultation with concerned State Governments 
and construction work should start without delay by obtaining more 
allocation under the Capital Outlay at RE stage. The Committee had also 
wanted to express their desire that if the Ministry found it difficult to 
convince the State Governments for allocation of land, then they should 
explore the possibility of acquiring built up properties t o house the PoE 
Offices to avoid huge rental outgo. The Committee had also desired to be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter and response of the Ministry of 
Finance in this regard.  
 
6. The    Ministry of   Overseas Indian Affairs in   their action taken   
reply  (dt. 26 July, 2010) have stated as under: - 
  
“It is brought to the notice of the Hon‟ble Standing Committee that 
the buildings in which five POE offices are presently housed are 
rented. The ministry has made efforts with the State Governmen ts 
to acquire land but the response from the State Governments was 
not very positive.  Therefore, an internal committee under the 
chairmanship of Secretary has been constituted in the Ministry to 
identify the space requirement for the POE offices.  The int ernal 
committee in its first meeting held on 07.04.2010 has taken the 
following decisions: - 
 
(i) Exploring the possibilities of getting the space for POE 
offices in the buildings in which Regional Passport Offices 
are housed. 
 

(ii) Exploring the possibili ties for getting the space for POE 
offices in the buildings relating to other central government 
department offices.  
 
(iii) Pursuing with the home departments of the state 
government for providing the requisite land or the building 
for POE offices. 
 
(iv) The committee agreed on the need of integrating all the field 
activities being performed by the different organizations/ 
offices under the MOIA into one place / building so that all 
the services of the Ministry are available to the emigrants at 
one place.  The requirement of the land or space for POE 
offices have to be worked out keeping this objective in view.  
This matter will also be one of the agenda items of the next 
Consultative meeting with the state governments. 
 
As a follow up to the above decision, the five POE offices which 
are presently housed in private buildings have taken up the matter 
with the Regional Passport Offices and the other Central 
Government departments.” 
 
 
7. While expressing their concern over the huge recurring 
expenditure being incurred towards payment of rented premises 
taken to house the Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should take up the 
issue with the respective State Governments for allotment of 
suitable land to bu ild up those offices and if required try to explore 
the possibility of acquiring built up properties to house PoE offices 
to avoid huge rental outgo.  The Committee observe that the internal 
Committee constituted for this purpose held only one meeting on 
7.4.2010  and as a follow up action on one of the decisions taken by 
the above said committee, the matter is being taken up with the 
Regional Passport Offices and other Central Government 

Departments at some of these places.  The Committee find that even 
after a lapse of more than six months after the meeting of internal 
committee, nothing concrete seems to have come out so far. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs should convincingly take up the issue on the lines  decided 
by the committee constituted by it so that the huge recurring 
expenditure on account of payment of rent could be averted. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the concrete 
action taken by the Ministry in this regard.  

Recommendation (No. 5) 
 
8. The Committee had welcomed the proposal of the Ministry to 
enhance the activities covered by Overseas Workers Resource Centre 
(OWRC), including additional services to be made part of the OWRC 
purview and making the OWRC helpline a State  of Art Resource Centre 
by increasing its scope of work. It was important to note that this 
enhanced scope of work would enable the Centre to facilitate and provide 
support services to workers who intended to go abroad for employment 
by an interactive web -site. The Committee hoped that the Centre shall 
also act as a single window source for registering, responding and 
monitoring complaints, collection and dissemination of information on 
matters relating to emigration, grievance redressal forum and a 
knowledge centre. The Committee had also desired that all the proposed 
activities should be enhanced in a definite timeframe. The Ministry should 
provide all possible assistance to OWRC to enable them to provide all 
necessary support services to workers who inten ded to go abroad for 
employment and try to make the Helpline more efficient and responsive 
by extending services in some more Indian languages including Marathi 
and Gujarati. The Committee had also desired that a time frame should 
be fixed for solving the problems of different nature. 
 
 9. The    Ministry of   Overseas Indian Affairs  in  their action taken 
reply (dt. 26 July, 2010) have stated as under :-   
“A new service provider has been selected for operating the 
OWRC with the expanded set of services. 
 
The recommendation of the Standing committee will be duly 
considered for implementation during the tenure of the new service 
provider.” 
 
10. During examination of Demands for Grants 2009 -10, the 
Committee was informed that the increase in fund allocation for 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) was done to make the 
OWRC a State of the Art Resource Centre and to beef up that as a 
single point window source to take care and redress the grievances 
of the users. The Committee had, however, desired that for making 
the Resource Centre more efficient and responsive, the proposed 
activities should be enhanced in a definite time frame. They had also 

desired that a time -frame should also be fixed for solving the wide -
ranging problems of its users.  But the Committ ee observe that the 
Ministry has only selected the new service provider for operating 
OWRC with the expanded set of services.  They have not disclosed 
anything whether any time -frame has been fixed for implementation 
of new activities by the new service provider.  
 
 The Committee would, therefore, like to know the details   of 
the time -frame drawn by the Ministry/Centre for enhancing the 
activities  of  OWRC  and  also  about  the fixation of time - frame for 
resolving the grievances of varied nature of its users and whether 
the time frame so drawn up is being adhered to. Besides this, the 
Committee would also like to know about the steps being taken by 
the Ministry for extending the helpline services in all the scheduled 
languages. 
  

Recommendation (No. 6) 
 
11. The Committee had noted that the Overseas Citizenship of India 
(OCI) Scheme was made operational in December 2005. The scheme 
envisaged issue of OCI documents consisting of OCI registration 
certificate and universal visa stickers to Persons of Indian O rigin. As an 
estimate there were around 25 million Overseas Indians, out of which 15 
millions were Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs). A registered OCI was 
granted multiple entry, multi -purpose, life long visa for visiting India and 
was exempted from registra tion with Foreigners Regional Registration 
Office for any length of stay in India.  
 
12. The Committee had observed that there were delays in processing 
of OCI applications particularly in the Missions of the countries where 
large number of applications we re received every day. The Ministry had 
no appropriate tools and reliable mechanism for an authentic survey and 
this was why they had not made any assessment of the number of PIOs 
eligible for OCI Cards so far. Moreover, no separate staff had been 
provided to Missions exclusively to handle OCI work. The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that MOIA should take up the matter with 
MEA to post exclusive and dedicated staff to handle the OCI work 
particularly in the Missions where more OCI applications were r eceived 
on daily basis. The Committee, expected that the Ministry would evolve a 
suitable mechanism by engaging appropriate agency to assess the 
number of PIOs eligible for OCI cards for flawless issuance of OCI Cards 
to them in a planned and time bound manner. 
  
13. The    Ministry of   Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken 
reply (dt. 26 July, 2010) have stated as under: - 
  
“In order to process OCI applications in a time bound manner there 
is a need to provide regular staff in the Missions and Pos ts abroad 
especially where a large number of OCI applications are received 
every day. In this regard Missions/Posts, where a large number of 
OCI applications are received every day and the need has been 
felt to augment the staff strength, have been asked t o undertake 
the work study for the consular work and provide the number of 
OCI/PIO cards issued during the last five years. On receipt of the 
work study reports from such Missions/Posts, MEA will be 
requested to provide regular staff to look after the work  of OCI/PIO 
cards. 
 
PIOs being essentially foreign nationals and in the absence of 
appropriate information and a reliable mechanism for an authentic 
survey, the Ministry has not made any assessment of the number 
of Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) eligible for OCI Cards.” 
 

14.  It is matter of serious concern for the Committee to 
note a casual approach of the Ministry in taking up the work 
relating to issue of OCI/PIO cards to eligible applicants under the 
Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) Scheme, which was 
operationalised way back in December 2005. The reply of the 
Ministry gives an impression that the Ministry have failed to take 
requisite initiatives to evolve a suitable mechanism to assess the 
number of PIOs eligible for OCI cards and regularize the proces s 
of issuance of OCI cards in a planned and time -bound manner.   
The Committee also find that the Missions where a large number 
of OCI applications are reportedly received every   day have been 
asked to undertake the work -study to enable MOIA to request 
MEA to provide regular staff to deal with the work of issue of 
OCI/PIO cards.  
The Committee, therefore, would once again desire that 
MOIA should make all possible efforts to evolve a reliable 
mechanism for an authentic survey of PIOs eligible for OCI cards.  
On the basis of outcome of work-study done by the Missions and 
with a authentic assessment of number of PIOs in each country, 
they should depute the desired number of persons in the 
Missions so that OCI cards are issued to all of them in a planned 
and time-bound manner.  
 
 
  

Recommendation  (No. 7) 
 
15. The Committee had noted that several benefits notified in January, 
2009 regarding OCI card holders practising their professions in India were 
not implemented so far. Ministry of Culture had not issued executive 
instructions regarding parity with NRIs in entry fees for visiting the 
national monuments, historical sites and museums in India, Ministry of 
Health and F amily Welfare had not taken any decision regarding OCI 
card holders to practice in India as dentists, nurses and pharmacists and 
permitting them to appear for All India Pre -medical Test or such other 
tests. Similarly, Ministry of Law had to grant permissio n to advocates to 
practice in India. Permission to architects and Chartered Accountants to 
practice in India was pending with the Ministry of HRD and Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs respectively. The Committee had, therefore, desired 
that the Ministry of Ove rseas Indian Affairs should pursue vigorously with 
the Ministries/Departments which were concerned administratively for an 
early implementation of all the notified benefits.  
 
16. The    Ministry of   Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken 
reply (dt.  26 July, 2010) have stated as under: - 
  
“After the benefits have been notified for OCI card holders in 
January 2009 MOIA has been pursuing with the concerned 
Ministries to amend their regulations/ issue necessary instructions 
to implement these benefits.  
 
Medical Council of India has amended its Screening Test Regulations 
allowing the Overseas Citizens to appear in the screening test for the 
purpose of registration in the Council. Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare has also set in motion the process o f amendment to the Indian 
Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 inter -alia permitting OCIs to 
appear in admission tests for admission to MBBS course in India.  
 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Higher 
Education has included profession  of Architecture in the proposed 
Architects (Amendment) Act, 1972 to grant parity to Persons of 
Indian origin holding OCI cards with NRIs to practice their 
profession in India. 
Regarding permission to PIO Advocates holding OCI cards to 
practice in India, the subject matter is the concern of Bar Council of 
India as it enrolls a person as an advocate on its roll under the 
Advocates Act 1961. A litigation in this regard is pending before 
the Hon‟ble High Court of Bombay on the issue of entry of foreign 
law fir ms. Any decision on allowing OCIs to practice in India will 
depend on the outcome of the litigation.  

  
Regarding issues about parity of OCIs with NRIs in the matter of 
entry fees for visiting the national monuments, historical sites and 
museums in India, the matter has been taken up with the Ministry 
of Culture. The matter regarding allowing OCIs to  practice in India 
as dentists, nurses and pharmacists is being pursued with Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare. Similarly issue of OCI chartered 
accountants to be allowed to practice in India have been taken up 
with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs by MOIA for early 
implementation.”     
 
17. The Committee observe that after the notification of benefits 
for OCI card holders in January, 2009 and with the effo rts of MOIA, 
some Ministries namely Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry 
of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education), 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Law 
have taken some initiatives to amend th eir regulations/issue 
necessary instructions to implement those benefits but in some very 
important issues final configuration has yet to come from the 
Ministries like Culture, Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs.   The Committee fe el that until the relevant 
amendments are made, the PIOs holding OCI cards may not be able 
to avail of the opportunities to practice their professions in India, 
extended to them under the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should continue 
impressing upon all the Ministries/Departments concerned to do the 
needful expeditiously in order to implement all the benefits notified 
in the Scheme.  The Committee would also like to be informed of the 
progress made in this regard from time to time.   

Recommendation  (No. 14) 
 
18. The Committee had been repeatedly recommending in their earlier 
Reports to convert the Emigration Act, 1983 into an effective instrument 
for prevention of irregular migration and urging the Government to 
introduce the Amendment Bill in Parliament on priori ty basis. During the 
examination of Demands for Grants 2009 -10, the Committee were given 
to understand that instead of amending the Emigration Act, 1983, a new 
comprehensive Bill namely Emigration Management Bill, 2009 was under 
finalization. Now, the Mini stry  informed that the said Bill after the vetting 
and concurrence of the Ministry of Law had been submitted to the 
Cabinet for consideration and approval. The Committee were not satisfied 
with the pace of progress in introducing the Bill and recommended that all 
efforts should be made to finalize and introduce the proposed Emigration 
Management Bill.  
 
19. The    Ministry of   Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken 
reply (dt. 26.07.2010) have stated as under :- 
  
“The proposal to introduce the new Emigration Management Bill, 
2010, in the Parliament was submitted for consideration and 
approval of the Cabinet.  Subsequently, as directed by the Cabinet 
Secretariat, the proposal has been referred for consideration and 
recommendations of the Committee of  Secretaries, before further 
submitting the proposal to the Cabinet for approval for introduction 
of the Emigration Management Bill, 2010, in the Parliament.” 
 
20. The Committee are not happy with the tardy pace adopted by 
the Government in respect of intr oduction of the Emigration 
Management Bill, 2010 in order to act inter alia as an effective tool  
to check and   prevent  irregular migrations.  The said Bill has now 
reportedly been referred for consideration and recommendations of 
the Committee of Secret aries before it is placed before the Cabinet 
for approval. The Committee emphasize the need to get an early 
requisite clearance of the Bill from the Committee of Secretaries and 
thereafter approval from the Cabinet so that the Bill could be 
introduced in P arliament without any further delay. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the status of finalization of the Bill and 
its introduction in Parliament.  
 

Recommendation (No. 15) 
 
 21. The Committee were  concerned to note that Overseas Indian 
workers were facing numerous problems regarding non -payment/delayed 
payment of wages, unilateral changes in the contract of workers, 
changing the job arbitrarily etc. In certain cases, the workers were not 
given any employment and were left in the lurch in the foreign country. 
The Committee also observed that disposal of such cases took very long 
time. During the last two years and upto February 2010 only in 6 cases 
the bank guarantees submitted by Recruiting Agents ( RAs) had been 
forfeited and in 71 cases Registration Certificates had been suspended or 
cancelled. As informed by the Ministry 114 cases were still pending since 
2009 for completion of procedural formalities including response from the 
complainants on the replies of RAs. The Committee had, therefore, 
desired that there should be a time -frame for disposal of such cases and 
Indian Missions should be asked to provide all possible assistance to the 
complainants to understand and respond to the replies of the re cruiting 
agents because most of them were poor and not well educated. The 
Ministry should also ensure that if there were more than one complaint 
against any particular RA, his/her Registration should be suspended 
immediately so that other persons might not  be duped by them during the 
pendency of such complaints.  
 
22. The Committee had also noted that there was a need to curb the 
incidents of integral emigration, large scale exploitation and harassment 
of prospective emigrants for which spurious RAs were re sponsible. The 
Committee had recommended that the respective PoE Offices should 
hold regular meetings with the concerned states to follow up the 
registered cases and to chalk out ways and means for dealing with such 
spurious RAs. The Committee had also lik ed that the information about 
black-listed agents (both foreign and Indian) and black -listed foreign 
employers should be widely circulated to preclude duping of workers 
seeking emigration.  
 
23. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(dt. 28 July, 2010 ) have stated as under :- 
  
“Whenever Indian emigrants face any problem from their foreign 
employer, the emigrants contact the Indian Mission or write to the 
Ministry and request for redressal of their grievances. 
 
Immediately on  receipt of complaint, the Mission takes up the 
matter with the foreign employer, the concerned Indian emigrants 
as well as local authorities to settle the matter amicably.  And in 
deserving situations they try to get the workers repatriated by 
coordinating with the concerned Recruiting Agents and the 

Protector General of Emigrants. Indian Missions and posts abroad 
have standing instructions to immediately take up such cases with 
the relevant local authorities / foreign sponsors with a view to 
expediting th e process of law and obtain due justice for the 
emigrants.  Indian Missions also recommend inclusion of such 
foreign employer in the Prior Approval Category list based on the 
seriousness of the case. On the basis of such recommendation 
this Ministry places  the concerned foreign employer in the Prior 
Approval Category.  A foreign employer, when included in the Prior 
Approval Category list, is no longer allowed to recruit workers from 
India.  Presently, 389 foreign employers are in the Prior Approval 
Category list which is displayed on the Ministry‟s website.   Action 
is taken against the recruiting agent who deployed the aggrieved 
worker(s) under the provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983 with the 
direction to have the worker(s) repatriated and resolve their 
grievances.   
 
As and when any complaint is received Show -Cause Notice is 
issued to the registered Recruiting Agents against whom the 
complaint is made and the Recruiting Agent is directed to forthwith 
settle/resolve the complaint. If the Recruiting Agent fails to respond 
to the Show -Cause Notice or his reply is not satisfactory his 
Registration Certificate is suspended for 30 days.  If the complaint 
still remains unresolved, the suspension of the Registration 
Certificate is extended till such time that the  matter is resolved.  
Bank Guarantee is ordered for forfeiture when the registering 
authority/Protector General of Emigrants decides that it is justified 
to do so taking into consideration the nature of complaints.  
 
The complainants, the recruiting agents and the Missions are given 
a time frame within which to respond.  Even after 2 -3 reminders 
when no reply is received from the concerned, a decision is taken 
at the level of the registering authority/Protector General  of 
Emigrants.   The Missions have been responding as fast as they 
can but in cases involving the foreign labour courts where cases 
are filed by the workers, it takes some time for the Missions to 
convey the judgment.  If any worker deployed by the RA is 
stranded, the RA is directed to settle the grievances of the worker 
or get him repatriated on the RA‟s cost.  
 
In the case of complaints against spurious RAs (unauthorized 
agents), the complaints are forwarded to the concerned Protector 
of Emigrants for tak ing up the matter with the respective State 
police authorities towards filing FIR against the accused.  
 

With regard to holding meetings with the police department, 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  All Protectors 
of Emigrants are being instructed in the matter for compliance. 
 
The Registration Certificates of the Indian registered recruiting 
agents are suspended or cancelled on the merit of the 
complaint(s).  Details of RAs whose Registration Certificates are 
suspended/cancelled are removed from the list of active RAs on 
Ministry‟s website. However, in the case of foreign employers, on 
the recommendation of the Indian Mission abroad, the erring 
foreign employer is placed in the Prior Approval Category (PAC) 
List. List of foreign employers in PAC list has been placed on 
Ministry‟s website.  Presently, 389 foreign employers are in the 
PAC List. “ 
 
24.  The Committee had observed that 83 cases of the year  2009 
and 31 cases of 2010 (upto 28.02.2010) relating to complaints of 
emigrant workers were pending against the Recruiting Agents (RAs) 
for completion of procedural formalities. They had desired that such 
cases should be disposed of within a time frame and MOIA was 
supposed to provide every possible assistance through missions in 
that regard. Th e Ministry had also inter alia  promised that those 
pending cases would be disposed of as quickly as possible. But the 
Committee are surprised to note that   in their action taken reply  no 
specific information has been supplied by the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs about the status of those pending cases and the time -
frame fixed for disposal of such cases.  The Committee would, 
therefore, like to know the status of all the pending cases and the 
time frame, if any, drawn by them for their quick resoluti on.  The 
Committee would also like to know from MOIA as to how do they 
want to make the proposed Emigration Management Bill 2010, to be 
an effective tool to deal with such erring RAs stringently?    

Recommendation  (No. 18) 
 
 25. The Committee had noted t hat Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(ICWF) had been established in 18 important destination countries. The 
fund enabled the Indian Missions to provide welfare services including 
food, shelter, air passage, legal assistance and counseling etc. to the 
distressed or stranded emigrants and it had been placed at the disposal 
of the Indian Missions in all the Emigration Check Required countries. As 
per the Ministry‟s own admission, there was no corpus amount of the 
welfare fund. The scheme was funded by service cha rges collected by 
Indian Missions for consular services and attestation of documents. The 
Indian Community could also contribute to the fund. It was also not very 
clear to the Committee as to how they would obtain the contribution of the 
Indian Community f or this purpose. It was strange that all the 
responsibilities relating the fund were with the Indian Missions abroad. 
Even, the Ministry had no information about the receipt/expenditure made 
through this fund or of its audit etc. The Committee had, therefo re, 
desired that the role of MOIA might be defined in the management, 
control and monitoring of this fund. The Committee had also desired that 
a corpus amount should also be provided for support of this scheme so 
that the scheme might not face paucity of funds at any point of time.  
 
26. The    Ministry of   Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken 
reply (dt. 26 July,2010) have stated as under :- 
  
The contribution from the community as envisaged under the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is volunt ary which the 
members of the Indian Community might make for the community 
welfare. Any receipt of this nature will be credited in the Fund.  
However, no mandatory contribution from the community is 
envisaged. 
 
Although the fund is placed at the disposal of the Missions they will 
have to maintain the accounts of its operations, which are subject 
to the audit.  Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs will monitor the 
performance of the ICWF from time to time and will provide 
budgetary support to it as per the sa nctioned scale (Rs. 5 lakh and 
Rs. 15 lakh). 
 
There is no need to have a corpus fund as there will be a regular 
inflow of funds into ICWF on account of the levy of surcharge on 
the consular services, which will be credited into the ICWF.” 
 
  
 
 
 

 
27. The Committee had raised their concern over the functioning 
of the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) reportedly extended 
in 18 important destination countries aimed at ensuring better 
protection and welfare of Indian workers in distress in those 
countries. The Committee had also suggested to make provision of 
corpus fund in that scheme so that the welfare of workers in 
distress might not suffer due to paucity of fund at any stage/point of 
time.   
From the reply furnished by the Ministry it is not clear whether 
the Missions/ abroad where the scheme has been made operational 
would be in a position to directly disburse the aid to the workers 
under distress out of funds collected by them through levying a 
surcharge on account of consular services or the aid w ould be 
granted from the budgetary support disbursed to the Missions/posts 
by the Ministry. The Committee would like to have an elaborate and 
unambiguous procedural details about collection and disbursement 
of the funds under the said scheme. At the same t ime, the 
Committee lay emphasis that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
should keep a close watch on the functioning of the scheme and 
oversee that overall transparency is maintained by the 
Missions/Posts abroad in collection and disbursement of the f und 
and also ensure that the scheme is run strictly on the basis of the 
merit of the cases as well as in accordance with the provisions 

underlined in the scheme. The Committee would also like to know 
about the total fund collected in each mission/post thro ugh 
contribution and the aid received through budgetary support as well 
as the number of workers benefited and the expenditure made so far 
under this Scheme at each destination.  The Committee also feel 
that due publicity of the scheme should be made among  the Indian 
workers where the said scheme has been set forth.   
     
  

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that the Budget allocation of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2010 -11 is Rs. 81 crores comprising 
Revenue section as Rs. 71.80 crores and Rs. 9.20 crores as Capital Section. The 
Budget Estimates for the year 2009 -10 stood at Rs. 80 crores which was reduced 
to Rs. 60 crores at Revised Estimates (RE) stage and upto January 2010 the 
actual expenditure of the Ministry was Rs. 27.75 crores only. The remaining 
amount of Rs. 32.25 crores was to be spent in the last two months of the financial 
year. The Committee are constrained to observe that MOIA has not shown any 
improvement in the trend of under -utilization of funds since 2006 -07. The 
Committee do not hesitate in observing that the Ministry, which was created in 
the year 2004 with certain very important objectives cannot achieve its goal with 
such trend of expenditure of the allocated Budget. Perhaps due to unrealistic 
projections and poor utilization of funds in the past years, the Ministry could not 
get the approval of t heir proposed requirement of Rs. 155 crores and they have 
got only Rs. 81 crores with an advice to seek additional allocation during 
supplementary estimates. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry have 
not been able to make realistic projections o f their budgetary requirements since 
its inception and they have not been able to spend even the heavily Revised 
Estimates. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry must 
review the schemes/programmes,  planning/monitoring system to make the  
projections more realistic and ensure proper and judicious utilization of funds 
within the allocation.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The reduction of Budget allocation from Rs.155 crores to Rs.81 crores is 
mainly due to pending approval of the Committee on Non -Plan Expenditure 
(CNE) for the proposed Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK). The utilization of funds 
on various schemes by the Ministry for 2008-09 and 2009-10 is given below: 
 
Year          Allocation on Schemes  Utilization       %  Utilization 
 
2008-09  27.22 crores  26.54 crores   97.50 
 
2009-10  37.70 crores  34.55  crores             91.64 
 
 It may kindly be seen from the above th at the utilization on account of 
various schemes being implemented by the Ministry is over 90%. However, 
Ministry will review the schemes from time -to-time for optimum utilization of 
available resources. 

Recommendation  (No. 2) 
 
 The Committee observe that during 2009-10, the major non-utilization of 
Budget allocation was of Rs. 21 crores under the Capital Head of account due to 
delays in approval to the Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK). The Committee are not 
satisfied with the efforts made by MOIA for startin g the project relating to 
construction of PBK. Though, the Ministry has furnished a programme/schedule 
for starting construction on the project but the Committee are of the opinion that 
unless concrete efforts are made in this direction, the schedule will remain on 
paper. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should now take up 
the matter relating to approvals from the concerned agencies at the highest level 
so that the project may see the light of the day as per schedule fixed by the 
Ministry i.e. by 31.7.2012. The Committee want to be informed of the progress 
made in this regard at regular intervals.  
 
Reply  of the Government 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.   
  
As regards the approval of the Project, the Com mittee on Non -Plan 
Expenditure (CNE),  had  recommended  the proposal at an estimated cost of 
Rs.107.22 crore, inter -alia, subject to review of the cost estimation given by the 
NBCC to ensure that the same are reasonable. The CNE laid such condition on 
the basis a note given by the CPWD which pointed out that the cost estimates of 
the PBK are very high and need to be reviewed.  Subsequently, as advised by 
DoE, MoIA in consultation with the NBCC, had provided detailed 
justification/clarifications  to the CPWD  on the cost estimates.  The CPWD, 
however, did agree to the justification and sent their observations on various 
items of expenditure. Necessary clarifications/justification on each observation 
were sent to the CPWD. The CPWD, however, did not agree to th e justification 
and re-iterated their earlier stand that the cost of construction estimated by the 
NBCC was much more than the cost of construction of various projects being 
constructed by CPWD. 
 
To sort out the issues, Addl. Secretary & FA, MEA took a meeting on 
14th May, 2010 with the representations of CPWD and NBCC. Based on the 
discussion, NBCC has analyzed the CPWD‟s objections and re -examined the 
estimates and made available to the CPWD.  The NBCC are already in constant 
touch/personal discussion with officers of the  CPWD to arrive at an realistic cost 
estimates. It is expected that the matter will be resolved soon and the approval of 
the competent authority will be obtained accordingly. 
 
           So far as the approval of the building plans/dra wings are concerned, the 
NDMC, after vetting the drawings, had forwarded to the Delhi Fire Service 
(DFS) and  Delhi Urban Arts Commission (DUAC). The drawings are required 
to be cleared first by DFS and thereafter, by the DUAC. DFS had made 
observations thrice.  The observations made by DFS have since been complied 

with and conveyed by NDMC. To expedite NOC from DFS‟s side, a 
communications detailing the urgency of the case has been addressed to the 
Director, DFS.  
  
 Concerted efforts are already being made to get the approvals of the 
authorities concerned so as to start the construction of PBK. 
 
Recommendation (No. 3) 
 
The Committee express their concern over the huge number of vacant 
posts in the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in each grade for th e last several 
years. The Ministry has shown a saving of Rs. 1 crore due to large number of 
vacancies in PoE Offices. At present, as against the sanctioned strength of 195 
persons, the Ministry is having only 155 persons. In the absence of adequate 
manpower, the Ministry will not be able to handle the ambitious projects in an 
effective manner. The Committee regret to observe that even after 6 years of its 
creation, the Ministry still does not have any cadre staff of its own and for the 
lower level staff it has to depend on the Ministry of External Affairs and 
theMinistry of Home Affairs. These Ministries are also facing shortage of staff. 
Therefore, it does not seem possible for them to provide more staff to MOIA. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Mi nistry should make all possible 
efforts including creation of a separate cadre for the Ministry to ensure that 
vacancies are filled up at the earliest. Simultaneously, they may do contractual 
employment on short term basis so that the work relating to exec ution of various 
schemes/projects undertaken by them does not suffer more.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry has again taken up the matter of having a separate 
independent cadre of its own with the Department of Personnel & Training.   All 
the posts which are lying unfilled for want of regular staff have been filled up by 
deployment of outsourced/contractual staff. 
 
          
 
 
  

 
Recommendation (No. 5) 
 
The Committee welcome  the proposal of the Ministry to enhance the 
activities covered by Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC), including 
additional services to be made part of the OWRC purview and making the 
OWRC helpline a State of Art Resource Centre by increasing its scop e of work. 
It is important to note that this enhanced scope of work will enable the Centre to 
facilitate and provide support services to workers who intend to go abroad for 
employment by an interactive web -site. The Committee hope that the Centre 
shall als o act as a single window source for registering, responding and 
monitoring complaints, collection and dissemination of information on matters 
relating to emigration, grievance redressal forum and a knowledge centre. The 
Committee also desire that all the p roposed activities should be enhanced in a 
definite timeframe. The Ministry should provide all possible assistance to OWRC 
to enable them to provide all necessary support services to workers who intend to 
go abroad for employment and try to make the Helpli ne more efficient and 
responsive by extending services in some more Indian languages including 
Marathi and Gujarati. The Committee also desire that a time frame should be 
fixed for solving the problems of different nature. 
 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
A new service provider has been selected for operating the OWRC with 
the expanded set of services. 
 
The recommendation of the Standing committee will be duly considered 
for implementation during the tenure of the new service provider. 
 
          

Recommendation (No. 8) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry is organizing Know India 
Programme (KIP) with the aim of creating awareness about the phenomenal 
transformation taking place in India and the country‟s progress from just a 
destination for culture, heritage an d art to an emerging powerhouse in the global 
economic system. These programmes are conducted in partnership with one or 
two State Governments. Under this programme, participants are taken to various 
places to make them aware about the cultural diversity of India. Visit to historical 
monuments, famous religious and tourist attractions are included in their itinerary 
besides organizing cultural programme for them and lectures on Indian culture, 
Yoga, Heritage and tradition. They are also taken to villages to  participate in 
their cultural activities and learn about our rich cultural heritage and are also 
exposed to our village panchayat system. The Committee are of the view that 
these programmes should be more village and craft oriented because India is 
rooted in its villages and hope that more avenues will be added in this 
programme such as folklores, craftsmanship and social systems and many more. 
The Committee also hope that with an all India concept of the programme, the 
participants will also be able to le arn positiveness of Indian culture, heritage and 
tradition and prove themselves as brand ambassadors of India‟s soft power. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should facilitate the participants to 
pursue their interest with the support of the I ndian Government, if they show 
interest in a particular field. Apart from this the participant should also be taken 
to world class prime academic and technical institutions/organizations situated 
within the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The  content of the KIP Programme broadly includes the following: 
 
(a)  Presentations on the country, the constitution, political process etc. 
(b)  Interaction with faculty and students at a prestigious 
      University/College/Institute. 
(c)  Presentation on the industrial development and visit to some 
      Industries 
(d)  Visit to a village to better understand the typical village life 
(e)  Exposure to Indian media and Film Industry. 
(f)  Interaction with NGOs and organizations dealing with women affairs. 
(g)  Visit to places of historical importance/Monuments. 
(h)  Taking part in Cultural programmes 
(i)  Exposure to yoga 
(j)  Call on high dignitaries, which may include President of India, Chief 
Election Commissioner of India, Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India, and Ministers in -charge of Overseas Indian Affairs, Youth Affairs 
and Sports. 
 

KIP Programme is organized in partnership with States of India. The 
latest 14 th KIP Programme was organized in partnership with Maharashtra and 
Haryana. During this Programme i n Maharashtra participants visited a village 
namely Narayangaon near Pune to experience the village way of life. The group 
visited Elephanta Caves, Gateway of India, IIT Bombay, Mumbai Film City, 
Raigad Fort, Warna Campus Sugar Factory, Milk Processing Fac tory, Panchayat 
and Mahabaleshwar. As regards partner state Haryana, participants visited 
Kurukshetra University, Pinjore Garden, National Dairy Research Institute, 
Karnal, Panipat Refinery. During this visit they also visited important places in 
Delhi lik e Raj Ghat, India Gate, Lotus Temple. Qutub Minar, Supreme Court, 
Aurbindo Ashram, Amity Business School Manesar, Gurgaon and also 
proceeded to Agra to see Tajmahal and  Fatehpur Sikri. The recommendation of 
the Committee with reference to more village and  craft oriented nature of KIP 
Programme with focus on folklores, craftsmanship and social systems have been 
noted for inclusion in future KIP Programme. 
 
 
 
  
 

Recommendation  (No. 10) 
 
 The Committee welcome the establishment of Overseas Indians 
Facilitation Centre (OIFC) in Gurgaon as a not for profit trust in partnership with 
CII to serve as a „one stop shop‟ for all investment and business related services 
for potential Overseas Indian  Investors. The Ministry has accepted that NRIs 
have shown a lot of interest in investment related issues during road shows and 
PBD meetings but the Ministry is not sure whether these interests are converted 
into investment or not. Moreover, the Committee regret to observe that neither 
OIFC have any mechanism to monitor investments made by the Overseas Indians 
nor it has been devised by the Ministry so far. The Committee are of the view 
that a mechanism must be in place to monitor investment made by the Ove rseas 
Indians. The Committee desire that the compendium on policies, incentives and 
investment opportunities for Overseas Indians and the Handbook for Overseas 
Indians providing information on investment opportunities should be brought out 
and made availab le to all State Governments. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should develop and come up with new schemes/initiatives to attract 
investment in India by Overseas Indians. The Committee further desire that the 
Ministry should identify the regions an d chalk out schedules well in advance to 
organize investor meets every year across the globe. The Ministry should also 
publicise these programmes amongst target groups for a better success rate.   
The Committee has also noted that today India has the highe st remittance 
anywhere in the world. But most of the remittance is basically going towards 
consumption expenditure. The Committee appreciate that the OIFC functions as 
a clearing house for all investment related information and the same is done by 
processing information in consultation with the knowledge partners appointed by 
it. Realising the potential and capacities of Overseas Indians to invest in India, 
the Committee feel that Overseas Indians are presently investing in India only in 
a lower proportion of their resources. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry must commission a study to find ways in which Indians can make 
greater contribution through investments in India. This study should also analyse 
the investment pattern of the Oversea s Indians in India so that investment 
promotion policies can also be fine-tuned. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has published „Investment Tool -Kit for Global Indians‟ 
during the PBD 2010. The Tool -Kit is also available online on OIFC website at 
www.oifc.in. The Tool-Kit has been shared with many state Governments. It will 
be sent to all states again. 
 
 The Ministry has already sent a proposal to Ministry of Finance for 
floating of NRI – Infrastructure Bonds for Overseas Indians. 
 
 As recommended by the Committee, Ministry will commission a study to 
final ways in which Overseas Indians can make contributions through 
investments in India and investment pattern of Overseas Indians in India. 
 

Recommendation  (No. 11) 
 
  The Committee note that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is 
considering to raise over $ 5 billion from global Indians and FIIs for an 
Infrastructure Fund. The main objectives of launching India Infrastructure Bonds 
(IIB) are attractive and convinci ng. As informed by the Ministry, the funds 
would be raised for financing the crucial infrastructure projects, the cost of funds 
would be low as compared to other instruments and the funds would be readily 
available for core sector projects. It is proposed that India Infrastructure Bonds 
would be issued as quasi sovereign bonds and guaranteed by the Government of 
India. The Committee desire that the Ministry should be very careful with regard 
to whole host of issues. Prior to launch, it should be discussed with Reserve Bank 
of India, State Bank of India and Ministry of Finance and then the nature, 
duration and rate of interest which is very important should be defined very 
clearly. The Committee also feel that India is a very attractive destination for 
investment due to highest interest rates prevailing in the country. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that pros and cons of this infrastructure bond should be 
examined very carefully and cautiously before its issuance.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry is consulting all the stake holders in the proposed NRI – 
India Infrastructure Bond. All the issues related to proposed Bonds will be 
discussed and finalized before launch. 
 
           
 
 
 

Recommendation  (No. 12) 
 
  The Committee note that two Overseas Indian Centres (OIC) are working 
at Indian Embassy, Abu Dhabi and at Indian Embassy, Washington. At present, 
these Centres are providing services to the workers such as attestation of work 
permits, implementing the general policies of the Mini stry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs pertaining to Community Welfare, coordination with the local authorities 
regarding welfare of the workers, interacting with the Indian Community 
organizations etc. The Committee also note that an OIC at Kualalampur has been 
approved by the Government but the same has not started functioning so far. The 
Ministry has informed that these OICs have started functioning recently and 
based on the experience of these offices, creation of such offices in other 
countries would be considered by the Ministry. The Committee consider this as a 
very important step in the right direction to help the Overseas Indians by way of 
providing guidance and counseling to them. The Committee desire that the 
Centres should be adequately managed by perso ns who are experts in the field of 
economics, investments and law. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should make appropriate efforts to start OIC at Kualalumpur at the earliest. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should also consider se tting up of 
more OICs at the much required destinations.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs has posted a Director level officer at the 
Embassy of India in Kuala Lumpur who is looking after all the work 
relating to Indian Community .  As such, the Overseas Indian Centre at 
Kuala Lumpur has started functioning, though the officer has been posted 
by the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
At present, the Ministry is considering a proposal for setting up an 
Overseas Indian Centre in United K ingdom in consultation with Ministry of 
External Affairs and Ministry of Finance. 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation (No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that Indian Council of Overseas 
Employment (ICOE) has become fully operational from the first  year of its 
existence i.e. 2009-10. The Ministry has furnished various reasons for increase in 
BE 2010-11 to Rs. 4 crores over RE 2009 -10 of Rs. 3 crores. Some of which are 
like Scheme for Research Internship, operationalisation of the MOU signed 
between ICOE and European University Institute, as well as between ICOE and 
Hellenic Migration Policy Institute, activities under the India -EU Scientific 
Working Group (SWG) on Mobility Partnership, study by International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) on Labour  Mobility Partnership Agreement 
(LMPA) in the European countries, operationalisation of Returned and 
Resettlement Fund (R&RF) etc. The Committee note that the study conducted by 
the ICOE on impact assessment of recession on Indian migrants in GCC  
 countries and Malaysia and to alleviate the distress of Overseas migrant workers 
returning to India on account of pre -mature termination of their employment are 
very encouraging. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry/ICOE should 
concentrate on making ef forts to fulfill the objective of positioning India as 
supplier of skilled and trained manpower as assigned to ICOE. The Committee 
desire that no impediment like paucity of fund etc. should be allowed to occur 
and the Ministry should be more vigilant over the activities and requirements of 
the Council. The Committee recommend that the budgetary allocation of the 
Council should be substantially augmented, keeping in view the expanding 
activities and new schemes/study which are likely to be undertaken by the ICOE 
during the year 2010 -11 and the enhanced amount should be utilized to support 
much larger activities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICOE is making efforts to fulfill the objective of positioning India as 
supplier of skilled and trained manpower. Ministry  of Overseas Indian Affairs is 
ensuring that no impediment like paucity of fund etc should be allowed to happen 
in order to ensure smooth functioning of ICOE. Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs has noted the recommendation of the Standing Committee to aug ment 
substantially the budgetary allocation of the council keeping in view the 
expanding activities and new schemes/study likely to be undertaken by ICOE 
during the year 2010 -2011 subject to budgetary allocation by Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
          
 

Recommendation (No. 15) 
 
  The Committee are concerned to note that Overseas Indian workers are 
facing numerous problems regarding non -payment/delayed payment of wages, 
unilateral changes in the contract of workers, changing the job arbitrarily etc. In 
certain cases, the workers are not given any employment and are left in the lurch 
in the foreign country. The Committee also observe that disposal of such cases 
take very long time. During the last two years and upto February 2010 only in 6 
cases the bank guarantees  submitted by Recruiting Agents (RAs) have been 
forfeited and in 71 cases Registration Certificates have been suspended or 
cancelled. As informed by the Ministry 114 cases are still pending since 2009 for 
completion of procedural formalities including resp onse from the complainants 
on the replies of RAs. The Committee, therefore, desire that there should be a 
time-frame for disposal of such cases and Indian Missions should be asked to 
provide all possible assistance to the complainants to understand and res pond to 
the replies of the recruiting agents because most of them are poor and not well 
educated. The Ministry should also ensure that if there are more than one 
complaint against any particular RA, his/her Registration should be suspended 
immediately so t hat other persons may not be duped by them during the 
pendency of such complaints.  
 
The Committee also note that there is a need to curb the incidents of 
integral emigration, large scale exploitation and harassment of prospective 
emigrants for which spuri ous RAs are responsible. The Committee recommend 
that the respective PoE Offices should hold regular meetings with the concerned 
states to follow up the registered cases and to chalk out ways and means for 
dealing with such spurious RAs. The Committee woul d also like that the 
information about black -listed agents (both foreign and Indian) and black -listed 
foreign employers should be widely circulated to preclude duping of workers 
seeking emigration.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Whenever Indian emigrants face  any problem from their foreign 
employer, the emigrants contact the Indian Mission or write to the Ministry and 
request for redressal of their grievances. 
 
Immediately on receipt of complaint, the Mission takes up the matter with 
the foreign employer, the concerned Indian emigrants as well as local authorities 
to settle the matter amicably.  And in deserving situations they try to get the 
workers repatriated by coordinating with the concerned Recruiting Agents and 
the Protector General of Emigrants. Indian Missions and posts abroad have 
standing instructions to immediately take up such cases with the relevant local 
authorities / foreign sponsors with a view to expediting the process of law and 
obtain due justice for the emigrants.  Indian Missions also recom mend inclusion 
of such foreign employer in the Prior Approval Category list based on the 

seriousness of the case. On the basis of such recommendation this Ministry 
places the concerned foreign employer in the Prior Approval Category.  A 
foreign employer, when included in the Prior Approval Category list, is no longer 
allowed to recruit workers from India.  Presently, 389 foreign employers are in 
the Prior Approval Category list which is displayed on the Ministry‟s website.   
Action is taken against the recruiting agent who deployed the aggrieved 
worker(s) under the provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983 with the direction  to 
have the worker(s) repatriated and resolve their grievances.   
 
As and when any complaint is received Show -Cause Notice is issued to 
the registered Recruiting Agents against whom the complaint is made and the 
Recruiting Agent is directed to forthwith s ettle/resolve the complaint. If the 
Recruiting Agent fails to respond to the Show -Cause Notice or his reply is not 
satisfactory his Registration Certificate is suspended for 30 days.  If the 
complaint still remains unresolved, the suspension of the Registr ation Certificate 
is extended till such time that the matter is resolved.  Bank Guarantee is ordered 
for forfeiture when the registering authority/Protector General of Emigrants 
decides that it is justified to do so taking into consideration the nature of 
complaints.  
 
The complainants, the recruiting agents and the Missions are given a time 
frame within which to respond.  Even after 2 -3 reminders when no reply is 
received from the concerned, a decision is taken at the level of the registering 
authority/Protector General of Emigrants.   The Missions have been responding 
as fast as they can but in cases involving the foreign labour courts where cases 
are filed by the workers, it takes some time for the Missions to convey the 
judgment.  If any worker deployed by the RA is stranded, the RA is directed to 
settle the grievances of the worker or get him repatriated on the RA‟s cost.  
 
In the case of complaints against spurious RAs (unauthorized agents), 
the complaints are forwarded to the concerned Protector of Emigrants for taking 
up the matter with the respective State police authorities towards filing FIR 
against the accused.  
 
 With regard to holding meetings with the police department, 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  All Protectors of Emigrants 
are being instructed in the matter for compliance. 
 
The Registration Certificates of the Indian registered recruiting agent s 
are  suspended or cancelled on the merit of the complaint(s).  Details of RAs 
whose Registration Certificates are suspended/cancelled are removed from the 
list of active RAs on Ministry‟s website. However, in the case of foreign 
employers, on the recomme ndation of the Indian Mission abroad, the erring 
foreign employer is placed in the Prior Approval Category (PAC) List. List of 
foreign employers in PAC list has been placed on Ministry‟s website.  Presently, 
389 foreign employers are in the PAC List.  

Recommendation (No. 16) 
 
  The Committee note that under the Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana 
(PBBY), 2006 the emigrant workers now get a minimum insurance cover of Rs. 
5 lakhs and the policy is for the entire period of employment contract. An 
additional cover of Rs. 25 thousands for the legal expenses by the emigrants in 
connection with their employment has also been included. The Committee, 
however, note that upto September, 2009 , 40,4008 policies have been issued, but 
there is a huge gap between the number of p olicies issued vis -à-vis the actual 
number of emigrant workers. The Committee feel that there are many more 
potential workers in need of insurance. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry must sensitize the workers through Missions/Posts and 
Overseas Indian Centres on the benefits of getting insured. The Committee also 
desire to review the subscription premium with a view to explore the possibility 
of reducing it.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is stated that every emigrant going to ECR countri es on employment 
visa has to compulsorily obtain a PBBY policy.  The ministry has taken note of 
the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Standing Committee and is fully aware of 
the need to insure every worker going for overseas employment in accordance 
with the Emigration Act 1983 and the rules thereunder.  This is being ensured 
through the offices of POEs. The ministry is also taking steps to sensitise the 
workers about the benefits, their rights and procedures to claim benefits under the 
PBBY policy.  The Minis try will also explore the possibility for reducing the 
subscription premium under the PBBY.   
 
 

       
Recommendation (No. 17) 
 
 The Committee note that in the era of globalization, there is huge outflow 
of professionals and work -force outside the country  and protecting economic 
interest of its citizens is important for any country.   The Committee welcome 
India‟s entering into Agreement on Social Security with 8 countries namely 
Belgium, France, Germany, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Hungary 
and D enmark.  The Committee also note that negotiations regarding Social 
Security System Agreements have been completed with 5 countries are under 
process and negotiations with 11 countries have been proposed but no response 
has been received from them.  The Co mmittee are of the view that these 
agreements will secure long term economic interest of Indian citizens.  In 
Committee‟s views all these countries including US, Canada, Germany and 
Australia are economically and politically very important where Indians ar e 
playing a major role.  The signing of Social Security Agreements with these 
countries will go a long way in protecting economic interests of Indian citizens.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should expedite the 
process of signing ag reements with countries with whom the negotiations have 
already been completed or are in progress.  The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry should also pay equal attention to pursue the proposal with those 
countries from whom no response has been received.  
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry is furthering its efforts for entering into the Social Security 
Agreement with the USA.  In this regard the third round of negotiation was held 
with US Social Security Administration in Baltimore, USA, on 19-20 May, 2010.  
The Indian delegatio n also met the concerned officials in the US explaining to 
them the rationale of the proposed totalisation agreement underlining the need for 
expeditious commencement of negotiations.  The matter is further being pursued 
with the US Social Security Administration. 
 
 Social Security Agreement has also been signed with Czech Republic 
during June, 2010. 
 
 In pursuance of the recommendations of the Standing Committee the 
Ministry is taking all possible steps to enter into the Social Security Agreements 
with various countries with an aim to benefit the Indian workers abroad.  

Recommendation  (No. 18) 
 
  The Committee note that Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) 
has been established in 18 important destination countries. The fund 
enables the Indian Missions to provide welfare services including food, 
shelter, air passage, legal assistance and counseling etc. to the 
distressed or stranded emigrants and it has been placed at the disposal 
of the Indian Missions in all the Emigration Check Required countries. As 
per the Ministry‟s own admission, there is no corpus amount of the 
welfare fund. The scheme is funded by service charges collected by 
Indian Missions for consular services and attestation of documents. The 
Indian Community could also contribute to the fund. I t is also not very 
clear to the Committee as to how they would obtain the contribution of the 
Indian Community for this purpose. It is strange that all the responsibilities 
relating the fund are with the Indian Missions abroad. Even, the Ministry 
has no in formation about the receipt/expenditure made through this fund 
or of its audit etc. The Committee, therefore, desire that the role of MOIA 
may be defined in the management, control and monitoring of this fund. 
The Committee also desire that a corpus amount  should also be provided 
for support of this scheme so that the scheme may not face paucity of 
funds at any point of time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The contribution from the community as envisaged under the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is volunt ary which the members 
of the Indian Community might make for the community welfare. Any 
receipt of this nature will be credited in the Fund.  However, no mandatory 
contribution from the community is envisaged. 
 
Although the fund is placed at the disposal of the Missions they will have 
to maintain the accounts of its operations, which are subject to the audit.  
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs will monitor the performance of the ICWF 
from time to time and will provide budgetary support to it as per the sanctioned 
scale (Rs. 5 lakh and Rs. 15 lakh). 
 
There is no need to have a corpus fund as there will be a regular 
inflow of funds into ICWF on account of the levy of surcharge on the 
consular services, which will be credited into the ICWF.” 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 

     
   Recommendation (No. 19) 
 
  The Committee note that the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) 
Convention is being celebrated every year on 9 th January with the 
objective of providing a common platform to the vast Diaspora for 
interaction among themselves and  bring their knowledge, expertise and 
skills on a common platform for mutual benefit. But, the Committee have 
noted that celebration of PBD has become a routine affair for the Ministry 
and questions are being raised about the utility of the event. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should assess the impact of PBD 
Conventions and the extent upto which it has been able to meet its 
objectives. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should take 
initiative to make PBD Conventions more theme and content specific with 
a focus on fruitful discussions on durable mutual benefit programmes 
which can bring tangible benefits to the target groups. The Committee are 
also of the view that the focus should not merely be on boosting 
investment but also in helping the  Overseas Indians to maintain their 
Indian cultural identity and strengthening their emotional and cultural 
bonds with India. The Overseas Community should be viewed as 
country‟s important links with the world community and not only as mere 
investors.  
 
The Committee welcome the proposal of the Ministry to celebrate 
this day (9 th January) all across the world where there is concentration of 
Overseas Indians by asking Indian Missions abroad and posts to organize 
local function on the same day. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should go ahead with the proposal to celebrate this as a „Divas‟ for the 
country and for all Indians. The Committee also desire that the proposed 
celebrations should be focused on the issues relating to Indian Diaspora 
of specific country and the feedback should also be collected and 
considered to make these events result oriented.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired by the Committee MOIA is striving to make PBD 
conventions more theme and content specific  with a focus on fruitful  
discussions on durable mutual benefit programme which can bring 
tangible benefits to the target groups. The stress is to involve Overseas 
Indians in PBD with a view maintain their Indian cultural identity and 
strengthen their emotional and cultural bonds with India. The efforts are 
being made celebrate this day (9 th January) all across the world where 
there is concentration of Overseas Indians as a „Divas‟ for the country 
and for all Indians.   
 
         

    
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
Recommendation  (No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that under the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC), the Ministry has been providing 100 
scholarships every year for undergraduate courses to partially fund the 
tuition and hostel fee each year from 2006 -07 with the objecti ve to make 
higher education in India accessible to the children of overseas Indians 
and publicise India as an education hub. It has been observed that at 
present, 268 NRIs/PIOs are studying in India under this Programme. In 
2008-09, the Ministry proposed to prepare a reserve list to ensure that the 
higher number of scholarships are availed. The Committee regret to note 
that available scholarships were not fully utilized during the last two years. 
Moreover, during 2009 -10, 126 candidates were declared succes sful (63 
PIOs and 63 NRIs) but only 70 candidates are presently pursuing their 
courses. The Committee take note of the fact that instead of having an 
entrance examination, now, the Ministry has decided to select the 
candidates on the basis of performance of the candidates in the qualifying 
examination. This is a welcome step but the Committee want that the 
Ministry should evolve such a system through which at least all the 
scholarships are utilized every year.  
 
The Committee also desire that the scholarshi p scheme should be 
widely publicised to bring greater awareness about the scheme among 
the Diaspora population . The Committee further desire that the students 
who are selected under the scheme should be offered the 
technical/professional courses so that th ey may present an impressive 
picture of India and its educational system in their countries of residence 
or wherever they work or live.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is stated that first merit list of 120 Candidates have been 
approved by the Ministry for S PDC, 2010 -11. In case the short listed 
candidates do not avail the scholarship, a second merit list would be 
issued to ensure full utilization of the scholarship programme. Scholarship  
scheme is given wide publicity to bring greater awareness about the 
scheme among the Diasporas population.  The scheme is being 
implemented by M/s. Educational Consultants India Limited (Ed.CIL), an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. 
    

CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPCT OF WHIC H 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (No. 6) 
The Committee note that the Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) 
Scheme was made operational in December 2005. The scheme 
envisages issue of OCI documents consisting of OCI registration 
certificate and universal visa stickers to Persons of Indian Origin. As an 
estimate there are around 25 million Overseas Indians, out of which 15 
millions are Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs). A registered OCI is gra nted 
multiple entry, multi -purpose, life long visa for visiting India and is 
exempted from registration with Foreigners Regional Registration Office 
for any length of stay in India.  
The Committee observe that there are delays in processing of OCI 
applications particularly in the Missions of the countries where large 
number of applications are received every day. The Ministry has no 
appropriate tools and reliable mechanism for an authentic survey and this 
is why they have not made any assessment of the numb er of PIOs 
eligible for OCI Cards so far. Moreover,  no separate staff has been 
provided to Missions exclusively to handle OCI work. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that MOIA should take up the matter with MEA to 
post exclusive and dedicated staff to h andle the OCI work particularly in 
the Missions where more OCI applications are received on daily basis. 
The Committee, expect that the Ministry will evolve a suitable mechanism 
by engaging appropriate agency to assess the number of PIOs eligible for 
OCI cards for flawless issuance of OCI Cards to them in a planned and 
time bound manner.  
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to process OCI applications in a time bound manner there 
is a need to provide regular staff in the Missions and Posts abroad 
especially where a large number of OCI applications are received every 
day. In this regard Missions/Posts, where a large number of OCI 
applications are received every day and the need has been felt to 
augment the staff strength, have been asked to undertake the work s tudy 
for the consular work and provide the number of OCI/PIO cards issued 
during the last five years. On receipt of the work study reports from such 
Missions/Posts, MEA will be requested to provide regular staff to look 
after the work of OCI/PIO cards. 
        PIOs being essentially foreign nationals and in the absence of 
appropriate information and a reliable mechanism for an authentic survey, 
the Ministry has not made any assessment of the number of Persons of 
Indian Origin (PIOs) eligible for OCI Cards. 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (No. 4) 
 
The Committee observe that the process of emigration clearance 
is currently being done through the eight offices of Pr otector of Emigrants 
(PoEs). All these offices are functioning from rented premises. During 
2007-08, Rs. 27.16 lakhs were spent on rent for PoE Offices which went 
upto 70.61 lakhs in 2008-09 and during 2009-10, they have paid Rs. 1.01 
crores as rent for th ese offices. The Committee express their concern 
over the approach of the Ministry in the matter. They are paying huge 
amount as rent but the matter relating to purchase of land/construction of 
PoE Offices has been put in abeyance because the concerned Sta te 
Governments are not enthusiastic. More surprisingly, during 2009 -10, no 
initiative was taken in this direction showing nil expenditure during the 
whole financial year. An allocation of a meager sum of Rs. 20 lakhs for 
2010-11 for this purpose shows the reluctance on the part of the 
Government. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should finalize the proposals to purchase the lands in 
consultation with concerned State Governments and construction work 
should start without delay  by obtaining more allocation under the Capital 
Outlay at RE stage. The Committee also want to express their desire that 
if the Ministry finds it difficult to convince the State Governments for 
allocation of land, then they should explore the possibility o f acquiring 
built up properties to house the PoE Offices to avoid huge rental outgo. 
The Committee also desire to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter and response of the Ministry of Finance in this regard.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is brough t to the notice of the Hon‟ble Standing Committee that 
the buildings in which five POE offices are presently housed are rented. 
The ministry has made efforts with the State Governments to acquire land 
but the response from the State Governments was not ver y positive.  
Therefore, an internal committee under the chairmanship of Secretary 
has been constituted in the Ministry to identify the space requirement for 
the POE offices.  The internal committee in its first meeting held on 
07.04.2010 has taken the following decisions: - 
 
(i) Exploring the possibilities of getting the space for POE 
offices in the buildings in which Regional Passport Offices 
are housed. 

 
(ii) Exploring the possibilities for getting the space for POE 
offices in the buildings relating to ot her central government 
department offices.  
 
(iii) Pursuing with the home departments of the state 
government for providing the requisite land or the building 
for POE offices. 
 
(iv) The committee agreed on the need of integrating all the field 
activities being performed by the different organizations/ 
offices under the MOIA into one place / building so that all 
the services of the Ministry are available to the emigrants at 
one place.  Th e requirement of the land or space for POE 
offices have to be worked out keeping this objective in view.  
This matter will also be one of the agenda items of the next 
Consultative meeting with the state governments. 
 
As a follow up to the above decision, t he five POE offices which 
are presently housed in private buildings have taken up the matter with 
the Regional Passport Offices and the other Central Government 
departments. 
 
 

Recommendation  (No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that several benefits notified in January, 2009 
regarding OCI card holders practising their professions in India have not been 
implemented so far. Ministry of Culture has not issued executive instructions 
regarding parity with NRIs in en try fees for visiting the national monuments, 
historical sites and museums in India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has 
not taken any decision regarding OCI card holders to practice in India as dentists, 
nurses and pharmacists and permitting them to  appear for All India Pre -medical 
Test or such other tests. Similarly, Ministry of Law has to grant permission to 
advocates to practice in India. Permission to architects and Chartered 
Accountants to practice in India is pending with the Ministry of HRD an d 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs respectively. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should pursue vigorously with the 
Ministries/Departments which are concerned administratively for an early 
implementation of all the notified benefits.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After the benefits have been notified for OCI card holders in January 
2009 MOIA has been pursuing with the concerned Ministries to amend their 
regulations/ issue necessary instructions to implement these benefits.  
 
Medical Council of India has amended its Screening Test Regulations 
allowing the Overseas Citizens to appear in the screening test for the purpose of 
registration in the Council. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has also set in 
motion the process  of amendment to the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) 
Bill, 2005 inter-alia permitting OCIs to appear in admission tests for admission to 
MBBS course in India.  
 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Higher 
Education has included professi on of Architecture in the proposed 
Architects(Amendment) Act, 1972 to grant parity to Persons of Indian origin 
holding OCI cards with NRIs to practice their profession in India. 
 
Regarding permission to PIO Advocates holding OCI cards to practice in 
India, the subject matter is the concern of Bar Council of India as it enrolls a 
person as an advocate on its roll under the Advocates Act 1961. A  litigation in 
this regard is pending before the Hon‟ble High Court of Bombay on the issue of 
entry of foreign law firms. Any decision on allowing OCIs to practice in India 
will depend on the outcome of the litigation.   
 
Regarding issues about parity of OCIs with NRIs in the matter of entry 
fees for visiting the national monuments, historical sites and museums in India, 
the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Culture.  The matter regarding 
allowing OCIs to  practi ce in India as dentists, nurses and pharmacists is being 
pursued with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Similarly issue of OCI 
chartered accountants to be allowed to practice in India   have been  taken up 
with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs by MOIA for early implementation.     
        

  
 
 
Recommendation  (No. 14) 
 
 The Committee have been repeatedly recommending in their earlier 
Reports to convert the Emigration Act, 1983 into an effective instrument for 
prevention of irregular migration and urgin g the Government to introduce the 
Amendment Bill in Parliament on priority basis. During the examination of 
Demands for Grants 2009 -10, the Committee were given to understand that 
instead of amending the Emigration Act, 1983, a new comprehensive Bill namely 
Emigration Management Bill, 2009 was under finalization. Now, the Ministry 
has informed that the said Bill after the vetting and concurrence of the Ministry 
of Law has been submitted to the Cabinet for consideration and approval. The 
Committee are not sa tisfied with the pace of progress in introducing the Bill and   
recommend that all efforts should be made to finalize and introduce the proposed 
Emigration Management Bill.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal to introduce the new Emigration Management B ill, 2010, in 
the Parliament was submitted for consideration and approval of the Cabinet.  
Subsequently, as directed by the Cabinet Secretariat, the proposal has been 
referred for consideration and recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries, 
before fu rther submitting the proposal to the Cabinet for approval for 
introduction of the Emigration Management Bill, 2010, in the Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
ANANATH KUMAR 
New Delhi;                        Chairman 
21 December, 2010               Standing Committee on External Affairs 
30 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) 
  

 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 21 DECEMBER, 2010 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1635 hrs in Committee Room G 074 in 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
      Shri Ananth Kumar  -  Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri S. Alagiri 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
6. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
7. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri Aswani Kumar 
9. Shri H.K.Dua 
10. Shri Tarun Vijay 
11. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S.Saxena  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K.Jain   -  Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  -  Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action 
Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 3 rd Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee in respect of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 

Overseas Indian Affairs f or the year 2010 -2011.  The Committee adopted the 
same, subject to the following additions/modifications: 
(i) In Recommendation No. 5 the words “… some more Indian 
languages including Marathi and Gujarati.” should be substituted 
with the words “…all the scheduled languages.” 
 
(ii)  In Recommendation No. 6 the words “… free and easy...” should 
be substituted with the word “…casual...” 
  
(iii) In Recommendation No.18 the following phase to be added: 
“The Committee would also like to know about the total fund collected in 
each mission/post through contribution and the aid received through 
budgetary support as well as the number of workers benefited and the 
expenditure made so far under this Scheme at each destination”. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman  to finalise the report in the 
light of the modifications suggested and consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of factual verification of the Report by the Ministry and thereafter to present 
the Report to    Hon‟ble Speaker under direction 71A(1) durin g the inter Session 
period and subsequently in the House on commencement of the next Session of 
Parliament.    
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
  
  

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction of Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 (15TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government 
  
 Recommendation Nos.1,2,3,5,8,10,11,12,13,15,16,17,18 and 19 
         Total – 14 
        Percentage :     74 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 9 
        Total – 01 
       Percentage:     05 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
Recommendation Nos. 6  
       Total – 01 
        Percentage:      05 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited.  
 Recommendation Nos.4,7 and 14 
         Total – 03 
        Percentage:      16 