   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2009/Agrahanya, 1931(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
                             FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  1 
 

 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2009-2010) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 3rd December, 2009. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on3rd December, 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November, 2009/ Agrahanya, 1931(Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2009 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)……………………….        (ii) 
INTRODUCTION…………………..………………………………………….      (iii) 
REPORT 
PART – I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
I. Implementation of the Committee‟s Recommendations…………………..     01  
PART – II 
II. Overall Budgetary Proposals 
A.  Budgetary Allocation and Utilization...……………………………………..  02   
%.  Secretariat General Service…………………………………………………  06 
C.  Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC)..………………….………….  08 
D.  Indian Council of Overseas Employment (ICOE)…................................  11 
E. Grant-in-aid to other Institutions…………………………………………..     18 
F. Pre-departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation for Emigrant Workers…  22 
G. Know India Programme (KIP)…………….…………………………………  22 
H. Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC)   ...………………………… 24 
I. Legal Assistance to Women Facing Problems in NRI Marriages……….. 26   
J. Construction of Pravasi %haratiya Kendra (P%K)…………………………. 28    
K. Working of Protector of Emigrants (PoEs) Offices ……………………….. 30 
L. Investment by Overseas Indians…………………………………………….. 30 
M. Labour Mobility Partnership(LMP)……………………………………………. 31 
N.  Emigration Act 1983.................................................................................... 39 
O. Setting up of PIONRI Universities……………………………………………. 40 
P. Bilateral Social Security Agreement/Cooperation with other countries……       41 
Q. Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006………………………………………….. 43 
R. Effect of Global Economic Recession…………………………………………. 46 
PART – III 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee ……………………………………… 47                         
 
APPENDICES 
 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 30.10.2009       ..……………… 59       
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 17.11.2009       ..………………. 61 
(i) 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(2009-2010) 
  
Smt. Sushma Swaraj – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7. Shri Pradeep Majhi 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi 
10. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
11. Shri Digvijay Singh 
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
13. Smt. Supriya Sule 
14. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
15. Shri Takam Sanjoy  
16. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
17. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
                           Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil 
24. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
25. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
28. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
29. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
30. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey  - Executive Officer 
5. Shri Manoj Pahuja  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on External Affairs, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this First 
Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (200 9-10) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2009-10. 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on 30.10. 2009.   
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 
17.11.2009.  Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 30.10.2009 and 
17.11.2009 are given in Annexure I and II to this Report. 
 
4. The Committee wish to expres s their thanks to the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for placing before them the material and information which they desired in 
connection with examination of the Demands for Grants (200 9-10).  The Committee 
also wish to express their thanks in particular to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs appearing before the Committee and placing their 
considered views before them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                     Sushma Swaraj, 
27th November,  2009                                            Chairperson,          
Agrahayana 06,1931(Saka)              Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 1 
PART - I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
I. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE‟S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The 21st  Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs o n “Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs  for the year 2008 -2009 was presented 
to the Lok Sabha on 16 th April, 2008 and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 15 th April, 2008. 
The Report contained 13 recommendations/ observations. 
 
1.2 In compliance of the Direction 73-A of the Directions by the Speaker, the Minister 
of Overseas Indian Affairs made a statement in the House on 22 nd October, 2008 giving 
the status of the implementation of various recommendations/ observations made by 
the Committee in their 21 st Report. An analysis of the Minister‟s statement showed that 
the Government has accepted all th e 13 recommendations. Out of these, 11 
recommendations (Nos. 1,2,3,4,6,7,9,10,11,12 and 13) were under process and 2 
recommendations (Nos. 5 and 8) were to be implemented by the Government.   
 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken Replies received from the Mini stry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs on 21st Report, the Committee presented their 23 rd Report (Action Taken 
Report) to Parliament on 18th December, 2008. The Committee in their 23rd Report have 
commented on the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry in  respect of 
recommendations Nos. 3,4,8,9 and 11 contained in the 21 st Report. The final replies 
have been received from the Ministry and will be laid in Parliament. 

 2 
PART-II 
 
II. OVERALL BUDGETARY PROPOSALS 
 
A. Budgetary Allocation and Utilization 
The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs was established in 2004 to build closer 
and wide ranging ties between India and it‟s Overseas Indian community.  The 
symbiotic connection of India and the Diaspora works in both directions – the Diaspora„s 
engagement with India as well as India‟s engagement with the Diaspora.  The strands of 
their „Indianness’ and common heritage can be further strengthened to create a resilient 
bond of robust exchange.  Over the last five years, the Ministry has undertaken a 
number of pol icy initiatives and has taken up a wide variety of programmes and 
schemes to fulfill its mandate.  The Ministry has also grown with the posting of the 
sanctioned strength of Officers and staff.  The Budget of the Ministry is fully on the Non 
Plan side.  Th e Ministry  is now well placed to ensure that the financial and physical 
targets are achieved and the targeted outcomes of its programmes and schemes are 
met.  The focus of the Ministry to achieve its mandate has been the following three 
parameters: 
(a) Contain Administrative Expenditure. 
(b) Increase allocations for Programmes and Schemes. 
(c) Maximize the productivity of scheme expenditure through partnerships. 
 
2.2 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is a young Ministry.  The year 2008 -2009 
was the fifth Budget year of this Ministry with BE of Rs. 65 crore and RE of Rs. 45 crore.  
For the year 2009-2010, the Budget Estimate for the Ministry is Rs. 80 crore.   
 
2.3 Outlining the overall Budgetary proposals of the Ministry for 2009 -2010, the 
Secretary, MOIA during the evidence, stated as follows: 
“Our effort over the last five years has been to further the engagement with 
the Indian Diaspora.  Our effort has primari ly been on three fronts. One is to 
establish a robust institutional arrangement for a sustainable and mutually 
beneficial engagement between India and its overseas community. The 
second has been to pursue bilateral agreements with various other countries 
for the benefit of overseas indians, in all the countries where there is a 
substantial Indian population. And the third has been to build partnerships 
with the State Governments because in many matters whether it is relating to 
potential immigrants or with the overseas community, it is necessary that the 
State Governments play a very very important role. We have been addressing 
this issue.  

 3 
 
We have basically two major Heads of Accounts on the revenue section and 
one major head on the capital section. The Bu dget is a total of Rs.80 crores 
which is 59 crores on the revenue section and Rs.21 crores on the capital 
section. Our work is mainly through four organizational divisions. 
 
We had asked for Rs.125 crores and we got Rs.80 crores which is an 
increase over t he previous year‟s Revised Estimate of Rs.45 crores. 
Organisationally, we have four divisions – the E migration Policy Division, 
Financial Services Division, Diaspora Division and the Social Services 
Division. Apart from that, we have the offic e of the Prot ector General of 
Emigrants. There are eight f ield offices of Protectors of E migrants in various 
parts of the country. Our biggest constraints have been that we do not have 
field implementation machinery. We rely entirely on the Missions abroad, the 
State G overnments and various other private or voluntary organizations for 
the implementation of our work. The second is, in many of the matters where 
inter-departmental or inter -Ministerial consultations are required, there have 
been delays. And the third is, we  have severe staff shortages. But in spite of 
these shortages, our effort has been to create a value which is much higher 
than what would normally be expected from our Budget and the staff 
strength.”  
 
2.4 The Committee enquired whether the total budget of Rs. 80 crore are sufficient to 
discharge the mandate of the Ministry, the Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
during evidence has stated: 
“.......Definitely, Budget is a constraint.  There is a need for an enhanced 
Budget which can help us to perform better in the various activities that we 
have proposed.  But, as I mentioned initially, our effort is to create the 
institutional frameworks which will take care of bulk of these so that we have 
a value which is much higher tha n what is normally generated from such 
investments......” 
 
2.5 The details of the overall budget allocation and actual utilization by the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs are as follows: 
          (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals Shortfall in utilization 
(over  BE) 
2006-2007 38 26 22 16 
2007-2008 50 40 35.4 14.06 
2008-2009 65 45 45(Provisional) 20 
2009-2010 80 - - - 
 
It can be seen from the above table that under utilization of funds is 
becoming a trend during the past three years. 

 4 
2.6 On being asked to explain the precise reasons for this underutilization of 
budgetary allocations by the Ministry  and as to whether the  increased allocation of Rs. 
80 crore during BE 2009 -2010 based on actual requirement , the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs stated as under:  
 
“(i) The shortfall in expenditure was primarily in the financial years 2006 -07 
and 2007-08, when the Ministry was still in the process of being established 
and schemes were under formulation. In particular, the shortfall in the year  
2006-07 arose because the process of completing inter -ministerial 
consultations and of obtaining approvals for the programmes of the ministry 
took considerable time. The shortfall in the year 2007 -08 was essentially due 
to non -utilization of the budget al location made for the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Kendra.  In the financial year 2008 -09 the Budget Estimate of Rs 65 crores 
was revised downward to Rs 45 crores by the Ministry of finance as a result 
of a budget cut applied across for all ministries in the last financial year.  
The only shortfall, nevertheless, in the FY 2008-2009 was on the capital head 
of account due to non -utilization of the allocation made for the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Kendra. This was because of delays  in statutory approvals 
including change of lan d use, building plan approvals and approval of the 
project by competent authority.  
(ii) The increase in the BE 2009 -10 is primarily due to the expansion of 
the activities  of the institutions established for the benefit of the overseas 
Indian community. These include the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre 
(OIFC), the Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC), the Indian Council 
of Overseas Employment (ICOE), the India Development Foundation, and the 
Overseas Indian Centres at Abu Dhabi and Washington as well as one in 
Kuala Lumpur, which is expected to become  operational in the current 
Financial Year.” 
 
 
2.7 The Committee pointed out that  the amount allocated during the last three years 
on the v arious schemes of the Ministry was not fully utilized and the Ministry has now 
asked for  enhanced budgetary allocations for 2009 -10, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs during evidence has stated: 
“....As is obvious to th e hon. Committee, the amount available under each 
head of account is very small.  There are very clear plans for utilization of that 
amount and the utilization of the funds as such is not a difficult thing at all.  
The only problem is the occasional budget ary cuts also happen as it 
happened last year.  So, budgetary constraints come and sometimes it is 
necessary and we are forced not to utilize the entire amount.  This year our 
assessment as of now is that we should be able to utilize the entire amount 
that is allotted to us.  But the Budget Estimate, as the hon. Committee is 
aware, is Rs. 80 crore.  There has been a recent cut and now it is limited to 
Rs. 76 crore......” 

 5 
2.8 Further on being asked as to whether the Ministry have chalked out/formulated 
any comprehensive plan of action so that the funds allocated for the current Financial 
Year (2009-2010) for the above cited purposes would be utilized  fully, the Ministry in its 
reply has stated: 
  
“Yes, the Ministry has chalked out a comprehensive plan of act ion and the 
fund allocated for the purpose during the current Financial Year are expected 
to be fully utilized. (a) The Overseas Indian Centres at Abu Dhabi and 
Washington are already operational. (b) The activities of institution like India 
Development Fo undation (IDF) have also taken off with its 1 st Meeting of 
Board of Trustees recently and commencement of the work for development 
of a Portal. ( c) The Indian Council of  Overseas Employment (ICOE) has  
already undertaken several studies for the benefit of t he workers. (d) The 
Indian Community Welfare Fund has been established and is operational in 
18 countries. (e) Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) has taken up the 
development of Global Indian Network of Knowledge (Global INK). (f) 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) has started functioning 24x7 
and an international help line has been started from the UAE.  
 
The other activities of the Ministry like Scholarship Programme for Diaspora 
Children (SPDC), Know India Programme (KIP), Overseas Citizen of India 
(OCI) Cards, Awareness Campaign / Media Plan etc. are going on as per 
schedule. 
 
i) So far Ministry has spent Rs.2.40 crores on the expansion of activities of 
the institutions established for the benefit of the overseas Indian 
community. 
ii) The Ministry  has proposed minor decrease in the total budgetary 
allocation at RE stage due to mandatory cut to be applied due to economy 
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance. The details are given below. 
Incidentally, it is stated that for the schemes, no cut has been proposed. 
  

 6 
( Rs. in crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head Scheme BE 2009 -
10 
RE 2009-10 
1. 2052 – Sectt. 
General Services 
1. Secretariat 21.00 20.07 
2. 2061 – External 
Affairs 
3.International 
Conferences/meetings 
1.00 0.90 
4. Entertainment of 
Dignitaries 
0.30 0.10 
5. Other Schemes 30.70 30.70 
6. Celebration of PBD 6.00 6.00 
Total 38.00 37.70 
3. 4059 – Cap outlay 
on pub Works 
7. Pravasi Bharatiya 
Kendra 
20.00 18.30 
8. 
Construction/purchase 
of buildings for 
PGE/POEs 
1.00 0.20 
Total 21.00 18.50 
 Grand Total 80.00 76.27 
 
B. Secretarial General Services 
 
2.9 The Committee observed from the establishment strength shown in the Detailed 
Demands for Grants that as many as 40 posts in group B, and D are still lying vacant.  
The same number of posts were lying vacant in the last fiscal year as well.  On being 
asked to explain th e reasons for these posts still lying vacant  and as to w hether the 
Government is considering to fill up these posts for smooth functioning of the Mini stry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs, the Ministry in its reply stated: 
 
 “There is no separate cadre of the Mi nistry of Overseas Indian Affairs and 
the Cadre Controlling Authority is the Ministry of Home Affairs for the 
Secretariat Staff, who had been requested to provide the personnel.  Some 
posts encadred in the MEA are vacant.  The MEA has shown inability to 

 7 
provide personnel.  Two posts lying vacant are to be filled by the Department 
of Official Languages.  They have been requested to fill up the posts.  For the 
POE offices, the posts are filled up on loan basis by calling applications on all 
Sectt. basis. 
 
Efforts have been made to fill up these posts for smooth functioning of the 
Ministry.  This Ministry had requested the Ministry of Home Affairs to provide 
staff.  The Ministry of Home Affairs had informed that all cadre units including 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs are facing shortage of staff and will have  
to bear with Ministry of Home Affairs till the situation improved.  MHA had also 
intimated that they would try to fill up the vacancies as quickly as possible.  
The Department of Official Languages ha s informed that it will provide the 
personnel as soon as the officers are selected by the SSC. 
Applications have already been called for filling up the posts in the POE 
Offices.  Selection Committee will select the persons shortly and offers for 
joining will be sent after selections are made. 
 
Outsourced staff have currently been deployed against these vacancies to 
ensure that work does not suffer.” 
 
2.10 Further on being asked as to what is the present status of the proposal  for filling 
up the posts in PoE and  is it progressing as per time table approved or there is any 
likelihood of delays, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“The posts of the level of Under Secretary and below upto LDC are filled up 
on loan basis by calli ng applications from the candidates of CSS Cadre from 
different Ministries/Departments.  Posts of POE (Deputy Secretary Level) are 
filled by DOP&T on Central Deputation basis. Applications were called for the 
posts of Assistants, UDCs and LDCs of CSS cadre . The selection committee 
has already  selected the candidates for the vacant posts of Assistants and 
UDCs. The selected candidates  have been issued offer letters and are likely 
to join  after they are relieved  by their parent Ministries/ Departments. 
 
The posts of LDC‟s had also been circulated but selection for all the posts 
could not be done as the number of applicants were much less than the 
number of vacancies. Selection of one LDC was done and offer of 
appointment has been sent. Further it is clarif ied that  recruitment of LDCs 
have been stopped by the Government. Accordingly, we have instructed all 
POE offices to fill up the vacant post of LDCs through outsourced staff  so 
that work does not suffer in POE offices.” 
 
 

 8 
C. Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) 
 
2.11 The allocation in BE 2009 –2010 for Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) 
has been enhanced to 4 crores as against Rs. 95 lakhs of BE 2008 -09  for providing 
information to Overseas Indians. On being asked as to w hat kind of information the 
Ministry has proposed to provide online to Overseas Indian , the Ministry in its reply 
stated: 
“The OIFC currently provides all information related to investing in India that a 
potential overseas Indian investor would need. The queries relat ing to 
investments across a wide gamut of sectors are replied through the OIFC 
web site. In addition, where requests are received, the OIFC also provides 
hand- holding services.  
 
The OIFC is now developing the Global Indian Network of Knowledge (Global 
INK), an electronic platform that will serve as a knowledge network and 
enable knowledge transfer across several sectors. To fulfill its mandate to 
facilitate B usiness to B usiness partnerships, the OIFC is also developing a 
Business networking platform and business directory.” 
 
2.12 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry launched the Overseas 
Indian Facilitation Centre  (OIFC), a not -for-profit trust, in partnership with the 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), to serve as a „one stop shop‟ fo r economic 
engagement, investment and business related services for potential overseas Indian 
investors.  During 2008, OIFC organized a market at the mini Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 
(PBD) at Singapore in which many one -on-one meetings were held with prospectiv e 
investors. A similar market place was organized at Chennai  during Pravasi Bhartiya 
Divas 2009.   On being asked as to what is the outcome of these meetings and 
presentations organized by OIFC during Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 2009 at Chennai and 
Mini Prava si Bhartiya Divas at Singapore.  Further,  the areas in which potential 
overseas Indian i nvestors are expected to invest, as to whether  any investment 
proposals have been received by the OIFC and as to what has been the achievement of 
the OIFC in promoting in vestment in India by Overseas Indians? Whether it has 
succeeded in getting overseas Indians investment in the infrastructure and social 
sectors in India ?  If so, please give details, the Ministry in its reply stated: 
 

 9 
“(i) Market place at PBD 2009 and Mini PBD  were an unique platforms 
created by OIFC for the visiting delegates for face to face meetings with the 
knowledge partners in sectors such as Real Estate; Finance &Taxation 
advice, Education, Health, NGOs etc.  Among the sectors, most sought after 
by the delegates were Real Estate and Education, followed by Wealth 
Management and Tax/FDI.  A number of queries are also raised on 
Philanthropy, Tourism and Business -to-Business networking.  Majority of the 
delegates listed Real Estate as the preferred area of investment.  For 
business to customer services, delegates preferred investment in financial 
instruments, real estate, contribution to charitable causes etc.  
 
   In order to gather information about the experience of visiting delegates 
with the market place as well as about their expectation of services, a survey 
was also conducted during the market place.  The important 
recommendations of the survey are as under: 
 
(a) OIFC market place should become a standard feature of the future 
PBD and should be expanded in its scope, coverage and depth. 
(b) OIFC market place should focus on various sectors.  In the run up of 
the market place, small but effective Special Interest Group (SIG) can 
be created to focus exclusively at specific sector and garner support 
for it fro m all quarters to present the specific investment related 
proposal during OIFC.  OIFC can use its unique public -private 
partnership to give creative thrust to the efforts of the Govt. of India 
and Industry in accelerating the pace of various initiatives ta ke by the 
Government in social sector. 
(c) A pre -event publicity platform can be created about three months in 
advance to attract better participation from OIs.   
(d) To ensure that problems faced by OIs are handled expeditiously, 
OIFC can consider nominating trus ted trouble-shooters in respective 
areas based on their interest. 
 
(ii) OIFC works on an ICT platform where Overseas Indians (OIs) ask 
investment, taxation etc. related queries for the purpose of making 
investment in India.  These queries are transferred to the specific knowledge 
partners appointed by the OIFC in various sectors such as Real Estate, 
Taxation, Wealth Management, Legal etc.  The knowledge partners, in 
addition to replying queries, provides hand holding services and help 
potential Overseas Indian investors in making investment in India 
 
 OIFC has received approximately 1250  such queries through website, 
emails, faxes.  Majority of the queries were received from Canada, Australia, 
USA and UK. Out of the total q ueries received, 32% were investment related 
queries and 68% were investment related information.  The break up of the 
total queries sector-wise is as follows:- 
 

 10 
Information related queries –    68% 
 Information and advice in sectors like 
1. Education 
2. Investment 
3. Professional      20% 
4. Trading 
5. Advertising Industry 
6.  General 
 Rules & Regulations (legal aspects) 20% 
 Taxation Rules and PAN Card  10% 
 General Research    02% 
 Consular Issues    14% 
 Social Security Contributions  02% 
 
Investment related Queries –                32% 
 
 Potential Investments   19% 
i. Property investment/ construction 
ii. Hotels/ Hospitality 
iii. Investment in MFs, stock market, etc. 
iv. Telecom 
v. IT investment 
vi.         Health Care 
 
Business to business Partnership   13% 
 Marketing Tie Ups in sectors like 
1. Soaps, detergents 
2. Cotton Textiles 
3. Latex products 
4. Cement and marble manufactures 
5. Rugs and Carpets 
6. Water Purifiers 
7. Power sector products 
     8.          Flooring Manufacture 
 
 Joint Ventures 
 
1. Health Care 
2. IT 
3. Media 
4. Infrastructure. 
 
 All the investment related queries have been answered.  However, 
actual conversion of these queries w.r.t. real investment are not known to 
OIFC as many of the potential investors do not inform OIFC after getting 
information. 

 11 
 
(iii) & (iv) OIFC has received a large number of investment related 
queries, including those in respect of infrastructure and social sectors. OIFC 
has been successful in serving as a clearing house for investment related 
information to potential investors. It has als o been successful as a one stop 
agency for replying queries and providing handholding services.  Actual 
investment coming to India is a function of many factors and is monitored by 
the Ministry of Industrial Promotion and Policy.” 
 
2.13 The Committee desired to know whether the  Ministry think that with the mandate 
about the welfare of Overseas Indians, OIFC ought to have this data so as to chalk out 
new strategies and polices for effectively performing their mandated  functions, has any 
interface to get info rmation about real investment by potential investors in consultation 
with Ministry of Industrial Promotion and Policy been devised  and as to what is the level 
and periodicity of information exchange with Ministry of Industrial Promotion and Policy 
in the matter, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“So far OIFC has been working as a clearing house for investment related 
information to potential investors. So far no information has been exchanged 
with the Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy. OIFC  is being 
directed to have interaction with the Department of Industrial Promotion and 
Policy.“  
 
D. Indian Council of Overseas Employment (ICOE) 
 
2.14 On being asked to furnish detailed note on ICOE including its man date, structure 
and functioning, as to what are the reasons for increase in allocation this year  and the 
initiatives being undertaken for the  programme, the Ministry in its written replies has  
stated:  
   
(i)  Considering the necessity for establishing an institutional mechanism 
for promotion o f overseas employment, better protection and welfare 
of overseas Indian workers and for the study of emerging overseas 
employment opportunities, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has set 
up a „Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment‟ (CPOE) as a 
Not-For-Profit Society registered under Registration of Societies Act, 
1860. This was registered on 30th July, 2008.  
 
 

 12 
The CPOE was subsequently renamed as Indian Council of Overseas 
Employment (ICOE). 
The Mandate of the ICOE is: 
 
i)  To serve as a „think tank‟ to devise and execute medium to long 
term strategies for promoting overseas employment of Indians. 
ii) To regularly monitor, study and analyze the trends in International 
labour markets as well as strategies of various labour sending and 
labour receiving countries. 
iii) To develop and sustain a national strategy to be globally 
competitive as a labour supplier. 
iv) To commission studies on the International labours markets and 
identify emerging overseas employment opportunities for Indian 
youth. 
v) To position potential Overseas Indian Workers as “consumers” of 
employment services provided by the private recruitment industry. 
vi) To project India as a supplier of skilled, trained and qualified 
workers. 
vii) To adapt training material developed by International Labour 
Organization and International Organization for Migration for 
specific states / country and gender. 
(viii) To administer need based welfare schemes for overseas Indian 
workers. 
(ix) To create resources 
 
(a) To gain a better understanding o f existing and emerging 
opportunities for overseas employment 
(b) Develop and deploy appropriate strategies and decision making 
tools that would enhance the capabilities of skilled and unskilled 
manpower to match international standards 
(c) To create awareness abo ut the growing international employment 
opportunities 
(d) To provide mechanism for promotion and facilitation of overseas 
employment 
 
x) To act as a channel and provide a database for communicating 
with stakeholders and develop links for implementing strategie s to 
address labour supply gaps, country / sector specific. 
xi) To monitor and analyse the problems faced by emigrant Indian 
workers and returnees and suggest corrective measures. 

 13 
xii) To establish links with national and international industry , trade, 
employment agencies, government and non -governmental 
organizations in order to develop and implement programmes on 
overseas employment. 
xiii) To undertake, support and promote studies and research in 
international employment opportunities 
xiv) To design and provide specialized training facilities for emigrants 
both in India and abroad 
xv) To do all such other lawful acts, deeds or things as are incidental or 
conducive to the attainment of any of the above objects 
Structure of the ICOE 
 
The Indian Council for Overseas Employment (ICOE) has been 
structured as a two -tier body comprising of a Governing Council and an 
Executive Directorate. 
 
Governing Council 
 
The composition of the Governing Council is as under: 
 
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs or his representative. 
(ii) Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs or his representative. 
(iii) Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs or his representative 
(iv) Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises or his 
representative. 
(v) Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment or his 
representative. 
(vi) Three Secretaries of the State Governments by rotation every two 
years from amongst the major emigrant sending States. 
(vii) Four experts to be nominated by the Government for a term of 
every two years. 
(viii) The Executive Director of the Council appointed by the 
Government. 
 
Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs is the Chairman of the 
Governing Council.  
 
 
 
 
 

 14 
Executive Directorate 
 
a. The Government shall appoint an Executive Directorate (ED), 
headed by an Executive Director. The ED would consist of 
officers/officials as decided by Government on periodic basis. 
b. The Executive Directorate shall look after the day to day 
management of the Society. The main role of ED would be to 
implement the decision of Governing Council. 
c. The strength of the ED shall be as may be fixed by Governing 
Council from time to time.  
d. Subject to the overall control and general direction of the 
Governing Council, the ED shall have the following powers and 
duties and shall perform the following functions. 
 
i. To perform all such acts and duties and exercise all such 
powers as may be delegated or assigned to it by the Governing 
Council 
ii. To make recommendations in regard to the programme 
activities of the Council 
iii. To examine the budget, revised bu dget and audited accounts 
and to recommend the same for the approval of the Governing 
Council. 
iv. To examine the quarterly income and expenditure statements 
v. To provide guidance in regard to the publications which may be 
brought out by the Council 
vi. To propose b ye-laws, for any of the matters for which they are 
required to be made, for consideration and adoption by the 
Governing Council.  
Other Committees set up  
 
Besides Executive Directorate, for effective functioning and 
implementation of policies framed by Governing Council, there shall be 
following committees: 
 
A Research / Monitoring Committee 
 
(a) The Research / monitoring committee shall consist of the following 
members: 
(i) Chairman of the Council 
(ii) Executive Director of the Council 

 15 
(iii) A person no minated by the Government having relevant 
experience 
(iv) A person nominated by the Chairman 
(b) All members (other than ex officio members) shall hold office for a 
term of two years 
(c) The Committee shall be the principal planning & monitoring body 
responsible for various research and development programmes of the 
society. 
(d) The Committee shall have the right to advise the Governing Council on 
any matter which it considers necessary for the fulfillment of the 
objectives of the society. 
(e) The Committee shall meet at least twice a year to examine the various 
proposals and review the progress of projects / programmes. 
B. Finance Committee 
 
a)   The Finance Committee shall consist of the following Members: 
 
(i) Chairman of the Council 
(ii) Executive Director of the Council 
(iii) Treasurer 
(iv) A person nominated by the Government 
(v) A person nominated by the Chairman 
    
  (b) All members of the Finance Committee other than ex -officio                
members shall hold office for a term of two years. 
 
 (c) Powers and Functions of the Finance Committee 
 
(i) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice a year to 
examine the accounts and to scrutinize proposals for expenditure. 
(ii) The annual accounts and financial estimates of the Council shall 
be placed before the Finance Committee for consideration and 
thereafter submitted to the Governing Council for approval. 
(iii) The Finance Committee shall fix limits of the total recurring 
expenditure and the total non -recurring expenditure of the year 
based on the income and resources of the Council. No 
expenditure shall be incurred by the Council in excess of the limits 
so fixed without the approval of the President/Chairman. 
(iv) No expenditure other than that provided in the Budget shall be 
incurred by the  Council without the approval of the Finance 
Committee. 

 16 
(v) To recommend to the Governing Council, creation of various 
sources to augment revenue. 
 
C. Administrative Committee 
 
(a) There shall be an Administrative committee to periodically review the 
administrative / personnel matters of the society and make 
recommendation to the Governing Council. The committee shall also be 
responsible for making recommendation in connection with the following 
matters: 
 
(i) recruitment / selection of new staff and fixing terms & conditions 
(ii) outsourcing of administrative functions 
(iii) removal of staff / other vendors with appropriate reasoning. 
(iv) ensuring maintenance of discipline by framing various rules & 
regulations in this regard. 
(b) The Administrative committee shall consist of the following members: 
 
(i) Chairman of the Council 
(ii) Executive Director of the Council 
(iii) A person nominated by the Government having relevant 
experience 
(iv) A person nominated by the Chairman 
(c) All members other than ex -officio member shall hold office for a term of 
two years. 
 
(d) The Administrative Committee shall meet at least twice a year to 
examine and review various matters. 
 
(ii) While deciding this year‟s allocation for ICOE, the facts of setting up of 
the office, payment of salary to the staff engaged/appointed and the 
expenditure on various schemes and projects to be undertaken have been 
kept in view. The budget allocation is based on the work plan  of the ICOE for 
the FY 2009-10.  
 
(iii) The following activities have been undertaken / planned for this year: 
 
(a) Developing a Labour Market Assessment in select European 
countries by IOM 
(b) Assessment of extent of impact of global recessi on on Indian migrant 
workers in sic GCC countries 
(c) Design of welfare fund by KPMG 

 17 
(d) Study on strategic and special interventions in realization of the 
objectives of HOPAB, Haryana commissioned by HOPAB/ICOE 
(e) Study on promotion of overseas employment avenues in  different 
sectors in specific countries for Andhra Pradesh by OMCAP/ICOE 
(f) India-EU mobility cooperation. 
(g) Design of a pension programme for returning workers.” 
 
2.15 On being further asked to elaborate as to what inputs have been provided by 
ICOE about the trend in international labour market in the context of present economic 
scenario and the strategies have been advised by ICOE so as to tackle the declinin g 
labour market trends globally, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“A study on labour market asses sment in France, Denmark, Sweden, 
Romania, Poland and Czech Republic has been commissioned to be 
undertaken through International Organisation for Migration (IOM). The 
project will commence shortly. Strategies will be decided on the basis of the 
outcomes of the project. A study on the impact of the global financial crisis on 
the overseas Indian workers in the Gulf has shown that except in the emirate 
of Dubai in the UAE, there has not been any more adverse impact on existing 
jobs or on future job prospects.” 
 
 
2.16 Further, on being asked to  state as to how ICOE i s going to fulfill this mandate 
and as to w hether any action plan has been prepared for this purpose,  the Ministry in 
its reply has stated: 
“The ICOE is currently following a three pronged approach to develop a medium 
to long term strategic policy to po sition India as a supplier of skilled, trained and 
qualified workers: 
 First:  By developing Partnerships with independent thing -tanks 
overseas such as the European University Institute of the E -U, the 
Washington based Migration Policy Institute and the Athens based Hellenic 
Migration Policy Institute.  These Partnerships will foster  understanding of 
India‟s potential and reinforce bilateral  arrangements for mobility of Indian 
Workers and Professionals.  
 Second: The ICOE is commissioning   Labour market Assessments of 
select countries in the E -U that would due to demographic pressures of 
ageing population face severe skill shortages and labour supply gaps in the 
future. This will enable us to give focused attention on a country specific and  
sector specific basis to facilitate overseas employment.  
Finally the ICOE will throug h appropriate partnership develop 
comprehensive country -specific and skill specific training manuals and 
curricula to ensure that there is appropriate matching of skill sets between the 

 18 
supply of professionals from India with the skills standards that the market 
demands in the destination countries.  
In addition the ICOE will facilitate direct contacts between foreign 
employers  and  potential employees in India. 
A conference of prominent employers of overseas Indians in important 
sectors in six GCC countri es and Malaysia is being planned in partnership 
with the Government of Andhra Pradesh.  This is expected to be held in 
2010.” 
 
E. Grant-in-aid to other institutions 
 
2.17 On being asked to furnish details of allocation to other Institutions under “Grant in 
Aid” and how does the Ministry contemplate to promote empirical research in  Diaspora 
and Migration studies, the Ministry in its reply stated: 
 
“(i) The details are as under: 
 
a. Grant to Centre for Development studies, Thiruvanthapuram for the 
research unit on International Migration – Rs 31.70 lakhs 
b. Grant to JNU for the research programme on International Migration 
by ZHCES, School of Social Sciences – Rs.47.14 lakh 
c. Grant to School of International Relations, Mahatma Gandhi University 
– Rs. 60 Lakh 
d. Grant to Pardada – Pardadi Educational Society – Rs. 15 lakh 
 
(ii) A key problem in addressing the problems and concerns of migrant 
workers and the overseas Indian community is the absence of a data base, 
empirical research and analysis that can support appropriate policy decisions. 
The need has therefore been felt to strengthen research support for issues 
relating to migration of Indians overseas as well as the needs and 
expectations of the diaspora.  
 
The Ministry has signed MoUs with CDS Thiruvanthapuram and JNU to 
support research work relevant to the mandate of the Ministry. A good 
example is the pre -departure orientation manuals developed by the CDS for 
the Ministry to train workers going to the GCC countries” 
 
 
2.18 To a further query as to  how would CDS and JNU be better qualified than the 
Government of India to carry out an investigation into the Diaspora across the world, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs during evidence has replied: 
“......Coming to the research done by the two institutions, namely, the Centre 
for Development Studies and the Jawahar Lal University, in fact, there are 
specific mandates which are assigned to these organisations.  With the CDS, 

 19 
for example, the task assigned to  them is recommending a coherent 
international migration policy framework/strategy for India over medium to 
long term, preparing country briefs on major labour importing countries.  The 
CDS has produced a number of reports in these areas. Similarly, the JNU has 
been focussing on the mobility and labour transfer matters and other issues. 
At the same time, we have been working with various institutions abroad as 
well.  We have started working with three academic institutions.  One is the 
Migration Policy Institute in Washington.  The other institute is in Athens.....” 
 
2.19 The Committee wanted to know the details of the research work being done by 
the agencies and  also state categorically how the research work done by the agencies 
will be helpful in addressin g the problems and concerns of migrant workers an d the 
Overseas Indian Community, the Ministry in its written replies has stated: 
 
“Details of the Research Work undertaken by CDS and JNU are indicated as 
under: 
                             
CDS, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
  As per the Memorandum of Agreement signed between the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and Centre for Development Studies (CDS) 
on       12 th June, 2006,  a Research Unit on International Migration was set 
up with financial assistance by MOIA, valid for a period of five years (2006 -07 
to 2010-11). The scope of the Research Work included the following: 
 
(i) Recommending a coherent International Migr ation policy framework country 
strategy for India over medium to long term. 
(ii) Preparing country briefs on major labour importing countries including a 
study of their labour laws, working conditions, problems of emigrant workers 
and suggesting issues that need to be addressed through bilateral 
Agreements. 
(iii) Country-wise analysis of the emerging opportunities for new jobs in various 
sectors and suggest skill upgradation strategies to help India position itself 
as an exporter of highly skilled manpower and help  emigrant workers move 
up the wage chain.  

 20 
(iv) State-wise analysis of the major sourcing States and suggest strategies to 
help the States make emigration an orderly process and open opportunities 
for its potential overseas workers.  
(v) Pilot Research on Recruitment Agencies in India. 
 
2.  CDS has furnished the following Research Reports, so far. 
 
(i) Draft Outline Paper on Migration Policy 
(ii) Pre-departure Training Manuals – 06 Countries 
(iii) Survey of Emigrants in Kerala -  Report. 
(iv) AP Migration Study. 
(v) International Migration Policies in India 
(vi) Human rights issues of migrant workers in GCC Countries. 
(vii) Migration – Remittances and Employment. 
(viii) Managing Migration in Philippines – Lessons for India. 
(ix) Revamping the Overseas Recruitment System in Kerala: A Case Study. 
(x) Return Migrants in Kerala – Rehabilitation Problem and Development  
 Potential. 
(xi) Beyond the existing structures: Revamping Overseas Recruitment 
System in India (First Report) 
 RESEARCH PROGRAMME WITH JNU 
As per the MOU signed with the Jawaharl al Nehru University (Zakir Husain 
Centre for Educational Studies (ZHCES) on 22.05.2008, a Research 
Programme on International Migration has been initiated. The Project aims to 
conduct focused Research Programme on various aspects of International 
Migration from India and to prepare policy/strategy briefs for the Ministry and 
conduct seminars on different diaspora subjects, over a period of five years.  
 
2. An Advisory Committee has been constituted to guide and monitor the 
Research programmes undertaken by the Unit. The Ministry organized an 
International Conference on „India -EU Partnerships in Mobility: Data, 
Agreements and Policy in International Migration‟, at New Delhi on February 
21-23, 2009 with a view to address critical issues in India -EU Partnership in 
human mobility comprising highly skilled, semi skilled and low skilled category 
of workers, student migrants and families. The focus areas were :  

 21 
 
(i) Labour Transfer Matters - relating to Demographic transition and changing 
Migration trends, including ag eing and labour shortages in EU Countries, 
employment opportunities which can be filled up by Indian labour and the 
demographic dividend for the country, etc. 
(ii) Financial Transfer Matters - relating to cost of migrating to and living in EU 
countries, wages to the migrant labour, savings and remittances, pension 
and social security schemes, etc. 
(iii) Knowledge Transfer Matters - relating to enrolment of students in the EU, 
education fares, content of the curriculum, etc. 
(iv) Overarching issues - relating to Consular a nd Visa issues, integration of 
migrant labour, return and re -integration, human trafficking in asylum, 
climate change and migration, future of International migration, etc. 
 
4. A Drafting Group for formulating the „National Migration Policy‟ has also 
been constituted to finalize the Policy at the earliest.  
 
5. As may be seen from the above, the Research work done by the two 
Agencies would be helpful in addressing various issues relating to migrant 
workers, especially in formulating Policy initiatives on we lfare of migrant workers 
in the GCC countries and Labour Mobility partnerships with the Member States of 
the EU.” 
 
2.20 The Committee desired to know as to whether the Ministry have any meaningful 
directory or data base of Indian people living in different  countries and as to why it 
should not be done by the Indian Government, the Secretary, Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs during evidence has stated: 
“......On the data base of Indians, I must confess that this is something which 
is being built up.  As I  mentioned earlier, we have 5 lakh overseas citizenship 
of India where a data base is available.  We have the data base on the Indian 
associations which again is partial.  It is not complete.  We are trying to build 
up the list of Indians who are successfu l in various walks of life including the 
political, social, academic and other areas. But we have not reached really 
anywhere.  We have a long way to go.  Our assessment is that as far as the 
academic and skills are concerned, it would be our global knowle dge network 
which should be able to attract all such persons.  We expect this to be 
functional in two months.  This is a major development.  Once it is set up, we 
will take up the marketing of that, making it known to people and we expect 
substantial inter est on the part of the overseas Indians ... The basis for the 
data that we now have is the information collected by the High Level 
Committee on Diaspora headed by Dr. Singhvi.  The Committee had visited 
most parts of the world and collected a lot of informa tion.  That is serving as a 

 22 
basis for information as of now.  The way we are looking at it is that we do 
need the data but we should be able to utilise the data also and benefit from 
the data as well.  It is an evolving thing because this is something we a re 
conscious of that.  I am happy that the hon. Member has stressed this point.  
We are working on that but there is no specific thing as of now.  I must 
confess that.”  
 
F. Pre-departure Orientation and Skill Up-gradation for Emigrant Workers 
 
2.21 The Ministry in their written replies informed that  allocation made for Pre -
departure Orientation and Skill Up -gradation for Emigrant Workers has been drastically 
reduced from Rs. 5 Crores to Rs. 1 Crore.  The Ministry was asked to give the reasons 
for steep d ecrease in allocation  keeping in view the importan ce of this particular 
programme/scheme, the Ministry in its written replies stated:   
 
“The Ministry has been periodically reviewing the implementation of the Skill 
up gradation and Pre -departure orientation programme. During the review, it 
was observed that the implementation of the Scheme by the State 
Governments and other Agencies during t he last three years has been slow. 
The major States of origin have not been able to utilize the funds released so 
far and hence no further funding can be given till full utilization is reported.  
 
The Core Group set up by the Ministry to oversee the progra mme, 
subsequently, recommended that the Scheme should be self sustaining and 
not dependent upon the financial assistance released by the Ministry. The 
programme is now being implemented in partnership with the apex industry 
bodies. Efforts are underway to standardize the curricula, provide for 
independent testing and third party certification for the training. Hence, it was 
decided to reduce the allocation for the Programme to Rs.1 crore dur ing the 
current Financial Year.”  
 
G. Know India Programme (KIP) 
 
2.22 The Committee are informed that the allocation for the Know India Programme 
(KIP) has been raised from Rs 87 lakhs in 2008 -09 to Rs 1.25 crores in 2009 -10. The 
annual report 2008-09 of MOIA indicates low level of participation viz only 31, 34 and 22 
participants joined the programme during the 9 th, 10 th and 11 th KIP respectively. On 
being enquired about the  reasons for low level of participation in this programme and 

 23 
the initiatives taken by the Ministry to promote and popularize Know India Programme, 
the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
(i) For 11 th KIP, the total approved participation was 29, 7 of whom dropped 
out subsequently due to personal reasons. 
 
41 participants have been approved for the 12 th KIP beginning 24 th 
September. Four of them have since dropped out.  
 
The Ministry is now organizing 3 KIPs each financial year and upto 40 
participants could take part in each of these programmes. 
 
(ii)  The programme earlier restricted to PIOs from a select list of 32 
countries, has now been opened to PIOs from all countries.  It has also 
been decided that from 12 th KIP onwards MOIA will reimburse 90% of the 
total cost of air ticket (at lowest economy excursion fare) to the 
participants from their country of residence to India and back instead of 
50% of airfare reimbursed earlier.   
 
2.23 Further on being asked as to  whether there is any proposal in the Ministry to 
increase the number of Know India Programmes (KIPs)  in each Financial Year, if not, 
whether organizing 3 K /IPs in each Financial Year is su fficient keeping in view the 
opening of the programme to PIOs from all countries and as to what further steps have 
been taken to ensure high participation in these KIPs, the Ministry in its reply as stated: 
 
“There is no proposal in the Ministry to increase the number of Know India 
Programmes (KIPs) in a financial year. 
 
With the opening of the KIP to PIOs from all the countries and our publicity 
effort the number of KIPs have been increased to 3 in a year to accommodate 
more participants. As KIP is designed keeping in view the weather conditions 
and examination period it may not be feasible to organize more than 3 KIPs in 
a financial year.  
 
We have advised the missions/posts to give wide publicity of the program and 
have been inviting applications for KIP through all our missions/ posts abroad. 
We have also decided to  involve the Indian Associations abroad to give wide 
publicity to the program.  From 12 th KIP onwards MOIA is reimbursing 90% of 
the  total cost of air ticket (at lowest economy excursi on fare) to the 
participants from the country of residence to India instead of 50% of airfare 
reimbursed uptill now. For the 13 th KIP we have received 70 applications for 
participation which is the maximum number for any KIP till date.”   
 

 24 
H. Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) 
 
2.24 An allocation of Rs. 20 lakhs was made towards establishing Overseas Workers 
Resource Centre (OWRC) and the allocation made for this Centre in BE 2009 -10 has 
been increased to Rs. 50 lakh.  The Centre was established on ly on January, 2008 with 
12X7 helpline functioning in 7 languages.   The Committee desired to know about the 
utilization of increased allocation, the number of complaints or grievances registered, 
responded and redressed by OWRC since January, 2008  and w hat awareness 
campaign are being carried out by the Ministry for educating the emigrants about 
emigration procedures, the pitfalls of illegal emigration and precautions to be taken 
during recruitment and overseas employment, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“(i)     The budgetary allocation for the OWRC has been increased keeping in 
view the additional services to be provided by the OWRC, escalation in the 
cost of infrastructural facilities and for making the OWRC helpline a state of 
the art Resource Centre to provide walk -in-counseling as well act as a data 
source for disseminating information to the emigrant / would be emigrant 
workers. The additional facilities include: 
 
 OWRC has since been made operational on 24/7 basis w.e.f.  1 st May, 
2009. 
 An international toll free number (800 091 202 53) has been activated 
for information seekers from three countries, viz: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait 
and UAE.  The ISD toll free number is currently operating for Dubai 
and will be extended to Saudi Arabia & Kuwait, afte r the requisite 
service lines are available. 
 
(ii)  Since its inception in January, 2008 till June, 2009, 15716 calls were 
received by OWRC Helpline which includes 14,684 enquiries, 309 complaints 
with complete details and 723 complaints with incomplete de tails.  Out of the 
309 complaints with complete details, 275 complaints have been redressed.” 
 
(iii) The upward trend in the number of calls received by the Helpline 
indicates the growing popularity and faith of the people in approaching the 
Helpline for s eeking relevant information for their benefit as well as for 
lodging their grievances. 
 
(iv) The Awareness Campaign of the Ministry focuses on creating 
awareness on the risks of illegal migration and the procedures to be followed 
for legal migration.  
 
 

 25 
2.25 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry intends to expand the 
scope and reach of the Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) to make it 
operational with global reach and accessibility and establish regional OWRCs in select 
state Capitals.  On being asked to give details of establishment of these regional 
Centres, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“Ministry has already established one Migrant Resource Centre (MRC) at 
Cochin which started its operations w.e.f. 1 st September, 2008.  The MRC is 
working as a telephone Helpline as well as a walk -in-Counselling Centre for 
dissemination of information to the potential emigrant workers.   
 
Another Migrant Resource Centre is now being established in Hyderabad.  
Ministry intends to set up these MRCs as regional hubs which will then be 
connected to the central OWRC for strengthening the information 
dissemination and grievance redressal.” 
 
2.26 The Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs during evidence added as 
under: 
“....We have set up a Migrant Resources Centre at Kochi which is to provide 
guidance for potential migrants to various countries. A similar one is proposed 
to be set up at Hyderabad and also in Chandigarh. They are going to come 
up very soon. This is in addition to what was set up earlier called the 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre which primarily operates through a 24/7 
multilingual toll free telephone line. This is an additional thing.....” 
 
2.27 On being asked as to w hat are the timelines of establishm ent of Migrant 
Resource Centre (MRC), Hyderabad , the status of the proposal and  number of MRCs 
proposed to be set up in country as regional hub, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“The MRC at Hyderabad is being set up under the India -EU Project on safe 
and legal migration being implemented by IOM in partnership with the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs.  The work for setting up of the MRC at Hyderabad 
is underway.  It is expected to be set up by the end of 2009 - early 2010.   
 
The staff required for the MRC will be provided by the State Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh.    
 
The number of MRCs to be set up will be decided after due diligence 
considering the major sourcing States.”  
 
 

 26 
2.28 Further on being asked as to what  about remaining 34 complaints?  Why these 
complaints could not be redressed , as to what action has been taken by the Ministry on 
723 complaints re ceived with incomplete details and as to w hether the Ministry asked 
the complainants to furnish complete details or took other proactive actions with a view 
to redress such a substantial number of complaints, the Ministry in its reply stated: 
“The OWRC is essentially a 24X7 helpline which disseminates authentic 
information to the Indian emigrants abroad  and to potential emigrants .  
Various types of complaints and queries are received through the OWRC.  
Action is initiated in respect of all the actionable references.  However, not all 
the references received through the OWRC are act ionable. In many cases it 
is seen that the same complaint from the same complainant is forwarded time 
and again, the second and later references being reminders. Out of 34 
pending cases, 14 have been resolved and the remaining 20 are under 
process.” 
 
 
I. Legal Assistance to Indian Women facing problems in NRI Marriages 
 
2.29 The Committee have been informed that the allocation made for legal and 
financial assistance to Indian women facing problems in NRI marriages has been 
increased from Rs. 2 lakhs in 2008-2009 to Rs. 15 lakhs in 2009-2010.  On being asked 
to give reasons for this increase in allocation for assistance to Indian women under the 
scheme, in how many such cases the Ministry has rende red assistance during 2008 -
2009 and what are the details o f funds provided to each Indian Missions during the last 
two years and their utilization thereof, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“(i) The funds under the scheme are allocated to the Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad based on the projections raised by th em. These projections are made 
on the basis of cases available/anticipated in a financial year.  
 
(ii) The details are as under: 
 
1. High Commission of India, Wellington   4 cases 
2. Consulate General of India, San Francisco   1 case 
3. Consulate General of India, New York   1 case  
 Total    6 cases 
 Total amount   Rs. 2,67,820/-  
  
 
  

 27 
(iii) The details are as under: 
S.No. Indian 
mission   
Allocation 
of  fund 
sanctioned 
under  the 
budget 
during 
2007-2008 
(Rs. in 
lakhs ) 
Utilization of 
fund  
Allocation of 
fund 
sanctioned 
under the 
budget during 
2008-2009 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
utilization of 
fund  
1 U.S.A 15 Rs. 1,24,000/- 19.30 Rs. 92,220/-  
2 U.K. 08  …. 08 … 
3 CANADA 08 …. 05 …. 
4 AUSTRALIA  08 …. 10.08 …. 
5 NEW 
ZEALAND  
03 …. 08 Rs. 1,75.600/-  
6 DUBAI 
(UAE)  
02 …. --- …. 
7 KUWAIT 02 …. --- …. 
8 QATAR 02 … 04 …. 
9 BAHRAIN  02 … 02 …. 
TOTAL   RS. 50.00 
LAKHS 
Rs.1.24,000/-  Rs. 56.38 
LAKHS  
Rs. 2.67,820/-  
 
(iv) The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has prepared 
pamphlets/guidance Booklet on NRI Marriages   in different languages to 
educate prospective brides and their families to take all possible precautions 
before entering into marriage alliance with overseas Indians. The information 
campaign is still ongoing. Its impact will be known only in due course.” 
 
2.30 Further on being enquired about the reasons for less utilization as compared to 
allocation of funds sanctioned under the budget during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 
by the aforesaid 9 Indian Missions  and as to w hat is the allocation/utilization stat us 
during the current Financial Year (2009-2010), the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“The cases received by the Indian Missions/Posts may come under different 
categories. In majority of the cases Indian women desire reconciliation rather 
than divorce which the legal system in a country may not support.  Taking  in 
to consideration the legal system prevailing in the country, cost of legal 
expenses, worthiness of the cases etc.  the Missions decide the cases for 
providing legal assistance on a case to cas e basis which leads to less 
utilization . 
“The allocation and utilization status during the current financial year up to 
October, 2009 by the Indian Missions /Posts is as under:- 
 

 28 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Mission/Post  Funds  
allotted 
Rupees in 
Lakhs 
Utilization  
1 CGI, Melbourne 4.76  NIL 
2 CGI , Sydney 2.50  NIL 
3 HCI, Wellington, New Zealand  4.00 NIL 
4 Embassy of India, Safat, Kuwait  1.42  NIL 
5 Embassy of India, Qatar , Doha  2.00 NIL 
6 Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi, UAE  6.75 NIL 
7 Embassy of India, Bahrain  1.00  NIL 
8 HCI, London, U.K. 3..00  NIL 
9 Embassy of India, Washington, USA 2.36 NIL 
10 CGI, Chicago 2.10  NIL 
11 CGI, Houston 2.10  NIL 
12 CGI, New York 2.36 NIL 
13 CGI, San Francisco  1.25 NIL 
 Total 35.60 NIL 
 
J. Construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) 
 
2.31 Allocation for construction of  Pravasi Bharatiya Ke ndra (PBK) and for 
construction/purchase of new Office Premises for PoE shows a substantial increase 
from BE 2008-2009 of Rs.10 crores (subsequent RE 2008 -2009 of Rs.1 crore) to Rs.21 
crore for 2009 -2010.  Construction of PBK has been long overdue .  When asked to 
furnish the details regarding  actual status about the construction of  Pravasi Bharatiya 
Kendra (PBK), the Ministry in its reply has stated:   
“The land use of the plots allotted for the construction of the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) in Chankyapuri, New Delhi  has since been changed 
from “Residential (foreign Mission) to “Public & Semi Public Facilities (Socio -
cultural) by a notification issued on 19th February, 2009 issued by the Ministry 
of Urban Development.  
 
The National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd., (NBCC), a turn -key 
Consultant and Project Manager, has already prepared a Detailed -Project 

 29 
Report (DPR) of the PBK.  As per the DPR, the Project c ost has been 
estimated at Rs.112 crores, with applicable cost escalation formula 
prescribed by the CPWD. The Project has been appraised by the Committee 
on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) in its meeting held on 6 th August, 2009 and 
has been recommended for approval of the competent authority. The minutes 
of the CNE meeting has since been finalized. The CNE has recommended 
the proposal for approval of the competent authority at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 107.22 crore subject to certain conditions. Further appropria te action is 
being taken. 
 
The municipal drawings of the building have already been submitted to the 
NDMC, who in turn would seek the approval of Delhi Urban Arts Commission 
and Delhi Fire Service.  Concerted efforts are been made to get the drawings 
cleared by the authorities concerned.  Simultaneously, the NBCC is already 
in the process of getting the soil investigation etc. so that the detailed working 
drawings are ready and tenders for construction are invited by the NBCC. An 
amount of Rs.4.74 lakh has also been released as advance payment to the 
NBCC for soil testing.  The soil testing is expected to be started from 2 nd 
week of September, 2009 and likely to be completed by the last week of 
October, 2009. 
 
It is expected that the construction of the buil ding will start in the third quarter 
of the current financial year and the Project is likely to be completed by the 
end of year 2011.“  
 
2.32 The Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs during evidence has further 
added: 
“.....One of the important things I must mention where there has been a visible 
lack of performance on our side is the implementation of the project of 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra. This is a very ambitious project. The facilities are 
to come up in a plot of land in  Chanakyapuri in Delhi. The land has been 
allotted. The designs have been prepared and submitted for approval by the 
various agencies. The budget provision is there. There is a provision of Rs.21 
crore for this year for the capital works. The delays have b een because of the 
procedural matters with various agencies, one of which is permission for 
conversion of land use. The land was originally earmarked for diplomatic 
missions. So, the change of land use was a long process. It was ultimately 
got done. Now, w e are waiting for the approvals of the plan from the NDMC. 
Now it is actually pending with the Urban Arts Commission. Plus we also 
need approvals from the Finance Ministry, from the Committee for Non -Plan 
Expenditure. The Committee has appraised the scheme  but they are still 
waiting for some clarifications from the CPWD. This is one very ambitious 
programme where little headway has been made. But we hope to start the 
physical work on this because both the financial approval and the plans 
approval are at var ious advance d stages. So, we expect action during the 
current year itself.....” 

 30 
K. Working of Protector of Emigrants Offices (PoEs) 
 
2.33 The Committee desired to know as to whether all the POE Offices have their own 
premises and how many POE offices are s till functioning in rented buildings , the 
Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“There are 8 POE Offices located at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, 
Triruvananthapuram, Cochin, Hyderabad and Chandigarh. None of these 
offices are functioning from own premises.  The POE Offices of Delhi, Kolkata 
and Chandigarh are functioning from government buildings whereas the 
remaining offices are functioning from rented premises.” 
 
2.34 Further to a query about the  details of rent paid for PoE Offices for the last three 
years, and as to w hether there is any proposal to acquire/purchase land/building to 
house the PoE Offices, the Ministry in its reply has stated:  
 
“The details of rent paid for POE offices for the last three years, year-wise, is 
as under:  
 
Sl.No. Year  Rent Paid (Rs.)  
1. 2006-07 3493522 
2. 2007-08 2715945 
3. 2008-09 6838801 
 Total 13048268 
 
There is no proposal to acquire / purchase land / building to house the POE 
offices.   Funds provided for constructions / purchase of building for PGE/ 
POE are inadequate.”    
 
L. Investments by Overseas Indians 
 
2.35 According to the Ministry, one of the mandates of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs is promotion of investments by Overseas Indians in India particularly in areas 
such as exclusive Special Economic Zones (SEZs).  The Committee enquired about the 
steps taken by the Ministry vis -à-vis investments in SEZ during the last fiscal year , the 
Ministry in its reply has stated: 

 31 
“To achieve the objective of brining investment to India, OIFC planned to 
organize „Investors  Interactive Meetings‟ in eight regions showing a range of 
exclusive products and projects from the India Corporate to Overseas Indian 
investment in real estate wealth management, health care etc. The regions 
identified were Middle East, South Africa, Australia, UK, Netherlands, 
Canada, USA and Malaysia. First such meet was held in No vember 2008 in 
Oman. But due to the Global financial crisis and sharp decline in investor 
interest across the world, further investor meets have been deferred for the 
present.”  
 
2.36 Regarding organizing further investor meets in the identified regions in  near 
future, the Ministry in its post-evidence reply has stated: 
 
“The Ministry intends to organize further investors‟ meeting in the identified 
regions in next financial year . The revised dates will be finalized in 
consultation with the Embassies / High Commissions concerned.” 
 
 
M. Labour Mobility Partnership (LMP) 
 
2.37 On being asked to  furnish informa tion regarding Labour Mobility Partnership 
(LMP) Scheme and as to how the management of migration of workers be 
strengthened/improved by this Scheme, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
„(i) A tripartite Pilot Project titled „Administration of Temporary Contractual 
Employment Cycle from India and the Philippines to the United Arab Emirates‟ 
has been approved for implementation among the three Countries.  The objective 
of the Pilot Project is to develop best practices in the administration of the 
Temporary Contractual Employment Cycle leading to a framework for 
cooperation among Asian countries of origin and destination. The Pilot Project 
aims to achieve the following during the four phases of employment cycle: 
  
(a) Improving the quality of recruitment and pre-deployment processes. 
(b) providing the workers with appropriate working and living conditions and 
treatment during their employment abroad. 
(c) preparing the workers for their return at the end of their contract; and  
(d) facilitating the return and re -integration of the workers into their home 
communities.  
 
Another Project being implemented by the Ministry is the Information 
Campaign in six select States for creation of awareness among the general 
Public about the risks of irregular migration. This project implemented through 
IOM will address some of the immediate and urgent concerns arising out of 
irregular migration, especially in the rural side. This will b e achieved through 

 32 
organizing seminars involving the key stakeholders from the different regions 
for formulating a sustainable strategy for the prevention of irregular migration.  
Through the implementation of this project, the Heads of the Gram 
Panchayats of the targeted villages will be made aware of the risks and 
realities of irregular migration in order to communicate those risks to potential 
irregular migrants and to on a longer term basis, contribute to the prevention 
of irregular migration. State spe cific documentary films and Information 
Brochures will be produced and street plays will be organized to raise 
awareness among potential migrants at the grass -root level on the risks and 
realities of irregular migration.  
 
The Budgetary allocation of Rs. 1 .5 Crore will cater to the administrative 
expenses of the India – UAE- Philippines tri-partite Pilot Project and also the 
Information dissemination Campaign implemented through the IOM.   
 
(ii) The Pilot Project envisages placing a minimum of 1,500 workers each  
from India and the Philippines in three key sectors, namely, Construction, 
Healthcare and Hospitality who will be working in the UAE. Through joint 
implementation of the Project between India, the Philippines and UAE, the 
best Practices in the entire Mobi lity Cycle will be evolved. The management 
of migration of workers can be strengthened by applying these best practices 
across all workers moving from India to the Gulf region.” 
 
 
2.38 The Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs during the course of  evidence 
has further added: 
“....One major development is that we have been able to sign a Labour 
Mobility Partnership with Denmark, which we consider as a major inroad into 
Europe and we are following it up with efforts for more of such labour mobility 
partnerships including one with the European Union.  But unfortunately, 
because of the global recession which has substantially hit Europe the direct 
outcome of these efforts is probably not very visible as of now.....” 
 
2.39 Asked further about the Information Campaign is being implemented in only six 
selected States, whether there is any proposal in the Ministry to extend this project for 
other States of the Country and can‟t the medium of television and FM Radio be roped 
in for the purpose to disseminate the information in a more effective and holistic manner 
rather than restricting it to the campaign being undertaken by the Ministry nowadays , 
the Ministry in its reply stated: 
“The information campaign was restricted to six states only which were the 
major labour sending states. Information campaign in those states from where 
Labour sending is very less, will not have much meaningful utility. 

 33 
The focus of our campaigns has been on the Vernacular and regional 
channels that have made coverage in rural areas.  However, National News 
channels have been roped in for disseminating the information on a country-
wide basis. FM Radios are mostly popular in metro cities / urban areas. As 
most of the  migrant  labour force is from the small towns / rural villages, 
roping in FM Radio may not be of much use.” 
 
2.40 “Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF)” has been created by the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs in all the 17 Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) countries 
w.e.f 1 -1-2009.  The Outcome Budget also mentions that the Ministry is pursuing 
Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements (LMPA) with several countries.  An out lay of 
150 lakhs (1.5. Crores) has been provided to this programme in BE 2009-2010.   
The Committee desired to know the  details of this programme vi z. Negotiations 
made with different countries and w hich Region  of the world is the area of focus under 
Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements (LMPA), the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“(i) The Ministry is pursuing Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements 
(LMPA) with several countries  with the objective of  facilitating mobility of 
Indian workers for employment in these countries and curbing irregular 
migration to these countries from India.  
 
Labour Mobility Partnership with Denmark has been negotiated and initialed 
recently. Exploratory discussion on the possibility of an LMP has been held 
with France recently. Draft LMPs have been sent through diplomatic channels 
to Belgium, Sweden, Poland a nd Romania and discussion with them is likely 
to commence in the near future. An informal dialogue with the European 
Commission for exploring the potential for an India -EU LMP has been 
proposed. 
Countries in Europe are the focus under LMPA.”   
2.41 In their post evidence replies, the Ministry has  furnished the data about the PIOs 
and NRIs in the following countries: 
 
Denmark 6196  (April, 2009) 
France 65,000 (April, 2009) 
Belgium 17,000 (April, 2009) 
Sweden 22,000 (April, 2009) 
Poland 1642 (May, 2006) 
Romania 800 (May, 2006) 
 

 34 
As part of our strategy to diversify the destination base of overseas Indian 
professionals and workers, mobility partnerships with different countries 
are being pursued. A mobility partnership is a bilateral instrument that 
provides a framework for coopera tion to facilitate legal migration, ensure 
better management of migratory flows and take measures for prevention 
of illegal migration.  
The European Commission has been invited to send a delegation to India 
for an informal dialogue on the basis of the draft proposed by us.  The 
individual member states of EU have to be involved in the process. 
Draft LMPs have been sent to Belgium, Sweden, Poland , France and 
Romania through diplomatic channels.  
No responses have been received from Romania and Belgium. Sweden 
and France have evinced interest.  
 
In the case of Sweden, the Minister of Migration and Asylum Policy of 
Sweden had a meeting with the Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs in 
November, 2008 and discussed about mobility partnership between the 
two co untries and expressed the desire for continued dialogue on this 
important issue.  To set the process in motion a draft LMP was forwarded 
to them.  Further, response in this regard is awaited.   
 
As regards France, an official delegation is expected for discussions in 
early 2010.  
 
In the case of Poland,  the Indian Mission is in touch with that Govt. for 
further progress in the matter.” 
 
2.42 The Committee have been informed that the  third annual Conference of the 
Heads of the Indian Missions in the major la bour receiving countries was held in New 
Delhi during 27 -28 November, 2008.  Representatives of the State Governments of 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Punjab and representatives of Ministry of External Affairs 
and Home Affairs were also present.  The objectiv e of conference was to provide an 
opportunity to the Indian Missions in various labour receiving countries to share their 
experience in dealing with labour issues amongst themselves and with the Central 
Government. The recommendations of the conference ser ve as useful inputs for 
formulating the policy framework on Migration and to take appropriate steps in the 
destination countries. On being asked as to wh at were the major issues that have  been 
emerged in common as a result of this Conference  i.e. recommendations of the 
Conference considered as usefu l inputs for corrective action and t o what extent this 

 35 
Conference was helped the Government in finding w ays to deal with labour issues, the 
Ministry in their reply has stated that: 
“(i) The Heads of Missions Conf erence deliberated on a number of 
important issues aimed at protecting the welfare of the migrant workers.  
These included: 
 
(a) Setting up of the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) in the 
Missions in all the ECR countries to provide for welfare of the 
overseas Indian workers in distress.  
(b) Finalizing the Memorandum of Understanding with the major labour 
receiving Countries like Ki ngdom of Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, 
Bahrain, Libya, etc. for protection of  safety and welfare of Migrant 
workers.  
(c) Operationalising the Office of Director, Community Affairs 
(Development) at Abu Dhabi, UAE to look after the labour matters 
in the GCC Countries.  
(d) Revamping the existing system of Recruitment and enforcing a 
model contract for protecting the interests of Indian workers in the 
Gulf region.   
(e) Review of the Grievance Redressal System in the Missions for 
migrant workers. 
(f) Review of Skill Up gradation and Pre -departure Orientation 
Programme for potential migrant workers.  
 
(ii)    The major recommendations / decisions of the 3rd Heads of Missions  
Conference are as under:  
 
I. Launching of Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF). 
 
 The Scheme for the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) to be set up in 
the 17 ECR Countries to extend a host of welfare services for the overseas 
Indian workers was adopted.  
 
 The Fund will be operated by the HOM, as per the Scheme document and 
the sanction orders will be issued by the MOIA with the concurrence of MEA 
in this regard.   
 
 II. Activating the Joint Working Groups (JWGs).  
   
 The Ministry has signed bilateral Memor andum of Understanding (MoU) on 
labour with a number of labour receiving countries, like Jordan, Qatar, UAE, 
Kuwait and Oman. Similar MoUs have been finalized with Bahrain and 
Malaysia. The Missions concerned may coordinate the dates for signing 
these MoUs with the respective Governments.  
  

 36 
 Joint Working Groups (JWG) which have been set up under the MoUs should 
be activated and regular meetings of the JWG should be organized to sort 
out bilateral issues on labour such as model contract, minimum wages, 
documentation requirements, labour dispute redressal, retention of 
passports, substitution of contracts, dealing with recalcitrant employers, 
practical solutions to problems of exploitation and abuse of workers, 
regulation of intermediaries, sharing of experi ence in manpower deployment, 
exchange of information on legislative and administrative measures, 
exchange of labour market information, providing welfare support services 
through Indian Workers Resource Centres etc. A calendar of JWG Meetings 
may be prepared by the HoM‟s. 
 
 III. Operationalising the Office of Director, Community Affairs 
(Development) in the GCC Countries. 
 
 The Charter of the duties of Director, Community Affairs (Development), 
posted in the Overseas Indian Centre (OIC) in the UAE and repor ting to the 
Ambassador will be finalized and the Office would be operationalised in the 
first week of January, 2009 to render a wide variety of services including 
counseling to the migrant workers in legal, medical and financial matters.  
The Centre would act as a Resource Centre for the GCC Countries. A similar 
Centre would be set up in Kuala Lumpur, shortly.  
 
 IV. Finalization of the Model Contract for universal application by the 
Missions.  
 
 The model Work Contract may be made applicable to all the ECR  countries 
subject to the local laws. HoM‟s can customize the model Work Contract to 
accommodate country specific laws which can be enforced through 
administrative instructions. Country specific variations in the Work Contract 
can be discussed and finalize d in the meetings of the Joint Working Group 
set up under the provision of MoUs.   
 
 V. Universal Attestation of the Work Contract through outsourcing.      
 
 The attestation of the Work Contract by the Missions should be universalized. 
This would ensure creation of a Master Data Register and reinforce the legal 
migration process.  The Kuwaiti model of attestation of work contract through 
outsourcing can be adopted and the cost of outsourcing can be met from the 
attestation charges to be levied from the workers. This facility should work on 
an electronic platform so that data collection would be instantaneous and 
verifiable.   
 
 

 37 
V. Establishing Indian Workers Resource Centre (IWRC) which includes 
a Help Desk and a 24 X 7 Help Line in the GCC Countries and 
Malaysia.  
 
 Indian Workers Resource Centre (IWRC) which includes a Help Desk and a 
24 X 7 Helpline may be made functional in the Missions in the GCC 
Countries and Malaysia. This would facilitate redressal of the grievances of 
the migrant workers, provide information dissemination to intending migrants 
and act as a Resource Centre for State Governments to interact with, in 
times of distress. A model RFP for solici ting proposals for outsourcing the 
Helpline for the IWRC was circulated.  HoM‟s will take steps to operationalise 
the IWRC at the earliest. 
 
VII.Operating a Shelter - cum- Counseling Centre in the GCC Countries 
through Indian Associations / NGOs / Outsourcing.  
  
 The Missions may set up Shelter –cum – Counseling Centre to provide 
temporary shelter, food and medical facilities etc. to the runaway workers and 
housemaids and provide counseling services and legal assistance to the 
distressed workers. The HoM‟s can cons ider management of the Shelter 
Homes in partnership with Indian Associations / NGOs or through 
outsourcing to reputed agencies on the model of the Shelter Home operated 
by EOI, Kuwait.  HoM‟s will take steps to operationalise the Shelter -cum-
Counseling Centres.  
 
 VIII. Designing and Implementing an on-site Insurance Programme. 
  
 Since the existing PBBY Scheme has not proved beneficial to a large 
segment of the migrant workers, awareness about the scheme has to be 
spread and the procedures simplified.  Fea sibility of alternative Insurance 
Schemes may be explored which would be in conformity with the local laws. 
The Insurance Scheme should, in particular, cover cashless hospitalization. 
The premium of the Insurance cover can be levied from the employers.    
 
IX.Implementation of the Indo -UAE Pilot Project on Temporary Labour 
Mobility Partnerships and initiating similar Pilot Projects in other 
GCC Countries  
 
 The Indo -UAE Pilot Project on Temporary Labour Mobility Partnerships in 
three sectors, viz., Construc tion, Health Care and Hospitality was discussed.  
It was felt that similar Pilot Projects can be initiated in other countries of the 
region to adopt best practices in Labour Migration Management.  HoM‟s may 
explore the possibilities in consultation with the host Government. 
 
 X. Organizing focused India Investor Meets in all the GCC Countries   
 
 One Investor Interactive Meet was successfully organized at Muscat in 
partnership with OIFC on 12 th November, 2008. Similar Investor Meets may 

 38 
be organized in the other GCC countries to attract maximum investment from 
this region. OIFC to lay emphasis on developing customized products for 
overseas Indian workers to transform them from being mere savers to 
becoming investors.  OIFC will liaise with HoM‟s in this regard. 
 
(iii)    The deliberations and recommendations of the Conference helped in 
understanding issues relating to migrant workers in the major labour receiving 
Countries. This has resulted in formulating necessary policy framework for 
handling labour migration matters in these Countries.  
 
2.43 According the Outcome Budget the Skill up gradation and Pre -departure 
orientation scheme aims at capacity building in the country in the area of development 
of standards, curricula, learning material assessment standar ds, testing the certification 
on par with Global Standards.  On being asked to  furnish the details of steps taken by 
the Ministry in this regard during the last three years, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“The Scheme of Skill Up -gradation and Pre-departure Orientation undertaken 
by the Ministry is being implemented in partnership with the Ministry of Micro, 
Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME), major labour sending State 
Governments, apex Industrial Associations like ASSOCHAM, CII, etc. The 
Ministry has given financial assistance for implementing the Scheme through 
these agencies. This has helped in capacity building of the State 
Governments to a large extent.    Pre -departure Orientation Manuals have 
been prepared by the Centre for Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram 
under a funded research programme.  These Manuals have been given wide 
publicity to enable Pre -departure Orientation training to be given by the State 
Governments.”   
  
2.44 On being asked to  furnish the list of pre -departure orientation - cum- training 
institutions established / functioning for skill up gradation of prospective emigrant 
workers in various States particularly in States where the labour outflow is substantial , 
the Ministry in its reply has stated:  
 
“As explained in the previous para, the Ministry is implementing the scheme 
of Pre -departure and Orientation through the MSME, select State 
Governments and apex Industry Associations. The State Governments of 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and A ndhra Pradesh have set up Nodal departments for 
looking after the welfare of the overseas Indians, including the workers. They 
also provide training to the potential migrant workers from these States and 
facilitate their employment overseas. NORKA  in Kera la, the Overseas 
Manpower Corporation Limited (OMCL) in Tamil Nadu and Overseas 
Manpower Corporation of Andhra Pradesh (OMCAP) in Andhra Pradesh 
have developed the expertise for imparting the training to prospective 

 39 
emigrant workers.  The Pre -departure Ori entation Manuals prepared by 
Centre for Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram under a Research 
Programme funded by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs provide the 
requisite training material for the pre -departure Orientation training 
programme.”   
 
 
N. Emigration Act 1983 
 
2.45 Emigration related complaints have necessitated a fresh look at the emigration 
process as enshrined in the Emigration Act, 1983 particularly with reference to the need 
for redefining the role and responsibilities of stake holders so as to ensure protection  
and welfare of Emigrant Workers and prospective emigrants.  According to the Ministry 
the revised legislative framework required to be enacted is under finalization and will be 
placed before the cabinet shortly.  O n being asked to  state the current status  of the 
proposed amendments to the Emigration Act, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“MOIA has been pursuing amendment of the Emigration Act, 1983, and 
towards this end, had proposed the Emigration (Amendment) Bill, 2009, for 
introduction in the Rajya Sabha.  However, the Bill could not be introduced as 
the House was adjourned sine die on 26.02.09.  Subsequently, a decision 
was taken for enactment of a comprehensive new law to replace the existing 
Act.  The new law is to be based on the e -Governance Business Processing 
Re-engineering Report and the draft National Policy on Overseas 
Employment. This will enable MOIA to implement the new paradigm of 
emigration management which has been building in recent times.  The new 
legislation is aimed to bring about  major changes in the existing law and will 
transform emigration into a simple, transparent, efficient, and humane 
economic process, facilitate legal migration, prevent illegal migration and 
human smuggling, enable ethical recruitment practices, enhance th e 
protection and welfare of emigrants, manage student mobility and matters 
connected therewith.  The draft proposal has been circulated for inter -
ministerial consultations.”  
 

 40 
2.46 In its post-evidence reply, the Ministry further informed the Committee that:  
“MOIA is proposing enactment of a new legislation namely Emigration 
Management Bill, 2009, to replace the existing Emigration Act, 1983. The 
draft Cabinet Note alongwith the draft Emigration Management Bill, 2009, is 
under finalization. After the propo sal has been finalized, it will be referred to 
the Ministry of Law for vetting of the draft Bill. Subsequently, approval of the 
cabinet will be sought for introduction of the Bill in the Parliament.” 
 
O. Setting up of PIO/NRI Universities: 
 
2.47 On being asked as to why the work of  NRI/PIO University, Bangalore was 
entrusted to  Manipal Academy of Education,  a private institution, the focus of this 
University, the topics and academics of this University and who would be heading it, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in his reply during evidence has stated: 
“.....On the NRI -PIO University, the Ministry examined two options – one 
having it in the Government sector and two, having a private sector partner to 
do it. The prime difficulty with doing it in the Government sector was that of 
resources because setting up of  a university would need substantial input of 
resources which would have been very difficult for us to mobilize, Even as of 
now, the Committee may kindly note that our budget is entirely in the non -
plan side. We have not yet been included in the plan secti on. So, when we 
wanted to start, but the best option was to start with a private partner. So, 
there was a process of selection with various experts associated with it, and it 
was through this transparent process of selection that the Manipal Group  was 
identified as the partner for the first of the universities in NRI -PIO University. 
This university as now conceived, is going to be a multi-disciplinary university. 
They will start with under-graduate courses in various disciplines starting with, 
maybe some of the conventional types, including technology sector, medical, 
humanities and arts and science. But it should develop  to have post-graduate 
and research levels; it is a longer term plan because it is at this stage that we 
would benefit from the real advantages of having a specialized university. The 
responsibility for implementation of the project will be with the private partner, 
but there will be close monitoring by the Government. But for monitoring, the 
initial proposal was that we will have an advisory  board and that is what is 
there now . The advisory board consists of representatives of various 
academic organizations including the UGC, AICTE, the Medical Council, the 
Nursing Council, Pharmacy Council, etc. But at the meeting of the Advisory 
Council its elf, the feeling was that there must be a separate law governing 
these universities; otherwise, the approval process for each of the courses is 
going to be very difficult and time -consuming. It has therefore been decided 
that we should have a legislation to govern the NRI-PIO university and we are 
in the process of drafting a legislation which we should be able to present to 
Parliament very soon....” 
 

 41 
2.48 It has been informed  that expressions of Interest for setting up four more 
PIO/NRI Universities in dif ferent cities in India have been called for.  When asked to 
furnish the details regarding setting up  four PIO/NRI Universities in the country, the 
Ministry in its reply has stated: 
 
“Advertisements were placed on all national dailies in February, 2009 invi ting 
Expressions of Interest (EOIs ) to  set up four more PIO /NRI Universities in 
different cities , other  than Bengaluru.  Since the number of proposals 
received (18) was inadequate, another advertisement was published in all 
national dailies in June, 2009. The last date for receipt of EOIs was 31 st July, 
2009.  A total number of 57 EOIs have been received by  the prescribed last 
date for their receipt”  
 
 
2.49 Further on being asked as to whether the Ministry been able to identify four cities 
where PIO/NRI Universities are to be set up  out of these 57 EOIs and  any roadmap for 
the purpose of fructification of these Universities been work ed out by the Ministry,  the 
Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“The Ministry has not identified the four cities where PIO/NRI Universities 
are to be set up. This decision would depend upon the proposals received, 
which are yet to be examined.  
The roadmap for establishment of the Universities would be worked out 
after examination of the proposals received.” 
 
 
P. Bilateral Social Security Agreement/Cooperation with other countries 
 
2.50 On being asked about the  current status of Bila teral Social Security 
Agreement/Cooperation with different countries for the benefit of expatriate  workers on 
a reciprocal basis, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“Most of the developed countries have an umbrella social security system 
mandated by law. It is funded through mandatory contribution in the form of 
tax from all working people and their employer in order to provide multiple 
benefits like old age pension, d isability insurance, health insurance and 
unemployment insurance. The Indian workers and companies in these 
countries are required to pay these contributions even if they are deputed in 
these countries for a short term/contract. However, the individuals do  not get 
any benefit from the contribution made abroad on their return to India, as 
export of social Security Contribution is not permissible under the law in these 
countries. The Indian companies who operate in these countries also loose 
revenue and in th e process become less competitive in the international 
market.   
 

 42 
2. To protect the interest of the Indian professionals as well as self employed 
Indians working in the developed countries it is necessary for the Government to 
enter into social security agreement with the countries having sizable Indian 
professional workforce. 
 
3.  The following are the basic principles on which social security 
agreements (SSAs) with other countries are negotiated: 
 
(i) Avoidance of double taxation/contribution for the detach ed  workers 
deployed for a short term period up to 60 months. 
(ii) Portability of benefits on relocation to the native country. 
(iii) Totalization of contribution period for determining the eligibility for benefit 
of payments. 
 
4. The position of bilateral social sec urity agreements (SSAs) with different 
countries is as under:  
 
 SSA with Belgium, was signed in November, 2006.  The agreement 
will come into force from 1st September, 2009.  
 
 SSA with France was signed on 30 th September, 2008.  Forms 
and other procedures in connection with implementation of the 
agreement will be finalized soon and thereafter, the date for 
coming into force of the agreement will be decided.  
  
 Agreement on social insurance (for posted workers on ly) with 
Germany was signed on 8 th October, 2008.  The agreement will 
come into force from 1 st October, 2009.  This agreement will 
benefit the Indian professionals from payment of double social 
security contribution for a period of four years of posting in  
Germany.   
 
 
 Negotiations on SSA have been completed with the Czech 
Republic, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Norway, 
and Hungary. 
 Negotiations are going on with Denmark, Sweden, Germany                          
(comprehensive SSA), Australia and Canada.  
 Proposals for negotiation on SSA have been initiated with 
Spain, Portugal, Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, Austria, Finland, 
Cyprus, Italy and Greece. 
 Two rounds of exploratory talks have been held with by USA. 
 
 

 43 
Q. Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006 
 
2.51 On being asked to  furnish detailed note on Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana 
(PBBY) and India Health Care initiative, the Ministry furnished as follows: 
“Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006 
The PBBY, 2003 has been upgraded as the Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006 
to provide broader coverage to the emigrant workers.  The PBBY, 2006 has been 
notified on 25.01.2006  and it has come into effect from 01.02.2006.  The 
emigrant workers now get a mi nimum insurance cover of Rs. 5 lakhs (instead of 
Rs. 2 lakhs) and the policy is for the entire period of employment contract.  An 
additional cover of Rs. 25,000/ - for the legal expenses incurred by the emigrants 
in connection with their employment has also been included.   
Salient features of Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006  
 The Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006 provides for an insurance 
cover of a minimum sum of Rs. 5.00 lakhs  payable to the 
nominee/legal heir in the event of death or permanent disability of any 
Indian emigrant who goes abroad for employment purpose after 
obtaining emigration clearance  from the concerned Protector of 
Emigrants (POE). 
 In the case of death, besid es the cost of transporting the dead body, 
the cost incurred on the one-way airfare of one Attendant  shall also 
be reimbursed by the Insurance Company.  
 If a worker is not received by the employer on his arrival to the 
destination abroad or there is any su bstantive change in Employment 
Contract to his disadvantage or if the employment is pre -maturely 
terminated within the period of employment  for no fault of the 
emigrant, the Insurance Company shall reimburse one way economy 
class airfare provided the groun ds of repatriation are certified by the 
concerned Indian Mission/Post. 
 In cases where the repatriation is arranged by the Indian 
Mission/Post, the Insurance Company shall re -imburse the actual 
expenses to the concerned Indian Mission/Post. 
 The Insured pers on shall be reimbursed actual one way economy 
class airfare by the Insurance Company if he falls sick or is declared 
medically unfit to commence or continue working and the service 
contract is terminated by the Foreign Employer within twelve months of 
taking the insurance. 
 The Insurance Policy shall be valid for a minimum period of two 
years or the actual period of contract, whichever is longer.  

 44 
 The Insurance Policy shall also provide medical cover of a minimum 
of Rs. 50,000 /- as cash-less hospitalization and/or reimbursement of 
actual medical expenses of the insured emigrant workers on grounds 
of accidental injuries and/or sickness/ailments/diseases occurring 
during the period of insurance whether in India or in the country of his 
employment.  
 An insured p erson shall be covered for a minimum sum of Rs. 
25,000/- in connection with the legal expenses incurred by him in any 
litigation relating to his/her employment.    
 The Insurance Policy shall also provide maternity benefits, subject 
to a minimum cover of Rs . 20,000/- in case of women emigrants.  
In case of medical treatment in the country of employment, the 
maternity benefits would be provided if the requisite documents are 
certified by the concerned Indian Mission/Post.   
 The family of emigrant worker  in India consisting of spouse and two 
dependent children up to twenty one years of age shall be entitled to 
hospitalization cover in the event of death or permanent disability of 
the insured person for a maximum amount or Rs. 25,000/ - per 
annum.  
 The Insurance Companies shall charge fair and reasonable 
premium.  Service tax will be charged as applicable.  
 
Applications: 
The Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana is applicable to only citizens of India who 
apply for and obtain an emigration clearance as required under Emigration 
Act, 1983. This Yojana is not applicable in the event of war or internal conflict 
in the country to whic h the citizen of India holding the said policy has given 
for work. 
 
Revision of new rates of premium and additional benefits implemented 
w.e.f 1.04.08: 
 
PBBY 2006 has since been amended vide instructions dated 28 th February, 
2008, implementing the reduced premium rates along with increased / 
benefits w.e.f. 1.04.08.  This was following the decision taken in the meeting 
held under the chairmanship of Secretary, MOIA with the Insurance 
companies listed under the PBBY on 15th March, 2007.  The rates of reduced 
premium and the additional benefits, wherever applicable, in place of and in 
addition to the other existing benefits under the PBBY 2006, for 
implementation w.e.f. 1.04.08, are as per details given below: 
 
 

 45 
Minimum sum for which insured under 
the PBBY  
Rs. 10 lakh (in place of existing Rs. 5 lakh) 
Hospitalisation (Medical Expenses) 
covering injuries / sickness / ailment / 
diseases 
Rs. 75,000/ - ( in place of existing Rs. Rs. 
50,000/-) 
Repatriation covers medically unfit Actual one-way economy class air fare. 
Family Hospitalization in India Rs. 50000/ - (in place of existing Rs. 
25,000/-) 
Maternity Rs. 25,000/ - (in place of existing Rs. 
20,000/-) 
Attendant Actual One way economy class air fare 
Employment Contingency -do- 
Legal expenses Rs. 30,000/ - (in place of existing Rs. 
25,000/-) 
Actual Premium to be charged (without 
any hidden costs) 
Rs. 275 for 2 years policy period 
Rs. 375 for 3 years policy period 
 
 
2.52 Regarding India Health Care Initiatives, the Ministry has informed:  
 
“Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the American Association of Physician of 
Indian Origin (AAPI) during Pravasi Bharatiya divas 2006 at Hyderabad to 
implement Health Care Projects in India. 
 
AAPI is one of the major association of Indian doctor in the USA with more 
than 45,000 membership. AAPI has expertise in Primary and Secondary 
Health care and had already shown a keen interest in working in Village 
and Taluka Level in many Indian States. AAPI has done a lot of research 
in primary and secondary health c are and with this expertise they are 
considered to play a very important role in extending primary health care 
at Village and Taluka Level. 
 
The Ministry has defined three project areas for starting the Pilot Projects: 
 
 Primary health care 
 Emergency Medical Service 
 Geriatrics  
 
Andhra Pradesh and Bihar have been selected to implement the project 
on a pilot basis.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46 
R. Effect of Global Economic Recession 
 
2.53 The Committee desired the Ministry to explain the initiatives being undertaken 
by the Government to rehabilitate the unskilled/semi -skilled Indian emigrant workers 
returning to India particularl y those from the gulf Countries, the measures taken to 
provide assistance to retrenched Indi an professionals working abroad and as to 
whether any data been collected regarding such affected people , the Ministry in its 
reply has stated: 
 
“Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has been constantly monitoring the 
impact of global economic recession on the migrant Indian labour 
employed overseas, especially,  in the Gulf region.  Indian Council of 
Overseas Employment (ICOE), an autonomous organization under the 
Ministry was assigned the task of conducting a study on the subject and 
submit recommendations for taking suitable steps in this regard.  The final 
Report of the Study is awaited. Meantime, the impact assessment made 
by the Ministry indicates that there is no major retrenchment of overseas 
Indian workers from the GCC Countries. Ministry is presently engaged in 
finalizing a Co-contributory Pension Fund for the Overseas Workers which 
would also act as a Welfare Fund. 
 
In the absence of any empirical data of retrenchment of Indian 
professionals working abroad, the Ministry has not formulated any 
financial assistance Scheme to this category of workers.            
Awards also renew development of strong ties between Overseas Indians 
and the India.” 
 
2.54 Further on being asked as to w hen ICOE was assigned the task of 
conducting the study and terms of references and as to  what purpose would be 
served by having t he Report when the damage due to recession and related 
problems would be done, the Ministry in its reply has stated: 
“The terms of reference of the study was to assess the impact of global slow 
down on Indian migrant workers in Gulf Cooperation Council (GC C) countries 
and Malaysia.  The study was commissioned to be undertaken by M/s 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India Pvt. Ltd. On 28 th April, 2009 after inviting 
bids from important consultants, and the final report was submitted on 29 th 
September, 2009 after visits to six GCC countries and Malaysia were 
undertaken by a team of their professionals.  
 
“Mechanisms could be put in place to ove rcome such situations in future 
through better preparedness for the return and resettlement of worke rs if they 
are adversely affected by the economic downturn.” 

 47 
PART-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1. The Committee note that the Budget E stimates for the year 2008 -09 were  
Rs. 65 crore and provisional Revised Estimates were  pegged at Rs. 45 crore , 
which reflects that Rs. 20 crore remained unutilized during the year 2008-09, while 
Rs. 14.06 crore was unspent during the year 2007 -08 and the  position during 
2006-07 was no  better which shows that under utilization of funds has b ecome a 
trend during the last 3 years .  The Committee are of the view that but for this 
trend, this unspent amount could have been utilized somewhere else.  The 
Budget Estimates for the year 2009 -10 are Rs. 80 crore which has been reduced 
to Rs. 76 crore after the cut.   As per the Ministry‟s own admission the shortfall  in 
the F inancial Year 2008-2009 was on the capital head of account due to non -
utilization of the allocation made for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra  (PBK).  The 
increase in the BE 2009 -10 is primarily due to the expansion of the activities of 
the institutions established for the benefit of the overseas Indian community.  The 
Committee are not happy with such state of affairs.  The Committee are of the 
view that  budgetary estimates should be realistic as far as possible.  The 
Committee note that the Ministry has prepared a comprehensive action plan for 
the purpose.  The  Committee recommend that the comprehensive action plan  
prepared by the Ministry  should be adhered to properly for optimal utilization of 
funds.   All ground work should have been done before hand such as approvals 
for building plan, land use etc. to avoid  unnecessary delays as has happened  in 
case of PBK.    The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 

 48 
pay focused attention towards ensuring that there are no un utilized funds in 
future as has been the case during 2006-07 and 2007-08. 
 
2. The Committee are surprised to find that in spit e of their earlier 
recommendation regarding fi lling up of vacancies in the Ministry expeditiously, 
40 posts in Group „B‟ and „D‟ and two vacant posts to be filled by Department of 
Official Languages are still lying vacant .  Similar situation persists in PoE Offices 
also.  The Committee find it quite strange that some posts encadred in the 
Ministry of External Affairs are also vacant and the Ministry of External Affairs 
has shown inability to provide personnel.  The Committee further regret to 
observe that even four years  after the creation of this Ministry, they have to 
depend on other Ministries for staff strength . The Committee suggest to the 
Ministry to take up the matter of  the vacant posts at the highest level in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs  and MEA  as well as in the  Department of Official 
Languages to fill up these vacant posts immediately.  The Committee also 
suggest that pending formal selection of staff and also to cope up with the 
increased workload, the Ministry may recruit qualified temporary staff in Group 
„B‟ and „D‟ on contract basis through local Employment Exchange  or on 
deputation basis .  The Committee  also recommend to the Ministry to take 
immediate steps for filling up the required number of vacancies in PoE Offices 
too. 
 
 

 49 
3. The Committee note the exist ence of the Overseas Indian Facilitation 
Centre (OIFC), which is engaged in the field of providing all information related to 
investing in India that a potential Overseas Indian Investor would need.  The 
queries relating to investments across a  wide gamut of sectors are supposed to 
be replied through the OIFC Website , including those in respect of infrastructure 
and social sectors. OIFC is mandated to serve as a clearing house for investment 
related information to potential investors  besides bein g a one stop agency for 
replying queries and providing handholding services . This can be possible only 
when the Website is upgraded and updated regularly to provide all kind of 
information. The Committee feel that OIFC is not working as a single window to 
all investment related queries. The Website is not updated quite often. In such a 
scenario, the very purpose of setting up of OIFC gets defeated. The Committee 
desire that the OIFC be provided all possible assistance by the Government in 
developing a Busin ess networking platform and business directory to fulfill its 
mandate to facilitate Business to Business partnership.    The Committee find it 
extremely important that the OIFC must encourage potential overseas investors 
to invest in India and more importa ntly – by informing them about incentives to 
do so.  The Committee also desire that the Government should evolve a 
mechanism to collect the information about the actual investment coming to India 
in collaboration with Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Industrial 
Promotion and Policy). 
 
4. The Committee are happy to note that considering the necessity for 
establishing an institutional mechanism for promotion of Overseas Employment, 

 50 
better protection and welfare of Overseas Indian Workers and for  study of 
emerging overseas employment opportunities, Ministry has set up a Council for 
Promotion of Overseas Employment (CPOE) which has since been renamed as  
Indian Council of Overseas Employment (ICOE).  The activities have been 
undertaken/planned for this year as developing a labour market assessment in 
select European Countries by International Organization for Migration (IOM) , 
India-European Union Mobility Cooperation and design of a pension programme 
for returning workers are attractive and impressive.  The Committee are of the 
view that it should be ensured that activities undertaken by the Council ( ICOE) 
are carried out vigorusly and all possible efforts should be made in this direction. 
 
5. The Ministry has admitted that a key issue in addressing the problems and 
concerns of migrant workers and the Overseas Indian Community is the absence 
of a data base, empirical research and analysis that can support a ppropriate 
policy decisions.  The migrant workers do not have access to the Helpline 
numbers provided in the Missions and Posts abroad nor there is any dedicated 
officer to help them.  The Committee are unhappy with such sorry state of affairs. 
The Committee want that Helpline numbers and name and telephone number of 
dedicated officer should be prominently displayed in the Missions/Posts abroad. 
Within India, the information containing the Helpline numbers and name of nodal 
officer should be supplied to all State Governments/Chief Secretaries/ District 
Collectors besides being circulated among Members of Parliament for 
dissemination at Block and Panchayat levels.  This should also be done through 
other means of publicity viz. TV/Radio/Newspapers etc. The Committee want to be 

 51 
informed in this regard at periodic intervals. The Committee further recommend 
that a comprehensive data base may be prepared at the earliest to address the 
problems and concerns of migrant workers and expectations of the Diaspora. 
 
6. The allocation for Know India Programme (KIP) has been raised from Rs. 87 
lakh in 2008-09 to Rs. 1.25 crore in 2009 -10.  An increase of 43.68% over BE 2008-
09.  The Committee regret to observe the low level of participation viz. only 31, 34 
and 22 pa rticipants joined the programme during the 9 th, 10 th and 11 th KIP 
respectively.  The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry is now 
organizing 3 KIPs each financial year and up to 40 participants could take part in 
each of these programme s which was  restricted earlier to PIOs from a selected 
list of 32 countries, has now opened to PIOs from all countries  and it  has also 
decided to reimburse 90% of the total cost of air ticket to participants from their 
country to India and back from 12 th KIP onwards instead of 50% of air fare 
reimbursed earlier. 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry may increase the number of 
participants in the KIPs to be organized every financial year keeping in view the 
opening of programme to PIOs from all countries.  The Ministry should also think 
about introduction of more incentives to the participants to make KIP  a success 
in future.  The Committee recommend that concrete efforts should be put in place 
to ensure high level of participation in KIP.  A wait  list of desirous participants 
should be made to replace the drop outs. 
 
 

 52 
7. The Committee are happy to note that the allocation for the Overseas 
Workers Resource Centre (OWRC)  has been increased, k eeping in view the 
additional services to be provided by the OWRC.  The Committee observe that 
since its inception in January, 2008 till June, 2009, 15716 calls were received by 
OWRC Helpline which includes 14,684 enquiries, 309 complaints with complete 
details and 723 complaints with  incomplete details.  Out of the 309 complaints 
with complete details, 275 complaints have been redressed.   The Committee 
further observe that the popularity of OWRC and faith of the people in it , is 
growing for seeking relevant information for their benef it as well as for 
registering their grievances. The Committee want that the causes for delay, if any, 
in finally disposing of complaints received by OWRC should be looked into and 
suitable remedial measures be taken to ensure expeditious action on complain ts.  
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should provide all possible 
assistance required by the OWRC to make their helpline a State of  the Art 
Resource Centre.  For ensuring t he success of OWRC helpline, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry  should make vigorous efforts in educating the 
immigrants about legal im migration procedures, the pitfalls of illegal immigration 
and precautions to be taken during the recruitment and overseas employment. 
 
 
8. The Committee observe that allocation made for legal and financial 
assistance to India n women facing problems in NRI marriages has been 
increased from Rs. 2 lakh in 2008 -09 to Rs. 15 lakh in 2009 -10.  The Committee 
note that the funds under the scheme are allocated to the Indian Missions/Posts 

 53 
abroad based on the projections made by them, but 9 Indian Missions have failed 
to utilize the allocated funds under the scheme during 2007 -08 and 2008-09.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for under utilization of allocated funds 
by the Indian Mis sions under the scheme and the impact of the information 
campaign to educate prospective brides and their families.  The Committee 
further desire that the Ministry should endeavour to formulate a panel of legal 
experts for such cases within the Ministry as  well as in Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad who are familiar with the le gal systems of other countries since many of 
the victims are not familiar with legal systems abroad. 
 
9. The construction of PBK in New Delhi is a glaring example of Ministry‟ s 
ineptitude where in spite of repeated recommendations by the Committee, the y 
have not been able to start the construction work and the ambitious project  of 
PBK in New Delhi has not been materialized as yet.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with the Minist ry‟s explanation in this regard and observe  that the 
Ministry was not serious enough in the matter and the project has been 
languishing for the last 4-5 years.   
 The Committee desire that all formalities regarding construction of Pravasi 
Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) should be completed within a time frame and the whole 
process of necessary approval w.r.t. design/drawing, obtaining necessary 
clearance of statutory authorities, inviting bids and awarding of contract for the 
construction of building should be compl eted at the earliest.  The Committee feel 
that this is paramount to avoid time and cost overruns. The Committee strongly 
recommend to the Ministry to ensure early construction of PBK by accelerating 

 54 
all the processes involved so that PBK becomes functional  within the time limit 
i.e. by the end of 2011. 
 
10. The Committee observe that there are eight PoE offices in the country and 
none of these offices are functioning from their own premises.  The PoE offices of 
Delhi, Chandigarh and Kolkata are functioning from Government buildings 
whereas the remaining offices are functioning from rented premises.  The 
Committee also observe that the Ministry has not made any proposal in the 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) under the Head Capital Outlay on Public Works in 
this regard.  The Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry‟s casual reply in 
this regard that there is no plan to construct own buildings.  The Committee are 
unable to understa nd the reasons therefor.  This attitude of the Ministry has 
pained the Committee very much. Therefore, Committee strongly recommend the 
Ministry to draw a comprehensive and time -bound plan with adequate budgetary 
support in the coming years and to put regu lar monitoring mechanism in place to 
gradually accommodate all PoE offices in their own buildings to save huge rental 
outgo of the Ministry.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard on quarterly basis.  
 
11. The Committee observe that Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) had 
planned to organize “Investors Interactive Meetings” in eight regions showing a 
range of exclusive products and products from India Corporate to Overseas 
Indian Investment in real estate, w ealth management, health care etc.  First such 
meeting was held in November 2008 in Oman.  But due to the global financial 

 55 
crisis and sharp decline in investor interest across the world, further investor 
meets have been deferred for the present.  The Commi ttee are of the view that 
while the global market is recovering from recession,  Investor Interactive Meets 
may be planned in near future so that India can be showcased in a better way.   
 
12. The Committee note that a tripartite Project titl ed „Administrat ion of 
Temporary Contractual Employment Cycle from India and the Philippines to the 
United Arab Emirates‟ has been approved for implementation among the three 
Countries.  The objective of the Pilot Project is to develop best practices in the 
administration of the Temporary Contractual Employment Cycle leading to a 
framework for cooperation among Asian countries of origin and destination. The 
Pilot Project aims to achieve the objectives like improving the quality of 
recruitment an d pre -deployment processes, providing the workers with 
appropriate working and living conditions and treatment  during their employment 
abroad, preparing the workers for their return at the end of their contract; and 
facilitating the return and re -integration of the workers into their  home countries 
during the four phases of employment cycle .  The Committee consider it a 
landmark project which can go a long way in ameliorating the plight of Diaspora.  
The Committee are of the view that such type of projects should not be restricted 
to only three countries and hence may be undertaken with other countries too .  
The Committee want that the possibility of such proj ects being spread to other 
countries may be explored sincerely. 
 

 56 
13. The Committee note that the information campaign project in  six selected 
States for creation of awareness among the general public about the risk of 
irregular migration is being implemented.  This project will address some of the 
immediate and urgent concern s arising out of irregular migration, especially in 
rural areas.  The Committee want that such prestigious campaigns should not be 
limited only to six States.  There is no point in ignoring the other areas, so the 
Committee want that such campaign may be spread over to other States .  T he 
Committee want to  be apprised of the impact of this  campaign among targeted 
people and the extent of its success. 
 
14. The Committee are of the view that deliberation s and recommendations of 
the third annual conference of th e Head of the Missions in the major labour 
receiving countr ies held in New Delhi to provide an opportunity to the Indian 
Missions in various labour receiving countries to share their experience in 
dealing with the labour issues amongst themselves and with the Central 
Government w ill certainly help in understanding issues relating to migrant 
labourers.  The Committee hope that problems of workers will be minimized after 
these recommendations  come into force which has resulted in formulating 
necessary policy framework for handling labour migration matters in these 
countries.  The Committee want to be informed about the status of 
implementation of the recommendations. 
 
15. The Committee are not convinced at all with the reply of the Government 
regarding amendment of the Emigration Act 1983  as t he Government is 

 57 
furnishing similar replies for the last 3-4 years and no positive result has come 
out so far.  The dillydallying attitude of the Ministry in this regard is beyond 
comprehension. The Committee are given to understand that instead of amending 
the Emigration Act,  1983, a new comprehensive Bill  namely the Emigration 
Management Bill, 2009 is under finalization.  The Committee observe that already 
undue delay has taken place in this regard and there is no point in 
procrastinating further.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all 
formalities regarding this Bill should be completed at the earliest and it should be 
introduced during the next session of the Parliament positively. 
 
16. The Committe e understand that setting up of PIO/NRI Universities is a 
prestigious task and the Committee are of the view that the issue should be taken 
up at the Government level.  However, the Committee find that the project has 
now been assigned to Private Partner Manipal Academy of Higher Educational 
Trust (MAHET) and its advisory board has been constituted to evaluate the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR).  The Committee want the Government should keep 
close monitoring o n it.  The M AHET should be advised to prepare a transparent 
and time bound plan for its completion.  A legislation to govern the PIO/NRI 
University at Bengaluru  should be enacted at the earliest  to avoid any kind of 
delay in its establishment. The Committee als o want tha t the PIO University 
should impart knowledge of all disciplines including arts, culture and literature. 
The Committee are also of the view that all formal action for setting up of 
four more PIO/NRI Universities should be taken up at the earliest to ensure the 
commissioning of these projects without any delay. 

 58 
 
17. The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the Government to 
enter into social security Agreement s with the countries having sizable Indian  
professional workforce to protect the interests of the Indian professionals as well 
as self employed Indians working in the developing countries.  The Committee 
are of the view that such agreement s will benefit our people and the Indian 
Government as well .  It will not only enable workforce to avoid the payment of 
taxes again and again  but will ensure the portability of benefits on relocation to 
the native country.  The Committee recommend that the Government should try 
to make efforts to sign such agreement s with USA and gulf countries where huge 
number of Indians are working. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                         Sushma Swaraj, 
27 November 2009                                                        Chairperson,  
Agrahayana 06, 1931(Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 

 59 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 30th October, 2009 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Room No. 62, Parliament 
House. 
Present 
 
Smt. Sushma Swaraj – Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri S. Alagiri (Cuddalore) 
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
4. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
5. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
6.  Shri Janardhana Swamy 
7. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri Ashwani Kumar 
9. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
10. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
11. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
12. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director  
2. Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
 
1. Shri K. Mohandas   - Secretary 
2. Shri D.N. Srivastava - Joint Secretary (DS) 
3. Shri G. Gurucharan  - Joint Secretary (FS) 
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh  - PGE 
5. Shri A.K. Chatterjee  - Director (Finance) 
 
 

 60 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to the sitting of the Committee.  
The Chairperson then drew attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(I) of the Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs in connection with examination of the Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2009-2010. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 61 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 17TH NOVEMBER, 2009  
  
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1145 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. 62, Parliament House.  
PRESENT 
Smt. Sushma Swaraj  – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
4. Shri Pinaki Misra 
5. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
6. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
7. Dr. Karan Singh  
8. Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil 
9. Dr. (Smt.) Najma A. Heptulla 
10. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
11. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
12. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
Secretariat 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3.   Shri Hoti Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

 62 
 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2009 -
2010. The Chairperson invited Members to offe r their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. 
 
2. The Members suggested certain modifications and desired that those be 
suitably incorporated into the body of the Report. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report in 
the light of modifications suggested and consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of factual verification of the Report by the Ministry and thereafter, to present 
the Report to Parliament. The draft Report was then adopted. 
 
The meeting was then adjourned. 
 