 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2013-2014) 
 
                          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 23 
 

 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
 
 
 
                             
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
                 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 107  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of  Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition).  

CONTENTS 
 
             PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2013-2014…………………       (ii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………     (iii)  
 
Chapter I Introductory and General Issues relating to Nalanda University      1-6    
 
Chapter II Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013       7-28   
 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the third sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs held  
on 04.10.2013 …………………………………………………………………….      29 
II. Minutes of the fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs held 
             on 22.10.2013……………………………………………………………...              31 
III. Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs held 
             on 22.10.2013………………………………………………………….                      33 
                                
 
ANNEXURE 
  
 The Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013 ………………………………   35      
    
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2013-2014) 
 
 
 Shri Ananth Kumar                  -                 Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
Sl.No  Name  
 
2.     Shri Sultan Ahmed  
3.  Shri Anto Antony 
4.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
5.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
6.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
7.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
8.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
9.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
11.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
12.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
13.  Shri J. Ramesh  
14.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
15.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
16.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
17.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
18.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant  
21.           Vacant  
                                      
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri Murli Deora 
24.  Shri H.K. Dua 
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Smt. Ambika Soni 
31 Shri D. P. Tripathi  
              
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Smt Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Co mmittee on External Affairs (2013 -2014) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Third 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘The Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013’. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 26th August, 2013 and on the request of 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha , on 3 rd September, 2013 it was referred by the Hon’ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha  to the Standing Committe e on  External  Affairs  for  examination  and 
Report.   
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, t he Committee  were briefed by  the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Nalanda University on 4 th October, 
2013.  The Committee also  took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Aff airs, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and Nalanda 
University on 22nd October, 2013. The Committee also sought written information on various 
aspects relating to Nalanda University and the Amendment Bill from the Ministry of External 
Affairs.  
 
 
4. The    Committee  considered   and   adopted   this  Report  at  their  sitting  held  on 
10th  December, 2013. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended t o the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs who appeared before the Committee and  placed their considered views and 
also for furnishing background information and written replie s to the points raised by the 
Committee in connection with the examination of the Amendment Bill.  The Committee 
would also like to thank  the representatives of the Nalanda University and the Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) who also deposed before the Committee. 
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                            ANANTH KUMAR, 
10th December, 2013                                                                                          Chairman,   
19 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL ISSUES RELATING TO NALANDA UNIVERSITY 
 
 The ancient Nalanda University was a great seat of learning, scholarship, philosophy and 
statecraft.  To revive its glory, the need was felt for establishing a new University for the meeting of 
minds from the national and international arenas, to carry out research that would link philosophy to 
science, technology, economy and spirituality, and integrate both  ancient and modern thinking.  
Accordingly, in 2007, the Government of Bihar decided to set up the University of Nalanda, and the 
State Legislature of Bihar unanimously passed the University of Nalanda Act 2007 to facilitate its 
founding.  The University was established through a notification on 24th August, 2007.  
1.2    Independently, in mid -2006, there was a proposal from the Government of Singapore for 
the revival of the ancient Nalanda University.  It observed that Nalanda would be the ideal site for 
establishing a 21 st century institution of learning, linking South and East Asia. After discussions 
between India and Singapore, it was decided that Nalanda University could be established under an 
inter-governmental agreement among the member -states of the East Asia Summit (EAS).  But this 
idea was dropped because of a l ack of agreement within the East Asia Summit.  It was decided to 
establish the University under an Act of Parliament.   
1.3  The 2 nd East Asia Summit, held at Cebu, the Philippines in January, 2007, agreed on the 
revival of the Nalanda University, to enhan ce regional understanding and the appreciation of one 
another’s heritage and history.  The University was to be established on the basis of a Joint Press 
Statement at the 4 th East Asia Summit held at Hua Hin, Thailand in October, 2009, which supported 
its establishment as a non -state, non -profit, secular and self -governing international institution.  
After the support of EAS leaders had been secured, the Ministry of External Affairs moved the 
Nalanda University Bill which was passed by both the Houses of Parliament in the Monsoon Session 
of 2010, and received the President’s assent on 21st September, 2010.  After the issuance of a gazette 
notification the Nalanda University Act came into effect on 25 th November, 2010.  Following this 
Act, the University of Nalanda Act 2007 passed by the Bihar Government in 2007 stands repealed. 
1.4 India, as the host country, has made a significant contribution to the University.   Apart from 
the 455 acres of land provided by the Government of Bihar free of cost, the Government of India has 
released Rs. 25.28 crores to the university so far. The Expen diture Finance Committee (EFC) has 
completed their appraisal about the University and finalized an expenditure of Rs. 2727 crores upto 
year 2020-21. To raise funds from external sources, an External Endowment Committee has been 
constituted, to seek funding through public-private partnerships. 

2 
 
1.5 In view of the fact that the Ministry of Human Resource Development is the nodal Ministry 
dealing with higher education in the country, when the Ministry was asked to justify its 
responsibility in the establishmen t and running of the University,  Secretary East in the Ministry of 
External Affairs placed the following facts on the Bill: 
“... So, it became an international University. It was because of this international 
background of the Nalanda University project th at the Ministry of External Affairs was 
given the nodal role.  Our role is a limited one.  Our role is essentially as of a facilitator to 
assist the Nalanda University authorities in developing and bringing to fusion this very 
important initiative of the G overnment of India with the support of the participating 
countries of the East Asia Summit. We are also the conduit for the funding of the Nalanda 
University by the Government of India."   
1.6 Describing the role of Ministry of External Affairs in handling  academic activities of the 
University, the Secretary East, Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
"…. as far as its academic activities are concerned, bulk of its activities are concerned, we 
do not have any direct role.   On the two sides of this table, we have two of the members 
of the Governing Board of the Nalanda University and they will confirm that  the Ministry 
of External Affairs does not try to run or manage this University in any way.  That is well 
beyond our competence.  We are essentially handholding, we are essentially assisting this 
University especially keeping in mind the international char acter of the University, which 
is also an important part of India’s soft power.  We are trying to reinforce the civilisational 
outreach that we have in East Asia in particular but also elsewhere and there the Nalanda 
University played a very important role  from Sixth Century A.D. to 12 th Century A.D. 
when it was brought to an abrupt closure.  I wanted to clarify that we do not have 
competence or any objective or any desire to run or to manage the Nalanda University." 
  
1.7 The Ministry further clarified that the Ministry of Human Resource  Development (MHRD) 
was consulted during the formulation of the Nalanda University Bill, 2010 and they had supported 
the proposal for introduction of the Bill. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has also submitted 
in a written reply that in order to ensure continued involvement in decision making bodies of the 
University, it has been decided that the Additional Secretary (Financial Advisor) of the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development will be a member of the University’s Finance Committee besides a 
representative of the rank of Additional Secretary will be on  the Governing Board of the Nalanda 
University.   
1.8 The Preamble of the Nalanda University Act, 2010 declares the University to be an 
international institution. The Ministry while highlighting the unique character of the University  
made the following submission:   

3 
 
 “The Nalanda University is a stand -alone university created by an Act of 
Parliament which recognizes that unique status of the university…. 
 
... the core of the university’s academic programming is built around reviving inter -
Asian connections and, once more, encouraging participatory dialogue and research 
that is built around the shared heritage and history of Asia. The internatio nal status 
of the University, internationalism in its governance structure and its freedom to 
reach out to the world in its pursuit of excellence, its freedom to set a globally 
compatible academic agenda and curriculum, all give to the University a status 
different from virtually all existing Indian universities.”  
 
1.9  On being asked about the plans to actualize the vision  as enshrined in The Nalanda 
University (Amendment) Bill, 2013 which proposes to amend the Preamble by adding the lines 'as a 
contemporary university inspired by the academic excellence and global vi sion of the historic 
Nalanda', the Ministry furnished the following reply:  
"The new Nalanda University is a university that draws inspiration from its illustrious 
predecessor but is not its recreation. The vision for the revival of ancient Nalanda 
University is contained in the Vision Statement adopted by the Governing Board whic h 
mentions that the challenge for the University is to match the excellence of Nalanda of 
the first millennium CE for the third millennium CE. The University has, therefore, to be 
universalist in its outlook, open to currents of thoughts and practice from around the 
globe, and has to respond to the needs of a world which has miles to travel before it can 
ensure peace and prosperity with equity and hope for all the people of the world. Above 
all, Nalanda must be a centre of knowledge and a most excellent one . Its primary 
function must be to harness the best talents for the creation and dissemination of new 
knowledge as well as for the recovery and restoration of valuable old insights. Nalanda 
has to be open to students from across the world chosen for their d esire for and capacity 
to absorb knowledge in diverse fields.  Nalanda will be new but will aspire to be as good 
as its old self. It will draw upon the best resources of Asia and the world." 
 
1.10 Further elaborating upon the  Nalanda University being conceived as a unique project of the 
Government of India in partnership w ith EAS participating countries d uring the briefing, the 
Secretary East, Ministry of External Affairs  informed the Committee about the present status of the 
University as under: 
“The University has already started operating from its Project Office in New Delhi. It 
launched its website in October, 2011; its logo in November, 2011. The statutes were 
published in the Gazette of India on 31st March, 2012. The Government of Bihar has very 
generously transferred 455 acres of land acquired in Rajgir on a 99 -year lease to the 

4 
 
University on 4 th February, 2011. The construction of the boundary wall has essentially 
been completed. The first teaching programmes are scheduled to commence from the 
leased premises in the academic year 2014 -15. I understand that that will be in 
September, 2014.  The first two Schools will be the Schools of Ecology and 
Environmental Studies, and of Historical Studies. Teaching in all the seven Schools will 
commence in th e academic year 2017 -18. For the permanent campus of the University, 
an international architectural design competition was launched in November, 2012 and 
Vastu Shilpa consultants were declared winner by the international jury on 6th May, 2013. 
Since then, the design has been confirmed by the Governing Board of the University and 
preparatory steps are being taken to launch construction sometime early next year." 
1.11 When the Committee desired to know that how the Government of India propose  to monitor 
and regulate the  international institution like Nalanda University,  the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted the following justification: 
“The Government has representatives on the Governing Board which is the highest 
decision making body of the University and also on the Finance Committee and 
the Building and Works Committee of the University. All Government of India 
funding to the University is subject to laid down budgetary scrutiny and checks 
and balance as also parliamentary approvals and  oversight. The Comptroller and 
Auditor General also monitors the functioning through periodic audit.  All the 
subordinate legislation of the University is sent for notification to the MEA. There 
is a constant process of consultation between the MEA and va rious arms of 
Government of India, with regard to affairs of the university. The process of 
regulation is balanced to ensure that the autonomy of the institution is maintained.” 
 
1.12  Further, the Committee deliberated upon various academic aspects of the University 
including Schools, academic curricula and faculty. In the same context while describing the 
academic activities of the Nalanda University, the Ministry furnished the following details  in a 
written reply: 
 
"The University has announced that it will start teaching in two Schools viz. 
School of Historical Studies and the School of Ecology and Environment Studies 
in the academic session 2014 -15 and is doing its best to adhere to this sched ule. 
The tentative roll out plan for the other five Schools as per the Board’s current 
view is as follows:  
1 in 2015-16 
1 in 2016-17 
2 in 2017-18 
1 in 2018-19" 
1.13 When asked about the tentative roll out schedule for five Schools, the Ministry submitted the 
following facts in a written reply: 

5 
 
 "Though the Board has discussed the schedule of start of the five remaining 
Schools that will follow the first two Schools, namely the Schools of Historical 
Studies and Ecology and Environment Studies, a final decis ion on the five 
remaining schools will be taken by the Governing Board at an appropriate time, 
preferably after it has been constituted following the adoption of the amendments. 
Thus, at present there is no agreed upon schedule regarding the order in which  the 
other schools will roll out. All schools are expected to work at their peak capacity 
by 2021-22.  The annual academic calendar is likely to be from end -August or 
beginning of September to late-April or early-May each year." 
  
1.14 The Committee welc ome the initiatives taken by India in  partnership with the 
international community for reviving the ancient glory of Nalanda through the establishment 
of Nalanda University.  The Committee observe that through enactment of the Nalanda 
University Act, 2010, the Government have taken initiative  to establish the Nalanda 
University as an international institution .  This will certainly advance the concept of an 
Asian Community by bringing together future generations in the common objective of 
making new discover ies o f old relationships to realize the  unity of minds. The Committee , 
however, would like to suggest that  all efforts should be made  to invoke and include the 
icons, nomenclature and cultural as well as scholarly traditions of the old Nalanda University 
in the new initiative. The Committee are hopeful that by reconciling  the ancient glory with 
contemporary and future academic pursuits, the authorities would be able to develop it as an 
international centre of excellence.  
1.15 The Committee observe that  in the Joint Press Statement of the 4 th East-Asia 
Summit on 25 th October, 2009 on the revival of the Nalanda University and the 
Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU) signed on 10 th October, 2013, it is clearly mentioned 
that the Nalanda University will be non -state, non -profit, self -governing internationa l 
institution and it will have academic freedom for attainment of these objectives. But neither 
the Nalanda University Act, 2010 nor the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013 makes 
reference to these specific characters of the University, particularly in the Preamble. The 
Committee note this as a major lacunae and would like  that the proposed amendment to the 

6 
 
preamble of the Nalanda University A ct, 2010 shou ld be appropriately modified  to 
specifically include the se terms so as to reflect the spirit as envisaged by the member 
countries of the East Asian Summit behind the proposal for setting up the Nalanda 
University. 
1.16 The Committee take note of the tentative academic schedule of the University which 
envisages the beginning of academic activities from the year 2014 -15. However, the 
Committee are disappointed to note that the final roll out plan for the remaining five Schools 
is yet to  be decided  by the Governing B oard. The Committee  do not favour such  lack of 
planning on the part of the  Ministry/University/Governing B oard in delineating the exact 
academic plan of the University  and desire that Ministry/University must streamline the 
academic activities in order to set achievable targets  and start to work on that with 
immediate effect. The Committee also favour  the endeavors being made by the Nalanda 
University to collaborate wi th other centers of excellence and would further like to s uggest 
the University to also dwell upon the prospects of engaging with United Nations Educational 
Scientific & Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in this regard.  
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-II 
NALANDA UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
A. GENERAL ISSUES ABOUT THE BILL 
 After the establishment of the South Asian University, Nalanda University is the second 
international university located in India.  Since the coming into effect of the Nalanda University Act, 
2010 there has been a perceived need to amend and further refine some of its provisions, create an 
even better governance structure for the Un iversity than exists presently and help speed up the 
project.  Towards this end a Committee of Experts was constituted under the Planning Commission 
to suggest the amendments. The committee, headed by Prof. N. R. Madhava Menon, former Vice 
Chancellor of the West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, held four 
meetings on May 16, June 15, September 6 and October 7, 2012 .  The Committee of Experts tasked 
to suggest the amendments examined the issues of academic, administrative and financial autonomy 
related to appointments, salaries and emoluments, and auditing. It examined how existing gaps can 
be filled, and how the University can acquire international stature and ex cellence through 
representative and flexible governance and forward looking legislation, consistent with the Act. The 
Committee's recommendations have been factored into the draft amendments  being proposed in the 
Bill. 
2.2 According to the Ministry,  the Bill deals with the twin issues of autonomy and governance. 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee of Experts, discussions with the University and 
inter-ministerial consultations, the following important  aspects have been considered in the 
amendments:  (1)  The composition and functions of the Governing Board; (2) an enabling provision 
in Section 21 to bring the University as an entity under the ambit of the Headquarters Agreement and 
its notification with retrospective application from the date of co mmencement of the Act; (3)  
inclusion in the Preamble of the need to conclude an inter -governmental agreement; (4) an enabling 
provision allowing the Government of India to meet not only the University’s capital expenditure, 
but its recurring expenditure a s well and (5) retrospective application of Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations from the date of commencement of the Act. 
 
2.3 When the Committee desired to know about the Ministry's justifications for introducing the 
Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013 during such short period and particularly when the 
University has not even started working. The Ministry in written reply submitted as under: 

8 
 
"Since the coming into effect of the Nalanda Act some deficiencies and omissions 
have come to notice because of which it was not possible to carry the University 
project forward.  One such example is the constitution of the new Governing 
Board which was to have five members from amongst the Member States which 
provide maximum financial assistance. This clause would have come in the way of 
including countries that have a strong historical association with Nalanda 
University but are not in a posit ion to make fina ncial contributions. A need was, 
therefore, felt to amend this and certain other sections of the Nalanda University 
Act. The proposed amendments to the Act will improve the governance structure 
of the University. In addition to that, the pr ovision to conclude an inter -
governmental agreement, allow the Government of India to meet not only the 
university’s capital expenditure but its recurring expenditure as well and 
retrospective application of its Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations from th e date 
of commencement of the Act will help speed up the project. Though a 
Headquarters Agreements has been signed between the Government of India and 
Nalanda University, it cannot be fully implemented till the Amendment Bill is 
enacted."  
 
2.4 The Committee observe that through the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013, 
the Government has tried to rectify the omissions in the principal Act i.e. Nalanda University 
Act, 2010.  The Committee express their concern over the manner in which the principal Act  
had been formulated as there were several major omissions in the Act. As per the Ministry's 
own admission that because of these lacunae it was not possible to carry forward the University 
project.  The Committee by and large accept the amendments proposed  in the Bill. However, 
the Committee have to comment upon certain clauses where they feel a need of revision in the 
proposed clauses of the Amendment Bill or corresponding changes in the principal Act. 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE EXAMINATION 
B. PREAMBLE 
 
2.5 Clause 2(a) of the Amendment Bill proposes to amend Preamble of the principal Act i.e. the 
Nalanda University Act, 2010 and proposes to modify the Preamble as under: 
"in paragrap h 3, after the words , "Stat e of Bihar" , the words "as a 
contemporary University inspired by the academic excellence and global vision 
of the historic Nalanda shall be inserted." 
 

9 
 
2.6 Elaborating upon the rationale for the amendment, the Ministry of External Affairs in the  
detailed explanatory note stated as under:  
"The original paragraph in the Act does not have the words “as a contemporary 
university inspired by the academic excellence and global vision of the historic 
Nalanda.”  
2.7  The Ministry has further stated as under: 
"This addition has been made to reflect the desire to  anchor the vision of the 
new Nalanda University in the ancient Nalanda University ". (Sl. No. 1 Detailed 
Explanatory Note and reasons for proposed amendment), 
 
2.8 Further, Clause 2 (b) of the Bill proposes to amend Preamble of the principal Act by inserting 
a new paragraph which is as under: 
  “AND WHEREAS, as the University progresses, it is intended to conclude an 
inter-governmental agreement, and encourage Member States of the East Asia 
Summit to become parties to the said agreement.”. 
 
2.9 During the sitting held on 22 October, 2013 the Committee were apprised about the signing of 
a Memorandum of Understanding on establishment of  the Nalanda University by eight participating 
countries of the East Asia Summit on 10 October, 2013 at Bandar  Seri Begawan, Brunei,  Darussalam.  
In view of the entry "into force of the Memorandum of the Understanding, the Ministry proposed that 
clause 2 (b) of the Nalanda University (Amendment Bill, 2013) shall be substituted by the following: 
"AND WHEREAS, an int er-governmental Memorandum of Understanding on the 
Establishment of Nalanda University (MoU) has entered into force on October '10, 
2013 and it is intended to encourage other EAS participating countries that have not 
yet signed this MoU as well as any othe r State that subscribes to the object and 
purpose of the establishment of Nalanda University to  become a signatory to this 
MoU." 
 
2.10 During the oral evidence held on 22 October, 2013 Secretary (East) made the following 
submission:  
 
"In fact, on this point there is one more suggestion we wanted to make from our side.  
We wanted to have your permission and then we will send the modified amendment.  
When the principal Act was enacted, at that time we had used the nomenclature of EAS 
Member States, Member States of East Asia Summit.  Subsequently when we were 
negotiating the draft MoU in September in Brunei, Darussalam, at that time The 
ASEAN Secretariat which is also a Secretariat for the East Asia Summit suggested that 
the correct terminology will be 'EAS participating countries' rather than Member States.  
So, we have discussed this with the Secretary, Legislative Department also.  This is a 

10 
 
technical amendment we will move that wherever we have reference to EAS Member 
States we will change it to EAS participating countries." 
 
 
2.11 The Ministry further elaborated the position through an Explanatory Note: 
 
"ln line with the use of the term ' participating countries' in the MoU, the Hon'ble  
Committee may kindly consider substitution of 'Member States' by 'participating  
Countries' occurring in sections 3 (d), (j) 9 (1) (d);  (h), (i); and 31 (3) of the  Principal 
Act and in clause 3, section 7 (1) (c), (d); clause 5, section 9 (2) of the Amendment Bill. 
Further, in clause 5, section  (1) (j) of the Amendment Bill, the term' members' shall be 
substituted by' participating countries'' ln the Financial Memorandum, paragraph 1, in 
the third and fifth  lines, the term  'member states' shall be substituted by the term 
'participating countries'.  Similarly, in paragraph 1, eighth line, the term 'member 
countries' shall be  substituted by' participating countries, I n the Statement of Objects 
and Reasons, paragraph 4(a), the term 'Member  States' shall be substituted by the term'  
participating countries.” 
 
2.12 During the course of evidence, the Committee were enlightened upon the concept of Nalanda 
University as a self governing international institution as mentioned in the Joint Press Statement and 
the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and the establishment of the Nalanda University .  But, 
when the Committee specifically  desired to know about the reasons for not mentioning  the other 
equally important terms like 'non-profit'', ' non state' and  'self governing', either in the principal A ct 
or in the Amendment Bill, the Ministry submitted the following facts in their post- evidence reply: 
"The term non -profit is mentioned in Section 9 (2) of the principal Act. However, 
there was no particular reason for not mentioning the terms non -state, and self -
governing either in the Act or in the Amendment Bill."  
 
2.13 The Amendment Bill proposes to add  a new line to the preamble to the effect that it 
seeks to establish the Nalanda University as a contemporary University inspired by the 
academic excellence and global vision of the historic Nalanda.  The Committee  feel that 
inclusion of these words would certainly reflect the desire to anchor the vision of the new 
Nalanda University in the ancient Nalanda University.  The Committee, however, desire that 
Government/University should also take initiatives to translate this concept into a reality by 
reflecting the reconciliation of historic as well as contemporary features, making it relevant for 
future generations to come.   

11 
 
 Further, in view of the signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  by nine 
participating countries of the EAS and suggestions made by the ASEAN Secretariat regarding 
the use of correct terminology  of 'EAS participating countries ' substituting 'Member States', 
the Committee are of the opinion that the modifications suggested by the ASEAN Secretariat 
may be accepted and these may be appropriately incorporated in all concerned sections of the 
Revised Amendment Bill. 
C. GOVERNING BOARD 
1.14 Amendments to provisions regarding the structure of the Governing Board was one of the 
major reasons to bring this amendment Bill.  Furnishing the comparative data on its composition, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
The structure of the Governing Board is set out below: 
Governing Board as set out in the 
Principal Act 
Proposed Governing Board in the Amended 
Act 
(a) the Chancellor; (a) the Chancellor; 
(b) the Vice Chancellor; 
 
(b) the Vice Chancellor; 
 
(c) five  members from amongst the 
Member State which provide maximum 
financial assistance during a period of three 
years to be nominated by the Member 
States 
(c) five  m embers, one each to be nominated 
by  five Member States of the East Asia 
Summit, invited by the Government of India 
with  the concurrence of the Visitor; 
(d) one member, not below the rank of 
Secretary in the Ministry of External 
Affairs, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
 
(d) one member, not below the rank of 
Secretary dealing with East -Asia Summit 
Member States in the Ministry of External 
Affairs, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(e) two members, representing the State 
Government of  Bihar, to be nominated by 
the State Government. 
(e) two members, representing the State 
Government of Bihar, to be nominated by the 
State Government. 
(f) one member not below the rank of 
Additional Secretary in the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development,  to be 
nominated by the Central Government; 
 
(f) one member not below the rank of 
Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, to be nominated by 
the Central Government;  
 
(g) three members from amongst the 
persons being renowned academician or 
(g) five persons of eminence to be 
recommended by the Governing Board and 

12 
 
educationist, to be nominated by the 
Central Government. 
nominated with the approval of the Visitor. 
 (h) two members of the academic faculty of 
the University nominated by the Vice 
Chancellor.   
TOTAL: 14 members TOTAL: 18 members 
 
2.15 Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend section 7 (1) ( c)  of the principal  Act by substituting the clause 
as under: 
" five members, one each to be nominated by five Member States of the East Asia 
Summit, invited by the Government of India with the concurrence of the 
Visitor;"; 
2.16 Elaborating upon the rationale of the amendment, the Ministry in the detailed Explanatory 
Note stated as under: 
"The Act provides for “five members from amongst the Member States which 
provide maximum financial assistance during a period of three years to be 
nominated by the Member States;” 
  
2.17 The Ministry further stated as under: 
"It is proposed to have members from the EAS by invitation, without linking 
membership to financial assistance".  
2.18 On being enquired about  the objectives of inviting the representatives of EAS member 
countries in the Governing Board and the criteria for selection of the five countries, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
“The objective of inviting the representatives of EAS member countries to the Governing 
Board is to further reinforce the international character of the University and to  involve  
them fully in making policies, giving directions and management of the University’s 
affairs.  Although the basis for the invitation will be decided by the Government of India, 
it would be left to the countries to choose a person from any field. Article 4 of the 
Memorandum of Understanding states that the membership of the Governing Board will 
include five representatives from participating countries of the East Asia Summit to 
enhance their role in developing Nalanda University as an international instituti on of 
excellence.”   
 
2.19 However, when the Committee further expressed their concern about  the rationale for the  
proposed amendment to section 7 (1) (c) in view of the Government’s intention to have participation 
of other coun tries/ non-member countries section 9 (1) (j) and the provision for nomination by five 
EAS member states is not limiting the par ticipation of non -EAS countries, the Ministry of External 
Affairs clarified the position in post evidence reply as under: 

13 
 
"…..the Government does not consid er it appropriate to  invite non -EAS countries to join 
the Governing Board.  Secondly, para 2 of  MoU's Article 4 on the governance structure 
clearly states that the membership of the Governing Board will include five 
representatives from participating countries of the East Asia Summit to enhance their role 
in developing Nalanda University as an international institution of excellence. As such, 
any non -EAS country deciding to become a signatory to the MoU will know that  
membership of the Governing Board is  not open  to them. Thirdly, as per the new sub -
clause 9 (1) (j),  one of the objectives  of the University shall be to encourage other 
interested countries, who are not participating countries of the East Asia Summit, to 
collaborate in developing the Nala nda University as an international centre of excellence. 
This implies that collaboration can be in any form, whether academic or financial, without 
these countries being on the Governing Board. There is no barrier on nationality in the 
category of five eminent persons to be nominated by the Governing Board under section 7 
(1) (g) of the Amendment Bill.   If it is felt that someone from a non -EAS participating 
country would be useful on the Board he could be invited to become a member under this 
Section."  
2.20 On the particular issue of  resolution of the cases of objections  being raised by other member 
states or the individuals being nominated by member s tates, the Ministry  of External Affairs  in 
written reply submitted as under: 
“Issues, if any, will be re solved through friendly consultations.  Article    8 of the MoU 
states that any issue concerning interpretation or implementation of this MoU shall be 
settled through mutual consultations.” 
 
2.21 The Committee note that in the proposed amendment, five Members from participating 
countries of the East Asian Summit (EAS) will be nominated by invitation in the Governing 
Board and linking of membership to financial assistance has been removed. Simultane ously, 
Ministry has pronounced that inviting the representatives from abroad is to further reinforce 
the international character of the University and to involve them further in making policies, 
giving direction s and management of University's  affairs. But , t he Committee are of the 
opinion that 'five Members one each amongst the EAS Member States, is restrictive and might 
be contradictory  with the Government 's expressed intention of 'promotion of global 
inclusiveness' as proposed in clause 5 to amend sections 9 (1) (b) as well as 'to encourage other 
interested countries, who are not members of the EAS to collaborate in developing Nalanda 

14 
 
University' as mentioned in section 9 (1) (j). The Committee are not convinced with t he 
explanation furnished by the Ministry  referring to similar clause in the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) as the binding one and strongly desire that inspite of  considering to 
invite someone from non -EAS participating countries out of the category of five eminent 
persons from India using section 7 (1) (g) of the Amendment Bill, the Ministry should make a 
clear provision in the same clause or in a separate clause for inclusion of at least two 
representatives from non -EAS participating countries, in addition to five representatives of 
EAS participating countries to ensure the active participat ion of these countries in the 
Governing Board to make it global in real term. 
2.22 Clause 3 of the Bill also proposes to amend section 7 (1) (d) of the principal Act as under: 
"for the words "rank of Secretary", the words "rank of Secretary dealing with 
East Asia Summit Member States" shall be substituted."  
2.23 Elaborating upon the rationale for the amendment, the Ministry in the detailed explanatory note 
stated as under: 
"The Act provides for “one member, not below the rank of Secretary in the Ministry of 
External Affairs, to be nominated by the Central Government;” 
2.24 The Ministry further stated as under: 
"The addition of “dealing with the EAS Member States” has been made for 
clarity." 
2.25 The Committee desired to know the significance of adding the phrase, 'dealing with the East 
Asia Summit Member States'. The Ministry in post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"…The phra se has been added to ensure that the incumbent Secretary dealing with  
participating countries of the East Asia Summit is always on the Governing Board.  
…there is no intention to invite non -EAS countries to join the Governing Board.  
Secondly, the specific nomination of the incumbent Secretary has been provided for 
functional reasons."  
 
2.26 The Committee are not satisfied with explanation furnished by the Ministry regarding 
the proposed amendment to section 7 (1) (d)  limiting the nomination of Secretary level officer 
dealing with East Asia Summit Member States in the Governing Board.  In order to widen the 
base for the selection of the Officers to be nom inated to the Governing Board  and even for 

15 
 
more stability, t he Committee  strongly recommend that the amendment may read as ' one 
member not below the rank of Secretary having experience in dealing with East Asia Summit 
Member States'.  
2.27 Though the Government has not proposed any amendment in section 7 (1) (e) of the principal 
Act which reads as under: 
"…Two members representing the State Government of Bihar  to be nominated by the 
State Government."  
 
2.28 However, the Committee desired to know  the rationale for  incorporating two Members 
representing the State Government of Bihar. The Ministry in post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"The rationale of incorporating two Members representing the State Government of Bihar 
is that the University is located in Bihar and the support of the state will be crucial to deal 
with   issues, such as provision of land, municipal permissions, logistic al support etc.  The 
functioning of the University will be facilitated by the presence of nominees of the State 
Government on the Governing Board.  This provision already existed in the principal Act 
and it did not seem appropriate to alter this position.   It was felt prudent to respect the 
freedom and choice  of the Government of Bihar on the position/status of their nominees, 
who can be from any field." 
 
2.29 However, in view of specific provision s related to nomination of representatives from 
Ministry Of External Affairs (MEA) and Ministry of Human Resource Developme nt (MHRD) by 
Central Government which  the Committee desired to know the specific reasons for no specific 
mention of category regarding the nomination by the State Government of Bihar under clause 7 (1) 
(e) to the Governing Board. The Ministry submitted the following explanation in a written reply: 
“In the case of the State Government of Bihar, it will be free to nominate anyone, 
including its officials, to the Board. If it nomin ates officials in their ex -officio capacity 
then the same rules as those that apply to all ex -officio members will apply.  If they 
nominate individuals then they will have a term of three years as all other nominated 
members. A clarification to this effect will be made in the Statutes.” 
 
 
2.30 The Committee note that Government has not proposed any amendment to section 7 (1) 
(e) regarding the representation of the State Government of Bihar to the Governing Board.   
The Committee, however, find that this clause is silent on the issue whether these two nominees 
of the State Government will be ex -officio Members or individuals and t he State Government 
has been kept  free to nominate anyone  under this category.  While describing the rationale of 
incorporating two members representing the State Government of Bihar, the Ministry has  

16 
 
clearly stated that support of state is crucial to deal with issues such as provision of land, 
municipal permission, logistical support etc.  The Committee are unable to understand to keep 
this category open for the persons of any field when the objective  to give representation to the 
State is clear. The Committee, therefore, desire that section 7 (1) (e) should be amended 
appropriately mentioning the specific Cabinet Ministers and/or senior officers to be nominated 
under this category to represent the State Government in the Governing Board.  
2.31 Clause 3 of the Amendment Bill further proposes to amend section 7 (1) (g) of the principal 
Act as under: 
"five persons of eminence to be recommended by the Governing    
Board and nominated with the approval of the Visitor;" 
 
2.32 In the Detailed Explanatory Note, the Ministry submitted as under:  
"The Act provides for “three members from amongst the persons being 
renowned academician or educationist, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;” 
 
2.33 Furnishing the rationale of the proposed amendment, the Ministry in the Detailed 
Explanatory Note further stated as under: 
"The number has been increased from three to five, firstly for larger 
representation; and secondly, to choose persons of eminence from a wider field .  
To enable the Governing Board to be a stake holder in the process, nominations 
will be based on its recommendation." 
 
 2.34 In this context, when the Committee desired to know the justification for keeping it open for 
all the persons of eminence and not restricting it to renowned national level educationists or 
academicians, the Ministry submitted following explanation in a written reply: 
“It has been kept open to all persons of eminence so as not to restrict the field to 
educationists or academicians only. All fields does not exclude these two 
categories." 
 
2.35 The Government has also stated that t here is no specific category in its  mind and it has 
been left open -ended to enable a wider search of suitable persons from within the country or 
even outside. 
 

17 
 
2.36 The Committee observe that amendment to Clause 7 (1) (g), proposes to increase the 
number of nominated persons of eminence in the Governing Board from three to five to give 
larger representation and provide a wider field for selection  to the Board .  The Committee 
however, are not convinced with the rationale furnished by the Ministry regarding keeping it 
open for all the perso ns of eminence and not restricting it to renowned educationists or 
academicians. The Committee are of the opinion that specific areas of activities from which 
these five eminent persons are to be nominated should be explicitly mentioned in the Act itself 
without leaving it open ended. Further, the Committee have a strong view that majority of the 
nomination under this category should be made from amongst eminent educationalists and 
academicians.  The Committee, therefore , desire that the proposed clause should be modified 
so as to ensure that atleast three of such Members be renowned academicians/educationists as 
was originally mentioned in the principal Act and two persons may be nominated from 
amongst eminent persons belonging to other fields.  
 
2.37 Clause 3 of the Amendment Bill further proposes to amend section 7 (4) by making the 
following substitution: 
"The Registrar of the University shall be the Secretary of the Governing Board." 
 
2.38 In the Detailed Explanatory Note the Ministry stated as under: 
 
"As per the Act "The member, being the secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, 
nominated under clause (d) of sub -section (1), shall be the Member -Secretary of the 
Governing Board." 
 
2.39 The Ministry further stated that the Secretary ME A is too senior and  busy a person to be 
entrusted w ith the responsibility of being the Member Secretary of the Governing Board.  The 
Registrar should be the Secretary of the Governing Board, as per the pract ice in other such 
institutions. 
2.40 In this context, the Committee desired to know whether it is possible to nominate a person to 
the post of Secretary to the Governing Board, without he or she being a member. The Ministry in the 
written reply stated as under: 
“This is the standard practice in Indian universities. The Registrar is the ex -officio 
Secretary of the Executive Council but is not be deemed to be a member.   In 

18 
 
international academic institutions, Governing Boards do not generally have a 
Member-Secretary. This role is usually performed by the Vice -Chancellor’s office. 
This reduces governance friction and the creating of another power centre. As 
Secretary, the Registrar will attend all meetings of the Board but will have no voting 
rights." 
2.41 The Commit tee note that the Government proposes to amend section 7 (4) of the 
principal Act following the standard practice in Indian Universities appointing the Registrar 
as ex -officio Secretary of the Governing Board . But so far as international academic 
institutions are concerned , the Governing Boards do not generally have a Member -Secretary 
and this role is usually performed by the Vice -Chancellor’s office. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that as per the international practices and the status of  Nalanda University being an 
international institution in the making , this role should be pe rformed by the Vice -Chancellor 
and there is no need to appoint Registrar as ex -officio Secretary of the Governing Board. If 
required this section should be amended appropriately. 
2.42 During the oral evidence held on 22nd October, 2013, the Committee had deliberated upon 
the need to make President, ICCR an ex-officio member of the Governing Board of the Nalanda 
University, thereby enlarging the same.  
 
2.43 On the issue of inclusion of President, ICCR, in the Governing Board the Ministry in post-
evidence written reply submitted as under: 
"….While seeking the approval of the Cabinet, the Government will consider recommending 
the inclusion of the Chairman, Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) as an ex-officio 
member of the Governing Board… 
 
 
 
….The following new Sub -Section 7 (1) (i) was discussed at the hearing on October 22, 
2013, and would be considered by the Government while seeking the approval of the 
Cabinet. The President, Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), to be nominated 
by the Central Government, as ex-officio member….." 
 
2.44 The Committee observe that the erstwhile Nalanda University was part of the cultural 
heritage of India and through the new initiative for establishment of Nalanda Unive rsity, the 
Government aims to expand India's soft-diplomacy. The Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) is the premier organization mandated to carry forward India's cultural diplomacy to 
foreign shores.  The represen tation of ICCR in  the Governing Board of Nalanda University 

19 
 
would certainly support this objective of the University.  The Committee, therefore, would like 
to suggest that the President, ICCR should be nominated by name by the Government as an 
ex-officio member of the Governing Board of Nalanda University and desire that necessary 
amendment in section 7 of the Act should be made in this regard. 
D. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE GOVERNING BOARD 
2.45 Clause 4 of the Amendment Bill proposes to amend section 8 (2)  of the principal 
Act as under:  
"Provided that the Nalanda Mentor Group shall exercise the powers and discharge the 
functions of the Governing Board for  period of one year or till such time the members 
referred to in clauses (c)  to (g) of sub -section (1)of section 7 are nominated, 
whichever is earlier." 
 
2.46 In the same when the Committee wanted to know about  the current status of the Nalanda 
Mentor Group and also about  the Governing Body, please state th e relevance of mentioning 
'Nalanda Mentor Group' in Section 8 (2), the Ministry  submitted the following written reply: 
" In order to ensure continuity, the Nalanda Mentor Group assumed the powers and 
functions of the Governing Board of the University on the commencement of the Principal 
Act under Section 8(2).  Their term has been extended twice due to inability to constitute 
the new Board. The current tenure of the Board expires on November 24, 2013.  Since the 
Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013, i s currently under consideration of 
Parliament, steps will be taken to extend the tenure of the Governing Board as an interim 
measure. 
 
It is only an interim provision as it was necessary to have a body for governing   the 
University till the constitution of the new board. Since this was the body that had laid 
down the vision of the University, it was essential that the NMG be there for continuity 
and to safeguard the vision of the project." 
 
2.47 When the Committee specifically asked about  deletion of the phrase 'for a period of one year 
or' and 'whichever is earlier' in this section and substitution of the word 'nominated' is substituted by the 
word 'appointed' in the same para to make it perfect, the Ministry replied as under: 
"If the  Hon'ble Committee so desires, its observations will be  incorporated into the 
revised draft of the Bill, for the consideration of the Cabinet." 
2.48 While going  through the amendment proposed under section 8 (2), the Committee 
find that the presence of word s 'of one year or' and 'whichever is earlier' has no significance 
in the clause since it was relevant for the first year of the extension of tenure of Mentor 
Group.  The Committee, therefore, desire that these words may be deleted in the revised 

20 
 
Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill.  Similarly, the Committee find it more appropriate to 
use the word ' appointed' for the members of the Governing Board being referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 7 in place of 'nominated'. 
E. OBJECTIVES OF THE UNIVERSITY           
2.49 Clause 5 of the Amendment Bill proposes to insert a new sub-section after sub-section 9 (2) 
namely: 
"Notwithstandin g anything contained in sub-section (2), the Government of India may meet 
both capital and recurring expenditure of the University to the extent required." 
 
2.50 Furnishing the rationale for the proposed amendment, the Ministry in the Detailed 
Explanatory Note stated as under: 
"The Financial Memorandum to the Nalanda University Bill, 2010 provided that the 
Government of India would contribute towards the capital expenditure for the 
establishment and maintenance of the University, and any other expenditure of 
recurring and non -recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India was not 
involved. Contributions from other countries, institutions and organizations are 
voluntary and may not be significant.  Therefore, this new  sub-section has been 
introduced to enable the Government of India to meet the expenditure of the University 
to the extent required, including recurring expenditure." 
2.51 While further elaborating the reasons for introducing amendment to Section 9 (3) for meeting 
both Capital and Recurring expenditure of University, the Min istry in written reply submitted as 
under:  
“The participating countries of the East Asia Summit encouraged funding on voluntary 
basis from government and other sources.  In view of voluntary nature of the financial 
contribution from the participating countries of the East Asia   Summit, institutions, 
organizations and other sources, and until the University starts generating its own 
resources, a significant portion of the capital and recurring expenditure will have to be 
met by the Government of Indi a.  The University will endeavour to raise funds from 
sources other than the Government of India to the extent possible.  Apart from seeking 
donations for its Endowment Fund, the University has also drawn up a revenue model 
incorporating all possible avenues of revenue generation.  While Indian universities in the 
public sector on an average only generate about 15 -20% of their operating costs, Nalanda 
University is hoping to generate a much higher percentage. Nalanda University will 
endeavour to raise over 50 % of its operating expenses when  it becomes fully 
operational." 
2.52 The Ministry in a written submission further stated as under: 

21 
 
"The University expects to raise over 50 per cent of its operating expenses when it 
become fully operational b y 2021.  A deci sion on further budgetary support will be 
taken at an appropriate time". 
2.53 During the course of evidence, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) 
submitted as under: 
"...Our objective is to ensure that the University has an assured fund ing up to the fiscal 
year 2021 -22.  With that objective in mind, we had asked the Nalanda University 
authorities to project their budget both for recurring expenditure and capital 
expenditure, and the budget was further discussed with them and with Expendi ture 
Finance Committee (EFC).  They gave certain suggestions and directions.  On that 
basis we have fine-tuned the budget." 
2.54 The Committee also deliberated upon the financial aspects regarding the establishment of 
Nalanda University and desired the Ministry to furnish the projected figures annually from 2010-
11 upto 2021 -22 as prepared by Ed. CIL and enlighten the Committee abou t the response of 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on the same, the Ministry in written reply submitted as 
under: 
"According to the original project report prepared by EdCIL for the Government of 
Bihar, the initial capital expenditure on the project was  expected to be Rs. 1,005 crores.  
According to the revised DPR submitted for Nalanda University, the projected Capital 
Expenditure was as follows: 
No. Particulars Total INR 
(Lakhs) 
1. Building & Civil Works  1,84,077.54 
2. Furniture, Library Books, Teaching 
Equipments & Machinery 
20,228.69 
3. Preliminary and Pre-operative Expenses 5,000 
4. Contingency @ 3% on sum (1&2) 6,129.19 
 Total 2,15,435.42 
 
The year wise projection of Capital Expenditure by Ed CIL was as follows:  
Total Capital Cost (2010-11 to 2020-21) Rs. 2,15,435.42 Lakhs 
2010 – 11 Rs. 112.0 Lakhs 
2011 – 12 Rs. 800.0 Lakhs 
2012 – 13 Rs. 1985.9 Lakhs 
2013 – 14 Rs. 52424.9 Lakhs 
Year-wise break-up of                 2014 - 15 Rs. 42295.4 Lakhs 
The capital expenditure               2015 - 16 Rs. 35565.7 Lakhs 
2016 - 17 Rs. 29461.0 Lakhs 
2017 – 18 Rs. 17251.5 Lakhs 
2018 – 19 Rs. 14730.5 lakhs 
2019 – 20 Rs. 12730.3 Lakhs 
2020 – 21 Rs. 8078.3 Lakhs 
 
In its meeting on July 9, 2013, the EFC examined the Nalanda University project proposal 
and observed that the cost of construction in administrative and academic areas be brought 
down, the University may relook at proposed Teacher to Student ratios as wel l as Teaching 

22 
 
to Non-Teaching staff ratio to bring it in line with standard norms as well as incorporate a 
revenue model.  Based on these observations, a detailed exercise was carried out to review 
the cost estimates and a revenue model was also devised by  the University to meet its 
expenditure to the extent possible.   
As a result of this exercise, the total capital cost of the project was revised downwards to 
Rs. 1,749.65 crore from Rs. 2,154.35 crore, while the recurring cost has come down to Rs. 
977.45 crore from the original figure of Rs. 1,378.26 crore. The total cost of the project was 
reduced to Rs. 2727.10 crore from the earlier estimate of Rs. 3,532.61 crore, with an 
aggregate reduction of Rs. 805.51 crore.  
The EFC accepted the Ministry’s submissi ons in terms of revised cost and recommended 
the project for Cabinet approval". 
2.55 In context of the Ministry's projection regarding the  Nalanda University for future and 
the actual experience so far, the Committee desired to be acquainted with the details of projected 
Demands for Grants, Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates allocated and Actual Expenditure 
incurred under the 'Nalanda University' since its inception.  The Ministry in a written reply stated 
as under: 
"The details of BE, RE, etc. are as below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-
14 
Projected 
Demand 
--- 49.50 100.00 598.95 547.07 
BE 50.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 125.00 
RE 1.00 2.00 10.00 12.00 --- 
Actual 
Expenditure 
0.24 2.21 7.17 11.51 4.15* 
*Actual expenditure as on 30.09.2013". 
2.56 The Committee note that the establishment of  the Nalanda University is primarily an 
initiative of the East Asia Summit  expecting significant contribution from participating 
countries. But in view of voluntary nature of financial contribution from them, the major 
burden of capital and recurring expenditure has to be borne by the Government of India . The 
new clause in section 9 has been inserted to fulfill this objective. The Committee approve the 
insertion of this clau se to enable the Government of India for  bearing the major expenditure 
burden for the setting up the University.  The Committee, however, desire that 
Ministry/University should continue to make efforts to garner resour ces from other possible 
avenues of revenue generation.  The Committee also recommend that the Constitution of the 

23 
 
International Advisory Committee and the Endowments Committee, whose Chairmen will be 
permanent invitees of the Governing Board be provided for in the Act itself and tasked with the 
responsibility of fostering partnership and garnering resources consistent with the vision and 
objectives of the University.  They should be suitably empowered to do so by suitable provision 
in the relevant Statutes. 
2.57 The Committee have been continuously taking note of the pace and progress of the 
Nalanda University and have thus commented upon it in the 14 th and 20 th Report on 
Demands for G rants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 
respectively as well as in the 17 th Action Taken Report on the abovesaid 14 th Report . The 
Committee had particularly commented upon the delay in  implementation of the project and 
gaps between Projected Demands, Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates and actual  
expenditure relating to the University . The Committee take note of two very significant 
developments i.e. signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) by nine countries for the 
establishment of the Nalanda University and approval of revised proposal by Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) for the expenditure upto year 2020 -21 and hope that the Nalanda 
University will now be in better position to streamline its internal procedures to expedite the 
pace of the implementation of the project both in terms of infrastructure development as well 
as the academic activities. The Committee further desire that University should draw defined 
timeline for completion of short term, medium term and long term activities  for 
establishment of the University and adhere to the schedule strictly. 
F POWERS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
2.58  Clause 6 (d) of the Amendment Bill further proposes to amend section 10 (xxiv) of the 
principal Act as under: 
"For the words “to borrow”, the words “to borrow funds”shall be substituted."  
2.59  In the Detailed Explanatory Note the Ministry have stated that the original provision is silent 
on what to borrow.  The word "Funds” has been added for clarity. 

24 
 
2.60  The Committee note that in the proposed amendment to section 10 (xxiv), the Ministry 
has not specified any source from where the funds can be borrowed by the  University, if required. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that if the Ministry has any specific source(s) in their mind , it 
should be clearly mentioned in the amen dments. It is also suggested to include the words 'if 
necessary' after the phrase 'to borrow funds' to make it more relevant. 
G UNIVERSITY OPEN TO ALL PERSONS 
2.61  Clause 7 of the Amendment Bill proposes to amend section 11 of the principal Act as under: 
"For the words “irrespective of gender”, the words "irrespective of nationality, gender" 
shall be substituted." 
 
2.62  In the Detailed Explanatory Note the Ministry stated as under: 
"The original provision does not include nationality . " Nationality” has been added to 
make the University more inclusive and give it the authority to recruit faculty and admit 
students from anywhere outside India." 
2.63  Acknowledging the concerns of the Members on the omission during the briefing, the 
representative of the Ministry submitted as under: 
"That was a serious omission in the principal Act. That is being rectified now. A good 
part of academy will be international".  
2.64  While further clarifying, the Secretary (East)  from Ministry of External Affairs submitted as 
under: 
"…On the question of faculty both through amendments as well as general approach of 
university authorities, an effort is being made to ensure that it will be an international 
faculty. We are also providing amenities for faculty to attract the best talent not only 
from within India, but from outside also. There is also a specific provision; I may refer 
to section 10( xxix) which asks for appointment of persons working in any university, 
academic institution fo r a specific period. We will get talent from outside for a limited 
period to reinforce the faculty of the university".  
2.65  During the course of evidence, the representative of the Ministry further elaborated as under: 
"…Apart from the Visitor of the University, who will be hon. President of India, all 
other positions that of Vice Chancellor and faculty positions will be open to nationals 
of other countries. We expect a significant percentage of faculty and student body to 
come from other countries. That would be our endeavour to underline the international 
character of the university…" 
2.66 The Committee welcome the proposed amendment to section 11 rectifying the serious 
omission on the part of the Ministry  and adding th e word 'nationality' alongwith words 

25 
 
'irrespective of gender' in the principal Act.  I nclusion of this word is essential because Nalanda 
University is an international institution and significant part of students and faculty will be 
international.  The Com mittee, however, recommend that after being empowered through this 
amendment, appropriate steps should be  taken to ensure diversity of nationalities in all 
endeavors of the University  including in recruiting process for academic staff as well as in 
admission of students to make this institution a prime international institution. 
H.  PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF UNIVERSITY, ACADEMIC STAFF , ETC.  
 
2.67 Clause 11 of the Amendment Bill, proposes to amend section 21 as under: 
 “The University, members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their 
dependents or members of the family shall enjoy such privileges and immunities 
as th e Central Government may, after entering into an agreement with the 
University from a date not earlier than the date of the commencement of this Act, 
notify under sectio n 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 
1947".  
 
2.68 In the Detailed Explanatory Note the Ministry stated as under: 
"The original provision does not include the University as an entity to enjoy privileges 
and immunities under section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 
1947. 
Secondly, the retrospective application is considered necessary to give a legal basis for 
appointments and financial decisions taken since the comm encement of the Nalanda 
University Act, 2010. 
The Act did not provide any privileges and immunities to the University as an entity and 
the proposed addition is to remove this lacuna. The second addition has been included to 
specify the date of applicabilit y of the privileges and immunities conferred in this 
section". 
2.69 During the course of evidence, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs 
clarified as under: 
"There are two changes being proposed here.  First is, it is an act of omission that the 
University was left out here. So, while these privileges and immunities are provided to 
academic staff, the University as an entity was not eligible".  
2.70 While elaborating upon the significance of inserting an enabling provision in Section 21 to 
bring the University as an entity under the ambit of the Headquarters Agreement, and its notification 

26 
 
with retrospective application from the date of commencement of the Act, the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted as under: 
“The previous Act did not provide any privileges and immunities to the University as 
an entity and the proposed addition is to remove this lacuna.  The University as an 
entity has been brought under the ambit of Headquarters Agreement because its assets, 
income and other property shall be exempt from all direct taxes other than charges for 
public utility services; from customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports 
and exports in respect of articles imported or exported for its official use, inc luding its 
publications; and the right to purchase, hold or dispose of any currencies, securities and 
funds through authorized channels.  The Host country shall take such steps as may be 
necessary to protect the University premises against any intrusion or  damage and to 
prevent any disturbance of the peace of the University or impairment of its dignity.  
The retrospective application of the agreement will regularize the University’s 
administrative and other functions since its establishments.” 
 
2.71 The Com mittee further sought clarification regarding entering int o an agreement with the 
Central Government to notify the University under Section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and 
Immunities) Act, 1947 under Section 21 , its implications  as well as reason s for retrospective 
application of the provision and application of immunities. The Ministry in  their written reply 
submitted as under: 
“The Headquarters Agreement signed on July 20, 2013 lays down obligations on the 
part of the Government of India as Host Country for the University. It was necessary 
for the University to enter into this agreement with the Central Government to facilitate 
notification of privileges and immunities under the United Nations (Privileges & 
Immunities) Act, 1947. 
  
The retrospective application of the agreement will regularize the University’s 
administrative and other functions since its establishment. 
 
The privi leges and immunities will apply only to academic staff as defined in the 
Statutes.  The non -academic/administrative staff will be governed by the established 
rules and regulations. 
 
The immunities are extended to foreign nationals working in the University as 
academic staff. The academic staff who are nationals of the host country (India) or 
permanent residents in India shall be granted only exemption from taxation in respect 
of salaries, honoraria, allowances and other emolument.   
 
The academic staff who are not from the host country (India) shall be granted 
exemption from taxation in respect of their salaries, honoraria, allowances and other 
emoluments; the right to get the appropri ate visa; the freedom to maintain movable and 
immovable property while in the employment of the University in the host country; and 
the right to import free of custom duties, taxes and other levies, items for personal use.”   
 

27 
 
2.72 Clarifying further on th e Headquarters Agreement, the representative of Ministry of 
External Affairs during the evidence submitted as under: 
  
"…Under the Headquarters Agreement, there are provisions like inviolability of the 
premises and protection of property and archives.  This is something which we are 
committing from our side…" 
2.73 He further added that: 
"…This is a notification and this provides a legal framework under which these UN 
privileges and immunities are  given.  There is the UN (Privileges and Immunities) 
Act, 1947 under which this is being notified  as an international institution.  This is 
an existing provision of the principal Act.  The only change that is being made is 
adding University which was not t here earlier. Otherwise, it is an existing 
provision".  
2.74 On Committee's query regarding the impact of deleting the phrase related to retrospective 
application on the working of the University, the Ministry in post-evidence reply submitted as under: 
"Although the deletion of the phrase related to the retrospective application will not  
affect the working of the University, its retention will help it to carry out its functions 
without any apprehensions concerning the University's decisions since its 
establishment. As mentioned above, the main purpose served by the retrospective 
clause is to ensure that the University as an entity is eligible for the privileges and 
immunities since its inception, on par with its academic staff. " 
2.75  When specifically asked about the  reasons for seeking retrospective application of Statutes, 
Ordinances and Regulations from the date of commencement of the Act, the Ministry of External 
Affairs furnished the following categorical reply:  
"Retrospective application of the Statutes, Ordinance and Regulations is the standard norm 
required for good governance. This provision is also contained in the Central University 
Act as well as the South Asian University Act. The inclusion of this provision had been 
overlooked in the prin cipal Nalanda University Act. It is now proposed to rectify this 
initial omission." 
2.76 The Committee note that clause 11 of the Amendment Bill proposes to amend section 21 
of the Act first by adding word 'University' with a view to provide privileges and immunities to 
the University as an entity and second , addition has been included to provide retrospective 
application of the privileges and immunities conferred in this section.  The Committee find it 
justified to add 'University' as an entity in this sec tion at par with its academic staff but they 
are not convinced with the explanation furnished by the Ministry about applicability of these 
privileges and immunities since commencement of the Nalanda University Act.   The Ministry 

28 
 
has also accepted that del etion of the phrase related to the retrospective application will not 
affect the working of the University. This  phrase also does not seem necessary since 
Headquarter Agreement has been signed on July 20, 2013 and Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with EAS  participating countries regarding establishment of the 
Nalanda University has been signed on October 10, 2013.  T he Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the amendment s to section 21 should be modified appropriately to make it 
applicable from the date of signing of Headquarters Agreement and not from the date of 
commencement of the Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                               ANANTH KUMAR, 
10 December, 2013                                                                            Chairman,  
19 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
  

29 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2013-14) HELD ON 4TH OCTOBER, 2013 
 
The Committee sat on 4th October, 2013 from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Bhudeo Chaudhary 
3. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
4.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
5. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
6.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Janardhana Swamy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri H.K. Dua  
10. Shri Balbir Punj 
11. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
12. Shri N.K. Singh  
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
14. Shri D.P. Tripathi  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director 
 
  
 Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs and Nalanda University 
  
  1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
 
Shri Ashok K. Kantha 
Dr. Jitendra Nath Misra 
Dr. Neeru Chadha 
Smt. Neeta Bhushan 
Shri Anurag Srivastava 
Dr. Gopa Sabharwal 
Shri. M.C. Singhania 
 
Secretary (East) 
Additional Secretary (Nalanda) 
Joint Secretary (L&T) 
Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
Director ( Finance) 
Vice Chancellor, Nalanda University 
Consultant (Nalanda) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and representatives of 
the Ministry of External Affairs and Nalanda University to the sitting of the Committee to have a 
briefing on the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

30 
 
3. Secretary (East) explained the background and rationale of the proposed amendments and 
also dwelled upon the progress achieved so far in the Nalanda University Project. He further 
informed the Committee about the features of Headquarters Agreement between Ministr y on 
External Affairs and Nalanda University the Immunities and Privileges to be extended to the 
Nalanda University under United Nations (Privileges/Immunities Act),  1947 through the 
amendment Bill, steps taken to conclude inter -governmental agreement and  the process of signing 
the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in the Eighth East Asia Summit in Brunei on 10 October, 
2013 and also contributions being pledged by various countries. 
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised various queries, inter -alia regarding core 
proposals in the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), funding pattern, University's idea of public 
private partnership, issues related to autonomy and governance, tentative academic schedule, 
inclusion of classical Indian languages in c ourse curricula of the University etc. The Members also 
drew attention of the Ministry to the proposed amendment in Section 7,8,9,10, 11 and 21 of the 
principal Act and raised concerns over composition and functioning of the Governing Board, 
incorporation of symbols and structural concepts from the old Nalanda University and functioning of 
Nalanda University after the notification of the Nalanda University Act, 2010 in the Gazette of India. 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Nalanda University also 
replied to various queries raised by the Members of the Committee. The Chairman, CEA directed the 
Ministry of External Affairs to furnish written replies on the points raised by the Committee for 
which the information was not readily available.  
 The Committee then adjourned.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2013-14) HELD ON 22TH OCTOBER, 2013 
The Committee sat on 22 October, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Room No. G -074, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Karan Singh-  In the Chair 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
1.  Shri Bhudeo Chaudhary 
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
5.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
7. Shri Bhola Singh 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri H.K. Dua  
9. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla 
10. Shri Balbir Punj 
11. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
12. Shri N.K. Singh  
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Nalanda University 
 1. Shri Ashok K. Kantha Secretary (East) 
2. Dr. Jitendra Nath Misra Additional Secretary (Nalanda) 

32 
 
3. Smt. Neeta Bhushan Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
4. 
5. 
Shri Anurag Srivastava 
Dr. P.K. Choudhary 
Director ( Finance) 
Director (L&T) 
6. Dr. Gopa Sabharwal Vice Chancellor, Nalanda University 
7. Shri. M.C. Singhania Consultant (Nalanda) 
8. Shri Sudhir Kumar Consultant (Nalanda University) 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department) 
1. Shri P.K. malhotra  Secretary 
2. Shri R. Sreenivas  Deputy Legislative Counsel 
Hon’ble Chairman, CEA (Shri Ananth Kumar) could not attend the sitting of the Committee 
due to some urgent engagement.  The Committee, therefore, chose Dr. Karan Singh  to act as 
Chairman for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha.  At the outset, the Chairpers on welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative 
Department) and the Nalanda University to the sitting of the Committee in connection with the oral 
evidence on the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013.  
3. The Committee were informed that a Memorandum of Understanding on the establishment of 
Nalanda University has been signed by eight participating countries of the East Asia Summit on 10 th 
October, 2013 at Banda r Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam at the 8 th East Asia Summit and 11 th 
ASEAN –India Summit. Thereafter, the Committee were briefed about the voluntary contributions 
already made as well as indicated by various countries, capital expenditure and recurring expenditure 
finalized by EFC for the Nalanda University and overall pro gress achieved in the implementation of 
Nalanda University Project since its inception. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee undertook clause -by-clause discussion of the Nalanda University 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the witnesses responded to the observations made  by the Members of 
the Committee. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
  

33 
 
APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2013-14) HELD ON 10TH  DECEMBER, 2013 
 
 
The Committee sat on 10th December, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600  hrs. in Room No.67, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Ananth Kumar   -  Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
7.  Shri Janardhana Swamy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri H.K. Dua 
9. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. Karan Singh 
12. Shri N.K. Singh 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman, CEA welcomed Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on 'The Nalanda University 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013'.  Hon’ble Chairman, CEA invited the Members to offer their suggest ions, 

34 
 
if any, for incorporation in the draft Report.  The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
Then, the Committee adopted the draft Report with minor modifications. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairman, CEA to finalize the Report inc orporating 
the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

ANNEXURE 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. LVI of 2013 
 
THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 of 2010.  
A 
 
BILL 
 
to amend the Nalanda University Act, 2010. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nalanda University (Amendment) Act, 2013. 
 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
5  2. In the Nalanda University Act, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
the preamble,— 
 
(a)   in paragrap h 3, afte r the words , "Stat e of Bihar" , the word s "as a 
contemporary University inspired by the academic excellence and global vision of the 
historic Nalanda" shall be inserted; 
 (b) after paragraph 3, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:— 
“AND WHEREAS, as the University progresses, it is intended to conclude 
an inter-governmental agreement, and encourage Member States of the East 
Asia Summit to become parties to the said agreement.”. 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shor t title 
and 
commencement. 
 
 
Amendment 
of preamble.  

  
 
Amendment 
of sectio n 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of sectio n 8. 
 
 
Amendment 
of sectio n 9. 
3. In section 7 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (1)— 
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
"(c) five members, one each to be nominated by five Member States 
of the East Asia Summit, invited by the Government of India with the  5 
concurrence of the Visitor;"; 
 
(ii) in clause (d), for the words "rank of Secretary", the words "rank of 
Secretary dealing with East Asia Summit Member States" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(g) five persons of eminence to be recommended by the Governing   10  
Board and nominated with the approval of the Visitor;"; 
 
(iv) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"(h) two member s of the academi c facult y of the University 
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor."; 
 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and letters "clauses (c) to (g)",   15  
the words, brackets and letters "clauses (c), (e), (g) and (h)" shall substituted; 
 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "The Chancellor", the words "The Chancellor 
or in his absence, any member nominated by him from the Governing Board" shall be 
substituted;  
 
(d) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—   2 0  
 
"(4) The Registra r of the Universit y shall be the Secretar y of the 
Governing Board.". 
 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (2), for the words, 
brackets and letters "clauses (c) to (g)", the words, brackets and letters "clauses (c) to (h)" 
shall be substituted.                                                                                                                  25  
 
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1),— 
(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
"(a) to meet and set global standards of academic excellence and 
research and enable capacity building in the domain of philosoph y,  3 0 
language, history and other areas of higher learning;"; 
 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "promotion of", the words "promotion of 
global inclusiveness" shall be substituted; 
 
(c) clause (c) shall be omitted; 
 
(d) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—         35  
 
"(j) to encourage other interested countries, who are not members 
of the East Asia Summit, to collaborat e in developin g the Nalanda 
University as an international centre of excellence."; 
 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "from each of the Member States", the 
words "from the Member States, Institutions and Organisations" shall be substituted;   40  
 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"(3) Notwithstandin g anything contained in sub-section (2), the 
Government of India may meet both capital and recurring expenditure of the 
University to the extent required.". 
 
 
36

  
 
6. In section 10 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
“(ii) to set up a consortium of international partners in furtherance of the 
objectives of the University;”; 
 
  (b) in clause (ix), for the words “Readerships and Lecturerships”, at both the 
place s where they occur, the word s “Associat e Professorship s and Assistant 
Professorships” shall be substituted; 
 
(c) in clause (xxiii), for the word “Ordinances”, the word “Statutes” shall be 
substituted;  
 
                       (d) in clause (xxiv), for the words “to borrow”, the words “to borrow funds” 
shall be substituted; 
(e) after clause (xxviii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(xxix) to appoint persons working in any other University or academic 
institution , includin g those locate d outsid e the countr y, as facult y of the 
                         university for a specified period.". 
 
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the words “irrespective of gender”, the words 
"irrespective of nationality, gender" shall be substituted. 
 
8. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted. 
 
 
9. In section 13 of the principal Act, after clause (2), the following clauses shall be 
 inserted, namely:— 
 
“(2A) the Deans; 
(2B) the Provosts;”. 
10. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 11. 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 12. 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 13. 
 
 
 
 
Insertio n of 
new sections  
15A and 15B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 1947.  
 
  “15A. The Deans shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service and exercise such powers and perform such functions as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 
15B. The Provosts shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service and exercise such powers and perform such functions as may 
             be prescribed by the Statutes.”. 
 
11. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted and 
shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 25th November, 2010, namely:— 
 
 
“21. The University, members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their 
dependents or members of the family shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as 
 the Central Government may, after entering into an agreement with the University 
from a date not earlier than the date of the commencement of this Act, notify under 
section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947.”. 
 
12. In section 22 of the principal Act, for clause (3), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
                         “(3) the Councils of Schools of Studies;”. 
13. In section 24 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (2)— 
 37
 
Deans.  
 
 
 
Provosts .  
 
 
 
Substitution 
of new 
sectio n for 
sectio n 21. 
 
Privileges 
and 
immunities 
of  
Universit y, 
academic  
staff , etc.  
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 22. 
 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 24. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 27. 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 31. 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 32. 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 42. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of  
sectio n 43. 
(i) for clause (iv), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(iv) Economics and Management;”; 
(ii) in clause (v), for the word "Langauges", the word “Linguistics” shall 
be substituted;  
 
(iii) after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—      5 
 
“(via) Information Sciences and Technology;”; 
 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the word “Board”, the word “Council” shall be 
substituted;  
 
(c) in sub-section (4), for the words “Boards of School”, the words “Councils of 
Schools” shall be substituted.                                                                                         10  
 
14. In section 27 of the principal Act, for clause (k), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
“(k) Schools of Studies, members of their Councils and the powers and functions 
of such Councils;”. 
 
15. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “shall also be   15  
submitted”, the words “shall be sent” shall be substituted. 
 
16. In section 32 of the principal Act, sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
 
 
17. In section 42 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 25th 
November, 2010, namely:—                                                                                                       20  
 
“(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations shall include the 
power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement 
of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations or any of them but no such 
retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to 
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or   2 5  
Regulations may be applicable.”. 
 
18. In section 43 of the principal Act,— 
 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
“(a) the first Registrar, the first Finance Officer, the first Deans and the 
first Provosts shall be appointed by the Governing Board, as it may deem fit,   3 0  
and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;”; 
(ii) clause (b) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The Nalanda University Act, 2010 (the Act) was enacted to implement the decisions 
arrived at the Second East Asia Summit held on the 15th January, 2007, in the Philippines 
and subsequently at the Fourth East Asia Summit held on the 25th October, 2009 in Thailand 
for the establishment of the Nalanda University in the State of Bihar as an international 
institution for the pursuit of intellectual, philosophical, historical and spiritual studies and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
2. The Act came into force on the 25th November, 2010. The President of India is the 
Visitor of the University and Professor Amartya Sen is the Chancellor and Chairman of the 
Governin g Board.   The Universit y has commence d its operation s from its office in 
New Delhi. The construction of the buildings that will come up in Phase I is expected to 
begin in the last quarter of 2013-14. Teaching in the Schools of Ecology and Environment 
Studies and Historical Studies is expected to begin from leased premises in September, 2014. 
Teaching in all the seven schools will commence in the academic year 2017-18. 
3. It has become necessary to amend certain provisions of the Act in order to create 
an even better governance structure for the University than exists presently, and help 
speed up the project. At present, there is no provision in the Act to extend privileges and 
immunities provided under the Act to the University, in addition to its academic staff so as 
to enable from the date of the commencement of the Act.  A provision is required the 
Government of India to meet not only the University’s capital expenditure but its recurring 
expenditure as well. The Act does not provide for retrospective operation of the Statutes, 
Ordinances and Regulations from the date of commencement of the Act, which will provide 
the University a legal basis for appointments, and for financial decisions made before the 
Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations came into force. 
4. In view of the above, it becomes necessary to amend the Nalanda University Act, 
2010 by the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which, inter alia, provides for the 
following, namely:— 
(a) to encourage Member States of the East Asia Summit to conclude an inter- 
governmental agreement with a view to providing further substantive basis for the 
University to be treated as an international organisation; 
(b) to amend section 7 of the Act relating to the “Governing Board” so as to 
increase the number of persons of eminence and to include two members from the 
academic faculty of the University on the Governing Board; 
(c) to insert a new sub-section (3) to section 9 of the Act so as to enable the 
Government of India to meet the University’s capital and recurring expenditure to the 
extent required; 
(d) to insert new sections 15A and 15B so as to make a provision for the 
appointment of Deans and Provosts; 
(e) to substitute section 21 of the Act relating to “privileges and immunities” so 
as to extend the said privileges and immunities to the University, in addition to the 
members of the academic staff, under the Headquarters Agreement, applicable from 
the date of commencement of the Act; and 
(f) to insert a new sub-section (3) to section 42 so as to empower the University 
to bring its Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations in to force with retrospective effect 
from the date of commencement of the Act. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                   SALMAN KHURSHID 
The 13th August, 2013. 
39 
 

 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 9 to provide that the 
Nalanda University shall be a non-profit public-private partnership, which shall seek support 
from each of the member States and from other sources but shall be autonomous and 
accountable to the Governing Board. Accordingly, the University’s funding is based on the 
contributions from the Government of India, and from amongst the Member States of the 
East Asia Summit, in addition to benefactions, donations and gifts received in accordance 
with the regulation s made by the Governin g Board.   Private donations , international 
contributions from other foreign governments and member countries of the East Asia Summit 
are expected on a voluntary basis. 
 
2. Clause 5 of the Bill further seeks to insert new sub-section (3) to said section so as 
to provide that the Government of India may meet both capital and recurring expenditure of 
the University to the extent required. To minimise the burden of recurring expenditure on 
the Government, the University will take steps to reduce recurring expenditure, and create 
a revenue model whereby it is able to meet recurring expenditure to the maximum extent 
possible.  
 
3. Educational Consultants India Ltd. had prepared a detailed Project Report, under 
which the capital expenditure projected between 2010-2011 and 2021-2022 is Rs. 2154.35 
crores, and the recurring expenditure which begins from 2014-2015 is Rs. 1,378.27 crores. 
On the basis of the said Report, the Ministry of External Affairs had submitted the Expenditure 
Finance Committee Memorandum for the consideration of the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC). Based on the observations of the EFC, efforts are being made to significantly reduce 
both capital and recurring expenditure.  Taking into account the inputs, the University is 
working on a revenue model to deal with recurring expenditure. In parallel, it has constituted 
an External Endowment Committee to raise funds through Public-Private Partnership, and is 
also preparing estimates of capital and recurring expenditure beyond 2021-2022.  Taking 
into account the inputs due to be received from the University, the EFC proposal will be 
further refined and a revised proposal for continuous budgetary support until 2021-2022 
will be sent to the EFC. Thereafter, the proposal will be brought before the Cabinet separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 

 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 15A which provides that the Deans 
shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service and exercise 
such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the statutes. The said 
clause of the Bill further seeks to insert a new section 15B which provides that the Provosts 
shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service and exercise 
such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 
2. The matters in respect of which the Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail.  The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governing  
Board.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers and 
function s of 
Governing  
Board.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective s of 
Universit y. 
ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2010 
(39 OF 2010) 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
AND  WHEREAS, it is considered expedient to make provision for implementing the 
decisions arrived at in the aforesaid East Asia Summits for establishment of the Nalanda 
University in the State of Bihar and declare it to be an institution of national importance. 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
7. (1) There shall be a Governing Board of the University consisting of the following 
persons as its members, namely:— 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(c) five members from amongst the Member States which provide maximum 
financial assistance during a period of three years to be nominated by the Member 
States;  
 
(d) one member, not below the rank of Secretary in the Ministry of External 
Affairs, to be nominated by the Central Government; 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(g) three members from amongst the persons being renowned academician or 
educationist, to be nominated by the Central Government. 
 
(2) Each member of the Governin g Board referre d to in clause s (c) to (g) of 
sub-section (1), shall hold office for a fixed term of three years. 
 
(3) The Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Board. 
 
(4) The member, being the Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, nominated 
under clause (d) of sub-section (1), shall be the Member-Secretary of the Governing Board. 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
8. (1)         *                          *                          *                          *                        * 
(2) The Governing Board shall exercise such powers as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes:  
 
Provided that the Nalanda Mentor Group shall exercise the powers and discharge the 
functions of the Governing Board for a period of one year or till such time the members 
referred to in clauses (c) to (g) of sub-section (1) of section 7 are nominated, whichever is 
earlier. 
 
9. (1) The objectives of the University shall be— 
 
(a) to impart education and to enable research towards capacity building of the 
Member States in the domain of ancient science (in particular, practised in the Nalanda 
several centuries ago), philosophy, language, history and other areas of higher learning 
vital for improving the quality of life; 
 
(b) to contribute to the promotion of regional peace and vision by bringing 
together the future leaders of the East Asia, who by relating to their past history can 
enhanc e thei r understandin g of eac h others ’ perspective s and to shar e that 
understanding globally; 
 
(c) to harmonise the academic standards and accreditation norms in teaching, 
research and curriculum that are acceptable to all Member States; 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
42 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 1947.  
(2) The University shall be non-profit public-private partnership, which shall seek 
support from each of the Member States and from other sources but shall be autonomous 
and accountable to the Governing Board. 
 
10. The University shall have the following powers, namely:— 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(ii) to set up a consortium of international partners and friendly countries in 
furtherance of the objects of the University; 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(ix) to institut e Professorships , Readership s and Lecturership s and other 
teaching and academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons 
to such Chairs, Professorships, Readerships and Lecturerships and other teaching 
and academic positions; 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(xxiii) to receive benefactions , donations and gifts in accordance with the 
Ordinances and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes or objects of 
the University and to invest funds in such manner as it deems fit; 
 
(xxiv) to borrow, with the approval of the Governing Board. 
 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
 
11. The University shall be open to all persons irrespective of gender, caste, creed, 
disability, ethnicity or socio-economic background. 
 
12. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University: 
 
Provided that the President may, by order, nominate any person to be the Visitor and 
such person so nominated shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as may 
be specified in the order and the person so nominated shall exercise the powers and 
discharge duties of the Visitor. 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
13. The following shall be the officers of the University:— 
 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
 
21. The members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their dependents or 
members of the family, shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as the Central Government 
may, after entering into an agreement with the University, notify under section 3 of the 
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947. 
 
22. The following shall be the authorities of the University:— 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
(3) the Boards of Schools of Studies; 
24. (1) *                    *                               *                          *                                 * 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision contained in 
sub-section (1), the University shall have the following Schools, namely:— 
 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(iv) Business Management in relation to Public Policy and Development Studies; 
(v) Language and Literature; 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
Power s of 
Universit y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University 
open to all 
persons.  
 
Visito r. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officer s of 
Universit y. 
 
 
Privileges 
and 
immunities 
of academic 
staff , etc.  
 
Authorities 
of the  
Universit y. 
 
 
The School 
of Studies. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statutes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual 
report .  
 
 
 
Annual  
accounts, 
etc.  
 
 
 
 
Transitional 
provisions.  
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
(3) Every School of Studies shall have a Board comprising of such members as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
 
(4) The powers and functions of the Boards of School of Studies shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes. 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(k) Schools of Studies, members of its Board and the power and functions of 
such Board; 
 
*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
31. (1)*                      *                              *                              *                              * 
(3) A copy of the annual report so prepared shall also be submitted to the Member 
States and exhibited on the website of the University. 
32 .( 1 )*                            *                            *                            *                            * 
(6) A copy of the audited annual accounts shall also be submitted to the Member 
States. 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,— 
 
(a) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the 
Governing Board and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three 
years; 
 
(b) the first Board of School of Studies shall consist of not more than eleven 
members, who shall be nominated by the Governing Board and they shall hold office 
for a term of three years; 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
 
to amend the Nalanda University Act, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of External Affairs) 
 
45 
 
 