 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
    PASSPORT SEVA PROJECT-  
TARGETS AND ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 
       TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2013-2014) 
 
                             FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
25
00
0 
 

 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
    PASSPORT SEVA PROJECT-  
TARGETS AND ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 
                Presented to Lok Sabha on 20th February, 2014 
                 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRAURY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2014 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rule s of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (__________Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
   PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012) ……………………. (iii)  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-2013) …………………… (v)  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014) …………………… (vii)  
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………… (ix) 
   
Chapter-I Passport Seva Project ………………………………………..          1  
A.    Introductory…………………………………………….…....    1 
B. Procedure for obtaining Passport under the new system……           3 
           C.        Aims and Objectives of the Project   ………………..............              4  
D. Establishment of Passport Seva Kendras and Achievements  
of the Passport Seva Project:………….……………………...         5   
 E. Rollout of Passport Seva Project  ……………………………         6 
F. Financial Implications of Passport Seva Project  ……………         7 
G. Location of Passport Seva Kendras……………………………        10 
H. Role of various agencies and inter agency coordination………        13 
 
Chapter-II Procedure of seeking online Appointment, Verification Procedure  
at PSK and status checking system      ……………………….    22 
A. Problems in seeking online appointment………………………..    22 
B. Verification Process at PSK and referring applications from  
PSKs to RPOs   ……………………………………………….    26 
 
 
 Chapter-III.  Issues Related to Police Verification ……………..…………    32    
 
Chapter-IV.  Passport Issuance System   ………….. …………………….           43 
 
             Chapter-V.  General Issues Related to the Passport…………………………...      48 
A. Centralization of delivery of Passport Services-Historical Aspect..   48 
B. Passport Melas organized by RPOs  ………………………………   54 
C. Role of Authorized Agents/Agencies ……  ………………………   56 
D. Grievances Redressal Mechanism … ……………………………...  58 
E. Malpractices  and Role of Touts in the Passport System………….   63 
 
(i) 
 

 
 
Chapter-VI. MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES…………….……………………….        67  
A. Manpower Management under Passport Seva Project…………….      67  
B. Integration of Indian Missions/Posts with Passport Seva Project 
with Passport Seva Project ………………..………..…………….      70 
C.       Quality of Passport Booklets …………………………………….      73 
 
APPENDICES 
  
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held 
on 27.01.2012………………………………………………………………          75       
II. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee (2012-13) held 
on 16.01.2013………………..……………………………………………..         78 
III. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee (2013-14) held 
on 17.12.2013………………………………………………………………          80 
         IV. Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee (2013-14)  held 
                 on 18.02.2014……………………………………………………………….             83 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

         
  
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2011-2012) 
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 Name        
 
1. 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS (LOK SABHA) 
 
2.  Shri Anandrao Adsul  
3.  Shri S. Alagiri  
4.  Shri Anto Antony  
5.  Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
7.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
8.  Shri P. Karunakaran  
9.  Shri Pradeep Majhi  
10.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
11.  Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13. Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao* 
14.  Shri Takam Sanjoy  
15.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
16.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
17.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor  
18. Vacant# 
19.  Vacant  
20.  Vacant  
21.  Vacant  
 
___________________________________________________________ 
 
 
*  Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao nominated to the Committee on External Affairs 
w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
#    Smt. Sushila Saroj ceased to be the Member of the Committee on External Affairs 
due to change of her nomination t o Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment w.e.f. 13.7.12. 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
MEMBERS (RAJYA SABHA) 
 
22.  
 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Shri H.K. Dua  
26. Dr.  Najma  A. Heptulla @ 
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
29.  Dr. Karan Singh $ 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
31.  Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D.Muley                       -           Director  
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Additional  Director  
4. Shri Rakesh Bharadwaj           - Under Secretary 
 
  
___________________________________________________________ 
 
 
$ Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of term of Dr. 
Karan Singh, Member Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  27.01.12 and re -nominated to the 
Committee w.e.f. 02.02.2012. 
@  Ceased  to  be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  due  to  expiry  of term of Shri 
Shreegopal Vyas, Member Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 02.04.12 and Dr.  Najma A. Heptulla 
nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 04.05.2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2012-2013) 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
Name of Member 
 
 1.  Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
                   Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  
3.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
4.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
5.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
6.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
7.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
8.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
9.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
10.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
11.  Shri J. Ramesh  
12.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
13.  Shri Elangovan T.K.S.  
14.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
15.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
16.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
17.  Shri Sultan Ahmed * 
18.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari @ 
19. Vacant $ 
20. Vacant ** 
21. Vacant @@ 
        
___________________________________________________________ 
  
 * Shri Manish Tewari ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment 
as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 and Shri Sultan Ahmed is nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012. 
@ Dr. Shashi Tharoor ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment 
as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 and Shri Inder Singh Namdhari is nominated w.e.f. 
13.12.2012 . 
$ Shri Nama Nageswara Rao ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon change 
of nomination to Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 13.12.2012.  
** Dr. Girija Vyas ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon her appointment  as 
Minister w.e.f. 17.06.2013 
 
@@ Shri M.B. Rajesh ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon change o f 
nomination to Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests w.e.f. 27.6.2013. 
 
 
 (v) 
 

 
 
 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  
 
Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard  
24.  Shri Murli Deora  
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Shri D. P. Tripathi  
31 
 
Smt. Ambika Soni# 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri A. Shivanandam               - Under Secretary 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
 
 
#  Smt. Ambika Soni has been nominated to the Committee vice Dr. M. S. Gill 
who has been nominated to the Committee on Urban Development  w.e.f. 
27.12.2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 

 
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2013-2014) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Member 
   1. Shri Ananth Kumar - Chairman 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Sultan Ahmed  
3.  Shri Anto Antony 
4.  Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary  
5.  Shri Bhudeo Choudhary  
6 Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7.  Dr. C.P. Joshi#  
8.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
9.  Shri Pradeep Kumar Majhi  
10.  Shri Jose K. Mani  
11.  Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
12.  Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar  
13.  Shri Rakesh Pandey  
14.  Shri J. Ramesh  
15.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana  
16.  Shri Elangovan T.K.S.  
17.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
18.  Dr. Bhola Singh  
19.  Shri Janardhana Swamy  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23.  Shri Murli Deora 
24.  Shri H.K. Dua 
25.  Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  
26.  Shri Balbir Punj  
27.  Dr. K.P. Ramalingam  
28.  Dr. Karan Singh  
29.  Shri N.K. Singh  
30.  Smt. Ambika Soni 
31 Shri D. P. Tripathi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U. S. Saxena  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Ms. Kiran Bhargava  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
______________________________________________________________________ 
#  Dr. C.P. Joshi has been nominated to the Committee on External Affairs w.e.f. 06.01.2014. 
 
 
 
(vii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
          I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this  Twenty Fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 13-2014) on the subject ''Passport Seva Project - 
Targets and Achievements''. 
 
2.         The Committee selected the subject ''Passport Seva Project - Targets and Achievements' ' 
for detailed exami nation during the year 2011 -12. The Committee were briefed by the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 27.01.2012. The Committee decided to 
continue with the subject during the next term i.e. 2012-13 for examination. The Committee held 
further discussion with the representatives of Ministry of External Affairs on 16.01.2013. The 
discussion remained inconclusive so, the Committee decided to continue further with the subject 
during their next term i.e. 2013 -14 for detailed ex amination. The Committee took or al evidence 
by the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 17.12.2013. 
  
3. Meanwhile the Committee  also unde rtook the on -the -spot study visit in 
February/March, 2012 to P assport Seva Kendras in Bengaluru, Mumbai and Ahmedabad and 
held discussion with representatives of Ministry of External Affairs, R egional Passport Office, 
Department of Police, Department of P ost and Department of Home Affairs. Further, in July, 
2013 the Committee also undertook on -the- spot study visit to Passport Seva Kendras in 
Bengaluru, Bhopal, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon and Delhi and held discussions with the representatives  
of Ministry of External Affairs, Regional Passport Office, Department of Police and Department 
of Post. 
 
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 18th 
February, 2014. The Minutes of the sittings of   the   Committee   are appended to the report.  
 
 
 
(ix) 

 
 
 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of External Affairs for 
placing before them the material and information as well as tendering evidence and placing their 
considered views before the Committee.  
 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                              ANANTH KUMAR, 
18 February, 2014                                                          Chairman,    
29 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
PASSPORT SEVA PROJECT 
 
A. Introductory 
Passport is an essential travel document for any Indian citizen who wants to proceed 
abroad. Globalization and growing economy have led to an increased demand for Passport and 
Passport related services in the country and this trend is expected to continue with increasing 
intensity in the foreseeable future. As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) 
Rules, 1961, the function of the Ministry of External Affairs also includes Passports and Visa 
excluding the grant of Visas or endorsements for entry into India.  
1.2 Over the last five decades, there has been considerable expansion in the number of 
services rendered by Passport Offices. During the year 1979-80, 8.51 lakhs Passports were issued, 
the number had increased  significantly to 52.5 lakhs in  2010 and during the year 2011, 58.69  
lakhs passports were issued . During January-November 2013 about 67.27 lakh passport service -
related applications have been received and 65.49 lakh passport and related documents have been 
issued. The Committee were informed that the passport services rendered in India during 2013 is 
likely to cross 72 lakh as compared to 64 lakh in 2012, which is an increase of over 12 per cent. If 
passport services overseas are also included then the figures are expected to reach so me 85 lakh 
passport services.   
1.3 In the erstwhile system, the passports were issued by a network of 37 Passport Offices and 
15 Passport Collection Centres in India. Paper applications were submitted by the applicants and 
the entire process for granting of passport was manual, including the interface with other 
stakeholders involved in the process. Though, all Passport Offices were computerized and they 
issued machine -printed and machine readable passports as per the guidelines laid down by the 
International Civil Aviation Organization and passport application were scanned and stored 
electronically, the digitization was done post -facto mainly for record purposes. The system was 
decentralized with variations across passport offices and little visibility of data across these 
offices.  

2 
 
1.4 Though, the Ministry has been taking a number of measures to make the passport issuance 
system simpler and speeder, yet, despite extensive computerization, opening of New Passport 
Office and Reforms in the Central Passport O rganization, a need was felt for change in the 
existing system due to speed ily growing volume of Passport Seekers . The fast rising demand for 
passport related services necessitated a new system for wider reach and availability of more 
service delivery points.  
1.5 After a study by the National Institute for Smart Government (NISG)  and with the 
approval of the Union Cabinet in September 2007, the Ministry of External Affairs  (MEA) 
embarked on Passport Seva Project (PSP), an ambitious Mission Mode Project undertaken on 
Public-Private Partnership basis as part of the National e -Governance Plan. Following a two bid 
process, M/s. Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) was selected as Service Provider in May 2008 for 
implementation of Passport Seva Project. A Master Service Agreement (MSA) was signed by the 
MEA with M/s TCS in October 2008. The Project runs on the Built - Own- Transfer model 
wherein the initial investments are by the Private Par tner. There is minimal investment from the 
Government.  
1.6 As informed by the Ministry, the Mission Mode Project ( MMP) on Passports namely, 
Passport Seva Project aims "to deliver all Passport -related services to the citizens in a timely, 
transparent, more  accessible, reliable manner & in a comfortable environment through 
streamlined processes and committed, trained & motivated workforce.   The Project aims to bring 
a radical shift in the way passport services are delivered to the citizens of India. The new system 
is centralized with standardized processes implemented across the country. Th e system is also 
available to 1 80 missions and posts abroad, immigration checkpoints, police and intelligence 
departments providing them access to real -time passport data.  At present, the passport services 
are provided through Central Passport Organization (CPO) and its network of  38 Passport Offices 
(including the Passport Issuing Authority in Andaman and Nicobar Is lands) across the country 
and Passport Seva Kendra s (PSKs) and consular, visa and passport services to overseas 
Indian/Foreign nationals through the 180 Indian Mission and Posts abroad.  
1.7 The Project is supported by the state -of-the-art technology infrastructure which enables 
end-to-end passport services to be delivered with enhanced security, comparable to the best in the 
world. A complex algorithm has been built in to highlight cases of possible duplication and 

3 
 
suppression of information by the applicant. A comprehensive c hange management process 
ensure the success of the program as it is rolled out across the passport offices along with the 
concerned state police departments. Under the Passport Seva Project, the entire process is online 
and streamlined including interface with the Indian police for veri fication of personal particulars 
of applicants and with India Post for tracking delivery of passports.  The website of the CPV 
Division http://passport.gov.in, which was established in 1999, has been phased out after the 
operationalization of PSP.  
 
B. Procedure for obtaining Passport under the new system 
1.8 Under new Passport Issuance System  the applicants need to log on to the website 
www.passportindia.gov.in; create thei r user ID and assign a password ; fill & submit the 
application form online, make payment of passport fee through debit/credit card and State Bank 
of India net -banking or through SBI challans , (applicants may scan and upload supporting 
documents, if they so desire)  and to note the Application Reference Number (ARN). The system 
allots first available appointment and along  with print -out of Appointment Slip, original 
documents and photocopies , citizens need to visit the PSK for submission of application. 
Applicants‟ presence in person at the PSK enables the Passport Issuing Authority to capture their 
photograph and fingerprints to prevent the incidence of impersonation. The applicants also get 
full opportunity to see and affirm their personal particulars to be entered in the passport to avoid 
unnecessary correspondence later. Status of applications can be tracked through website. For 
assistance one can call toll-free helpline 1800-258-1800. 
1.9 The Ministry further informed that the Passport Portal provides comprehensive and latest 
information on passport services as well as status of an application, thus enabling anytime -
anywhere access. An e-mail based helpdesk facility and a 24x7 National Call Cen tre has been set 
up to provide requisite information to citizens in  17  vernacular languages. A  mobile based 
„mPassport Seva‟ was  launched in June 2013  to offer a wide variety of services to smart -
phone/iphone  users such as Passport Application status  tracking, locating the  PSKs  and general 
information on various steps involved in obtaining passport services.  
 

4 
 
 
C. Aims and objectives of the Project 
1.10 Highlighting the set of objectives to be achieved through Passport Seva Project, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 Establish a secure & error -free Passport issuance system that compares with the best 
in the world 
 Issue Passports (fresh and re -issue) in 3 working days (for „No‟ or „Post‟ -police-
verification cases) 
 Issue Passports (fresh and re -issue) in 3 working days plus the time taken for Police 
Verification (for ‟Pre‟-police-verification cases) 
 Issue Passports under Tatkaal scheme next working day excluding the day of 
submission 
 Render miscellaneous Passport services (change in address and other pers onal 
particulars) on the date of application itself 
 Render the  services through simplified procedures and in conditions of comfort for 
the Passport-seeking public 
 Provide a portfolio of Online services to the citizens.  
 
1.11 The key features of the P assport Seva Project includes establishment of 77 Passport Seva 
Kendras (PSKs) for delivering all front -end citizen services, creation of on -line Passport Portal 
for offering  Passport services, providing links to designated points in Police department, 
establishment of  a Central Passport Printing Facility (CPPF) for handling extra  load of printing, 
introduction of a multi -modal Information and Grievance handling system, creating a centralized 
IT system linking all PSK‟s, Passport Offices, Police and Postal D epartments, introducing 
productivity linked incentive scheme for Government employees and establishment of a proper 
Program Governance Structure for managing the implementation and operation of all the above  

5 
 
1.12    As informed by the Ministry, the desire d outcomes for the Applicants/Citizens of the 
Passport Seva Project includes delivery of all Passport -related services within defined service 
levels, closer access points for services, ease of availability of all Passport -related information 
online and Por tfolio of online services with certainty and speed and with a real - time status   
tracking and enquiry facility.  Availability of good public facilities at the Passport Facilitation 
Centres, multiple service delivery channels, ease of payment of fees for t he services received and 
an effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism and transparency in availing the services is also 
expected. 
D. Establishment of Passport Seva Kendras and Achievements of the Passport Seva 
Project 
1.13 The pilot project s under the Passport Seva Project were  launched in Bengaluru and 
Chandigarh in May 2010 and August 2010 respectively. After certification of the Project by the 
Standardisation, Testing & Quality Certification (STQC), the Third Party Audit Agency under the 
Deptt of IT, in January 2011, the Passport Seva Project was cleared for launch across the country.  
By 14th June 2012, all the planned 77 PSKs were set up and operationalised in the country. After 
certification by the STQC in mid -June 2012, the Project has ente red Operation and Maintenance 
Phase for the next six years. The Ministry is also in process of establishing Passport Seva Laghu 
Kendras (PSLK).  More than 1.18 crore passport applications have been processed under the new 
system as on 30th September, 2013. 
 
1.14 The Ministry of External Affairs is engaged in comprehensive overhaul of passport 
delivery system through the Passport Seva Project. As informed by the Ministry, in December, 
2012, the Computer Society of India (CSI) in association with  Nihilent Technologies, adjudged 
Passport Seva Project as the most significant e -Governance initiative of the Govt. of I ndia 
undertaken during 2011 -12 and recognised  the successful efforts in application of ICT for good 
governance. The PSP has also won „eIndia Award  2013‟ in July 2013 , which  recognized the  
enhanced usage of ICT as envisioned in the PSP and has brought about transformation in the 
functioning of Passport Offices. This high-impact IT driven transformational initiative of Passport 
Seva is immensely contr ibuting to NeGP‟s objective of making Government services accessible 

6 
 
to common man ensuring  efficiency, transparency & reliability of such services at affordable 
costs. 
 
E. Rollout of Passport Seva Project 
1.15 Passport Seva Project is an innovative high impact e -governance initiative. The 
Committee have keenly followed the implementation of the project. As per the Annual Report of 
the Ministry of External Affairs  2008-09, the pilot project was expected t o begin at Chandigarh 
and Bengaluru by July-August 2009.  On the issue of delay in rollout of Passport Seva Project, the 
Ministry submitted in the following written reply as under:  
"The Agreement was signed by the Ministry with TCS on 13th October 2008. The 
original timeline for completion of Project was April 2010. However, due to technical, 
operational and other infrastructural problems, the project was delayed. The pilot 
phase was commenced at 4 PSKs under RPO Bangalore in May 2010 at 3 PSKs under 
RPO Chandigarh in August 2010. The penalty as per terms of the Agreement has been 
imposed on TCS.  The certification of all the processes involved in the new passport 
issuance system by t he STQC, an agency under DIT, Gov t of India  was done in 
January 2011. Only after that, the roll-out plan was firmed up. "  
 
1.16 The Ministry has informed that the tender is valid for TCS for six years from June 2012 
onwards and opening of new PSKs need fr esh process or appointment by nomination. In this 
context, the Committee d esired to know the rationale for the  period of tendering and the model 
being followed by other Government Departments under public -private partnership with service 
providers. The Ministry submitted the following details in a written reply: 
 
“RFP was  finalised in 2007 in consultation with NISG and therefore at this stage, 
it is not possible to comment on the period  of tendering of PSP. However, the 
Agreement with  TCS contains a clause permitting the Ministry to extend the 
Agreement by further two years on the same terms and conditions, implying that 
the Agreement could be extended up to 12th June 2020. 
Ministry does not have any information on the models being followed by other Govt 
Ministry/Deptts.”  
 

7 
 
F. Financial Implications of Passport Seva Project 
1.17 When the Committee desired to know about  the financial implications on the Government 
in connection with the Passport Seva Project ,  t he Ministry furnished a  statement showing  the 
expenditure of Rs.172,31,22,280/ - incurred by the Ministry in connection with PSP  from 1 -4-
2006 to 31-12-2013.  
 
1.18 On the total amount of service fee paid to TCS since the onset of Passport Seva Project, 
the Ministry in a post-evidence reply submitted as under: 
 
"The total amount of Service Fee paid to TCS from the Go-live date of PSP i.e. 12th 
June,  2012  to  31st December, 2013  is Rs. 109,93,07,085/- . (Rupees one hundred 
nine crore ninety three lakh seven thousand eighty five)."   
 
1.19 The Committee noted that 'as per the Master Service Agreement (MSA), the SP is liable to 
be penalized wherever service levels are not adhered to'. In this context, the Committee desired to 
know whether there has been any instance wherein  the service provider has been penalized. The 
Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"During the pre -pilot phase of the Project, the Service Provider (SP) was levied 
penalty of Rs. 48 Lakhs due to delay in start of the pilot and Rs. 34.20 Lakhs  penalty 
was levied during roll -out phase. At the pre -pilot stage the major delay was due to  
Passport Application related issues, however at roll -out stage the penalty was due to 
delay in setting up  of PSKs." 
 
1.20 On being asked  about the financial impl ications on account of opening of PSKs. The 
Ministry clarified that they have  not spent any sum on setting up PSKs, however, Rs.1.53 crore 
approximately per annum is being paid as rental for additional  space for  co-located PSKs in 
Srinagar, Shimla, Dehradun, Raipur and Ranchi. In this context, the Committee desired to know 
about the rationale of co-located PSKs.  The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"A total of 68 locations were recommended in the Report which were  placed 
before the Union Cabinet for approval.   However, the Note to Cabinet contained  
a stipulation that more locations could be added during implementation phase. 
Subsequently, 9  more locations were  added while  publishing the RFP in 2007 
and minor changes were also made in the locations.   It was also stipulated in the 

8 
 
RFP that 68 PSKs were to be located in premises to be leased by the Service 
Provider and 9 to be co -located with the existing passpo rt offices i.e. only the 
bare space to be provided by t he Ministry.   It was also mentioned in the RFP 
that ‘the cities/locations where PFCs (PSKs) have to be set up are indicated in 
Annexure I though there may be few changes in it (the locations) by the time SP 
starts the project’"  
 
1.21 The Committee furthe r desired to know about the financial implication of opening  of 
Passport Seva Laghu Kendras and revenue model for these PSLKs.  The Ministry furnished the 
list of places where Passport Seva Laghu Kendras/Mini Passport Seva Kendras  are to be 
established and stated as under: 
“As the decision on setting up PSLKs was taken up much later than publishing of  the 
RFP relating to PSP in October, 2007, there is no provision  in the PSP for setting up  
PSLKs and therefore full responsibility for their setting up   rests with the Minis try, 
which is required  to provide all financial, manpower, infrastructural and technical 
support. Setting up of PSLKs involves broadly  leasing/purchase of space, liaising 
with State PWD for civil and electrical works at the selected site  or alternativel y 
appointment of  Consultant for preparation of bid documents for carrying out civil and 
electrical works, furnishing of interiors, office furniture, counters, work -stations, 
computer hardware, cameras, fingerprint scanners, linkage/networking with PO, Dat a 
Centre/Disaster Recovery Centre,  telephones, fax, photocopier, water coolers, air -
conditioning, generator, UPS, Queue Management System, VOIP system, CCTV 
cameras, LCD Display, TV, fire fighting equipment, provision of security and 
cleaning.  Adequately trained manpower  including Central  Passport Organisation 
(CPO) officials or officials on deputation from concerned State Govt., Citizen Service 
Executives (CSEs) / Data Entry Operators (DEOs) and Resident Engineers would also 
need to be provided at each P SLK. It also needs to be ensured that IT 
hardware/software is fully compatible with PSP and responsibility for its maintenance, 
operation, licensing, connectivity and replacement is also entrusted to a 
vendor/supplier to ensure a single point of accountabi lity and sustainability of the 
PSLKs in the long run. It is also to be kept in view that as per MSA, TCS has been 
entrusted to render front-end services on all India basis and a particular Service Charge 
has been fixed for those services. As the additional  PSLKs are beyond the purview of 
PSP/MSA, a new revenue model would be required. It is also a moot question whether  
work relating to additional PSLKs, even restricted to IT infrastructure, should be 
awarded only after   fresh tenders are invited or on Nom ination Basis. Either way it 
affects the present revenue model. All these challenges need to be addressed in order 

9 
 
to set up additional PSLKs.  All these multiplicity of factors have resulted in delay in 
opening PSLKs.”  
1.22 On the issue of  financial implications of opening of PS LKs, the Ministry in post -
evidence reply clarified that the PSLKs are beyond the scope of PSP and all the responsibility 
to set up and operationalise the PSLKS, h as to be borne by the Ministry and t he Service 
Provider may, however, be asked to provide IT support and integrate the systems with 
Passport Seva. In this context, the Committee desired to know about the revenue model for the 
PSLKs. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"The Ministry has not taken any decision on the revenue model for the PSLKs. The 
NISG had been requested to indicate revenue model in the feasibility study on PSLKs 
but on the advice of Finance Division, the scope of work given to NISG has been 
curtailed to only a „Quick Study‟ . The NISG is expected to provide its 
recommendations by end of February 2014."  
 
1.23 In this context, the Committee desired to know  the reasons for delay in submission of 
Report by the National Institute for Smart Government (NSIG) on phase II of the Passport Seva 
Project and whether the matter has been pursued with NSIG. The Ministry in a post-evidence 
reply stated as under: 
 
"There has been some divergence of views within the Ministry on the scope of  
feasibility study  being carried out by NISG ... A final view has since been taken and 
the  Ministry has been constantly pursuing the matter with NISG."  
 
1.24 When t he Committee desired to know the amount for various category of services 
provided and amount paid per unit to each agency for various activities, including TCS,  Indian 
Security Press, Nasik, Service P rovider, Department of Police and Department of Post , t he 
Ministry in a post-evidence stated as under: 
"The fee for Normal category Fresh/Reissue passport is Rs.1500/ - for 36 page 
booklet  and  Rs.2000/- for 60  page booklet; for Tatkaal category, additional 
Rs.2000/- have to be paid ; for re -issue of passport in case of damaged /lost /stolen 
passport cases, the fee is Rs.3000/ - for 36 page booklet and Rs.3500/ - for 60 page 
booklet.   
 
Following are the current rates at which Travel Documents are being supplied by ISP, Nashik: 
 
 

10 
 
Sl. No. Particulars Unit Approved rate  in Rs. 
1 India International 
Ordinary/Official/Diplomatic Passport 
Per Booklet 284/- 
2 India International Ordinary Jumbo & 
Diplomatic Passport Booklets 
Per Booklet 445/- 
3 Emergency Certificates (PCO-7) Per piece 246/- 
4 Identity Certificate  Per piece 221/- 
5 MRV Stickers International variety 
(old & new) 
Per Sticker 61/- 
6 India-China Border Trade Pass Per Book 301/- 
7 Person of Indian Origin Cards (4 
pages) 
Per Book 336/- 
 
Payment to State / UT Govts for Police Verification is being made in the following manner: 
 
(a) If Police Verification Report (PVR) is received within 21 days: Rs. 100/- and (b) if PVR is 
received after 21 days: Rs. 25/- 
 
India Post is paid Rs.100/- per passport application accepted at Speed Post Centres. 
 
Payment to TCS is made as per Schedule VI of the MSA at the following rate: 
 
I. (New Booklet Service)       
Quarterly 
Volume 
<= 15 lakhs >15 & <= 20 
lakhs 
>20 & <= 25 
lakhs 
>25 lakhs 
Service charge 
rate (Rs.) 
199.00 195.00 190.00 171.87 
II. (Miscellaneous Service)    
Quarterly 
Volume 
<= 3 lakhs >3 & <= 4 lakhs >4 & <= 5 lakhs >5 lakhs 
Service charge 
rate (Rs.) 
108.23 88.49 82.15 77.61 
G. Location of Passport Seva Kendras 
1.25 Under the Passport Seva Project 77 Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) have been established. 
There has been concern over the location of PSKs as well as constant demands for increasing the 
number of PSKs. While  furnishing rationale and  justifying the criteria for selection of location 
and the proposal for future, the Ministry in a written submission stated as under: 

11 
 
“The Union Cabinet mandated Passport Seva  Project envisaged setting  up and 
operationalisation of 77 PSKs in the country on PPP basis. This was accomplished by 
June 2012.   The location of PSKs was based on a study by the National Institute for 
Smart Government (NISG) in 2006-07 which took into account the number of passport 
applications received by the Passport Offices  during 2001-2005 from areas under their 
jurisdiction. Over the last two years, the Ministry has received  several proposals and 
recommendations from  representatives of the public and other forums for establishing 
more PSKs  in the country.  As these proposals are beyond the scope of work of PSP, 
the Ministry has requested the NISG to carry out a feasibility study in this regard. The 
Ministry has not set any population-wise target for setting up Passport Offices/PSKs.”  
 
1.26    The Ministry further clarified that the NISG in connection with preparing concept paper on 
PSP in 2006 had conducted a sample study of select Passport Offices viz. Bangalore, Hyderabad, 
Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Ghaziabad and Lucknow, taking into account data for 2005.  
 
1.27 During the course of examination, the Ministry furnished the statewise list of PSKs. The 
Committee observed that the state of Kerala has 13 PSKs, Maharashtra has 7 PSKs,  Delhi NCT 
has 3 PSK while the S tates like Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jh arkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha have 
only one PSK each. The Committee noted that in the original Project, for the entire North-Eastern 
Region there was only one PSK at Guwahati which cover ed other 6 North -Eastern States also. 
Furthermore, the Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to the fact that there have been 
instances of few dis tricts having more than one PSK  while other places have been left out. On 
further query by the Committee, the Ministry admitted that most of the North -Eastern States 
(except Assam) and some other interior areas remained uncovered by Passport Seva Project.  
During the evidence before the Committee, the Foreign Secretary submitted the following 
clarification regarding PSKs/PSLKs in North Eastern States as under: 
 
“Apart from adding the 77 PSKs, the Ministry is working on setting up of what are 
called Mini -PSKs in North Eastern States and some other parts of the country... in 
addition to the Guwahati Passport Seva Kendra,  we will be setting up a mini Seva 
Kendra in Aizawl” 
1.28 In view of the opening of Mini PSKs /PSLKs in North -Eastern Region, the Committee 
desired to know about the basis for identification of their  location and sought Ministry‟s 

12 
 
justification for the dela ys in opening the Mi ni PSKs in North -Eastern Region. The Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under: 
“As follow -up of one of the Action Points that emerged during Chief Secretaries 
Conference on 1 -2 February 2010, it was decided to upgrade facilities for passport 
services in the North Eastern States. Accordingly, establishing of 14 mini -PSKs now 
known as PSLKs,  including those in the North East and other locations across the 
country besides 77 PSKs was  notified by the Ministry vide GSR 371(E) dated 28 th 
April 2010..."  .”  
1.29 The Ministry also informed the Committee that apart from these 14 Mini -PSKs, 
Karimnagar and Bhimavara m were also added, following an announcement by the former 
External Affairs Minister.   
1.30 The Committee underscored the need for expediting the process of establishing mini-
PSKs in various S tates of North Eastern Region in their 20th and 22nd Report. During the 
evidence, the Foreign Secretary assured the Committee as under: 
“We are committed to  setting up 16 Passport Seva  Lagu kendras across the country 
including the North Eastern States.  A PSLK is already functional in Aizwal  since 
July, 2012.  The Civil and Electrical works undertaken by Meghalaya State PWD for 
PS LK Shillong is nearing completion and MEA team has visited Agartala.”  
1.31 On the issue of delay  in establishment of PSLKs in North-East, in the post-evidence reply 
the Ministry informed that in Aizwal, it is functioning as PACC since July 2012 as IT 
infrastructure is to be upgraded so as to integrate with Passport Seva Project. In Shillong, civil 
and electronic work is concluded and o ffice furniture and IT infrastr ucture needs to be arranged. 
Site is finalized in Agartala, site is identified in Imphal and site is being located at Itanagar as well 
as Nagaland. On the reasons for delay, the Ministry stated that in Aizwal feasibility of cost etc. 
involved is under examination in consultation with NISG, in Agartala, financial approval for lease 
is awaited, in Sikkim work is in progress and correspondence is going on with State Government 
for Imphal. There is non -availability of suitable site at present i n Itanagar and Kohima, The 
Ministry has further cited 'non -availability of suitable site at present ' as the reason for delay at 
Bhimavaram (AP), Darbhanga (Bihar), Kharagpur (WB), Leh (J&K) and Siliguri (WB). 
1.32 On Committee's query about incorporation of provision for  opening Mini 
PSKs/PSLKS in Phase-I or they are proposed to be covered under Phase -II, the Ministry in a 

13 
 
written reply  stated that  these will be deemed to have been covered under Phase –II. On 
request being received for opening of new PSKs, the Ministry in  a written reply stated as 
under:  
 "Over the last two years,  recommendations have been received from  a number of 
representatives of public, dignitaries and forums for setting up more PSKs/PSLKs 
across the country....This number has been increasing by the week. The Ministry has 
envisaged setting up PSLKs  in the areas not covered so far so that  benefits of better 
passport services could be made available to people residing there.”  
1.33   Regarding the establishment of additional PS Ks/PSLKs, the Ministry in a post-
evidence reply categorically stated that the Ministry will be able to take a view only after the 
receipt of/ recommendation of the NISG which is expected in end of February 2014. Further, 
the Ministry also furnished list of  85 proposals received as on 31st December, 2013 for the 
establishment of new PSKs. 
 
H. Role of various agencies and inter agency coordination 
1.34 In view of the involvement of multiple agencies in the process of Passport Issuance, the 
Committee desired to be furnished with details of the work carried out by various agencies in the 
new system. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"The main role -players in  the Passport Seva system are the Ministry, Passport Offices, 
PSKs, CPPF, Police, I ndia Security Press (ISP)  Nashik, India Post and Tata Consultancy 
Services (TCS) being the Service Provider (SP) for PSP. Their roles are summarised 
below:-- 
 
i. Ministry (Hqs -CPV Division)  : Administration of Passport Act, 1967  and  
Passport Rules, 1980 an d performance of all functions laid down thereunder ; all 
Policy matters;  administration/control of  PSP; overseeing of working of Passport 
Offices/PSKs ; administration of CPO cadre and PLIS ; financial management of 
CPV; issuance of diplomatic/official passports at Hqs.  ; redressal of grievances ; 
appeal cases; RTI; court cases; procurement of passport stationery/travel 
documents from ISP Nashik; interaction/coordination with concerned 
Ministries/Deptts/State & UT  Govts/Police; Public outreach measures. 
ii. Passport Offices  :  Implementation of Policy laid down by the Hqs; 
Administration and control of PSKs under their respective jurisdiction; 
issue/printing/revocation/impounding of passports; all complex passport  cases 
escalated by PSKs or received direct ly; accounting of passport revenue ; redressal 
of grievances; RTI, court cases. 

14 
 
iii. PSKs : Front -end passport services such as   token issuance, initial scrutiny of 
passport service related application forms and supporting documents, acceptance 
of fee where app licable, scanning of  documents, taking photos and biometrics, 
verification of documents, granting of passport, issuance of PCCs, escalation of 
complex cases to Passport Office. 
iv. Central Passport Printing Facility   (CPPF): Printing and dispatch of passports  
based on data received from various Passport Offices. Set up to take care of spill -
over of passport printing workload of Passport Offices.  
v. Police: Verification of personal particulars and antecedents of passport applicants 
and dispatch of reports to Passport Offices. 
vi. ISP Nashik  : Printing of all travel documents and supply thereof to Passport 
Offices/Ministry. 
vii. India Post: Dispatch of passports to applicants by Speed Post. 
viii. TCS:  a. All hardware, software, networking & PCs of the entire Passport system. 
b. Physical Infrastructure for all PSKs including interiors thereof. 
c. Data Centre (DC), Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC)   and CPPF setup. 
d. Maintenance and operations of all the above. 
e. Staff for all SP counters at PSKs. 
f. Technical staff for supporting   PSK, PO, DC, DRC and CPPF. 
g. Training on the application software, training on general computer skills, soft 
skills, and customer service & delivery. 
h. Change management and communication strategy & implementation. 
i. Call Centre & grievance handling."  
 
1.35 Elaborating upon the administrative structure of the Passport Seva Project , the Ministry in 
a written submission stated as under: 
 
“The administrative structure of Passport Seva Project has been devised  to establish 
and maintain the formal and informal processes for managing the relationship 
between  MEA and the Service Provider. The Program Governance Structure of 
Passport Seva Project put in place by MEA comprises of the following units: 
a. Empowered Committee headed by Foreign Secretary. 
b. Program Management Committee headed by Additional Secretary (CPV). 
c.  Program Management Unit headed by Joint Secretary (PSP). 
d. Project Team at each Regional Passport Office /Passport Office headed by 
concerned Regional Passport Officer/Passport Officer.”   
 
1.36 As informed by the Ministry, Passport Seva is an IT driven program with over 2,500 
persons deployed from the private service provider and 2,4 00 officials from the Ministry of 
External Affairs. While clarifying the exact role and functions of the officials of the Ministry of 
External Affairs at the PSKs, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 

15 
 
"The PSKs are headed by Asstt. Passpo rt Officers or Passport Granting Officers who 
are assisted by Granting Officers (GOs) of the rank of Superintendents and 
Verification Officers (VOs) who could be Assistants/UDCs/LDCs. The APO/PGO 
supervises the working of entire PSK – administrative, accounts and operational and 
liaises with the Passport Office concerned. The Head of PSK also deals with 
applicants to address their difficulties and attends to the cases escalated by GOs/VOs. 
He also acts as Granting Officer, whenever needed."  
 
1.37 The Committee note that Police has to play a vital role in the existing passport issuance 
system. However, as per the Seventh schedule „Police‟ is a State subject. In this context, the 
Committee desired to know whether the Ministry has any mechanism to engage with the 
different/all state Governme nts on various issues including  online connectivity, delays and 
speeding up the process of verification and the response of various state governments to the new 
system as well as whether the Ministry has tried to identify the reasons for delay in police 
verification. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The Passport Officers keep in touch with State Police on passport service related 
matters to expedite verification reports.  Senior officials from the Ministry also interact 
with Police at appropriate level. A Verification Pendency Report is being sent 
regularly to all the District Police Hqs for monitoring and taking remedial action. 
While most state governments are receptive to the new system, broadband 
connectivity, lack of trained manpower and IT infrastructure is a challenge in certain 
states. 
It appears that the Police does not accord due priority to verification process. The 
Ministry, nevertheless, has been impressing upon the Police to expedite PV process. 
…… a letter is being sent by Foreign Secretary to all the Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs in the country.” 
 
1.38 During the on- the - spot study visits of the Committee, the Committee were informed 
that tripartite meeting are held regularly between the officials from local Passport Office, 
Deptt. of Police and Postal Department to ensure coordination. 
1.39 The Committee are happy to note that as a part of the national e-governance plan of 
the Government, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has embarked on the ambitious 
mission Passport Seva Project to make the passport issuance system more efficient.  The 
Committee, h owever, take note of the undue delay in execution of the Project  in the 

16 
 
beginning. At the same time, the Committee note that before embarking upon the project , 
the Ministry had overlooked certain aspects which led to significant  financial 
implications/burden on the Ministry as well as  created a chaotic situation during the period 
of transformation from old system to the new system.  Now , they have successfully 
established 77 Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) in different parts of the country in first phase 
of the Project to handle the work of passport and are in the process of opening Passport 
Seva Laghu Kendras (PSLKs) in North Eastern States and other areas.   The Committee, 
however, are of the strong opinion that the Ministry had not  appropriately dwelt upon the 
implications of centralization of passport application deposit  process and the system going 
online in view of digital divide and lack of infrastructure and connectivity in the country 
particularly, in semi -urban and rural area s.   In the second phase of the project the 
Government proposes to open more Centres.   The Committee, therefore, desire that in view 
of the experience of the Phase-I and the requirement  of infrastructure and connectivity, the 
Ministry must dwell upon the  project in its various dimensions and holistically examine  
them in its  entirety and come up with concrete policy decision on various issues before 
embarking on the next Phase.  
(Recommendation No.1) 
1.40 The Committee take  a note of payment made to each agency on the basis of per 
passport and find that charges paid to TCS for conducting front -end activity in regard to 
issue of new passport range from Rs. 171.87 to Rs.199.00 while for miscellaneous services , it 
ranges  from Rs . 77.61 to Rs. 103.23 and Rs. 100.00 per passport application was paid to 
India Post for accepting and forwarding the application to the concerned RPO. The 
Committee further observe that the payment made to Department of Police for Police 

17 
 
Verification (PV) is only Rs.100.00 in cases where it is received within 21 days, while it is 
only Rs. 25 .00 , if  Police Verification Report  (PVR) is received after 21 days. The 
Committee are of the opinion that in view of the tedious nature of the job and the time taken 
by the police officials in actually visiting residence s of applicants, verifying documents and 
also visiting references in case it is required and involvement of CID in carrying out 
verification in certain case, the Ministry should enhance the rates paid to police for carrying 
out verification.  
The Committee also note that in the new system under the Passport Seva Project, the 
DPHQ/SPHQ are expected to be e -connected but several St ates are still following manual 
process of sending police verification reports which usually take more than 21 days for 
which police is paid Rs. 25 only for each PVR. The time taken in some States/Union 
Territories like Andhra Pradesh and Delhi is very les s. The Ministry should treat that as 
model and implement it in all the States so that the time taken for police verification is 
reduced to minimum days.             
 (Recommendation No.2) 
1.41 The Committee observe that based on the feasibility study c onducted by National 
Institute for Smart Government (NISG),  the Government had approved to set up 77 PSKs 
across the country on the Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.   The Committee also 
observe that the only criteria to decide the location of PSKs was t he number of applications 
received by the Passport Offices during 2001 -2005 from the areas under their jurisdiction. 
Thereafter, it has been decided to open 16 P assport Seva Kendras because many of the 
areas including most of the North Eastern States remained uncovered.  Even after that there 

18 
 
is a huge demand from various other places for opening of PSKs or PSLKs in view of 
difficulties being faced by people in the interior areas in the country.  Due to such demands 
the Ministry has again asked NISG to conduct another study to decide the places for 
opening of more PSKs /PSLKs during the p hase II of the Project . The Committee strongly 
criticize the approach of the Ministry in deciding the places for opening of PSKs and 
keeping no  provision for identifying other places which require such facilities which was 
evident due to closure of multiple channels of submission , particularly in the rural and 
interior areas.  Simultaneously, the Committee also do not approve the policy of  opening of 
more than one Kendra in same districts and ignoring other places particularly, the far off 
districts and the North Eastern States. 
The Committee would , therefore, like to stress that while deciding the location for 
opening of PSKs/PSLKs in Phase II, apart from volume of applications received at Regional 
Passport Offices/Passport Offices  other criteria like number of applications received from 
particular districts/areas and distance/connectivity etc. should also be considered so that the 
PSKs are evenly located, passport issuance facility is made easily accessible to the applicant 
and they may not need to travel long distance for the same , particularly, in view of the fact 
that the PSK is the only channel for capturing biometric data as per the existing model of 
Passport Seva Project. In view of the present scenario of lack of alternative channels of  
submission of  forms as well as for capturing of the bi ometric data, the Committee would 
like to urge the Ministry of External Affairs to engage with NISG so that the Report is 
expedited and is finalized at the earliest. 
The Committee observe that Andaman and Nicobar Islands is not yet included in the 
Passport Seva Project. The Committee note that one of the objective s of the Passport Seva 

19 
 
Project is to render service s through simplified procedure and conditions of comfort for 
passport seeking  public. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should 
particularly look into the problems being faced by the applicants from Andaman and 
Nicobar Island as well as Lakshwadeep and address the issues at the earliest. Further, the 
Committee strong ly recommend that during phase II of the Passport Seva Project, the 
Ministry must strive to establish PSK/PSLK in each Union Territory.  
(Recommendation No.3) 
1.42 The Committee over the years have  been expressing their  concern over non-
availability of PSK s in the North -Eastern S tates during the Phase I of the Project.  
Considering the genuine requirement of satisfying the needs of these States, the Ministry 
has come up with the proposal for establishment of Passport Seva Laghu Kendras and have 
been assuring the Committee over early execution of the proposal s of PSLKs in the capitals 
of these States. The Committee, however, note that the Ministry had assured the Committee 
to establish Mini -PSK/PSLK in Aizwal by December 2010 and Mini -PSKs in other North 
Eastern States by end of December 2011.  But the Committee find that only one PSLK has 
started functioning in Aizwal since July 2012 and projects at other places are in various 
stages of inception and execution. The Committee are  dismayed to note that even after a 
continuous persuasion by the Committee through their Reports and on the spot visits, the 
Ministry has not been able to do much in establishing the PSLKs in the North -Eastern 
States and they have not even finalized or located/identified sites at Aga rtala, Imphal, 
Itanagar and Kohima.  In view of the urgent need of the people of North Eastern States, the 
Committee strongly criticize such casual approach of the Ministry and desire that 
immediate steps should be taken to expedite the work related to the establishment of PSLKs 

20 
 
in North-Eastern States  and complete them in the shortest possible time in association with 
respective State Governments . 
(Recommendation No.4) 
1.43 The Committee observe that the decision of opening of PSLKs was taken up b y the 
Ministry at later stage and  these are not covered under the provisions of Passport Seva 
Project.  The full responsibility for their setting up rests with the Ministry which is required 
to provide full financial, manpower, infrastructural and technical supp ort.  It is more 
surprising to note that the work related to establishment of all the proposed PSLKs were to 
be completed in June, 2012, but due to multiplicity of factors, the work relating to PSLKs is 
very slow and has been delayed.  The Committee also n ote that although Ministry feels that 
there is need of new revenue model of PSLKs even then, the Ministry has not taken any 
initiative to develop any such system till date and there are delays in implementation of 
these projects.  The Ministry of External Affairs has also not approached the Ministry of 
Finance to obtain funds for these PSLKs. More surprisingly, they do not have any such 
intention because recently they have curtailed the issue of obtaining indication about 
revenue model from  the purview of NISG study.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that Ministry of External Affairs should prepare the desired revenue model on priority 
basis for the proposed 16 PSLKs and other PSLKs likely to be established in future and 
obtain the funds for preparing pro posals for Cabinet so that these projects are not delayed 
more.  
(Recommendation No. 5) 

21 
 
1.44 The Committee note that there is a provision for holding regular tripartite meeting 
between officers of Passport Office, Department of Police and Postal Department  at local 
level. The Committee, however, observe that there is lack of any such mechanism at the 
central level. The Committee understand that most of the issues pertaining to the passport 
services have to be dealt at the level of state government as well a s locally, yet there are 
many issues which require involvement/coordination of the concerned Ministries of the 
Government of India particularly to maintain a uniformity in the system in all the States.  
The Committee are of the view that during such deliberations a holistic view of the matter 
related to passport may be taken and issues may be discussed at length as well as in-depth so 
as to reduce the procedural hurdles and difficulties in the system arising out of non -
communication/non-timely communication between various concerned 
Ministries/Departments to make the system more pragmatic and practical.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that Ministry of External Affairs should establish a coordination 
mechanism at Central level involving Ministry of Home Affa irs and Ministry of 
Communication with a view to share the views and maintain uniformity in the procedure of 
Police Verification and delivery of passport to the citizens. 
(Recommendation No.6) 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
PROCEDURE OF SEEKING ONLINE APPOINTMENT, VERIFICATION PROCEDURE 
AT PSK AND STATUS CHECKING SYSTEM 
 
A. Problems in seeking online appointment 
Obtaining appointments is a very important process after which citizens have to visit the 
PSK for submission of application and verification of documents. The appointment system 
ensures avoiding congestion at the PSK and cutting down waiting time for the applicants. 
However, the Committee noted that in spite of introduction of online payment of fee, there have 
been instances of delay in getting appointment. I n this context, the Committee desired to be 
furnished with data and status note on the PSKs wherein the appointment is available only after a 
period of more than 10 days. The Ministry accepted and informed the Committee that a sample 
data for 18 th December, 2013 shows that out of the total 77  PSKs in the country, in 31 PSKs 
appointments were available after 10 days from date of application under Normal (Fresh/Reissue) 
category passports.  The Committee noted that online appointments are available in 8 PSKs after 
a gap of forty days or more which includes PSKs in Patna, Pune, Bareilly, Gha ziabad, Varanasi, 
Vijayawada II, Vishakhapatnam and Gorakhpur.  The Committee observe that pilot project under 
Passport Seva Project was launched in Bengaluru yet , in both t he PSKs at Bengaluru the 
appointments are available after twenty days.  The Committee further note that though the time 
taken in police verification in Andhra Pradesh is minimum in the entire country i.e seventeen days 
but it takes more than forty days to seek online appointment in two of the PSKs in Andhra 
Pradesh.   
2.2  The Committee noted that the applicants  have been facing problems at various stages  of 
the new system  including seeking online appointments . In response to the specific query about 
the difficulties in getting appointments and steps taken by the Ministry to ease the situation, the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“The Ministry having come to know of various instances of blocking of appointments 
by vested interests and to address the challenges posed by digital divide in the country, 
has allowed   walk -in facility    to citizens having Application Registration Number 
(ARN)  to enable them to apply  for Tatkaal services ; issue of PCC ; deletion  of 

23 
 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) sta tus ; inclusion   of name of spouse in passport  
and  new booklets where pages have been exhausted.    Senior citizens (above 60 
years) ; minors below 15 whose parents hold valid passports;  differently -abled 
persons ; central/state govt servants and their spouse/dependent minor children  having 
ARN No., have also been permitted walk -facility. Family Tokens for up to 4 members 
are issued to avoid giving different dates to members of the same family. Besides this, 
where applicants are not able to obtain onli ne appointments, they are advised to visit 
concerned Regional Passport Office (RPO) in their area. Such applicants should fill-up 
the application online, generate „Application Reference Number‟ (ARN)  and visit 
RPO along with printed „ARN Sheet‟. RPO will consider such cases and will give 
staggered appointments keeping in view the load/capacity at the respective PSK under 
their jurisdiction.”  
 
2.3 On the recent measures undertaken by the Ministry to further streamline the passport 
issuance system, the Foreign Secretary during evidence stated that the number of public dealing 
counters has been increased from the erstwhile 350 to 1610 in the new syste m and public dealing 
hours have gone up from four hours to seven hours a day and further submitted as under: 
“The Ministry has taken a number of steps in the recent past in response to the 
suggestions made by this august Committee and to make the passport issuance 
system easier and more accessible. So, amongst the steps I might mention: 
That the passport website has been upgraded just two months back, in September, to 
make it more user friendly and it is kept updated with advisories and press releases 
relating to passport service developments; 
To address concerns regarding difficulty in obtaining appointments, the Ministry  
introduced online payment system in July this year. There has been a noticeable 
improvement in availability of appointments since then. T here are certain categories 
of applicants and services for which walk -in facility is available. However, to meet 
increased demand for passport services, 81 Passport Melas were organized from 
time to time in weekends by 27 Passport Offices from 1 st January to 30th November, 
2013. During these Melas, 35,525 passport applications were processed; 
The M Passport Seva App., which was launched on Android platform in March, 
2013 is now available on Windows and Apple IOS platforms also. The M Passport 
Seva App., pro vides passport related information including TSP locator, applicable 
fee, mode of submission, and tracking of passport application status; 
A premium optional SMS service has been introduced to enable citizens to receive 
alerts and updates regarding progres s of their passport applications and pending 
actions; 

24 
 
As part of expanding its outreach, the Ministry is bringing out a Passport Patrika in 
association with service provider for dissemination of passport related information.” 
 
2.4 On being asked by the Committee about the factors responsible for release of 
appointments, the Ministry  informed that it is for the Passport Officers to release appointments 
based on the handling cap acity of respective PSKs and that at present, nearly 35,000 
appointments are b eing released of which as many as 30% sometimes are not availed of by the 
applicants. The Committee desired to know  whether in such a scenario, can the Ministry not 
release larger number of slots taking into account the „no show cases‟ so as to ensure opti mal 
utilisation. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 
“The Passport Officers are under instructions to release additional appointments to 
take care of „no show cases‟. However, this has to be done with ca ution. The Passport 
Officer is no position to know in advance the extent of cancellations/no shows. These 
numbers are known only by hindsight. There could be every possibility that there are 
very few cancellations/no shows on certain days. In that event, there would be chaos at 
PSKs which are designed to handle certain number of applicants every day.  Provision  
also has to be kept for Walk -in categories which again is unknown number  and has to 
be entertained only within certain timings at each PSK. The Passport Officer therefore 
has to take a calculated risk in releasing additional appointments.”  
2.5 The Committee also took note of Ministry‟s observation that in some PSKs up to 30% „No 
Show Cases‟ occur due to booking of slots by Agents/Touts. In Committee‟s view, the Ministry‟s 
statement is very crucial as it forms the very basis of Ministry‟s understanding of the problems in 
the present system. The Committee desired to be acquainted with the material evidence with the 
Ministry to draw such conclusions or is it mere assumption. The Min istry in a written reply stated 
as under:  
“On the analysis of the appointment data for the   six months period October 2012 – 
March 2013, it was found that more than 20 appointments were booked through 6981 
different internet protocol addresses. In some c ases the number of appointments 
booked through  an IP address was even between 100 to 160. Considering that not 
more than 3 appointments can be booked at a time through an IP address, it safely 
follows that these IP addresses belong not to individual applicants but to internet café 
owners/agents/touts”.  

25 
 
2.6 When the Committee desired to know about the measures undertaken by the Ministry to 
address the problem, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:  
“The main challenge faced in the deposition of forms is difficulty in certain regions in 
obtaining appointment.  It is Ministry‟s view that once appoin tment is confirmed and 
availed, the citizen experience at PSK is very satisfactory. The difficulty in obtaining 
appointments is being addressed through advance payment of  passport fees to cut 
down on   blocking of appointments by vested interests. The modality is being 
developed with the  approval of  the Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of 
Finance and in association with the IT Deptt of State Bank  of India, Mumbai. Citizens 
would b e able to make payment through SBI Challans, debit/credit cards and e -
banking...”  
 
2.7 On the impact of introduction of online payment of fee, the Ministry submitted the 
following facts in a written reply: 
“At present, n early 30,000 passport related applications are being processed per 
working day. The impact of online payment system is evident in the fact that out of 6 , 
56,050 appointments country wide in November, 2013, the number of „no -shows‟ was 
7,996 i.e. 1.2 % only, down from 20-30% earlier.”  
 
2.8 In context of the online payment of fee when the Committee desired to know about the 
options available with the general public especially in rural areas, the Ministry in a post-evidence 
reply submitted as under:  
"The Ministry is in consultation with  India Post and DeitY for co -opting Speed Post 
Centres ( SPCs) and Common Service Centres (CSCs ) in  Passport Seva. This will 
greatly enhance the outreach of Passport Seva as there are over 1500 Speed Post 
Centres and 90,000 Comm on Service Centres in the country. The citizens can utilize 
these Centres to file Passport applications online and obtain appointments."  
   
 
2.9 The Ministry in a post -evidence reply further stated that appointments can be made 
available early provided more PSKs are set up and sufficient manpower within the CPO cadre is 
available to man the PSKs. The number of PSKs under PSP is frozen at 77 and there are shortages 
at certain levels in CPO cadre.  
 

26 
 
B. Verification Process at PSK and referring applications from PSKs to RPOs 
2.10 The Committee have come across several instances where during the process of 
verification of document and granting, a large number of applicants are referred from PSKs to 
RPOs on  various grounds  creating unnecessary delays and harassment . T he Committee sought 
Ministry‟s justification for making this arrangement where in the officials sitting at PSKs are 
unable to resolve the queries and desired to know whether these queries can be resolved by the 
officials sitting in PSKs in consultation with RPOs telephonically or through hotline with 
concerned sections in the RPO/PO. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“To the extent possible, efforts are made to resolve the issues by the Heads of PSKs 
who are Govt officials. However, in the event of any shortcoming  in the supporting 
documents or where these are not perceived to be genuine, reference is made to 
concerned Passport Office to ascertain the authenticity  from the issu ing authorities.  
Policy cases such as  lost /damaged passports, adoption and change of   date/place  of 
birth also need to be referred to Passport Offices for decision. Since May 2010, 
1,09,623  cases were referred to Passport Offices   as on 3rd August 2012, which comes 
to 212 cases per day for all the 77 PSKs (Less than 3 cases a day per PSK).” 
 
2.11 In view of involvement of more than one agency in Passport Seva Project and particularly 
within the PSK, the Committee was informed that a detailed instruction booklet was under 
preparation to clearly delineate the function of each category of personnel manning the PSKs. In 
this context, the Ministry in a written submission stated as under:  
“PSKs act as extended arms of  Passport Offices. PSKs are headed by a Government 
officers, generally by Assistant Passport Officers (APOs) or Passport Granting 
Officers ( PGOs). Complex cases or where the line of action is not clear or the ones 
where there is nee d for further verification are escalated by PSK Heads to respective 
Passport Offices for seeking solution. An instruction   booklet   containing instructions 
in the steps  and documents involved in processing various passport services has been 
sent to all the Passport Offices, which would help in reducing such referrals.” 
 
2.12 The Committee noted that applicants face a great deal of difficulty if there is certain 
system based wrong formatting/wro ng printing of personal details  or there are certain minor 
errors on the appointment sheet etc.  The Committee sought Ministry‟s view on their suggestion 
that such problems be dealt at a separate counter rather than asking the applicant to go the process 
all over again. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under:  

27 
 
“In the new system, the applicant gets full opportunity to see the personal details that 
would be printed on the passport and the chances of error are few. In case of wrong 
printing of personal details, a new booklet has to be issued and previous book let has 
to be cancelled.  It also needs to be checked whether the error is on the part of 
applicant or the system. In the case of latter, the replacement booklet is provided 
gratis. As per the design of the PSP, capturing of photograph and biometrics, payment 
of passport fee, verification of documents and granting  is  done  at PSK  while the 
printing, lamination, signing and dispatch of passport is done at the RPO.  The 
applicant can approach the Head of PSK/RPO for rectification of any error.”   
2.13 The Committee during the transitory phase have come across several cases, wherein the 
newly established PSKs or the PSKs that have been established for more than six months are 
unable to even maintain proper filing system , files were untraceable in many cases , with the 
applicant running from pillar to post in different offices with no idea of  location of his/her file.  
The Committee note that in several cases the applicants are unable to know the status of their 
applications under the new system. The Committee  desired to know the basic reasons for such 
lackluster arrangements at the PSKs and the reason for not regularly updating the status of 
application on the website. The Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 
“All the files in   the new system bear a unique number which  can be tracked through 
system 24x7 by indicating the number and date of birth. There is no manual intervention 
in the process.  The Call Centre facility is also available 24x7.   As soon as passport is 
dispatched, a SMS/e -mail alert i s also sent to the applicant informing the Passport 
Dispatch status. However, there could be some cases where data may not have been  
migrated from the old to new system  resulting  difficulties in tracking. It would be 
helpful to indicate specific cases to address this issue.”  
2.14 The entire passport issuance system has come under criticism due to delays at various 
ends.  In view of the fact that TCS conducts only front end job but all other functions are 
performed by government agencies either MEA/MHA o r security press. In this context, the 
Committee desired to know about the time taken by TCS for forwarding an application to RPO 
and from RPO to designated Police Stations as well as the steps that have been taken to reduce the 
time period in handling and  disposal of files in passport offices as well as Police Stations. The 
Ministry in a written reply furnished as under: 
“The applications are forwarded by TCS to Passport Office within 24 working hours 
and from the RPO to Police stations, it takes up to 3 - 7 working days. 
Passport Officers are under instr uction to dispose of the files without delay. They are 
also under instructions to keep in touch with concerned Police officers to speed up PV 

28 
 
process. A Police Verification Pendency Report is electronically  sent through PSP 
System to DPHQs twice a week for monitoring pendency and taking remedial action.”  
 
2.15 The Committee note that the prospective applicants have been facing great 
difficulties in the very first step of getting passport i.e in seeking online appointment in most 
of the PSKs. The Committee also observe that in order to streamline the online appointment 
system, various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry but in 31 PSKs it is still a 
challenge, where applicants get an appointment after a gap of 10 to 58 days.  In this regard, 
the Ministry has clarified th at problems faced in obtaining appointments  has no relation 
with the portal or the software. The s ystem can generate even a million appointments and 
that it is a matter of demand and sup ply and the appointments are released as per handling 
capacity of particular PSK. The Committee wonders as to why the number of slots had not 
been increased in the past when it is in the hands of th e Ministry and service provider? In 
Committee's view organizing the Passport Melas or Passport Seva Camps at sites other than 
PSKs may be a temporary arrangement to give appointments but it may not resolve the 
problem.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
seriously examine the is sue of handling capacity of each PSK and find a solution to ensure 
the generation of additional slots with the service provider and take initiative to ensure that 
the capacity of PSK is enhanced appropriately or new PSKs are set up with sufficient 
manpower to cater to the needs of enhanced number of applicants across the country. 
 (Recommendation No.7) 
2.16 The Committee note that as a measure to curb the tendency of 'No Show Cases', the 
Ministry has introduced provision of online payment of fee through SBI  chalans, 
debit/credit cards etc. and this step has shown welcome results and such cases have come 

29 
 
down to 1.2 percent from 30 percent.  However, the Committee may  not deny the fact that a 
large section of the population is not electronically connected to  the Banks or are not in 
procession of debit/credit cards of State Bank of India.  They are also facing difficulty in 
deposition of fee through their SBI cards.  The Committee, therefore, desire that initiatives 
should be taken to incorporate the credit/de bit cards of more popular nationalized/private 
banks for the purpose of online payment of passport fee to facilitate the applicants. 
 (Recommendation No.8) 
2.17 The Committee note that the Ministry has accepted that  once when on the passport 
seva portal de tails are filled online and documents are scanned and upload ed and 
appointments are obtained, experience of applicants at PSK is very satisfactory.   But the 
feedback available to the Committee  and media reports deny this claim.  The experience of  
applicants are similar at PSKs also and many applicants are called again and again for want 
of one or other document and feel harassed. The Committee desire that to minimize this 
problem, there should be a process of e-verification of documents prior to th e designate d 
day for appointments in cases  where the documents have already been uploaded by the 
applicants.  The Committee hope that Ministry alongwith Service Provider would come up 
with technological solution to this problem as this small step by the Mi nistry may facilitate 
to end the problems of a large number of applicants. 
(Recommendation No.9) 
2.18 The Committee note that in each PSK, officials from RPO are present as Passport 
Issuing Authority (PIA) as well as the employees of TCS to conduct the fro nt end activities. 
However, the Committee have often come across instances that a large number of cases are 

30 
 
being referred to RPO in the name of policy matters.  From the figures provided by the 
Ministry, the Committee find that on an average three cases p er PSK per day are referred 
to RPO.  The Committee have serious doubts on the figures provided by the Ministry in this 
regard.  However, figures of an average per day per PSK at all India level may not give 
conclusive results because this problem is RPO/PS K specific.  In such instances the 
applicants have to suffer a lot particularly , if he/she is a resident of one particular district 
and has to visit another district where PSK is located and if referred to RPO, the applicant 
has to travel to the third district leading to unnecessary hassle and stress. In this context, the 
Committee are dismayed to take note of Ministry's justification given for referring large 
number of cases that if the officials at Passport Seva Kendras dwell too long on certain 
cases, it would lead to delay even in less difficult cases. The Committee note that though the 
Ministry has come out with comprehensive guidelines so that various queries are resolved at 
the end of PSK only and the applicants are not referred to RPO  in large numb er but with 
no impact.  The Committee , thereafter,  would like to sugges t the M inistry to relook and 
review the role of Granting Officers so as to empower them to consider maximum number 
of cases except very complex cases and resolve then and there at PSK leve l.  If required, the 
assistance of policy section may be provided there itself .  The Committee also have 
apprehension and certain information that there may be understating between the Granting 
Officer and the query resolving officer which can result into referring a large number of 
cases from the table of a particular Granting -Officer at a particular PSK  to policy section 
for query resolution  for their gains. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should observe and analyze such cases RPO/PSK -wise and Granting Officer -wise to reach 
any conclusion.   

31 
 
 (Recommendation No.10) 
2.19 Despite a provision of tracking of status of application through website, the 
Committee have come across several instances wherein the Passport applicant is not able to 
know the correct status of his/her application as the status is not regularly updated on the 
website.  This is particularly true for the applicants whose cases are referred to the 
RPO/Policy Section or the cases th ose are closed after the expiry of one year  term and they 
are running from pillar to post  to know the status of their application s. On being asked, the 
Ministry has informed that the portal is maintained by TCS in consultation with the 
Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, feel that there is clear -cut lack of communication 
between the R PO and the Service Provider  which is leading to non -availability of 
correct/current status of the application s on the website .  The Committee , therefore, would 
like to suggest the Ministry to maintain and ensure proper flow of information between the 
RPO and the Service Provider so that the status is updated on real time basis. Similarly, the 
Committee would also like to suggest to the Ministry to engage with the service provider as 
well as the Department of Police so that it is ensured that the updated status reflected at the 
portal mentions the exact level and reason for keeping the application pending and to gu ide 
the applicant about any need to meet the concerned officers in the RPO or Police Station. 
 (Recommendation No.11) 

32 
 
CHAPTER III 
ISSUES RELATED TO POLICE VERIFICATION 
 
 The Police Verification is a key process in the entire passport issuance system. On being 
enquired by the Committee, the Ministry furnished  RPO-wise data regarding average time taken 
for police verification as on 31 December 2013. The Committee noted that there is huge disparity 
between average numbers of days taken for Police Verification. It was as high as 238 days in case 
of Arunachal Pradesh, 217 days for Manipur, 195 days for Assa m and 189 days for Tripura. In 
States like West Bengal, it is 107 days, it is 93 days for Madhya Pradesh and it is 67 days for 
Uttar Pradesh. In respect of U nion Territories, it is 89 days  for Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 85 
days for Lakshwadeep. However, police verification p rocess seems to have considerably 
improved wherein the process has been fast tracked. In Delhi the average number of days taken 
for Police Verification is 13 days, 17 days for Andhra Pradesh and 19 days for Haryana.  
 
 3.2 When t he Committee desired to know average time taken/being taken for Police 
Verification in the earlier system and new system in each state and the steps that are being taken 
to reduce the time for PVR. The Ministry stated in a written reply as under: 
“There is no data of average time taken for police verification in the old system. 
Ordinarily the PVR should be received in 21 days. The average time  for PV on all -
India basis was 49 days  during April 2012 - March 2013.  However, the percentage of 
PVRs on all India basis, received within 21 days has improved from 25 in September 
2012 to 34 in April, 2013. The concerned Chief Secretaries  have been requested to 
take necessary steps to switch over to DPHQ system for speeding up PV process.” 
 
3.3 During the evidence, the Foreign Secretary enlightened the Committee on the issue of 
delay in police verification as under:  
 “We are aware that police verifications plays  a very important role in the timely 
dispatch of passports. So, our project team is monitoring as to how it would take. We 
find that an all India average for the number of days for completing the police 
verification is 50 days, putting the public to great difficulty. Only about 36 per cent 
actually get within the desired limit of 21 days. Some States and Union Territories 
have got very good and low police verification processing time. Like Delhi Police 

33 
 
completes in 13 days; Andhra in 16 days; Haryana in 18 days; Kerala in 28 days; 
Chandigarh in 29 days…” 
 3.4 The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry/ RPOs have been able to identify 
the regions/districts where Police Verification Reports are taking very long time and sought 
information about these S tates/regions/districts. The Ministry in  a post-evidence reply stated as 
under: 
"the average time  taken for police verification during 2013, 6 states/UTs take less 
than one month, 9 states/UTs take from 1 to 2 months, 9 others take from 2 to 3 
months, 3 states take 3 to 4 months, 2 states take 4 to 5 months, one takes 5 to 6 
months and 5 take more than 6 months. The ones that take more than three months 
are   Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Odisha, Sikkim, Tripura & West Bengal."  
 
3.5 While furnishing data regarding uploading of Police Verification Report status 
electronically by the police authorities in v arious States/UTs and highlighting the problems being 
faced by RPOs in various State/UTs with regard to the above , t he Ministry in a post-evidence 
reply stated as under: 
"The total number of PV initiated by the Passport Offi ces was 63,07,889 in 2013 and 
taking into account disposals and previous outstanding reports, the balance as on 31 st 
December, 2013 was 8,35,363. It has been noticed from certain states/regions especially 
where manual model is still in vogue, that PV Repor ts are received in bulk in one go rather 
than transmitting these as soon as PVRs   are  received. Moreover, being not in the system, 
it is difficult to track their status."  
 
3.6 The Committee desired to know whether  the Police network of all the S tates has been 
integrated online with the Passport Portal as aimed by the Passport Seva P roject and desired to 
have state-wise status and reasons  for delay. The Committee also desired to know whether the 
issue of delay has been taken up with the Ministry o f Home Affairs or the State Governments at 
appropriate level. The Ministry submitted the following facts in a written reply: 
 
“The Passport Seva System has provision for all the States/UTs to electronically 
receive and update the PVRs. The procedures follo wed for PVRs in the different 
models viz. RPO (Manual), SPHQ, DPHQ -I and DPHQ..... SPHQ model is followed 
in Delhi, Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Kolkata and Mumbai ; DPHQ -1 model is followed in 

34 
 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu ; DPHQ model  is 
followed in Chandigarh, Punjab, Karnataka, Jharkhand and Haryana. The states of 
Bihar, UP, Maharashtra other than Mumbai, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal other than Kolkata, Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim follow RPO 
(manual) model for PVRs due to infrastructural challenges. Even though, MEA pays 
to State Govts Rs.100/ - per passport application for PVR,  some of the State Govts 
have not invested in the infrastructure required by the police for speedy PVR process. 
The matter is being taken up by the Foreign Secretary with Chief Secretaries of 
State/UT Governments to impress upon them  to attach due importance and attention 
to this aspect of governance.”   
 
3.7 The Committee desired to be  acquainted with the difference between SPHQ model and 
DPHQ model of police verification and desire to know which system is more efficient. T he 
Committee further desired to know about the  States that have already implemented DPHQ model 
of police verification and the steps being taken by the CPV Division for implementation of DPHQ 
model in all the States.  The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"In the SPHQ model, the particulars are sent electronic ally by Passport Seva 
System to  the SPHQ, the one and only centre in the state,   which  sends these to 
DPHQs and from there to Thana level.  In the  DPHQ model, the particulars are 
sent electronically   directly to DPHQ and from there to Thana level. The  DPHQ 
model is more efficient as it eliminates the step involving SPHQ which has to deal 
with the passport applications received from the entire state. Out of 35 states/UTs, 
barring Andaman & Nicobar which is not integrated with Passport Seva as yet, 12 
states/UTs are following DPHQ model, one is following  SPHQ model, 12 are 
following  manual model and 9 are in mixed models i.e. some districts are in DPHq 
and the rest in manual/SPHQ model. Out of 724 Police districts in the country, 410 
are in DPHQ mode, 2 3 in SPHQ mode and 291 in manual mode. As mentioned 
above, there is no feedback from the states/UTs police deptts regarding difficulties 
in adoption of SPHQ/DPHQ models. Only Tamil Nadu state police had indicated 
that it is not possible for them to bear ex penses on computers, printers, cartridges 
and paper. They instead desired TCS to bear expenses  for each DPHQ on this 
account. It is felt that broadband connectivity, lack of trained manpower and IT 
infrastructure could be the possible challenges in other states as well."  
 
3.8 In this context, the Committee desired to be furnished with the  status report on 
establishing e-connectivity between RPOs and designated police points in Police Department. The 

35 
 
Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated that the Passport Seva system is already connectivity -
ready and connected to SPHQs and DPHQs, wherever connectivity and IT infrastructure is 
available. The Committee desire to know whether any initiative is being taken by the Min istry of 
External Affairs to engage with the Department of Police in various States/UTs regarding training 
of the police officials for expediting police verification process in the new system. The Ministry 
in a post-evidence reply stated that necessary training has already been impar ted to police 
personnel in the States/UTs by the Ministry through TCS.  
 
3.9 While elucidating the mechanism to track/monitor movement of files from PSKs to RPOs 
to Department of Police and back, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"The  flow of movement of files from PSKs to RPOs to Police and back is as follows :-- 
 PSK : At the time of Granting stage, the system automatically  generates the proforma 
for PV  to SPHQ/DPHQ for Police Verification in case Police Verification is required. 
 SPHQ/Passport Office (in case of absence of SPHQ model) : Downloading and 
printing of  Personal particulars Form and dispatch to respective DPHQ. 
Police :   (SPHQ/DPHQ/Police Station ) : Verification of antecedents and personal 
particulars of applicant. Data entry and approval of PVRs electronically.  Uploading of 
PV reports to Passport Office. Dispatch of physical PVRs to Passport Office to enable 
decision on  issue of passports."  
3.10 The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry has issued any guidelines/ specific 
instructions regarding the procedure to be followed for Police Verification  Reports. The Ministry 
in a written reply stated as under: 
“The procedure for PVRs conveyed to the State Police is as follows :-- 
i. In the new Passport Application Form, there is no personal particulars (PP) 
form.  Personal particulars of the passport applicant are generated through the System. On 
the generation of  the  PV request from the PSKs, one electronic copy is sent to SPHQ and 
another copy is sent to respective District  Police Hqs (DPHQ)  wherever feasible, 
depending on the availability of connectivity and  computers.   The TCS personnel stationed 
at the SPHQ  download and print PP Forms and attachments in duplicate, and   send these to 
the respective DPHQ which in turn  forwards copies to the respective police station and 
CID. 
ii. On receipt of PVRs from police stations including report from the CID,    the police 
personnel at the DPHQ  do the data entry and  accord approval of PVR electronically with 

36 
 
Digital Signatures. In case where the electronic  facility (computer and internet) is not 
available at the DPHQ, the  TCS staff at the SPHQ  make data entry of PVRs  in the system, 
scan and upload  these PVRs (which are already signed by the respective police stations). 
The approval of the PVRs whose data entry is done by TCS personnel, is done by the SPHQ 
designated police officer. Multiple applications entered by  TCS staff   are approved in bulk 
by the designated Police Officers.  
iii. The physical PVRs  are dispatched by the designated  SPHQ Officer to the Passport 
Office in due course. 
iv. The designated SPHQ Officers are expected to ensure that the PV Forms are 
dispatched /collected to/from police stations without delay.”     
 
3.11 The Committee specifically desired to know whether there are any guidelines for the 
procedure to be followed for police v erification process so as to maintain uniformity in the 
system. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated that t he police being  a state subject, it is for 
the respective Home Deptts of the states/UTs to establish verification procedure depending on the 
security scenario. 
 
3.12 The Committee sought Ministry‟s views on reasons for delay in Police Verification  
process even in the new system. The Ministry in a written submission stated as under: 
“Delay in receipt of police verification reports is a major cause of   delay in issuance 
of passports. The Ministry has instructe d the Passport Officers to keep in touch with 
local police officials to avoid delays in police verification of passport applications.   
The criticality of police verification is impressed upon the Chief Secretaries and DGPs 
from time to time.  During inter actions of senior officers of CPV Division with DGPs 
/Police Commissioners, the urgency in police verification is impressed upon. It is, 
however, seen that verification of personal particulars and antecedents does not have 
the same priority for the police as for the Ministry/RPOs. In the new system, PV 
(Police Verification) Form is triggered electronically up to State/District level 
(wherever such connectivity is available in the state).  The State Police Hqs 
(SPHqs)/District Police Headquarters (DPHq) are expected to be connected to the PSP 
System through broadband connectivity.  Digital Signature Certificates (DSCs)  have 
been provided to PV approver at SPHq/DPHq to directly upload the PVR (Police 
Verification Report) electronically with no compromise on d ata security and non -
repudiation. The  success of   networking of  PSP with Police Stations in Hyderabad 
on pilot basis recently  is visible as  PVRs are now being received in 3 weeks. In Delhi 
too, PVRs are being issued quickly.  As the infrastructure, e -connectivity and 
awareness about the benefits of e -governance in the states grows, the delay on this 

37 
 
account will be greatly reduced.  The issuance of passports on the basis of electronic 
PVRs will become a reality only when the Crime & Criminal Tracking N etwork 
System (CCTNS), an e-Governance project undertaken by Ministry of Home Affairs is 
completed.”  
 
3.13 While further justifying their position in regard to expediting the process of Police 
Verification, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“As of now, there is no alternative but to depend on State Police for carrying out 
verification of personal particulars and antecedents of passport applicants as that is the 
only agency possessing records of unlawful activities of individuals or groups. T he 
Ministry feels that with the improvement of overall governance, attitudes would 
undergo change for the better. Completion and integration of other e -governance 
initiatives such as CCTNS, IVFRT, e -Migrate and Aadhar with Passport Seva System 
would also reduce the need for physical enquiry leading to a transparent and efficient 
service delivery.”  
3.14 The Committee desire d to know whether particular reasons have been identified by the 
respective Police Departments  for delay in adopting the new system and sending of Police 
Verification Reports. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
 
"There is no feedback from any state/UT police on the reasons of delay.  Only Tamil 
Nadu state police had indicated that it is not possible for them to bear expenses on 
computers, printers,  cartridges and paper. They instead desired TCS to bear expenses  
for each DPHQ on this account. It is felt that broadband connectivity, lack of trained 
manpower and IT infrastructure could be the possible challenges in other states as 
well."  
3.15 The Ministry informed the Committee about the success of networking of PSP with 
Police Stations in Hyderabad on pilot basis recently which is visible as  PVRs are now being 
received in 3 weeks. The Committee desired to know Ministry‟s view on the measures that 
can be adopted to streamline the system of police verification and steps that have been taken 
to decrease the time taken in police ve rification. The Ministry in written replies stated as 
under: 
 
“The police verification can be expedited only when the entire verification system is 
computerized and manual intervention is minimal.  The MHA is in the process of 

38 
 
implementing Crime & Criminal  Tracking Network System (CCTNS)  which would 
immensely help in obtaining  clearances quic kly.  The state govts also need to  
expedite connectivity to Police Station level for  fast verification." 
 
3.16 During the Committee‟s study v isit to Bengaluru in March 2012  to examine the 
implementation of the Passport Seva Project, the Committee had suggested for establishment for 
Police Passport Seva Kendras (PPSK) at Bangluru as Pilot Project with appellate authority. While 
furnishing a status note,  the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Two hundred and forty police personnel have been imparted train ing in electronic 
verification processing by  TCS. The Commissioner of Police Bangalore has been 
requested on 30th July 2012 to operationalise the PPSK  in pilot mode at the  earliest.”   
3.17 While furnishing current status as well as the results of the Pilot Project  and whether the 
Government plans to implement it on  a larger scale, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under: 
“The PPSK (Thana level PV Model) commenced functioning in Bangalore on 29 th 
August, 2012.  Since then more than 1,61,000 PVs were initiated out of which more 
than 1,50,000 reports have been received as on 24 th May, 2013. The Thana level 
official can download, print and per form data entry of particulars of the passport 
applicant. However, PVR has to be approved only by the designat ed DPHQ officer. 
PVRs are sent manually to RPO Bangalore. However, police report is visible at RPO 
as soon as it is digitally signed and approved by DPHQ office r. It is for the Police/ 
Home Deptt of the state to decide on extending the same to other DPHQs.” 
3.18 When the Committee desired to know whether instances of incomplete Police Verification 
Reports have increased in the recent past and whether the issue has been taken up with concerned 
state police authorities to overcome this problem, the Ministry has submitted the following reply: 
“Instances of increase in incomplete PVRs have not come to Ministry‟s notice. 
However, the matter has been  taken up with  Chief Secretaries to impress upon them 
the need for providing complete PVRs speedily.”  
3.19 The Committee observed that in several States including Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, the 
applicants are being called at Police Stations for police verification alongwith photographs and 
original of the documents which were  already deposited with the application and the police 
officials do not visit at the address for inspection/verification. The Committee sought clarification 

39 
 
from the Ministry whether this practice is part of defined procedure or otherwise. The Committee 
particularly desired to know about the steps taken by the Government to implement a uniform 
police verification procedure for is suance of passports in all the S tates.  The Ministry in  a written 
reply stated as under: 
“Ministry has also learnt that applicants are sometimes called to the Police Stations 
along with photographs for verification of documents and that the policemen do not 
visit the residence of applicants for requisite verif ication of address etc.  In  order to 
have an effective and reliable verification, it is expected of the  policemen to visit the 
residence of applicants to cross -check  with them the entries in  personal particulars 
form regarding identity and  residence e tc. This point has been included in the letter 
being addressed by Foreign Secretary to all the Chief Secretaries.” 
3.20 In the reply to a query by the Committee, the Ministry further added as under: 
"The Ministry agrees with Hon‟ble Committee that the police are not 
expected to call the   citizens to police stations. However, this needs more 
sensitization of police by the concerned State Govt Home Departments as 
MEA has no control over law enforcement agencies.”   
 
3.21 The Committee noted that Ministry  in a reply have submitted that a large number of 
categories are exempted from Police Verification Reports (PVRs). In this context, the Committee 
desired to know whether these stipulated norms are being followed by each RPO and sought 
clarification and desired to be furn ished with a status note in that  regard. The Committee further 
desired to know whether there is any rule regarding non -requirement of police verification for re -
issue of passport within 3 years of expiry is being followed by each RPO.  The Ministry in written 
reply submitted as under: 
 
“Information on compliance with the norms stipulated for exemption from PVRs for 
certain categori es is being obtained.  Ministry  keeps advising the RPOs to circu late 
passport issuance related instructions amongst the staff.   
Information is being sought from all the RPOs on compliance with  the said 
instruction.” 
3.22 The Committee sought clarification regarding Police Verification for minors and desired 
to know whether there is any stated guid eline in this regard. The Committee  further desired to 
know about the measures that are taken by the Ministry to ensure that uniform norms are followed 
in the regard. The Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 

40 
 
“The PVR requirement for minors are as follows:-- 
 
a. If both or either parent holds a valid passport, the passport can be issued 
without PVR. Photocopies of parents‟ passport should be attached with the 
application and at least one passport should contain spouse name 
b. If neither parent h olds a passport, passport to minor may be issued on pre -PV 
basis. Basically, parents‟ nationality and consequently eligibility of a child to 
be Indian citizen is verified by the Police. Simply by birth in India, a child does 
not acquire Indian citizenship automatically. 
c. Both parents are required to provide a declaration in the form Annexure H 
appended to Passport Application Instructions. These are available on the 
Passport Portal. 
d. Legal guardian can also apply for the passport of a minor child subject to 
production of a certified copy of the court  orders appointing him/her as Legal 
Guardian.” 
 
3.23  In this context, the Committee particularly wanted to know the policy regarding police 
verification of children below five years of age. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as 
under:  
 "General guidelines regarding police verification of minors, including children below five 
years of age are as under: 
Where both or either parent of the minor holds a valid passport with spouse name 
endorsed in at least one parent‟s passport, police verification is not required for issue of 
Passport to minor.  In al l other cases, Passport is issued only after receipt of clear police 
verification report. 
These are indicative, since as per the Passport Act 1967 and Passport Rules 1980, passport 
authority may conduct all such enquiry as deemed fit in respect of any Pass port 
application."  
 
3.24 Further, in context of crimes by juveniles the Committee desired to know whether any 
changes have been promulgated. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"As the Government of India has not taken any view so far o n redefining the age of 
juveniles in the context of   crimes/offences committed, no need has been felt for any 
change in police verification requirement  for  issue of passports to minors."  

41 
 
3.25 The Committee observe that smooth and efficient Police Verif ication is the key to 
successful implementation of the Passport Seva Project (PSP).  Under PSP, there is a 
provision to electronically receive and update the Police Verification Reports. The matter 
has been taken up by the Foreign Secretary with Chief Secr etaries of State/Union Territory 
Governments and during interaction of CPV Division Officials with DGPs/Police 
Commissioners.  But the pace of establishment of electronic connectivity with State Police 
Headquarters and District Police Headquarter is very s low and that is why in most of the 
States there is no success in reducing the period for receiving the PVR. Moreover, the 
Committee have come across instances where they have found that different procedures and 
levels are being followed in process of Po lice Verification in different S tates which is 
perhaps one of the reasons for delays in obtaining PVRs.   The Committee have been 
continuously asking the Ministry to make sincere efforts to shift to D istrict Police 
Headquarters (DPHQs)/State Police Headq uarters (SPHQs) Model and in all the S tates to 
ensure uniformity in approach and process across the country. The Committee, therefore, 
would like that the  issue of establishing e -connectivity with the respective State 
Governments and other issues related to Police Verification should be taken up in 
coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs of the Government of India.  The Committee 
would also suggest that Ministry should come up with the model procedure for police 
verification by circulating a  draft to all S tates to seek their opinion/suggestion  on the  
procedures to be followed and amendments  to be made in the Police Verification  process to 
make it more pragmatic.  Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that the  Model 
procedure for Police Verification is followed by all the States/Union Territories.  

42 
 
  Further, in view of the  technological changes and changing nature and profile of 
crime and including crimes by juveniles , the Committee are of the view that efforts should 
also be made to connect the Passport Seva Project with Crime and Criminal Tracking 
System (CCTNS) network, which is being implemented by the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
(Recommendation No.12) 
3.26 During the course of examination , the Committee have come across many issues 
relating to Police Verifications Forms. For example the  forms are auto-generated and there 
is no option for comments/remarks so as to qualify the reasons and once a 'no' is recorded in 
the form a rejected Police Verification Report is generated.  Similarly, there is a column 
pertaining to ongoing police case on the applicant but there is no column for making 
remarks or qualify it, wherein there is a need to make segregation on the basis of small and 
petty crime s or heinous crimes  or to mention 'no object ion for granting of passport by 
Police'. Moreover, there is no column in the Form regarding mobile number of the 
applicant on which police could inform the applicant about the time and date for 
verification The Comm ittee, therefore, have a view that such important 
lacuna/shortcomings in the Form should be discussed with the police authorities and  Forms 
should be appropriately modified. 
(Recommendation No.13) 

43 
 
CHAPTER IV 
PASSPORT ISSUANCE SYSTEM 
 
When asked about the volume of passport services rendered during 2013, Foreign 
Secretary submitted during the evidence as under:  
“During January -November 2013 about 67.27 lakh passport service -related 
applications have been received against 65.49 lakh  passport and related documents 
have been issued. So, the number of passport services rendered in India during 2013 is 
likely to cross 72 lakh as compared to 64 lakh in 2012, which is an increase of over 12 
per cent. If we include passport services oversea s, then we expect to have rendered 
some 85 lakh passport services.” 
4.2 The Committee specifically desired to know about  the prescr ibed time limit set by the 
Ministry of External Affairs with regard to issue of fresh passport and for rendering 
miscellaneous services to applicants and whether any change has been done after launching of 
Passport Seva Project. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under:   
 
“There was no   time limit for issue of fresh passports or miscellaneous services in the 
earlier system but usually the RPOs/POS were expected to issue passports in 45 days 
and miscellaneous services were rendered within a week.  The desired service levels    
aimed under PSP is 3 working days in case of fresh passports   in No or Post -Police 
verification cases; 3 working days + time taken for police verification in fresh passport 
cases requiring pre -police verification  and in case of miscellaneous services like  
Police Clearance Certificate  the same day.”  
 
4.3 In response to query of the Committee  whether there is any monitoring system to oversee 
that the PSKs and the RPOs are able to adhere to the prescribed timelimit for issuance of any kind 
of passports, the Ministry submitted the following written reply: 
 
“The system automatically generates reports on the number of passport services 
related applications processed, passports printed and dispatched    including delays in 
receiving police verification reports.”  
 
4.4 While furnishing the current status of deli very of passport services, the Foreign Secretary 
submitted during the evidence as under:  

44 
 
“.. it is a matter of great satisfaction to the Ministry of External Affairs that country -
wide 68 per cent of normal passports are despatched within seven days and 90  per cent 
are despatched within 15 days, excluding the time taken for police verification. In the 
case of Tatkal Passports, 73 per cent are despatched within three days, and 96 per cent 
are despatched within seven days.”   
4.5 The Committee noted that the stated objective of the Ministry is issuance of passport in 3 
working days plus the time taken for police verification and sought data from the Ministry 
regarding the passport s issued within 7 days/15 days.  The Ministry submitted the following 
details in a post-evidence reply: 
 
"Out of 66,36,356 passport applications received from 1 st January, 2013 to 15 th 
December, 2013, 12,99,737 passports were issued within seven days and 5,72,046 
passports were issued from 8 – 15 days, excluding the date of submissi on of 
application."  
 
 4.6         While furnishing the data regarding number of passport applications pending for more 
than one year, six months to one year and three months to six months respectively, the Ministry in 
a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"During the period from 1 st July 2012 to 31 st December 2012, 27,75,425 passport 
applications were processed in the new system. Out of these, 22,27,285 passports 
were issued within 90 days of receipt of application, 3,03,002 were issued within 180 
days and 1,33,148 within one year, including time taken for police verification. 
93,318 applications were pending disposal.  During the period from 1 st January, 2013 
to 30 th June 2013, 32,56,520 passport applications were processed. Out of  these, 
27,53,002 passports were issued within 90 days of receipt of application, 2,87,581 
were issued within 180 days and 68,418 were issued within one year, including the 
time taken for police verification; 1,47,519 applications were pending as on 1 st 
January, 2014."  
4.7  When the Committee desired to know about the steps taken by various RPOs to reduce the 
delay in issuance of passport/rendering of miscellaneous services and achiev ing 'Zero Pendency', 
the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
 
"Special drives are undertaken by RPOs to clear pendencies. There is no delay, 
however, in rendering Miscellaneous Services which now constitute issuance of 

45 
 
PCCs, provided clear Police report is available. RPOs also keep in touch with 
State/UT Police to speed up verification of personal particulars." 
 
4.8  The Committee noted that as per the information furnished by the Committee, the target 
under Passport Seva Project is to issue Passport next working day excluding the day of 
submission under Tatkaal Schem e. On being enquired about the data regarding average time 
taken in issuance of Tatkaal Passport, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under:  
"In the case of Tatkaal passports, 73% are dispatched within 3 days and 96% are 
dispatched within 7 days, excluding verification of supporting documents like Verification 
Certificate." . 
 
4.9.  The Committee noted that under the Passport Seva Project, the aim is to render 
miscellaneous passport services (change in address and other personal particulars) on the date of 
application itself. On being enquired about the  average time taken in rendering of miscellaneous 
passport services, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under 
"The average taken time taken in rendering of Miscellaneous Services is four days excluding 
the time taken for requisite verification." . 
 
4.10 According to the Ministry, the average time taken for issuance of passport is 15 days, plus 
the days taken for police ve rification, while the stated objective of the Ministry is issuance of 
passport in 3 working days plus the time taken for police verification. When asked about  the 
reasons for such delays in issuance of passport by the RPOs, the Ministry stated as under in a 
post-evidence reply: 
"The shortage of personnel, productivity,  paucity of printers and shortage of passport 
booklets at times are the causes for not meeting the desired objective"   
 
4.11 When t he Committee specifically desired to know that when passport issuing criteria 
remains the same throughout all the PSKs and Passport Offices in the country, why is it that PSKs 
and Passport Offices of certain States are doing excellent and efficient job and the other States are 
putting up a poor performance. The Ministry clarified the position in a written reply as under:  
“The workload of passport related services and demands of applicants differ from 
place to place as does the work culture of officials manning the PSKs/Passport 
Offices. The ability and handling capacity of officials even in the same office, vastly 

46 
 
differ and some officials despite training and offer of incentives, remain a challenge as 
far as service delivery is concerned.”  
 
4.12 On the main problems being faced by the Ministry in implementation of P assport Seva 
Project, the Ministry stated as under: 
 “As it is, the main problems faced by the Minis try in passport issuance are  delay in 
receiving verification reports from police, infrastructural inadequacies, lack of skills  
and  inadequate and   less than eager staff. Other shortcomings are lack of synergies 
between Govt and TCS staff.  Lack of clea r instructions and   arbitrary interpreta tion   
of rules at some levels also lead to difficulties in smooth operations and service 
delivery”  
 
4.13 The Committee  observe that as per the timeline  fixed under the Passport Seva 
Project for issuance o f passport (fresh or reissue) is  3 working days in case of 'no' or 'post 
police verification cases' and for the `pre-verification cases', it  is 3 working days plus the 
time taken for Police Verification and for passports under Tatkal Scheme, it is next working 
day excluding the day of submission.  But as informed by the Ministry  68% of normal 
passports are dispatched within 7 days and 90% within 15 days, excluding time taken for 
police verification while in case of Tatkal Passport 73% are dispatched within t hree days 
and 96% w ithin seven days.  While analyzing the factors responsible for delay,  the 
Committee observe that so far the Ministry of External Affairs has mentioned that delay in 
receiving Police Verification Report is one of the major factor for dela ys.  The Committee 
observe that major factor responsible for delay in receipt of Police Verification Reports but 
other delays at PSK/RPO level also contributes significantly.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly desire that initiatives should be taken to min imize the time in forwarding the file as 
well as dispatch of passports.  The Committee have a clear opinion that by streamlining the 
functioning of RPOs and developing better synergy between RPO and TCS , the Ministry 

47 
 
may be able to reduce the time  taken and proceed in the direction  of achieving the desired 
target of service delivery.  
 Moreover, the Committee note that in DPHQ/SPHQ Model, PVRs are uploaded by 
the concerned police and thereafter , the hardcopy is sent to the RPO after a long period.  
The Committee, however, have observed that the process of passport printing is initiated at 
the RPO only after the receipt of physical copy of PVR.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should not wait for the physical copy and in order to expedite 
the process, passport printing should be initiated once PVR are uploaded by the 
Department of Police or are received online  by the RPO. 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER V 
GENERAL ISSUES RELATED TO THE PASSPORT 
A. Centralization of delivery of Passport Services-Historical aspect 
Prior to onset of Passport Seva Project, in the earlier system passport applications were 
collected manually through various agencies like posts, collections cente rs, authorized passport 
agents etc. and District Passport Cell (DPC)/ Speed Post Centre (SPC) served an important role in 
the process of deposition of  forms. The Committee during examination of Demands for Grants  
of  Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2011-12  desired to know the fate of District Passport 
Cells and various Passport Collection Centers after opening of PSKs. The Ministry in a written 
submission had stated as under:  
“As per Cabinet Note, the existing Passport offices will be converte d into Passport 
Back Offices for handling of applications received through the DPCs and designated 
SPCs. However in view of functional requirement i.e. capturing of photograph and 
prescribed bio-metrics of the applicant need is being felt to revisit this matter.”  
5.2 However, in the Action Taken Replies on the abovesaid Report, the Ministry had 
categorically stated that: 
“..It may be ideal to close down the DPCs and other application form collection 
channels such as SPCs where PSKs are operational because of reasons i.e. i) in the 
DPC applications, biometric fingerprints are not taken resulting in risk of duplicate 
issuance of passports and ii) the DPC/SPC applications take longer time to process 
because of lack of proper documents and insufficient data provided by applicants in 
the physical (hard) copy of forms, Moreover, these applications require digitisation, 
once received at the Passport Office and further actions like verification and granting 
amounting to additional staff needs.  
However, till the PSP system is operational throughout the country with sufficient 
number of PSKs, it is prudent to have DPCs in place as part of the existing application 
collection channel. A clearer picture could emerge on the full roll -out of 77 PSKs 
across the country when a final decision on continuance of DPCs and PACCs and on 
opening of more PSKs could be taken.”   
5.3 During the examination , when the Committee desired to know about alternative methods 
of deposition of applications by the applicants and particularly desired to know about the position 
of DPC and SPC in the Passport Seva Project particularly in States like Gujarat, wherein more 

49 
 
than 70% of applicants in the past came through these alternate routes. The Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under: 
 
“In view of the requirement of the applicant‟s presence at PSK to give his/her 
photograph and biometrics, the continuance of DPC or SPC where even a third person 
may de posit applications, would be anachronistic. It would not be appropriate to 
continue two systems. Moreover, DPCs/SPCs   are authorized to accept only fresh 
passport applications and those seeking re -issue or miscellaneous service even in the 
old system, were required to apply to the nearest Passport Office. .. 
However, in order to address the difficulties of   citizens residing far away from PSKs, 
the Ministry is working on a plan to redefine the role of DPCs/SPCs in the new 
system. A uniform system will have to be introduced for all states, including Gujarat 
for integration of DPCs /SPCs with PSP. Ministry may have to consult state  govts and 
India Post in this regard."  
 
5.4 In view of the chaotic conditions prevailing in the process of passport issuance, the 
Committee in their various meeting with the Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs have 
strongly recommended for the need of  decentralization in passport issuance system and  have 
repeatedly recommended to work towards inclusion of District Passport Cells (DPCs)/ Speed Post 
Centres (SPCs) in the process of deposition of forms and capturing bio -metric data of the 
applicants due to their vast network and availabil ity of infrastructure and skilled manpower with 
the Postal Department. During sitting of the Committee, t he Representative of the Ministry of 
External clarified the position regarding engagement of SPC s and e-Seva Kendras and submitted 
as under: 
 
“The recognition of Speed Post Centre and e -Seva Kendra will create a benchmark 
because they will charge only Rs. 100. So, no cyber café will be able to charge Rs. 
5,000 be cause there will be competition in the market. I think that we will be in a 
position to start this in 2-3 months. We have already received a concrete proposal from 
the Department of IT on Common Service Centre, and there are 60,000 of them all 
over India. We have DPCs and then some 1,000 Speed Post Centres. If they take Rs. 
100 and provide online facility and that too assisted online facility, then those people 
who are taking advantage of those situations will be out because Rs. 100 will become 
the benchmark. 

50 
 
...we have already got the concrete proposal from the Ministry of IT. We have done 
this on trial basis in Hyderabad, and we are reasonably assured that we should move 
forward. I think that within this financial year we are hopeful to launch this.”  
5.5 In this context, the Committee further desired to be enlightened about the progress that has 
been made in the last six months. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The Ministry is working on a proposal to co -opt the services DPCs and SPCs acro ss 
the country  to facilitate filing of passport applications online, make payment of 
passport fees and obtain appointment. The DPCs/SPCs would need to be adequately 
equipped with IT hardware and broadband internet connectivity. This would also 
greatly address the challenge of digital divide in the country. However, the citizen, in 
the interest of security, transparency, avoiding misrepresentation and for error -free 
issuance of passports, will be required to appear at the PSK on the appointed day for 
biometrics and photographs and submission of supporting documents. It is emphasised 
here that applicants at PSK are given the opportunity to check their personal data and 
also to make corrections therein , if necessary, that would go into their passports and 
confirm the same by appending   their signatures in the passport file.”   
5.6 However, the Ministry in another reply further stated that: 
“…. the DPCs and SPCs can be us ed to file applications online after integration of 
their system with Passport Seva. The functions of biometrics and photographs can, 
however, be performed only at PSK which is an extended arm of the Passport Office 
and acts as a Passport Issuing Authority (PIA). The functions of PIAs c annot be 
delegated to any other entity.”   
5.7 On the efforts that have been made by the Ministry to decentralize passport application 
collection process and collection of biometric data of applicants, the Ministry stated as under: 
“…. the Ministry is working on a proposal to co-opt the services  of DPCs ,  SPCs and 
Common Service Centres across the country  to facilitate filing of passport 
applications online, make payment of passport fees and obtain appointment.  This 
would greatly address the challenge of digital divide in the country.”  
5.8 Though the Ministry clarified that the Ministry plans to co -opt DPCs/SPCs/CSCs for 
filing applications online. However, at present there is no plan to collect biometric data of 
applicants.  On the outcome of the consultation done by the Ministry with India Post for providing 
facility of online filling of application at Speed Post Centres (SPCs), the Ministry in a written 
reply submitted as under: 

51 
 
“The India Post authorities have been advised to ensure that adequate IT 
infrastructure is in place so that their services can be utilised for online fling of 
Passport application etc.”    
5.9 However, later when the Committee desired to specifically know about outsourcing of 
front-end passport services to Postal Network, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 
 
“As pe r the Cabinet approval and the Ministry‟s Agreement with Service Provider  
(SP), it is obligatory for the Service Provider to render front -end services Passport 
Service like initial scrutiny of the application forms, token issuance,  acceptance of 
fee, scanning and uploading of  documents and taking photos and biometrics of 
applicants. The Service Charge payable to SP includes these services. These services 
cannot be performed by any other entity. At the most Postal network can be utilized by 
applicants for filing passport applications online, payment of passport fees and 
obtaining appointment.”  
 
5.10 The Committee further suggested to the Ministry of External Affairs to incorporate the 
services of I ndian Postal Network in conducting various front -end activities. On the steps that 
have been taken by the Ministry of External Affairs to comply with the Committee 's suggestions 
and the discussion on the proposal with Department of Posts, the Ministry in  a post-evidence 
reply stated as under: 
 
"The Ministry is in touch with India Post.  As per Ministry‟s proposal, the Speed Post 
Centres (SPCs) may continue to be utilised as “online application filing centres” as 
part of Passport Seva. In a recent meeting, I ndia Post officials expressed their 
keenness in utilising India Post network as part of Passport Seva." 
5.11 While elaborating upon the blueprint, the Ministry in  a post-evidence reply stated as 
under:  
 
"As per the Ministry‟s plan, the procedure that may be followed in the SPCs and 
District Head Post Offices (HPOs) is stated as under:-- 
a. All the SPCs/HPOs would be required to equip themselves with computer 
system (PC/Desktop) having broadband internet connectivity and low -end 
printer.  The India Post offic ials have affirmed that most of the SPCs/HPOs 
already have requisite computer system in place. 
b. The concerned SPC/HPO official will access the Passport Seva Portal 
www.passportindia.gov.in, fill up the applicant ‟s data and book appointment 
after acceptance of requisite fee, on behalf of the applicant. The appointments 

52 
 
may be booked from the normal pool of appointments released for each PSK 
under the jurisdiction of the respective RPOs across the country. The applicant 
will carry this appointment slip to the PSK along with requisite original 
documents on the appointment day.  
c. For self -sustainability of the SPC/HPO and to recover the running cost, 
SPC/HPO will charge an amount of Rs. 100/ -  from the applicant for on line 
filing of applicants‟  data, generate ARN and print ARN receipt including   
payment of passport fee and scheduling of appointment. 
d. The SPC/HPO network would greatly help the citizens residing in remote and 
rural areas and having poor availability of d ata communication network and 
lesser coverage of broadband internet bandwidth. 
Present status: The proposal is awaiting internal approvals."  
 
5.12 Since the onset of the Passport Seva Project, the Committee have taken a strong 
objection to closing of multiple channels of submission and have clearly expressed their  
opinion that exist ence of PSKs alone will lead to  centralization of the system. In context o f 
the passport sys tem going online, the Committee have also often deliberated upon the 
existence of digital divide, lack of infrastructure and accessibility of hardware and online 
connectivity particularly  in rural India. The Committee are also aware that there is an 
immediate need to assist/facilitate those applicants who  are not accustomed to computers or 
not having regular access to computers in filing applications, uploading relevant documents, 
payment of fee as well as seeking appointments. In view of these practical considerations as 
well as availability of infrastructure and trained personnel and wide network , the 
Committee over the years have been strongly recommending the Ministry that the Speed 
Post Centres should be co -opted and reinvented to be used as channels for submission of 

53 
 
forms online as well as for capturing of  biometric data so that passport services are made 
accessible to those in distant areas as well as in rural hinterland. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
5.13 The Committee, however, feel that the Ministry has been ambivalent about the 
existence and role of DPCs/SPCs in the new system.   The Committee observe that inspite of 
more than one and a half year of completion of setting up and operationalisation of 77 PSKs 
in the country in June  2012, the Ministry is yet to decide upon the  status and role of 
DPCs/SPCs. The Ministry  in written submission  in 2012 had assured the Committee that 
recognition of Speed Post Centre and e -seva Kendra would start in 2 -3 months and the 
Ministry further stated that they had a concrete proposal from Ministry of IT and this was 
done in Hyderabad on trial basis. However, not much progress has been made so fa r and 
the Committee do  not approve the casual approach  of the Ministry  on the issue of 
consultations with the India Post in this regard.  Now, they have formulated a plan as well 
as procedure that may be followed in SPC s/HPOs however, this proposal is still awaiting 
internal approvals.  The Committee hope that this proposal is worked upon  and properly 
formulated without any further delay involving all the stakeholders . The Committee urge 
the Ministry to actively pursue the issue with India Post and various State Governments and 
ensure that DPCs and designated HPOs  are adequa tely equipped w ith infrastructure, IT 

54 
 
hardware, broadband connectivity and personnel and it is  not proved as another adhoc step 
by the Ministry.  
 (Recommendation No.16) 
B. Passport Melas organized by RPOs 
5.14 The Committee are informed that the Ministry has also directed the RPOs to conduct  
Passport Melas during the weekends from time to time to enable  submission of passport 
applications.  During 2012, Passport Melas were conducted by 24 RPOs at 62 locations and 
33,584 passport applications were received for processing. 
 
5.15  Furnishing the status of Passport Melas organized in the year 2013 , during the evidence , 
the Foreign Secretary submitted as under: 
“to meet increased demand for passport services, 81 Passport Melas  were organized 
from time to time in weekends by 27 Passport Offices from 1 st January to 30 th 
November, 2013. During these Melas, 35,525 passport applications were processed”  
 
5.16 On the Committee‟s suggestion to conduct Passport Melas in each district under RPOs as 
well as number of applications received during such Melas, the Ministry in a written reply 
submitted as under: 
 
“It is not practicable at this stage to organize Passport Melas in districts due to 
manpower and technology cons traints. Paradoxically, the number of applications 
(33584) received during Passport Melas conducted during 2012 did not indicate high 
demand for passports.”   
 
5.17  The Committee further pursued the issue of conducting Passport Melas  at other 
districts. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under:  
 
"Organising Passport Melas  or Passport Seva Camps at sites other than  PSKs, 
involves   additional expenditure on transportation of  IT equipment, Govt officials  
as well as TCS  personnel and arranging accommodation for holding the Seva Camp. 
Moreover, the Camps also can be organised only on weekends as the personnel are 
needed for manning PSKs.  There are locations which are far away from PSKs/ 

55 
 
Passports Offices and travelling f requently would stretch scarce human resources 
available at Passport Offices/PSKs.  A beginning has, however, been made with the 
launch of a first ever Passport Seva Camp on 14 th December 2013 at Fatehgarh  
(U.P.), for two days, for the benefit of passport  applicants residing in  the districts of 
Farrukhabad, Auraiya, Etawah, Hardoi and Kannauj."  
5.18  The Com mittee were informed that from 1st January, 2013 to 31 st December, 2013, 26   
Passport Offices  organised 83 Passport Melas  at 46 PSKs under them and 36,167 passport 
applications were received.   Elaborating upon the process of appointment and for processing of 
application received at Passport Mela, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply as under: 
"The Mela is conducted at the PSK itself.  Sufficient advance notice is given by 
Passport Offices at the Passport Portal  about holding the Mela. The process followed 
at the Melas is same as the one at PSKs i.e.  the  applicants are required to log on to 
the website www.passportindia.gov.in; create their user ID and assign a password ; 
fill & submit the application form online, make  payment of passport fees online 
through debit/credit card or internet banking of State Bank of India. Applican ts can 
also use the challan option provided on the portal and deposit the fees in SBI branch 
after generating challan online.  The System allots appointment for the Mela Day held 
on the weekends.  On the appointed time slot on the Mela Day, the applicants,  along 
with print -out of Appointment Slip, original documents and photocopies, visit the 
PSK for submission of application."  
 
5.19 The Committee take note of the Ministry's initiative to redress the greviances of the 
applicants and welcome initiatives like organization of Passport Melas by various RPOs. 
The Committee were informed that during the year 2012, Passport Melas were conduct ed 
by 24 RPOs at 62 locations and 83 Passport Melas were con ducted by 26 Passport Offices 
during the year 2013. The Committee note that such Passport Melas are random and are 
held only at few places.  Moreover, the Committee observe  that there is no clear c ut policy 
for organizing Passport Melas, t he Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should 

56 
 
pronounce a policy basically giving a priority to the Passport Offices where citizens are 
facing the problem of very long appointment dates. 
The Committee  also desire  that Ministry should ensure that all the passport 
applications collected during the  Passport Melas particularly during the tranistory phase of 
Passport Seva Project are processed expidiously and are not kept pending because such 
practice  defeats the very objectives behind organizing such Melas. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
C. Role of Authorized Agents/Agencies  
 
5.20 The Committee have noted that authorized agents/agencies were a major part in earlier 
system of deposition of applications/submission of documents. The Committee desired to know 
the reasons for immediate removal of all agents and sought Ministry‟s view on Committee‟s 
suggestion of permitting the authorized persons/agencies by RPOs to continue as centres to 
provide assistance to customers on a prescribed nominal fee. The Ministry in a written reply 
submitted as under: 
 
“It is submitted that Passport Act 1967 (as amended) does not provide for recognition 
of travel agents. The registration  /recognition of travel agents was  to afford  an 
alternative to the citizens  which was regulated by administrative orders only. These 
orders have no statuto ry status and thus liable to be  amended, modified or withdrawn 
as per policy of the Govt from time to time.  The registered travel agents were free to 
deposit passport application forms in the passport offices like any other individual, but 
with authorization letter  from the applicant subject to guidelines applicable earlier. A 
travel agency‟s role was thus limited to mere deposit of a limited number of 
application forms in the Passport Office on behalf of applicants, insofar as fresh and 
reissue of passports were co ncerned.  Log -in IDs had been provided to access the 
earlier system operated by National Informatics Centre (NIC). The role of the travel 
agents in the Passport Seva System has been  re-defined  as it is now mandatory for the 

57 
 
applicant to present himself/h erself for fingerprints and photograph etc. The travel 
agents still play a role to the extent that an applicant who has difficulty in filling 
up/online filling up of passport application, obtaining appointments and ascertaining 
status enquiry of applicatio n may seek assistance from Travel Agents in the new 
system.  The citizen is also free to obtain these services from any internet café or 
anyone   else familiar with computer operation/internet.   However, such applicant has 
to come to the Passport Seva Ken dra for submission of application, fingerprint and 
digitization of photograph requirements and the Travel Agents will have no role in that 
process. Since the  portal is web -based and any one can access it for  applying online,  
authorizing only certain age ncies would serve no purpose. As of now all travel 
agencies are alike – whether „recognized‟ or not and a level field is in place.”  
5.21 Further in a written submission, the Ministry further added as under:  
 
"It is also submitted that the whole philosoph y of e-Governance is that there has to be 
direct interface with citizens minimising the role of middlemen. Presence of   
applicants at PSKs and capture of  their  biometrics and photographs  and entry of their 
particulars in a centralised database,  ensure s that the passport is being issued to  
genuine applicants avoiding the possibility of issue of multiple passports,   leading to 
an error -free and secure System.  „Legalising‟ the agents  will be contrary to the 
philosophy of e-Governance. At the same time , Ministry has an open mind to re -look 
at the role travel agents could play in the new system." 
 
5.22 The Committee observe that in the earlier system registered and reputed travel 
agents/agencies were recognized/authorized to assist in filling the form, depositing the form 
and fee on behalf of the applicants and for that they were taking a nominal charge 
prescribed by the RPOs. They were regulated by administrative orders and  were also liable 
for any mistake or mischief done by them but in the new system their role has been 
redefined treating them as middlemen .  T hey are now free like other cybercafé owners to 
charge any amount from the applicants seeking their assistance in filing applications or 
getting appointments without any control of pass port authorities. The Committee also 

58 
 
observe that when Government is in search of multiple channels to facilitate the applicants 
on payment of nominal charge, the Ministry should relook at the role of these reputed 
agencies who may work as authorized cente rs on payment of  nominal fee fixed by the 
authorities. The Committee do not find anything contrary to the philosophy of e -governance 
in legalizing these agencies for their limited regulated role to prevent the exploi tation of 
applicants by anyone. Therefo re, the Ministry should think to define the role of agents to 
facilitate the prospective applicants alongwith incorporating the SPC/DPC/citizen service 
centers in the passport network.  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
D. Grievances Redressal Mechanism 
5.23 The Ministry has informed that one of the desired outcomes of the Passport Seva Project is 
effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism and transparency in availing the services.  The 
Committee note that there are two methods of redressal of grievances i.e. Passpor t Adalats (PAs) 
and appeal at the level of Chief Passport Officer (CPO). 
 
5.24 The Ministry has informed that Passport Offices hold Passport Adalats to redress the 
grievance of Passport applicants. These Adalats are particularly useful in disposing old cas es. On 
being asked, the Ministry furnished the details of Passport Adalats held during the two year 2012 -
13 and 2013 -14 wherein information was furnished about Passport Adalats held at 15 stations.  
The Committee noted that only at Trichy, adalats were con ducted on weekly -basis on  every 
Tuesday and cases relate  to issues of suppression of EC details/previous passport/double/multiple 
passports details and adverse PVR cases.  The Committee noted that apart from Trichy, maximum 
number of Adalats i.e 25 were  held in Patna, wherein 5191 application/complaints were received.  
The Committee noted that seven adalats were held in Jalandhar wherein 8350 applications or 

59 
 
complaints were received and most of the cases were pending due to non -receipt of reply from 
Missions/Posts. The Committee noted that in Chandigarh, el even Adalats were held wherein 5 500 
applications/complaints were received and cases mostly dealt with incomplete documentation.  In 
Bhopal, in the year 2012, 504 applications/complaints were received an d maximum number of 
complaints where due to court cases and cases on hold due to incomplete document. 
5.25   The Committee were informed that t he Central Passport Organization was created in 1959 
as a subordinate office of the Ministry and is headed by Joi nt Secretary and Chief Passport 
officer, who also acts as appellate authority under the Passports Act, 1967 and the Head 
Department under the Delegation of Financial Power Rules 1978.  The Committee have come 
across instance where the applicants ' case go for appeal at CPO level , if they are not given the 
passport due to their passports being revoked/impounded under the Passport Act. The Ministry in 
a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
 
"Yes, Passport Issuing Authorities  have powers to revoke/impound passports under 
the Passports Act, 1967. As per Se ction 10 (3) the Passport Act, Passport Issuing 
Authorities may revoke/impound passport on the following grounds:  
(a) if the passport authority is satisfied that the holder of the passport or travel document i s in 
wrongful possession thereof;  
(b) if the passport or travel document was obtained by the suppression of material information 
or on the basis of wrong information provided by the holder of the passport or travel 
document or any other person on his behalf; Provided that if the holder of such passport 
obtains another passport the passport authority shall also impound or cause to be 
impounded or revoke such other passport 
(c) if the passport authority deems it necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty  and 
integrity of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign 
country, or in the interests of the general public;  
(d) if the holder of the passport or travel document has, at any time after the issue of the 
passport or travel do cument, been convicted by a court in India for any offence involving 
moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than two 
years;  
(e) if proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by the holder of the 
passport or travel document are pending before a criminal court in India.  
(f) if any of the conditions of the passport or travel document has been contravened;  
(g) if the holder of the passport or travel document has failed to comply with the notice sent 
by Passport authority requiring him to return back the Passport;  

60 
 
(h) if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a warrant or summons for the 
appearance, or a warrant for the arrest, of the holder of the passport or travel document has 
been issued by a court under any law for the time being in force or if an order prohibiting 
the departure from India of the holder of the passport or other travel document has been 
made by any such court and the passport authority is satisfied that a warrant or summon s 
has been so issued or an order has been so made.  
Further as per Section 10(4) the Act -  The passport authority may also revoke a passport 
or travel document on the application of the holder thereof."  
 
5.26 The Committee desired to know whether any gui delines have been issued to decide the 
cases where passports are impounded under section 10 (3) (b) in the name of suppression of 
information or on the basis of wrong information provided by the holder of the passport. In this 
context, the Committee also desired to know from the Ministry whether the information and 
details of a lapsed/ lost passports issued long back to a minor are also considered as wrong or 
suppressed information under this category particularly when the passport holder never had in 
possession of two passports at a time. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under:  
"Under the Passports Act, 1967 and the Passports Rules, 1980, the Passport Issuing 
Authorities (PIAs) are vested with quasi -judicial authority. This implies that the PIAs 
should independently apply their mind to each case and arrive at a decision of their 
own on the merits of each case.  Thus all the PIAs deal with the cases as per the 
guidelines provided in the Passports Act, 1967 and the Passport Rules, 1980.  
However, the Ministry of External Affairs being the nodal Ministry for Passport 
matters provides clarifications and guidance as and when sought by PIAs.  Depending 
upon the common requirement of the PIAs, general instructions/circulars are issued 
from time to time.  There may not be any specific guideline for all the PIAs  to decide 
the cases under section 10(3)(b) of the Passport Act. The instructions on similar 
issues including dealing with double/multiple Passports are contained in Ministry‟s 
circular No.  VI/401/61/2001 dated 13th March, 2008. 
While applying for reissue of Passport, a number of information are sought from the 
application, one among that is the details of old/earlier Passports.  This includes even 
lapsed (expired)/lost passports.  The applicant  has to provide all the information 
correctly and has to specifically certify regarding this at the last part of the application 
form.  Thus, if the information has not been provided in the application form for 
reissue of passport, it will treated as wrong or suppression of information, irrespective 
of the date of issue of earlier passport as well as the minor status of the applicant 
earlier."   

61 
 
5.27 In this context, the Committee desired to know about the number of cases of appeal that 
have been filed to the Chief Passport Officer related to RPO situated in the four Metropolitan 
cities during the last three years. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under:  
"The number of appeals filed with the Chief Passport Officer related to the RPOs situated in 
the four Metropolitan cities are as follows : 
Sl. No. Metropolitan City 2011 2012 2013 
1 DELHI NIL 04 03 
2 MUMBAI 26 26 22 
3 KOLKATA 10 06 05 
4 CHENNAI 01 NIL 02 
 
5.28 The Committee further sought clarification from the Ministry a nd desired to know 
whether the Passport I ssuing Authority has powers to revoke/impound the passport under th e 
Passports Act and whether RPO s are also authorized to resolve the cases under section 10 (3) (b) 
by imposing penalties in terms of money or time. The Committee further desired to know the 
reasons for sending these cases to CPO in a large number. The Ministry in post -evidence reply 
stated as under:  
"The appeal cases are disposed off as per the prescribed guidelines as contained in the 
Passport Manual.  On receipt of an appeal, the Ministry always acknowledges it and 
requests the PIA who passed the order for detailed summary/comments of the case.    
The summary, along with copies of t he Show Cause Notice, explanation and final 
order, etc., is sent to the Ministry by the PIA as expeditiously as possible.  The PIAs 
abroad, in addition, furnish whether the appellant travelled illegally out of India, 
current visa status, whether the appell ant sought asylum, likelihood of legalization of 
visa/stay abroad, details of Police Verification Report, if received from the State 
concerned etc.  In all cases of appeal, the Chief Passport Officer (CPO) passes a 
Speaking Order with copies to the appellant and the PIA concerned who  takes further 
action as necessary.  The average time taken in disposal of such cases is three to six 
months.  Delay  may be caused due to many factors from the time of filing of such 
appeals till issuance of Speaking Orders, s uch as, non -remittance of the prescribed 
appeal  fee at the time of filing the appeal or remittance of fees in some other manner, 
incomplete documentation, etc.    There may be some cases where  Passport Offices 
are required to be approached for additional  details.  The Passport Rules prescribe 
amount of penalties to be imposed. In certain cases, a defaulter‟s name  may be 
placed under Prior Approval Category ( PAC) for a  specific period.  
 

62 
 
5.29 The Committee sought the complete guidelines for issue of 'sh ow cause notices' to the 
applicants as well as the average time taken in disposal of such appeals  at Headquarters and the 
nature of punishments/penalties given in these cases in terms of money or time. The Ministry in 
post-evidence reply stated as under:  
"Yes, as mentioned above, as per the Passports Act, 1967 and t he Passports Rules, 
1980, PIAs are vested independent authority. PIAs are expected to deal with the cases 
as per the guidelines provided in the Passports Act, 1967 and the Passport Rules, 
1980.  However, depending upon the facts and circumstances of any case having 
certain complexitie s, the PIAs seek clarification/ guidance from the Ministry of 
External Affairs, addressing their communication to the Chief Passport Officer 
(CPO). These exclude appeal cases, since under the appeal after refusal of passport by 
the Passport authority/Passport Officer, the applicant appeals to the higher authority 
i.e.  the CPO under Section 11 of the Passports Act.  
Show Cause Notice (SCN) is a communication issued by Passport authority for 
seeking any kind of explanation, information, etc., from the Passport applicant for 
taking  decision in that particular case. There are no consolidated guidelines for issue 
of „Show Cause Notice (SCN)‟ as it has to be decided by the passport authority 
depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case. 
 
5.30 The Committee observe  that under the Passport Seva Project there is no effective 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism. Now the Passport Adalats are not being organized on 
regular basis and more cases are being referred for appeal at Chief Passport Officer's level. 
The Committee, therefore, are of the view that the Ministry should work upon establishing 
responsive and effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism at RPO/PO level. Moreover, the 
Committee desire that the grievance of applicants are heard and resolved within the normal 
procedure of working of the RPO/PO. The Committee also note that the cases have been 
referred to the Passport Issuing Authority (PIA) for appeal. The Committ ee have been 
informed that PIA are vested with quasi -judicial authority and has power to 
revoke/impound passport and the appeal cases are disposed off as per prescribed guidelines. 
The Committee have noted that the average time taken for disposal of cases for appeal is 
three mont hs to six months. The Committee  are of the opinion that the cases where 

63 
 
information has not been consciously hidden by the applicant or the criminality is not 
involved, such cases should be dealt at the level of the Passport Officer only and should not 
be referred at CPO level as Regional Passport Officers/Passport Officers are empowered  to 
deal with such cases.  The Committee further suggest that in cases of non -criminality or 
unintentionally non -furnishing of information is there, in such cases applicant should be 
imposed a minimum monetary penalty or if time penalty is imposed, it shou ld include time 
since  the filling of application at RPO because the passport issuance has already been 
delayed due to delay in considering the case. 
 (Recommendation no 19) 
E. Malpractices and Role of Touts in the Passport System 
5.31 There have often been reports of malpractices by employ ees of various agencies involved 
in the process of Passport Issuance. The Committee enquired whether cases of corruption ha ve 
been detected against any P assport Office staff/PSK staff/employee of TCS since the onset of  
Passport Seva Project and the action taken in this regard. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply 
stated as under:  
"From  May, 2010, the pilot stage of PSP, to 31 st December 2013, 25 officials of the 
CPO cadre were proceeded against on  corruption related charges. Of these 10 were 
APO/PGO/Supdt level officials and 15 were Assistant/UDC/LDC/Office Asstt. level 
officials. Ten cases were filed by CBI, 5 by State Police,  7 were Departmental cases 
and 3 were by CBI and Department both. In one CBI case, a UDC was acquitted, in 
two Departmental cases penalty was imposed, one official was removed and the rest 
21  are at various stages of process by CBI/CVC/Department. 
 
Five TCS staff were alleged to be involved in corrupt practice. Out of these five, four 
were suspended pending enquiry and subsequently left on expiry of their employment 
contract with TCS and one was transferred out. All the five have been charged by 
State Police. The case is sub judice."  
 
5.32 The Committee have often come across the news of instances of malpractices by Police 
officials during the process of police verification as well as malpractices by Postmen during the 
delivery of passport. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 

64 
 
“The Ministry is aware of acts of wrongdoing by those who are entrusted with police 
verification but through they are part of the passport issuance system, they are beyond 
the domain of the Ministry. However, with the incr easing adoption of Citizen Charter 
by Govt Ministries and Departments and State Govts besides increasing awareness 
about e -governance, such instances are likely to come down. The Ministry takes 
serious note of corrupt practices indulged by its officials an d would appreciate if 
specific instances and details of the officials of Passport Offices are provided to enable 
it to proceed ahead.”  
5.33 However, when specifically asked, the Ministry in a written reply further stated as under: 
“The Ministry is not in possession of any details regarding malpractices by police 
officials during PV process or by postmen while delivering passports. The police and 
India Post employees are beyond the domain of the Ministry. At best, in the event of 
any specific complaint, the  same can be forwarded to the concerned authorities for 
such action as may be deemed fit by them.” 
 “In the absence of any specific complaint or conclusive proof of malpractices or 
demanding money for clear reports, it is not possible  for the Ministry to write to the 
State Govt   imputing motives to police.”  
5.34 When t he Committee sought MEA‟s j ustification and desired to know about the efforts 
being made by the Ministry to reduce the role of touts/agents in the process of issuance of 
passport, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“...Passport Portal is web -based and open for access by any one. The Ministry‟s  is 
taking steps  to co -opt Common Service Centres, e -Seva facilities in the states/UTs, 
DPCs and SPCs to provide more access points to citizens for filing passport applications 
online and   payment of fees through e -modes. The appointments will be released by the 
System itself over a 2 -3 weeks period. Opening of appointment window at a certain 
time,  as is being done at present, will  be discontinued. This will minimise the role of 
middlemen. ..” 
 
5.35 Regarding the harassment of public by agents/touts/public, the Ministry in a written reply 
had submitted that Ministry has not received any complaints. In this context, the Committee 
observed that the presence of agents/touts is commonly seen around every PSK/RPO and desired 
to know whether the Ministry has taken any action suo -motu to keep check on areas in the 
vicinity of PSK/RPO or conducted any raid. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
 

65 
 
“There are clear signages  displayed at the Passport Offices/PSKs advising the public to 
desist from dealing with touts. An advisory to this effect is also posted on the Passport 
Portal. It is submitted that it is not possible for the Ministry by itself to control 
movement of peopl e outside the premises of Passport Office/PSK nor it is empowered 
to conduct any raid. However, Passport Officers have been instructed to approach the 
concerned police officers to conduct the raid around Passport Offices/PSKs to curb the 
activities of touts.” 
5.36 The Committee also noted that often advertisements are found in newspapers and other 
media regarding agents promising assistance for faster passport issuance. The Committee desired 
to know whether the Ministry has enquired about their role in the new system and the role of 
officials of MEA/Passport Organization/TCS/PSK in such practices and the action taken if any, in 
this regard. The Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The Ministry is aware of advertisements in various newspapers etc as well as sign-boards 
and stickers on vehicles besides SMS on mobiles claiming to arrange passports quickly. 
The Ministry does not have the resources to go after each person making such claims. 
Appropriate action as per Govt rules is taken against any CPO em ployee if found 
indulging in any malpractice.” 
5.37 On being asked about the action taken by the Ministry about fraudulent advertisement, the 
Ministry has stated that "the Ministry does not have the resources to go after each person making 
such claims". The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry has brought this to the notice 
of the Police. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"It is not possible for the Ministry to utilise its scarce resources to pursue such matters 
with Police.  Advisories are  posted on the Passport website prominently,  cautioning 
citizens   against  dealing with touts and agents promising early issuance of passports.  
Such notices are also displayed at all Passport Offices/Passport Seva Kendra."   
 
 
5.38 The Committee observe that unauthorized touts/agents are still active in the new 
system and are taking the  advantage of difficulties being faced by the applicants at each 
stage of the process. This includes charging very high amount for submission of appl ications 
online, taking dates and clearance of PVR . U nder the new system , there are more 
opportunities for  such elements to harass the applicants.  The Committee  have also come 
across advertisements in media as well as reports of exploitation by touts who a ct as 

66 
 
facilitations and charge exorbitant sum from the applicants. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the information furnished by the Ministry about the measures undertaken to 
mitigate the situation. The Committee would like to urge the Ministry to purs ue the matter 
with concerned police officers and conduct surprise raids to curb the mushrooming of 
agents/touts around the PSKs/RPO. Furthermore, the Committee are also aware of the 
malpractice by few officials of Department of Police and Postal Department s during the 
process of police verification and delivery of passport s respectively. In this context, the 
Committee would like to urge the Ministry to take up the matter with concerned authorities.  
At the same time , the Committee would like to stress upon the need for verification of the 
antecedents of the employees of the Service Provider that are attached with the Passport 
Seva Project and conduct regular checks to ensure that these officials and officials from the  
Ministry of External Affairs/RPO are not involved in nefarious activities. 
 (Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 
  

67 
 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES 
A. Manpower Management under Passport Seva Project 
  As informed by the Ministry, the total strength of the Central Passport Organization Cadre 
was 2697 as on 31 December, 2012.  The Ministry has taken several steps to improve the service 
conditions of the CPO personnel by re -structuring of the cadre, faster promotion and introduction 
of productivity-linked incentive scheme. During their study visits, the Committee have looked into 
the concern raised by the officers/staff of the Central Passport Organization and have continuously 
highlighted the issue of shortage of staff in various RPOs. The Committee were particularly 
concerned over the issue of security and responsibility in the Passport Seva Project.
 According to the Ministry, steps undertaken included performance based incentive, re-structuring  
and expanding of the CPO Cadre  with  introduction of 320 posts of Passp ort Granting Officers 
(PGOs), fast tracking promotion prospects by revision and relaxation of Recruitment Rules, 
uniform and well -defined work procedures, Centralized Application and Database ensuring better 
availability and uniformity, Improved performance due to state of the art infrastructure and system 
deployment, Skill enhancement through training and Audit trail that ensures the legality of the task 
being performed by the user.  
 
6.2 On  the issue of staff welfare measures, the Ministry informed as under: 
“MEA has  put in place a Consultative Mechanism to address the genuine grievances 
of the employees. This mechanism aims to promote harmonious relations and secure 
greater measure of cooperation between the Ministry and its employees in matters of 
common concern. While designing the Project, the interests of employees have been 
kept in careful consideration. Among the beneficial steps taken are the expansion and 
restructuring of CPO cadres. Thanks to PSP, the cadre has been restructured and 
expanded. Th is Ministry is taking all efforts to fill up vacancies through fast track 
promotion, deputation and recruitment by Staff Selection Commission.” 
 
 
 

68 
 
6.3 On the issue of shortage of staff and resources, the Foreign Secretary during the sitting 
submitted as under: 
“I think, one issue which was raised by many hon. Members of the Committee is of 
staff, infrastructure and expanding the available resources. This is something which we 
will keep pressing for. All I can say is that the Ministry as a whole is facing one of its 
worst financial crises now because of the budgetary cuts and the pressures that there 
will be no additionality of funds given to us. But that kept in mind, I must mention that 
in all our interactions with the Ministry of Finance, we have repeate dly pointed out 
that in fact, passport services pay for themselves…. So, we keep on emphasizing this 
to the Ministry of Finance, but anything we earn goes into the Consolidated Fund of 
India and the MEA does not see it whereas anything we spend comes out o f the 
Ministry of Finance and therefore, has to be negotiated. This is a permanent problem”  
6.4 The Committee noted that it is reported that most of the Passport Offices are facing staff 
crunch. For instance, the Committee noted that currently appointment s are released as per 
handling capacity of a PSK which depends on the number of counters provided at the PSK and 
manning position. The Ministry had further stated that appointments can be made available early 
provided more PSKs are set up and sufficient manpower within the CPO cadre is available to man 
the PSKs. In this regard, the Committee sought the details of sanctioned staff strength of each 
Passport Office and actual staff strength as on date. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated 
as under: 
"The sanctioned strength of the Central Passport Organization was 2349 up to year 
2007.  Since 2007 and with the introduction of Passport Seva Project, whereby 77 
Passport Seva Kendras were  established all over India and keeping in view the new 
functional requirement of the staff, the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance had approved creation and abolition of some posts at different levels in the 
Central Passport Organization of Ministry of External Affairs.  In effect, 348 new 
posts were added t o the strength as in 2007 in different grades.  Thus the present 
sanctioned staff strength in the Central Passport Organization is 2697."  
 
6.5 When t he Committee desired to know whether this staff crunch has affected the 
implementation of Passport Seva Project, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under  
 "Following the implementation of Passport Seva Project (PSP) and consequent and 
steep increase in workload of Passport Offices the requirement of additional staff is 
being worked out. The earli er SIU study of Passport Offices and the staff strength 
approved in the past is no longer relevant in view of re -engineered passport issuance 
process."  

69 
 
6.6 The Committee desired to know about the initiatives and remedial measures taken in 
this regard.  The Ministry in post-evidence reply stated as under:   
 
"The increase in staff strength has not kept pace with high demand of Passports 
across the country.  The following measures have been taken to make up the 
shortages 
 
(a)    As part of the restructurin g and with a view to strengthening and upgrading 
the manpower capacity at the middle level,  Recruitment Rules have been amended to 
envisage direct recruitment of 25 percent of the vacancies  at the level of Assistant  
through the Combined Graduate Level E xamination being conducted by SSC.   An 
indent has been sent to SSC and nominations are being received.  Six new Assistants 
have already joined. 
 
(b)     Steps have been taken to fill up the existing vacancies at the Passport Offices 
through fast track pro motion, deputation and recruitment by Staff Selection 
Commission  and wherever necessary with the relaxation of norms and  with the 
approval of DoPT and UPSC.  From September 2008 to 12 th December, 2013, 2914 
officials have been promoted in various grades.   
 
(c)   The number of officers at Superintendent level has been increased by 
downgrading the existing posts of Passport Granting Officer to provide sufficient 
manpower  for smoother operation of the Passport Seva Kendras/ Passport Office. 
 
(d)  The additional staff requirement of the Passport Offices (where there is 
continuous or seasonal increase in workload), is met by transfer/temporary duty of 
some staff from the neighbouring offices.    
 
(e)     As a temporary measure,  the Ministry has   approved engagement of 450 Data 
Entry Operators(DEO  in lieu of Group “B”(Non -Gazetted) and Group ”C” posts. 
There are at present 316 DEOs working in Passport offices.   
 
(f)     The Ministry has implemented Productivity Linked Incentive Scheme (PLIS) on 
21st March, 2013, having retrospective effect, to financially incentivise individual 
performance measured against pre -set and mutually agreed upon parameters. The 
essence of PLIS is that differential performance would be differentially rewarded."  
 
6.7 The Co mmittee observe that Passport Offices have been facing continuous staff 
crunch. The Committee also find that under the new system of passport issuance, the 
Passport Offices have to   play a back office role and the staff available with the Passport 
Offices is to be posted at PSKs as well as RPOs. The Committee, however, have observed 

70 
 
during their study visits to Passport Offices that there is no balanced distribution of st aff 
between both the locations.  The Committee note that o n one hand, there is reductio n of 
work at RPO and on the other hand the Ministry has accepted that due to staff crunch they 
are unable to release more appointments at Passport Seva Kendras. It clearly shows that 
there is a need of proper planning for deputation of staff at RPO and PSK s. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry should undertake Passport Office specific 
studies to know the workload and requirement of manpower at particular PO or PSK and 
ensure optimal utilization of human resource in these offices. The Committee are sure that 
with the existing manpower and newly created 348 posts the Ministry will be able to handle 
the system efficiently. 
(Recommendation No.21) 
B. Integration of Indian Missions/Posts with Passport Seva Project  
6.8 The Committee desired to know about  the process for obtaining new passport/renew 
passport abroad and sought information about the  agencies involved and conduct of inspection to 
ascertain the level of services provided by them . The Ministry in a written reply submitted as 
under: 
“There are 180 Indian Missions/Po sts abroad. The passport cases abroad are mostly 
re-issue (renewal) cases as Indian nationals arrive there on the passport initially from 
the country of origin. The new passport cases are only of children born of Indian 
parents. In ei ther case, there is no police verification involved though the Passport 
database (PRIDE) is checked for antecedents or any adverse entry. The applicants fill 
in the form, pay the fees and receive the passports speedily. Our Missions/Posts in 22 
countries h ave passport printing facility there itself. The other Missions/Posts 
transmit the data digitally to the Central Indian Passport Printing System (CIPPS) 
Unit, CPV Division for printing of passports. Passports after printing are dispatched 
by courier to the originating Missions/Posts for signatures and return to applicants 
generally within a week. In a few Missions/Posts abroad. There is no regular system 
of inspections of level of services provided by the Missions/Posts. However, working 
of Consular, Passport and Visa Wing is  examined at the time of periodical audits or 
by Foreign Service Inspectors Team‟s inspections of Missions/Posts abroad.” 

71 
 
6.9 In order to integrate and streamline the entire passport issuance system, the Committee 
have emphasized on the  need for integration of Passport Seva Portal with Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad. The Ministry in a written submission stated as under: 
 
“The Passport service related data received from Indian Missions/Posts abroad is 
migrated to Passport Seva system. Requi site steps are under way to integrate the 
Missions/Posts with PSP.  Technical stu dy is likely to be completed by  31st March 
2014 and actual integration is likely to be achieved by December 2014.”   
 
6.10 The Committee during their sittings have highlighted the problems being faced by the 
individuals who have got passport re-issued from Indian Posts/Missions abroad. In its 
justification, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“In case the particulars of applicant are available in the Passport database (PRIDE), 
there is no need to make any reference. However, if the data is incomplete or not 
available or the photograph is not clear, a reference is necessary. Since complete data -
check/confirmation of photograph is crucial,  it is not advisable to issue pa ssport on 
the basis of affidavit or within a fixed timeframe in the absence of requisite 
confirmation.”  
 
6.11 The Committee sought clarification whether the data regarding passport services rendered 
by Indian Missions/Posts abroad are being integrated in PSP and the steps undertaken by the 
Ministry to incorporate these Missions/Posts in the PSP and timeline fixed for co mpletion of 
work. The Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"As of now, Missions/Posts are still working under the old application/system 
maintained by NIC. The data of such applicants/passports are first received through 
NIC and then it is migrated into PSP system as part of Central Database (PRIDE).  
In order to integrate Missions/Posts into Passport Seva,  the Ministry would adopt 
following approach so that unified globalised view of the entire Passport Issuance 
System is available to all the stakeholders including management :-- 
i. Submission of approach note regarding taking over of Missions/Posts into PSP system and 
approval of competent authority, 
ii. Once approved, study of at -least 2 small and 2 large Missions/Posts for preparation of 
detailed SRS document, 
iii. Submission of detailed SRS including requirement of Hardwa re/Software/Licenses etc. to 
competent authority for approval including commercials, 
iv. Readiness of application/hardware/software, 
v. Pilot implementation at 2 CIPPS location and 2 Large Missions, 
vi. Running of Pilot for at least a month and 

72 
 
vii. Roll out across CIPPS locations and Large Missions. 
 
As far as printing of Passports is concerned, certain large Missions would continue to 
have printing facility locally and for CIPPS, the printing would be taken care of at the 
Central Passport Printing Facility (CPPF), New Delhi,  which is connected to PSP 
network. It is felt that the best way forward for replacing current printers should be a 
long term strategy for moving into new generation printing technology which would 
also protect the existing investment. The time -line for integration into PSP system is  
based upon approval of point no. i, ii, & iii. After the approval, it would take at least 
8-12 months from development to roll-out approximately." 
6.12  The Committee are informed that Indian Missions/Posts are still wo rking under the 
old application system maintained by NIC and the data is migrated into PSP system as part 
of Central Database (PRIDE). The Committee note that the Ministry has prepared a 
blueprint for establishing a unified globalized view of the entire pa ssport issuance system, 
however, the Committee observe that inspite of launching the P roject, so far no view was 
taken on the issue of integration of Indian Missions/Posts in the Passport Seva 
Portal/Project. As a result , in the Missions/Posts , the application forms are still being filled 
in order to renew the passport and any information required in connection with issuance of 
passports take too much time, for example the Committee have noted that seven adalats 
were held in Jalandhar wherein 83 50 applications or complaints were received and most of 
the cases were pending due to non -receipt of reply from Missions/Posts.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Passport Seva Project should be linked with the Indian 
Missions/Posts at the earliest  so that data is available on real -time basis and also to reduce 
the delay owing to awaiting informa tion from Missions/Posts abroad  in case of applicants 
whose earlier passports were issued/reissued by Indian Missions/Posts abroad.   Further, the 
Committee are of the view that availability of data on real time basis would also facilitate in 
case of reissue of Passport/rendering of miscellaneous services in case the applicant who has 

73 
 
already been issued his /her passport from Indian Mission abroad and has fu rther 
requirement for reissue his/her Indian passport in any other country.  
(Recommendation No. 22) 
C. Quality of Passport Booklets 
6.13 During the sitting s, the Committee have often raised the issue of quality of passport 
booklets. On being enquired by the Members upon the issue, the Ministry in a written submission 
stated as under:  
“The Ministry has been urging the General Manager, India Security Press, Nashik to 
improve the quality of passports of all the categories.”   
6.14 The Ministry further reiterated that the Ministry is in constant dialogue with the India 
Security Press Nashik, the manufacturers and suppliers of passport booklets for improving 
quality. Elaborating upon the steps taken to improve the quality of pass port booklet, the Ministry 
in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
"The issue of improving the quality and security of the Indian passport booklets is a 
constant process and the Ministry of External Affairs has been periodically taking up 
this matter wit h Indian Security Press(ISP), Nashik, at the   MEA-ISP Coordination 
Committee meetings.   Improvements such as shifting of data -page to third page, 
space for LSI Ghost image etc. were introduced during the year 2013.   Further 
improvements to the quality and security of the passport booklets, in conformity with 
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) regulations, are being taken up with 
ISP."   
6.15 The Committee in their Report in the past have  taken up the issue of quality of 
passport booklets. The Committee are informed that the Ministry has taken up the issue of 
improving the quality and enhancing security features in Indian Passport Booklets with 
Indian Security Press (ISP), Nasik. The Committee, however, feel that not much has been 
done by ISP, Nasik in terms of improving the physical quality of the Passport booklets 
particularly, binding which has led to problems during immigration check for Indian citizen 
abroad. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry must pursue the matter with 
ISP, Nasik to improve the binding of the booklets. The Committee have also come across the 

74 
 
news reports about short supply of passport booklets  in various RPOs . The Committee 
therefore, suggest the Minist ry to take up the matter with ISP, Nasik for regular supply of 
desired quantity of Passport Booklets so that the printing of passport is not delayed due to 
non-availability of passport booklets. 
 (Recommendation No.23) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                ANANTH KUMAR, 
18 February, 2014                                                         Chairman,                
29 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on External Affairs 
  

75 
 
Appendix - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 27th JANUARY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room „63‟, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri H.K. Dua – In the Chair 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
3. Shri Anto Antony 
4. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
6. Shri P. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
8. Dr. Bhola Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
10. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard 
11 Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
12 Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
13. Shri Tarun Vijay 
14. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri K.D. Muley                - Director 
2.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Rakesh Bhardwaj         - Under Secretary 
 
 

76 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs 
 
1. Shri Ranjan Mathai    - Foreign Secretary  
2. Shri Basant K. Gupta   - Additional Secretary (CPV) 
3. Shri Amarendra Khatua  - Joint Secretary (PV) 
4. Shri P.M. Meena   - Joint Secretary (Consular) 
5. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi  - Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO 
6. Dr. B.M. Vinod Kumar  - Joint Secretary (Parl. &VIP) 
7. Shri A.K. Sobti   - Director (PSP) & PVA 
8. Shri Sanjeev Kumar   - Director (FSO) 
9. Shri A.K. Bhatnagar   - Consultant (PSP) 
 
 
2. Hon‟ble Chairman (Shri Ananth Kumar) could not attend the sitting of the Committee due 
to unforeseen engagement.  The Committee therefore, chose Shri H.K. Dua to act as Chairperson 
for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha. 
3. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee, Foreign 
Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of External Affairs and  drew their attention to 
Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
4. The Foreign Secretary, then briefed the Committee on the subject “Passport Seva Project-
targets and achievements” .  He dwelt upon the idea behind Passport Seva Project and discussed 
its various aspects and h ighlighted various initiatives taken by the Ministry to streamline the 
Passport issuance system. 
5. The Foreign Secretary also replied to various queries raised by the Members. During 
discussions, the Members of the Committee inter-alia raised various issues relating to the subject 
including the role of service provider and safety of data, improvement in rendering of services, 
reasons for long wait for seeking appointments, reasons for delays in new system and pendency of 
passport applications submitted under old system, roles of other agencies authorized to collect and 
submit  applications, presence of middlemen and touts, poor quality of passport and the issues 
related to police verification etc. Members further stressed upon the need to open new Passport 

77 
 
Seva Kendras (PSKs) at various important places in all the States in the Country and also opening 
of mini PSKs particularly in North Eastern States.  
6. A verbatim proceeding of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

78 
 
Appendix - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 16th JANUARY, 2013 
 
 
The Committee sat on 16th January, 2013 1600 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. 62, PH, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  –  In the Chair 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jose K. Mani 
3. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
4.  Shri M.B. Rajesh 
5. Shri J. Ramesh 
6. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
7. Dr. Bhola Singh 
 8.  Dr. Girija Vyas 
9. Shri Sultan Ahmed 
10. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Dr. Najma Heptulla 
12. Shri Balbir Punj 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
Witnesses 
Sl. No.   Name    Designation 
 
1. Shri Ranjan Mathai   - Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri B. K. Gupta    - Additional Secretary (CPV) 
3. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi  - JS (PSP) & CPO 
4. Shri Mridul Kumar    - Joint Secretary, (Parl. & Coord)\ 
5. Shri A.K. Sobti   - Director (PSP) & PVA 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai     - Director 
2. Shri A. Sivanandam    - Under Secretary 
 
   
 

79 
 
At the outset Hon. Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs for further discussion on the subject 'Passport 
Seva Project – Targets and Achievements'. 
 
2. While initiating the discussion, the Chairman enunciated various problems being faced by 
the applicants even after more than two and half years since the operationalisation of the Passport 
Seva Project (PSP) especially delays in getting Police Verification Reports.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary elaborated upon the salient features of Passport Seva 
Project and mentioned the initiatives being taken or being considered for smooth functioning and 
delivery of passports.  
 
4. The Committee deliberated on various issued related to the subject, viz. problems related 
to touts and agents, need for regulating the sys tem of on -line appointments, delays in police 
verification, lack of passport services in the backward regions of the country, outsourcing of visa 
services by the Indian consulates etc.  The Chairman reiterated Committee's earlier 
recommendation and desired  to know about the action taken by the Ministry for inclusion of 
District Passport Cells (DPCs), Speed Post Centres and Post offices in the process of deposition 
of forms and capturing of bio-metric data of the applicants to utilize the existing network.  
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry replied to the queries of the Committee and informed 
them about its plan to utilize the existing network of Common Service Centres, Speed Post 
Centres and District Passport Cells in extending Passport related services. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned  
 
 A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.  
 
 
 

80 
 
Appendix - III 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2013-14) HELD ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2013 
 
The Committee sat on 17 th December, 2013 from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'B' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Francisco Sardinha   - In the Chair 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
5.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
6. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
7. Shri. Rajendrasinh Rana 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri Balbir Punj 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
         1. Smt. Sujatha Singh                  - Foreign Secretary  
   2. Shri A.R. Ghanashyam            - Additional Secretary (CPV & Hajj) 

81 
 
   3. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi        - Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO 
   4. Shri A.K. Sobti                        - Director (PSP & PV) 
   5. Shri A.K. Bhatnagar                - Consultant (PSP) 
   6. Shri Golok Kumar Simli         - Principal Consultant (Tech-PSP) 
 
2.  Hon'ble Chairman (Shri Ananth Kumar) could not attend the sitting of the Committee due 
to some urgent enga gement. The Committee, therefore, chose Shri Francisco Sardinha, Member 
of Parliament to act as Chairman for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3.  At the outset, the Chair welcomed the Memb ers of the Committee and representatives of 
the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee to take oral evidence on the 
subject 'Passport Seva Project- Targets and Achievements'. The Chair outlined all the major issues 
relating to the pas sport seva project and wanted to listen the views of the Ministry particularly 
about the impact of recent initiatives taken by the Ministry for the benefit of applicants in all parts 
of the country including rural areas. 
4.  Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary elaborated upon the status of Passport Seva Project and 
various initiatives undertaken by the Ministry to ensure delivery of Passport Services in a  serious 
and reliable manner. She further informed the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry in  
response to their suggestion to make the passport issuance system easier and more accessible. The 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs also replied to various queries raised by the 
Members of the Committee. 
5. The Committee further discusse d various issues such as involvement of postal network in 
the passport services, plight of applicants from rural areas,  disposal of applications received 

82 
 
during passport melas, delay in opening of Passport Seva Laghu Kendra's in the  North East  
region and Union Territories, quality of passport booklets including diplomatic passports, delay in 
feasibility study being prepared by National Institute of Smart Governance (NSIG) and   opening 
of Lagu Passport Seva Kendras and  particular passport related proble ms being faced by residents 
of Goa, Rajkot (Gujarat) and  District Pathanamthitta (Kerala) etc. 
6. The Foreign Secretary brought to the notice of the Committee, the problem of delay in 
receiving police verification reports in the timely dispatch of passports.. Thereafter, the Chairman 
directed the Ministry to furnish written replies to the points raised by the Committee, to which the 
data was not readily available. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept. 
  

83 
 
Appendix-IV 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2013-14) HELD ON 18TH FEBRUARY, 2014 
 
The Committee sat on 18th February, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee 
Room No.67, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
       PRESENT 
Dr. Najma A. Heptulla  -  In the Chair 
 
        MEMBERS 
         
                        LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Sansuma Khunggur Bwiswmuthiary 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
5. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari 
6. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
7. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
8. Dr. Bhola Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
9.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
10. Shri Murli Deora 
11. Shri H.K. Dua 
12. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
13. Shri N.K. Singh 
14. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Ram Raj Rai  -  Director 
 
 

84 
 
2. Hon'ble Chairman (Shri Ananth Kumar) could not attend the sitting of the Committee due 
to some urgent engagement. The Committee therefore, chose Dr. Najma A. Heptulla to act as the 
Chairperson for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. At the outset, the Chair welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on the subject 'Passport 
Seva Project - Targets and Achievements'.  The Chair invited the Members to offer their 
suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor 
modifications. The Committee adopted the draft Report with minor modifications.  
5. xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
6.  The Committee then authorized the Chair to finalize the Reports incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 