 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Passport Seva Project – Targets and Achievements”] 
 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014 /Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2014-2015) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  2 
 

 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Passport Seva Project – Targets and Achievements”] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2014 
 
                            Laid in Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
COEA NO. 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2014 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (____________ Edition) and Printed by  
  

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-2015)………………………               (ii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………   (iii)  
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….        1          
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           47       
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…   61     
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………       62         
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………        71            
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee  
on External Affairs (2014-15) held on 25th November,2014…       78 
      
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                           
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing  
Committee on External Affairs ………….………………….        80   
     
 
(i)  

    
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2014-2015) 
 
Sl. No. Name of Member 
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
3. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
6. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
7. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
8. Shrimati Rakshatai Khadse 
9. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
10. Shri Jose K. Mani 
11. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi* 
12. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
13. Shri Magantti Venkateswara Rao (Babu) 
14. Md. Salim 
15. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
16. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
17. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
18. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
19. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
20. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Vacant# 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23. Shri H.K. Dua 
24. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
25. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
26. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
27. Dr. Karan Singh 
28. Shri D. P. Tripathi 
29. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
30. Vacant@ 
31. Vacant## 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Cyril John  -  Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director   
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director  
4. Ms. Kiran Bhargava - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
*Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha has been nominated vice Dr. K.C. Patel, Member 
of Parliament, Lok Sabha who has been nominated to the Committee on Information Technology w.e.f.11.09.2014. 
 
# Shri Vijay Sampla ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
09.11.2014. 
 
@ Shri Y. S. Chowdary ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
09.11.2014. 
 
 # # Shri Murli Deora, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha had been nominated vice Shri Anand Sharma, Member 
of Parliament, Rajya Sabha who h ad been nominated to the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 
25.09.2014. Vacancy arose w.e.f. 24.11.2014 due to his sad demise. 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on External Affairs (2014-15) having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Second Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth  
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on the subject “ Passport Seva Project – Targets and 
Achievements” 
 
2. The Twenty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha & laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20th February, 201 4. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 19th May, 2014.  The 
updated Action Taken Replies were received on 26th September, 2014. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sixth sitting held on 
25th November, 2014. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on External Affairs is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
28th November, 2014                                                                   Chairperson,        
7 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)               Standing Committee on External Affairs. 
                                                                 
 
 
(iii)  

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
their Twenty Fifth Report (15th L.S) on the subject “Passport Seva Project – Targets 
and Achievements” which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
20th February, 2014.  
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the observations/recommendations contained in the report.  These have 
been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 3,7,8,11,16,19,20,21,23 
Total-09 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
         Recommendation Nos. - NIL 
Total- 00 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 1,9,10,14,15,17,18 
Total-07  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. – 2,4,5,6,12,13,22 
                                                                        Total-07 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies t o the 
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government and also the recommendations/observation on which the 

2 
 
Committee have made their comments , should be furnished within three 
months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from he 
Government, which need reiteration or merit comments.. 
(Recommendation No.1) 
5. The Committee were happy to note that as a part of the national e -governance 
plan of the Go vernment, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) ha d embarked on the 
ambitious mission Passport Seva Project to make the passport issuance system more 
efficient.  The Committee, however, took  note of the undue delay in execution of the 
Project in the begin ning. At the same time, the Committee had noted that before 
embarking upon the project, the Ministry had overlooked certain aspects which led to 
significant financial implications/burden on the Ministry as well as created a chaotic 
situation during the per iod of transformation from  old system to the new system. 
Thereafter, they ha d successfully established 77 Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) in 
different parts of the country in first phase of the Project to handle the work of passport 
and were in the process of  opening Passport Seva Laghu Kendras (PSLKs) in North 
Eastern States and other areas.   The Committee, however, were of the strong opinion 
that the Ministry had not appropriately dwelt upon the implications of centralization  of 
passport application deposit process and the system going online in view of digital 
divide and lack of infrastructure and connectiv ity in the country particularly  in semi-
urban and rural areas.   The Committee had noted that in the second phase of the project 
the Government  propose to open more Centres and therefore, had desired that in view 
of the experience of the Phase-I and the requirement  of infrastructure and connectivity, 
the Ministry must dwell upon the project in its various dimensions and holistically 
examine them in its en tirety and come up with concrete policy decision on various 
issues before embarking on the next Phase.  
 6. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The recommendation of  Hon‟ble Committee has  been taken  note of   and  
it is submitted that the Ministry is committed to providing Passport services 
in a more efficient, timely and transparent manner. It is also submitted that  
with a view to address the challenge of digital divide  and to provide more 
access points for  filing passport applications online,  especially in the rural 
hinterland,   the Ministry in association  with M/s. CSC e -Governance 
Services India Limited {which is promoted by the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY)},  has facilit ated  online  
filing of  passport  applications,  through the vast network of over one lakh 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) across the country. The CSCs are the 

3 
 
delivery points for Government, Private and Social Sector services in the 
areas of agriculture, h ealth, education, banking, insurance, pension, utility 
bill payments, entertainment, etc. to rural citizens of India at their doorstep. 
 The passport related services have now been added as part of their b ouquet 
of services.   The CSCs facilitate filling a nd uploading of Passport 
application form, payment of applicable fee (through debit/credit card or 
through SBI internet banking/challan mode) and scheduling of appointment 
for  visit to the PSK,  at nominal charge  
not exceeding Rs. 100/-.  As per the appointment schedule, an applicant will 
have to visit the PSK for completion of application submission process 
(including collection of digital photographs/biometrics, verification of 
supporting documents and approval). The services through CSCs are 
available throughout the week, including during the weekend.  The Ministry 
has also decided to open a PSK each in Indore (Madhya Pradesh) and 
Solapur (Maharashtra) to increase the outreach of passport services besides 
adding more counters in various PSKs to augment  their  handling capacity.  
The Ministry has also drawn up a plan to  organize Passport Seva Camps   
periodically  at various places to take the passport services closer home.” 
   
7. The Committee have keenly observed the rollout of the Passport Seva Project 
(PSP) since its inception and have constantly commented upon various issues of 
concern during implementation of the first phase of the Project.  That is why t he 
Committee ha d specifically  desired that the Ministry should holistically examine 
and identify all the issues relating to the implementation of the Project as well as 
issuance of passports and come up with concrete policy decision s before embarking 
upon the next phase  of the p roject.  However, the Ministry in  its reply ha s 
elaborately stated only ab out the measures undertaken by them to provide more 
access points  without any mention of other  ground realities and the resultant 
bottlenecks faced by various stakeholders including the Ministry, passport offices, 
service providers and the public in genera l.  The Committee are , therefore, of the 
view that rather than adopting an adhoc approach, the Ministry must come up with 

4 
 
a bl ueprint of the subsequent phase of expansion and d well deep upon  all the 
pending issues, viz. opening of additional Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) and new 
Passport Seva Laghu Kendras (PSLKs), opening of additional counters, plan for 
organization of Passport Seva Camps, involvement of Common Service Providers 
(CSCs)/Department of Posts/any other service providers, modes of submission of  
application, fee and capturing of biometric data should all be resolved before 
implementation of the next phase.   
(Recommendation No.2) 
8. The Committee had taken a note of payment made to each agency on th e basis 
of per passport and found  that charges paid to TCS for conducting front -end activity in 
regard to issue of new passport range from Rs. 171.87 to Rs.199.00 while for 
miscellaneous services, it ranges  from Rs. 77.61 to Rs. 103.23 and Rs. 100.00 per 
passport application was paid to India Post for accepting and forwarding the application 
to the concerned RPO. The Committee had f urther observed that the payment made to 
Department of Police for Police Verification (PV) was only Rs.100.00 in cases where it 
was received within 21 days, while it was only Rs. 25 .00, if  Police Verification Report 
(PVR) was received after 21 days. The Committee were of the opinion that in view of 
the tedious nature of the job and the time taken by the police officials in actually 
visiting residences of applicants, verifyin g documents and also visiting references in 
case it was required and involvement of CID in carrying out verification in certain case, 
the Ministry should enhance the rates paid to police for carrying out verification.  
The Committee had also noted that in the new system under the Passport Seva Project, 
the DPHQ s/SPHQs were expected to be e -connected but several States were still 
following manual process of sending police verif ication reports which usually took  more 
than 21 days for which police was  paid Rs.  25 only for each PVR. The time taken in 
some States/Union Territories like Andhra Pradesh and Delhi was very less. The Ministry 
should treat that as model and implement it in all the States so that the time taken for 
police verification was reduced to minimum days.  
 9. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Ministry would like to inform  Hon‟ble Co mmittee  that the reimbursement to 
Police  for verification of personal particulars and antecedents  of applicants is  being  
increased from Rs.100/- to Rs.150/- per passport appli cation  provided that states/UTs 
implement DPHQ model  and t he verific ation report  is  received within 21 days of 

5 
 
making reference to Police.  In case the verification report is received afte r 21 days, the 
reimbursement would be restricted to Rs.50/ -.  This has been done to encourage state 
police to  implement DPHQ model and to  complete verification process in a time -
bound manner without delay. The matter of delay  in police verification  was raised by 
Foreign Secretary in a meeting of Chief Secretaries of State / UT Govts. on  13th March, 
2014. A Presentation on Police Verification (PV)  had also  been made  by the Ministry 
before the Chief Secretaries .  Subsequently,   a handout   containing 
suggestions/proposals to State/UT Govts.   for speeding up verification and 
emphasizing the need for setting up  the preferred DPHQ model,  is being finalised. It is 
reiterated that setting up IT infrastructure for Police Verification Reports (PVRs) is the 
responsibility of the States/UT Govts. and the Ministry can only impress upon them to 
do so with a view to improving governance in the c ountry.  As of now,  475 districts 
have adopted the DPHQ model.  The Ministry  has also prepared  a detailed  draft  
„Manual on Police Verification for Passports‟ for dissemination to State/UT Govts. to   
introduce uniform and speedy procedures and practices.” 
 
10. The Committee  are happy to note that the reimbursement for police 
verification has been increased in the states i mplementing the DPHQ model.  
Simultaneously, af ter meeting with Chief Secretaries  of the States/UTs in March , 
2014 a handout containing suggestions/proposals to State/UT Governments for 
speeding up verifications and emphasizing the need for setting up the p referred 
District Police Headquarters (DPHQ) model  is being finalized.  But the Committee 
regret to note that even after a lapse of several months, the handout has not been 
finalized so far.  The Committee, therefore, desire that it should be finalized at the 
earliest and circulated to all the States and UTs  to speed up the police verification 
process to make the system transparent .  The Committee also suggest that the said 
handout containing suggestions should also be supplied to all the Regional Passport 
Offices (RPOs) and also be displayed on the main  Notice-Board  for information of 
all the concerned .  The Committee also desire that detailed draft of „Manual on 
Police Verification  for Passport‟ being prepared with an objective of introducing 

6 
 
uniform and speedy procedure and practices should also be finalized without any 
further delay and circulated to the State/UTs Government. The Committee may also 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
(Recommendation No.3) 
11. The Committee had observed that based on the feasibility study conducted by 
National Institute for Smart Government (NISG),  the Government had approved to set 
up 77 PSKs across the country on the Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.  The 
Committee had also observed that the only crite ria to decide the location of PSKs was 
the number of applications received by the Passport Offices during 2001 -2005 from the 
areas under their jurisdiction. Thereafter, it had  been decided to open 16 Passport Seva 
Kendras because many of the areas includin g most of the North Eastern States 
remained uncovered.  Even after that there was a huge demand from various other 
places for opening of PSKs or PSLKs in view of difficulties being faced by people in 
the interior areas in the country.  Due to such demands the Ministry ha d again asked 
NISG to conduct another study to decide the places for opening of more PSKs/PSLKs 
during the phase II of the Project. The Committee  had strongly criticized the approach 
of the Ministry in deciding the places for opening of PSKs and keeping no provision for 
identifying other places which require such facilities which was evident due to closure 
of multiple channels of submission, particularly in the rural and interior areas.  
Simultaneously, the Committee also did not approve the policy of opening of more than 
one Kendra in same districts and ignoring other places particularly, the far off districts 
and the North Eastern States. 
The Committee  had, therefore, stressed that while deciding the location for 
opening of PSKs/PSLKs in Pha se II, apart from volume of applications received at 
Regional Passport Offices/Passport Offices other criteria like number of applications 
received from particular districts/areas and distance/connectivity etc. should also be 
considered so that the PSKs were evenly located, passport issuance facility  was made 
easily accessible to the applicant s and they may not need to travel long distance for the 
same, particularly, in view of the fact that the PSK was the only channel for capturing 
biometric data as per t he existing model of Passport Seva Project. In view of the then 
scenario of lack of alternative channels of submission of forms as well as for capturing 
of the biometric data, the Committee had  urged the Ministry of External Affairs to 
engage with NISG so that the Report was expedited and was finalized at the earliest. 
The Committee had observed that Andaman and Nicobar Islands was  not yet 
included in the Passport Seva Project. The Committee had noted that one of the 
objectives of the Passport Seva Project  was to render services through simplified 

7 
 
procedure and conditions of comfort for passport seeking public. The Committee  had, 
therefore, recommended that Ministry should particularly look into the problems being 
faced by the applicants from Andaman and Ni cobar Island as well as Lakshwadeep and 
address the issues at the earliest. Further, the Committee had strongly recommended 
that during phase II of the Passport Seva Project, the Ministry must strive to establish 
PSK/PSLK in each Union Territory.  
12. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
(i) “It is submitted that the location of PSKs under PSP was based on a study 
conducted by the National Institute for  Smart Government (NISG) in 2007 . 
The study had taken into account the number of passport applications received   
in the years preceding 2006, from regions under the jurisdiction of respective 
Passport Offices, while recommendin g locations of the PSKs.   In view of 
high number of passport applications from certa in ci ties and districts, more 
than one PSK was set up there. As regards North -east states, the position is as 
follows: 
a.         Passport services are being rendered  in Aizawl since July 2012 through 
Passport Applicatio n Collection Centre (PACC). The IT infrastru cture of 
PACC would be upgraded to PSLK as soon as financial concurrence for 
setting up IT infrastructure is received. 
b. The civil and electrical  works undertaken by Meghalaya State PWD   for 
PSLK Shillong have been completed.   It is likely to be launched by mid-
October, 2014.  On trial basis, applications are already being accepted.   
c.         The site for PSLK Gangtok has been finalized and financial concurrence has 
been received for civil and electrical works to be carried out by the Sikkim 
PWD. Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
d. Lease Deed for the PSLK   Agartala is under finalisation   after which civil 
and electr ical works would be carried out and IT in frastructure installed.   
Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
e.          A site has bee n identified in  Imphal and lease deed is being finalized  with 
Manipur Govt. Expected to be made operational during 2014-15. 
f.          A site has been   identified in Itanagar and lease deed is under discussion 
with the State Govt.  Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
g. Following a proposal from the former Chief Minister of Manipur that the 
PSLK may be set up in  Dimapur  instead of Kohima as Dimapur has better 
connectivity and many State Govt offices are located there, the matter was 
taken up with the  State Govt. by the Ministry. The State Govt has conveyed 
that the PSLK may be set up in  Dimapur.  Likely to be operationalised 
during 2014-15. 
 

8 
 
(ii)   The  Study R eport on setting up additional PSKs/PSLKs has been received 
from the NISG and has be en approved by the Ministry.  In keeping with its 
recommendations,    the Ministry has  decided to open a PSK each in Indore 
(Madhya Pradesh) and Solapur (Maharashtra) to increase the outreach of 
passport services besides adding more counters in various PSKs to au gment  
their  handling capacity.  The Ministry has also drawn up a plan to  organize 
Passport Seva Camps at various places to take the passport services closer 
home. 
(ii)  I.  As regards the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation to set up a 
PSK/PSLK in each UT ( Delhi and Chandigarh already have PSKs ), it 
would be useful to  consider the following :--- 
(a) Andaman & Nicobar Islands : Population – 3,79,944 ; Approx.  annual 
passport workload  -3000 i.e. less than 13 per working day   ; passports are 
issued by Andaman & Nic obar Administration, Port Blair which  acts as 
Passport Issuing Authority and passport booklets are supplied by RPO 
Kolkata. The Ministry  has plans to integrate PSP system with that of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Admn.  Along with integration of Missions/Pos ts 
abroad. 
 
(b) Lakshadweep Islands: Population – 64,429 ;  Approx. annual passport 
workload - 1113 i.e. less than 5 per working day ; Passport needs of citizens 
of Lakshadweep are met by PSK Kochi which is about 300 -400 kms away.   
The RPO, Cochin would be  or ganizing Passport Seva  Camp  in 
Lakshadweep periodically to collect passport applications from the citizens. 
 
(c)  Daman and Diu  : Population – Daman (1.9 lakh) and Diu (52,000) ; Approx.  
annual passport    workload (Daman) – 2794 i.e. 12 per working da y and 
annual passport workload (Diu) – 3320 i.e. 14 per working day. Citizens 
from Daman travel to Mumbai which is approximately 175 kms away and 
citizens from Diu travel to Rajkot which is 22 0 kms away. It is proposed to 
organize Passport Seva Camps  peri odically in   Daman .   The   Camps will 
also cater to the needs of the people  of Dadra & Nagar Haveli which is close 
to Daman. 
(d) Dadra & Nagar Haveli – Population 3,42,853;   Approx. annual passport 
workload  is 804 i.e. less than 4 per working day.  Passp ort needs of citizens 
are met by  PSKs in  Mumbai which is 180 kms away. The   Camps  in Daman 
will also cater to the needs of the people  of Dadra & Nagar Haveli   as it is 
close to Daman. 

9 
 
(e) Puducherry: Population -12,44,464 ; Annual passport workload – 15,212 i.e. 
64 applications per working day ; A  Passport Application Collection Centre is 
functioning at Puducherry. The Passport Application Collection Centre in 
Puducherry  would  be upgraded to a PSLK.  The  UT Govt. has been 
requested to provide additional  space for expansion of the existing facility. 
 
II.    The approximate cost of  procurement and  installation of IT equipment for  
each PSLK is Rs.64.5 lakh besides recurring expenditure of Rs.33.6 lakh  per 
annum towards technical and other manpower. T he leasing of site and 
expenditure on office furniture, furnishings, maintenance and security are 
additional.  As  the number of passport applications from Lakshadweep, 
Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli  is very low, it would not be 
economically prudent to  have a permanent establishment  there.  The passport 
needs of citizens there can be met by holding Passport Seva Camps.” 
13.  The Committee take note that the much awaited Study Report by National 
Institute of Smart Governance  (NISG) on setting up of  additional PSKs ha s been 
received and approved by the Ministry.  The Ministry, however, has not provided the 
details of the recommendations  about all the places decided for establishment of 
PSKs/PLSKs and the revenue model to be followed for establishment of additional 
PSKs/PSLKs as well as the time frame fixed in this regard. The Committee have also not 
been informed about the criteria to be followed for identification of places for opening of 
PSKs/PSLKs and whether the recommendations of the Committee in  this regard have 
been considered or not particularly about opening of centres in UTs and North Eastern 
States. 
Moreover, the Committee take strong objection to Ministry‟s reply and 
reasoning given regarding establishment of PSKs in Union Territ ories and N orth 
Eastern states and reiterate their  view that economic prudence alone cannot be the 
guiding force behind the establishment of PSKs/PSLKs  in these areas and the citizens of 
these areas should get equal facility either through opening of PSLKs or by providing all 

10 
 
facilities including capture of biometric data through Local Administration or their 
integration with the main system. 
  Furthermore, regarding the organization of passport seva camps,  the 
Committee are of the view that rather than randomly orga nizing camps,  the Ministry 
should come up with a policy indicating a fixed monthly/bimonthly schedule to organize 
such camps in each distinct areas covered under the designated PSK.  The Committee 
assume that such camps are duly equipped to capture biomet ric data so that applicants 
can complete the process in the camp itself and they are thus saved from travelling to 
such centres again from their place of stay. 
(Recommendation No.4) 
14. The Committee over the years ha d been expressing their concern over no n-
availability of PSKs in the North -Eastern States during the Phase I of the Project.  
Considering the genuine requirement of satisfying the needs of these States, the 
Ministry ha d come up with the proposal for establishment of Pas sport Seva Laghu 
Kendras and had been assuring the Committee over early execution of the proposals of 
PSLKs in the capitals of these States. The Committee  had, however, note d that the 
Ministry had assured the Committee to establish Mini -PSK/PSLK in Aizwal by 
December 2010 and Mini -PSKs in other North Eastern States by end of Dece mber 
2011.  But the Committee fou nd that only one PSLK ha d started functioning in Aizwal 
since July 2012 and projects at other places  were in various stages of inceptio n and 
execution. The Committee were   dismayed to note that even after a continuous 
persuasion by the Committee through their Reports and on the spot visits, the Ministry 
had not been able to do much in establishing the PSLKs in the North-Eastern States and 
they had not even finalized or locate d/identified sites at Agartala, Imphal, Itanagar and 
Kohima.  In view of the urgent need of the people of North Eastern States, the 
Committee had strongly criticized such casual approach of the Ministry and desired that 
immediate steps should be taken to e xpedite the work related to the establishment of 
PSLKs in North -Eastern States  and complete them in the shortest possible time in 
association with respective State Governments . 
15. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 

11 
 
“As mentioned in   ATR 3 , sub -para (i) , the position regarding PSLKs in  
North-east states, the position is as follows: 
a. Passport services are being rendered  in Aizawl since July 2012 through 
Passport Application Collection Centre (PACC). The IT infrastructure of 
PACC would be upgraded to PSLK as soon as financial concurrence for 
setting up IT infrastructure is received. 
b. The civil and electrical works undertaken by Meghalaya  State PWD   
for PSLK Shillong have been completed.   It is likely to be  launched  by 
mid-October, 2014 . On trial basis, applicatio ns are already being 
accepted.  
c. The site for PSLK Gangtok has been finalized and financial 
concurrence has been received for civil and electrical works to be carried 
out by the Sikkim PWD. Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
d. Lease Deed for the PSLK   Agartala is under finalisation   after which 
civil and electr ical works would be carried out and IT infrastructure 
installed.   Likely to be  operationalised  during 2014-15. 
e. A site has been ide ntified in Imphal and  lease deed is being  finalized  
with Manipur Govt. Expected to be made operational during 2014-15. 
f. A site has been identified in Itanagar and lease deed is under discussion 
with the State Govt.  Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
g. Following a proposal  from the former Chief Minister of Manipur that 
the PSLK may be set up in  Dimapur  instead of Kohima as Dimapur 
has better connectivity and many State Govt offices are located there, 
the matter was taken up with the State Govt.  by the Ministry. The State 
Govt has conveyed that the PSLK may be set up in Dimapur.  Likely 
to be operationalised during 2014-15.” 
 
16. The Committee are disappointed to note that even after several 
commitments, the work of establishment of PSLKs in North-Eastern states is still at 
a very uncertain stage and as per its reply, the Ministry propose s to complete the 
work and to operationalise the PSLKs at Shilong, Gangtok, Agartala and Imphal  
during 2014-15.  The Committee hope that the new timeline set up b y the Ministry 
would be strictly adhered to and would not be further extended.  

12 
 
The Committee further note that in case of Itanagar  and Imphal , the lease 
deed  is under discussion with the respective State G overnments, while in case of 
Dimapur it has been decided to set up PSLK  there, no timeframe has been fixed in 
this regard .  The Co mmittee, therefore, expect that these PSLKs would also  be 
operationalised during the year 2014-15.  The Committee would urge the Ministry 
to adopt a realistic approach in dea ling with the issues related to establishment and  
operationalisation of PSLKs in the North Eastern States and apprise the Committee 
about the progress in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
17. The Committee had observed that the decision of opening of PS LKs was taken 
up by the Ministry at later stage and these were not covered under the provisions of 
Passport Seva Project.  The full responsibility for their setting up rest ed with the 
Ministry which was required to provide full financial, manpower, infrast ructural and 
technical support.  It was more surprising to note that the work related to establishment 
of all the proposed PSLKs were to be completed in June, 2012, but due to multiplicity 
of factors, the work relating to PSLKs was very slow and ha d been d elayed.  The 
Committee also note d that although Ministry felt that there was  need of new revenue 
model of PSLKs even then, the Ministry ha d not taken any initiative to develop any 
such system till then and there were delays in implementation of these proje cts.  The 
Ministry of External Affairs ha d also not approached the Ministry of Finance to obtain 
funds for these PSLKs. More surprisingly, they did not had  any such intention because 
in the recent past they had  curtailed the issue of obtaining indication a bout revenue 
model from the purview of NISG study.  The Committee  had, therefore, recommended 
that Ministry of External Affairs should prepare the desired revenue model on priority 
basis for the proposed 16 PSLKs and other PSLKs likely to be established in  future and 
obtain the funds for preparing proposals for Cabinet so that these projects were not 
delayed anymore.  
 
18. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The NISG has suggested a revenue model  for additional PSKs/PSLKs which 
are beyond the scope of PSP. The PSP envisaged setting up  on PPP basis 77 
PSKs by the Service Provider,  which were to deal with passport applications 

13 
 
from all the regions in India covered by 37 Passport Of fices.  The Ministry 
has, therefore, to find a way so that while setting up additional PSKs, it is not 
faced with a legal challenge by the Service Provider.  The matter is under 
discussion with the Service Provider.” 
19. The Committee note that inspite of receiving the much awaited and m uch 
delayed Report by NISG, the Ministry is yet to decide the revenue model for 16 
PSKs/PSLKs as well as for the new PSKs /PSLKs.  The Committee have not even 
been apprised about the details of the revenue model(s) proposed by the NISG and 
the rationale beh ind taking so much time  by the Ministry  in deciding upon and 
finalizing the new revenue model.   Since all these projects have been delayed a lot 
due to non -availability of any clear revenue model , the Committee, therefore, 
desire that the  Ministry should examine the feasibility of the revenue model 
befitting the proposed PSKs/PSLKs and new PSKs/PSLKs and come up with the 
final decision in the shortest possible time . So far as persisting fear of legal 
challenges by the service provider is concerned, the Committee desire that it should 
be dealt cautiously and no scope should be given for any legal challenge by the 
Service Provider.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the details and 
outcome in this regard. 
(Recommendation No.6) 
20. The Committee had noted that there was a provision for holding regular 
tripartite meeting between officers of Passport Office, Department of Police and Postal 
Department at local level. The Committee  had, however, observed that there was  lack 
of any such mechanism at the cen tral level. The Committee had understood that most 
of the issues pertaining to the passport services ha d to be dealt at the level of state 
government as well as locally, yet there were many issues which require d 
involvement/coordination of the concerned Mi nistries of the Government of India 
particularly to maintain a uniformity in the system in all the States.  The Committee 
were of the view that during such deliberations a holistic view of the matter related to 
passport may be taken and issues may be discu ssed at length as well as in -depth so as 

14 
 
to reduce the procedural hurdles and difficulties in the system arising out of non -
communication/non-timely communication between various concerned 
Ministries/Departments to make the system more pragmatic and practi cal. The 
Committee had, therefore, desired that Ministry of External Affairs should establish a 
coordination mechanism at Central level involving Ministry of Home Affairs and 
Ministry of Communication with a view to share the views and maintain uniformity in 
the procedure of Police Verification and delivery of passport to the citizens. 
21. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Ministry keeps in regular touch with the Ministry of Home Affairs for 
security dimen sions of passport issuance process and Deptt. of IT for the 
implementation of the e -governance project. Since policing is a State subject, 
the Ministry has to work with different State Governments for police 
verification process. A meeting of the Chief Sec retaries of State/UT 
Governments was also taken on 13 th March 2014 by Foreign Secretary which 
dealt with this  issue amongst others.    As desired by Hon‟ble Committee,   a 
coordination mechanism  has been set up at Central level    for maintaining 
uniformity in the procedure for police verification for speedy delivery of 
passport services.” 
22. The Committee are happy to note that in view of their suggestion , a 
coordination mechanism has been set up at Central level for maintaining 
uniformity in the procedure for Police Verification for speedy delivery of passport 
services.  The Committee, however, have not been provided with the details in this 
regard and also about the incorporation of all other aspects related to issuance 
and delivery of passport services and nature of participation of the states/UTs in 
this system.   
The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised about the objective s/ 
procedure being followed for effective monitoring and the impact of the 
established mechanism on delivery of passport s ervices and also whether it is 
sufficient to facilitate achievable targets within specific time period as  defined in 
the mandate issued by the Ministry.   

15 
 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
23. The Committee had noted that the prospective applicants ha d been facing great 
difficulties in the very first step of getting passport i.e. in seeking online appointment in 
most of the PSKs. The Committee had also observe d that in order to streamline the 
online appointment system, various initiatives ha d been taken by the Ministry but in 31 
PSKs it was still a challenge, where applicants go t an appointment after a gap of 10 to 
58 days.  In this regard, the M inistry had  clarified that problems faced in obtaining 
appointments has no relation with the portal or the software. The syst em could generate 
even a million appointments and that it was a matter of demand and supply and the 
appointments were released as per handling capacity of particular PSK. The Committee 
had wondered as to why the number of slots had not been increased in th e past when it 
was in the hands of the Ministry and service provider? In Committee's view organizing 
the Passport Melas or Passport Seva Camps at sites other than PSKs might be a 
temporary arrangement to give appointments but it might not resolve the problem.  The 
Committee had, therefore, strongly recommend ed that the Ministry should seriously 
examine the issue of handling capacity of each PSK and find a solution to ensure the 
generation of additional slots with the service provider and take initiative to ensure that 
the capacity of PSK would be enhanced appropriately or new PSKs would be  set up 
with sufficient manpower to cater to the needs of enhanced number of applicants across 
the country. 
24. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
 
“It is submitted that handling capacity of a PSK depends not only on the number 
of counters but also the availability of manpower to man these counters.   
Whereas it is much easier for the Service Provider to recruit manpower from the  
open market and deploy them at the private counters, the Govt. counters have to 
be manned by the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) officials where   intake 
is governed by Recruitment Rules.  Obtaining the services of officials from 
other Govt. deptts on  deputation  also cannot be resorted to beyond a limit.  
CPO officials being from the Govt. are also entitled to various kinds of leave 
and absence of even one person at PSK impinges on handling capacity. During 
festival season also, appointments have to b e curtailed as many officials are not 
available.  Nevertheless the Ministry has increased the appointments in various 
PSKs in the last few weeks. As on 16th September, 2014, in 25  PSKs the 
appointment was available the next day;  in 5 PSKs from 2 to 7 day s ; in 14 
PSKs   from 8 to 14 days; in 4 PSKs from 15 to 20 days; in 12 PSKs from 21 to 

16 
 
30 days; in 13 PSKs from 31 to 45 days;  in 2 PSKs  from  46 to 60 days and in 
4 PSKs beyond 60 days (appointment window opened beyond 60 days on 
experimental basis) .  The Ministry has stepped   up its efforts  for organizing 
passport melas and camps regularly to meet passport d emand and  from 1 -1-
2014 to  20 -9- 2014,   164  melas were organized   at which  95,782  passport 
applications were accepted for processing. A detailed  Passport Seva Camp plan 
is being drawn up for launch in October 2014.   Challenges in setting up of new 
PSKs to meet rising passport demand, have already been i ndicated in ATRs     
3-5…..” 
25. The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry has simply showed 
their inability in reducing the days for appointment in most of the PSKs due to 
lack of handling capacity of PSKs . The Ministry has stated that out of the total 77 
PSKs, in only 30 PSKs, the appointments are available within seven days and in 49 
PSKs, the appointments are available within the days ranging from 8 to  60 days.  
The Committee are of the considered view that such a situation is beyond the limit 
of acceptability  to the Project‟s aim of providing speedy and timely passport 
services.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that all the constrain ts of manpower 
in the staff of Central Passport Organization (CPOs) should be removed through 
all possible efforts including taking people on deputation.   
The Committee support the Ministry‟s effo rts in organizing Passport 
Melas and Camps. H owever, they are of the view that collection of applications 
should not be the only purpose during such Melas/Camps and all related  
formalities upto the level of granting of passport s should be completed in thes e 
melas so that timely disposal of all such applications and issuance of passport to 
such applicants who apply during the Melas/Camps  is completed  as per the 
timelines fixed under aims and objectives of the Passport Seva Project. 

17 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
26. The Committee had noted that as a measure to curb the tendency of 'No Show 
Cases', the Ministry ha d introduced provision of online payment of fee through SBI 
chalans, debit/credit cards etc. and the step had shown welcome results and such cases 
had come down to 1.2 percent from 30 percent.  However, the Committee m ight not 
deny the fact that a large section of the population was not electronically connected to 
the Banks or were not in procession of debit/credit cards of State Bank of India.  They 
might also be facing difficulty in deposition of fee through their SBI cards.  The 
Committee had, therefore, desire d that initiatives should be taken to incorporate the 
credit/debit cards of more popular nationalized/private banks for the purpose of online 
payment of passport fee to facilitate the applicants. 
27. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“It is submitted that  for online payment of passport fees, debit/credit cards of all 
the nationalized/private banks are accep ted. Only for e -banking, State Bank of 
India payment gateway is open. State Bank branches cover almost entire India 
and payment can be easily made through SBI Challan.   It is added that the 
Ministry in consultation with the Deptt. of   IT,  has co -opted  Common Service 
Centre network comprising 1,00,000 outlets across the country to provide  more 
access points to citizens, especially in the rural hinterland, to file passport 
applicants online and where passport fees can be deposited in cash also.  The 
Ministry has written to the Secretary, Department of Posts to confirm that 
requisite IT and non -IT infrastructure is in place to enable the applicants to file 
passport applications online, make payment online and obtain appointment.  A 
sum of Rs.100/ - per passport application  would be paid by the Ministry to India 
Post for the said services. The Secretary, Deptt of Posts, in a meeting with the 
Ministry‟s officials ,   did not appear  inclined  to the Ministry‟s proposal,  
expressing  manpower and infrastructural co nstraints. The Ministry , however,   
continues to   pursue  the matter of co -opting services of Speed Post Centres  
(SPCs)  and Head Post Offices (HPOs)   to enable applicants, especially in the 
rural hinterland, to enable filing of passport applications onli ne. It would  still be 
mandatory for applicants to appear in person at concerned PSKs to give their 
photographs and biometrics and complete passport application submission 
procedure.” 
28. The Committee are happy to note that for online payment of passport fee, 
debit/credit car ds of all na tionalized/private banks are now accepted.  But 
payment through net banking is permitted through SBI only. The Committee 

18 
 
would like to suggest that the scope of net banking should  also be widened to 
include payment of fee t hrough net banking of other nationalized and reputed 
Private Sector Banks.  The Committee, however, at the same time would like to 
caution the Ministry and suggest to them to make the system secure and also set 
up security features as per international sta ndards so as to ensure safety of the 
network as well as that of applicants in online transactions. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
29. The Committee had  noted that the Ministry had accepted that once when on the 
passport seva portal details were  filled online and documents were scanned and 
uploaded and appointments were obtained, experience of applicants at PSK was  very 
satisfactory.  But the feedback available to the Committee and media reports had denied 
this claim.  The experience of  applicants were similar at PSKs also and many 
applicants were called again and again for want of one or other document and fe lt 
harassed. The Committee  had desired that to minimize this problem, there should be a 
process of e -verification of documents prior to the designated day for  appointments in 
cases where the documents have already been uploaded by the applicants.  The 
Committee hope that Ministry alongwith Service Provider would come up with 
technological solution to this problem as this small step by the Ministry might facilitate 
to end the problems of a large number of applicants. 
30. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“It is submitted that the Passport Portal has extensive information on the 
requirement of supporting documents for  the guidance of applicants. The 
applicants are required to bring original documents along with a copy thereof 
to the PSK at the appointed time/day where these are verified by the Govt 
Official. The applicant may be  required to make another visit only whe n the 
original document itself is of doubtful nature or incomplete in some respect.   
In view of the fact that original documents in any case have to be produced 
before the Verifying Officer, pre e -verification  of documents would not be of 
help. However, with a view to simplify  passport application submission 
procedure, it has been decided to accept registered rent agreement also as a   

19 
 
proof of address.  It  has also been  decided  w.e.f. 1 st August, 2014 to do 
away with ink signatures on  passports  and  replace these with stamped 
signatures to save  time and manpower.   The Ministry has also introduced the 
system of self -attestation of documents replacing the requirement of 
attestation by gazetted officers.” 
31. The Committee agree with the view of the  Ministry stating that the applicant 
may be required to make another visit only when the original documents 
themselves are of doubtful nature or incomplete in some respect. The Committee, 
however, are aware that  in several instances, the experience  of the a pplicants has 
been otherwise. In most of the cases the documents are checked initially by the  
Service Provider at the front desk and they are in hurry and do not check all the 
documents to ask the applicant to come with all the requirements on the next da te.  
The applicant is informed about some other lacuna on the next date and asked to 
visit again .  The applicant s also have  no opportunity to interact with any other 
officer or any senior officer for redressal of their grievances.  The Ministry in its 
reply is silent on this issue.   In view of the prevalent situation across PSK s, the 
Committee had suggested  the Ministry to conduct e-verification of the documents 
on the Passport Seva Portal itself so that they can carry the originals to the PSK  
on the date for verification and other formalities so as to minimize the time taken 
at PSK and obviate the need to revisit.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should take steps to ensure that the form s and documents of the 
applicants are thoroughly checked as per their checklist  so as to ensure minimum  
interface between the service provider/PSK officials and the applicant s and thus 
save crucial time of the employees as well as save the applicants from unnecessary 
harassment. 

20 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
32. The Committee had noted that in each PSK, officials from RPO were present as 
Passport Issuing Authority (PIA) as well as the employees of TCS to conduct the front 
end activities. However, t he Committee had  often come across instances that a large 
number of cases were being referred to RPO in the name of policy matters.  From the 
figures provided by the Ministry, the Committee f ound that on an average three cases 
per PSK per day were being referred to RPO.  The Committee ha d serious doubts on the 
figures provided by the Ministry in that regard.  However, figures of an average per day 
per PSK at all India level m ight not give conclusive results because the  problem was 
RPO/PSK specific.  In such instances the applicants ha d to suffer a lot particularly, if 
he/she was a resident of one particular district and ha d to visit another district where 
PSK was located and if referred to RPO, the applicant ha d to travel to the third district 
leading to unnecessary hassle and stress. In this context, the Committee were dismayed 
to take note of Ministry's justification given for referring large number of cases that if 
the officials at Passport Seva Kendras dwell too long on certain cases, it would lead to 
delay even in less difficult cases. The Committee had noted that though the Ministry had 
come out with comprehensive guidelines so that various queries were resolved at the end 
of PSK only and the applicants were  not referred to RPO in large number but with no 
impact. The Committee had, thereafter, suggested the Ministry to relook and review the 
role of Granting Officers so as to empower them to consider maximum number of cases 
except very complex cases and resolve then and there at PSK level.  If required, the 
assistance of policy section may be provided there itself.  The Committee had also 
expressed apprehension and had certain information that there might be understating 
between the Granting Officer and the query resolving officer which could result into 
referring a large number of cases from the table of a particular Gra nting-Officer at a 
particular PSK to policy section for query resolution for their gains. The Committee had, 
therefore, desired that the Ministry should observe and analyze such cases RPO/PSK -
wise and Granting Officer-wise to reach any conclusion.   
33. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“It is submitted that Granting Officers  (Superintendents/P assport Granting 
Officers) are G azetted o fficers of CPO, having nearly 20  years‟ experience of 
passport work and it is  felt that they are equipped to handle all sorts of cases. 
Most of the  PSKs are headed by Asstt Passport Officers and their expertise is 
also available.  However, in case of doubtful supporting documents or some other 
complexity, it becomes necessary to r efer the case to the RPO which has a policy 
section and works under the Head of Passport Office.  It would not be practicable 
to deploy „policy  sections‟  at each PSK as  in many cases there are more than 
one PSK under the concerned Passpo rt Office due to  shortage of manpower. The 
Ministry   is cognizant of complaints  of wrong doing  and  appropriate action  is 

21 
 
taken against  errant officials.  As desired by the Hon‟ble Committee, a test check 
by  the Ministry  on the passport appli cations received during  April–  August, 
2014 by the Passport Offices in Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Kolkata 
and Mumbai reveals that  the PSKs under them  cumulatively  received  11,75,041  
applications out of which  50,146  cases were escalated to the respective Pa ssport 
Office. This comes to 4.3 %  which  does not appear significant.  It is also 
submitted that escalation of cases is part of normal bureaucratic procedure and  
due diligence and  in Ministry‟s view, escalation helps  in supervision and 
monitoring  of work and affords learning experience to junior officials.” 
34. The Committee are astonished to note that the Ministry treat the 4.3 percent 
cases referred to RPOs form the PSKs  as insignificant.  The Committee consider i t 
at a higher side when the Ministry accepts that only the complex cases are referred 
to RPOs. The Ministry has given a cumulative figure which may be higher for some 
PSKs and particular desk s.  The Ministry is silent on that observation of the 
Committee about the compilation and observation at vario us centres with a view to 
find any possibility of referring of more cases by any particular granting officer.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the matter should be taken seriously and 
examine it from all the angles suggested by the Committee and e xplore the 
possibility of resolving most of the queries at PSK ‟s level by empowering the 
granting officers or placing the Policy Section persons at PSKs.  The Committee 
may be apprised accordingly. 
 The Committee are also appalled to take note that escalat ion of cases affords 
experience to junior officers.  The Committee feel that persons with experience and 
wide knowledge of rules and procedures only are posted in the Policy Section.   
(Recommendation No.11) 
35. Despite a provision of tracking of status of  application through website, the 
Committee ha d come across several instances wherein the Passport applicant was not 

22 
 
able to know the correct status of his/her application as the status was not regularly 
updated on the website.  This was particularly true for the applica nts whose cases were  
referred to the RPO/Policy Section or the cases that were closed after the expiry of one 
year term and they were running from pillar to post to know the status of their 
applications. On being asked, the Ministry ha d informed that the por tal was maintained 
by TCS in consultation with the Ministry.  The Committee  had, therefore, fe lt that there 
was clear-cut lack of communication between the RPO and the Service Provider which 
was leading to non -availability of correct/curre nt status of the applications on the 
website.  The Committee  had, therefore, suggest ed the Ministry to maintain and ensure 
proper flow of information between the RPO and the Service Provider so that the status 
was updated on real time basis. Similarly, the Committee had also suggested the Ministry 
to engage with the service provider as well as the D epartment of Police so that it was  
ensured that the updated status r eflected at the portal mentioned the exact level and 
reason for keeping the application pendi ng and to guide the applicant about any need to 
meet the concerned officers in the RPO or Police Station. 
36. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“In consultation with t he Service Provider , the software has been  modified   to 
enable the applicants to ascertain  status of  their passport application   indicating 
the reasons  such as (i) data entry modification, (ii) change of photograph  and  
(iii) documents resubmission  etc. along with the advice whether the appl icant has 
to visit the PSK or the Passport Office .  The  applicant is also informed at print  
stage that the passport will be dispatched after    print and  quality check . At 
dispatch stage, the Speed Post ref. no. is also conveyed to enable the applicant to  
keep track of dispatch by India Post.   The status of passport application when it is 
sent for  police verification (PV)  is already accessible to applicants. As the police 
verification process  in states is not fully computerized  and no centralized 
database for PV is available at present, it  may  not be possible to indicate the  
level where the applications   would be pending in the police department.” 
 
37.  The Committee appreciate the modifications in the software being made 
by the Ministry alongwith the Service Provider.  The Committee, however, are of the 
view that inspite of the modifications, much more needs to be done.  In several 
instances, the applicants are puzzled and are running a round from pillar to post to 
know the status of their application .  At Police Station s, they are informed that their 
reports have been sent to the concerned RPO/PO but this is neither reflected on the 

23 
 
Portal, nor the officials at RPO/PO  are able to tell the exact status  on enquiry.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that there should not be such gaps and the  system 
should be duly modified and applicant friendly. 
  The Committee are also not convinced with the argument of the Ministry 
that it is not possible to indicate the level where the applications would be pending in 
the Police Department  because it is not fully computerized in some states  as the 
Committee are aware that  it is also not available where it is computerized .  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry must strongly pursue the matter with 
the Ser vice Provider to modify the software to enable the provision of creating 
central database for Police Verification Reports atleast regarding the states/districts 
wherever the system is computerized and do the same in the cases where it is 
computerized in future. 
  In the same context, the Committee also desire that if PVR is rejected by 
the Police due to absence of the applicant during the visit by the officials from 
Department of Police, this status should also be reflected on the portal and otherwise 
also the cause for rejection of PVR should also  reflected on the portal.   Similarly, in 
case of closure of the case  due to passage of a year or any other reason , the status 
should also be reflected on the portal.  
(Recommendation No.12) 
38. The Committee had observed that smooth and efficient Police Verification was  
the key to successful implementation of the Passport Seva Project (PSP).  Under PSP, 
there was a provision to electronically receive and update the Police Verification 
Reports. The matter had been taken up by the Foreign Secretary with Chief Secretaries 
of State/Union Territory Governments and during interaction of CPV Division Officials 
with DGPs/Police Commissioners.  But the pace of establishment of electronic 

24 
 
connectivity with State Police Headq uarters and District Police Headquarter was very 
slow and that was why in most of the States there was no success in reducing the period 
for receiving the PVR. Moreover, the Committee had come across instances where they 
had found that different procedures and levels were being followed in process of Police 
Verification in differ ent States which was  perhaps one of the reasons for delays in 
obtaining PVRs.   The Committee ha d been continuously asking the Ministry to make 
sincere efforts to shift to District Police Headquarters (DPHQs)/State Police 
Headquarters (SPHQs) Model and in all the States to ensure uniformity in approach and 
process across the country. The Committee  had, therefore, desired that the issue of 
establishing e -connectivity with the respecti ve State Governments and other issues 
related to Police Verification should be taken up in coordination with Ministry of Home 
Affairs of the Government of India.  The Committee had also suggested that Ministry 
should come up with the model procedure for po lice verification by circulating a draft 
to all States to seek their opinion/suggestion on the procedures to be followed and 
amendments to be made in the Police Verification process to make it more pragmatic. 
Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that  the Model procedure for Police 
Verification was being followed by all the States/Union Territories.  
  Further, in view of the  technological changes and changing nature and profile 
of crime and including crimes by juveniles, the Committee were of the view that efforts 
should also be made to connect the Passport Seva Project with Crime and Criminal 
Tracking System (CCTNS) network, which was being implemented by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs.  
39. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
 
“It is submitted once again that it is for the State/UT govts to  take policy decision  
for improving police verification process and invest in necessary infrastructure to  
shift to DPHQ/SPHQ model. The Ministry has been exhorting the State/UT Govts 
to speed up the requisite processes  in this regard. Till 31 st August, 2014, out of 
724 police districts in the country,  4 80   districts have  adopted  DPHq model. In 
the Chief Secretaries Conference held in New Delhi on 13 th March, 2014, Foreign 
Secretary had emphasized on the need to adopt DPHQ model. A Presentation  on 
Police Verification was also made by JS(PSP) & CPO at the Conference. A  
„Draft Standard Operating Procedure for Conducting Police Verification‟   was 
circulated amongst the Chief Secretaries so that they could consult the respective 
Home Secretaries and Directors General of Police and implement the suggested 
measures. As regards integration  with CCTNS being implemented  by MHA, it is 
submitted that Passport Seva System is con nectivity-ready but the CCTNS itself 
is still not complete  and MHA is unable to have connectivity . The CCTNS being 

25 
 
a centralised database, cannot be integrated with Passport Seva till it is fully and 
finally implemented.   The Ministry has been  impressing upon the MHA  to 
provide   the said connectivity  at the earliest.” 
 
40. The Committee note that till 31 st August, out of 724 police districts in the 
country, 480 districts have already adopted DPHQ model and efforts are going on to 
implement the same in r emaining districts.  The Committee find that the same was 
emphasized by the Foreign Secretary during the Chief Secretar ies conference in 
March, 2014, but the Ministry has not informed about the response of the 
States/UTs towards DPHQ model as well as the d raft Standard Operating 
Procedure circulated to them.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the matter 
should be pursued further at the highest levels and outcome should be conveyed to 
the Committee.  The Committee also desire that the process of integration with the 
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and System (CCTNS) should also be 
pursued with the Ministry of Home Affairs and connectivity should be obtained 
immediately after it is implemented.   The Committee hope that with the 
establishment of the net work, the Ministry and the Department of Police would be 
able to check the antecedents of the applicants and check their criminal records, if 
any.  The Committee, however, are of the view that PVR form should be 
accordingly modified so that the Police can differentiate between petty crime and 
criminals. 
(Recommendation No.13) 
41. During the course of examination, the Committee ha d come across many issues 
relating to Police Verifications Forms. For example the forms were auto-generated and 
there was no option for comments/remarks so as to qualify the reasons and once a 'no' 
was recorded in the form a rejected Police Verification Report was generated.  

26 
 
Similarly, there was  a column pertaining to ongoing police case on the applicant but 
there was no column for making remarks or qualify it, wherein there was a need to 
make segregation on the basis of small and petty crimes or heinous crimes or to 
mention 'no objection for granting of passport by Police'. Moreover, there was no 
column in the Form regarding mobile number of the applicant on which police could 
inform the applicant about the time and date for verification The Committee  had, 
therefore, suggested that such important lacuna/shortcomings in the Form should be 
discussed with the police authorities and Forms should be appropriately modified. 
42. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“It is submitted that the particulars of applicants that are   auto -generated by the 
System for police verification, include mobile num ber of applicants including 
those of  the „references‟  mentioned in the Passport Application Form. The  
Police Verification Form   is  also being  modified  and the methodology to 
answer the queries therein have been  amplified  in the „Draft Standard Operating 
Procedure for Conducting Police Verification‟   besides the detailed „Manual on  
Police Verification for Passports‟ which is being worked upon taking into account 
the concerns of the Committee.” 
 
43.  The Committee would like to draw the attention of t he Ministry to the 
replies furnished to the Committee regarding status of „Manual on Police 
Verification‟ for Passports.  In Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No. 2, 
the Ministry has stated that the above document has been prepared by the 
Ministry; however in the Action Tak en Reply to this recommendation, the 
Ministry has stated that the document is being worked upon  taking into 
concerns of the Committee.  The Committee would like to know the exact status 
in this regard and would also like to know as to what suggestion s of the 
Committee have been incorporated and in what manner. Moreover, the 
Committee desire that the Police Verification Form should also be appropriately 
modified as suggested by the Committee and if possible the  form should 
incorporate a column regarding number of visits by the official from 

27 
 
Department of Police to contact the applicant  to exactly know the efforts made 
by the Police Department particularly when PVRs are returned. 
(Recommendation No.14) 
44. The Committee had observed that as per the timeline fixed under the Passport 
Seva Project for issuance of pa ssport (fresh or reissue) was  3 working days in case of 
'no' or 'post police verification cases' and for the `pre -verification cases', it  was 3 
working days plus the time taken for  Police Verification and for passports under Tatkal 
Scheme, it was next working day excluding the day of submission.  But as informed by 
the Ministry 68% of normal passports were dispatched within 7 days and 90% within 
15 days, excluding time taken for pol ice verification while in case of Tatkal Passport 
73% were dispatched within three days and 96% within seven days.  While analyzing 
the factors responsible for delay, the Committee  had observed that so far the Ministry 
of External Affairs ha d mentioned tha t delay in receiving Police Verification Report 
was one of the major factor for delays.  The Committee  had observed that major factor 
responsible for delay in receipt of Police Verification Reports but other delays a t 
PSK/RPO level also contributed  significantly. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
desire that initiatives should be taken to minimize the time in forwarding the file as well 
as dispatch of passports.  The Committee ha d a clear opinion that by streamlining the 
functioning of RPOs and developing better synergy betwe en RPO and TCS, the 
Ministry might  be able to reduce the time taken and proceed in the direction of 
achieving the desired target of service delivery.  
 Moreover, the Committee had noted that in DPHQ/SPHQ Model, PVRs were 
uploaded by the  concerned polic e and thereafter, the hardcopy was  sent to the RPO 
after a long period.  The Committee had, however, observed that the process of passport 
printing was initiated at the RPO only after the receipt of physical copy of PVR.  The 
Committee had, therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry should not wait for the 
physical copy and in order to expedite the process, passport printing should be initiated 
once PVR were uploaded by the Department of Police or are received online by the 
RPO. 
45. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Ministry is always striving to reduce the time taken to issue passport and to 
attain the desired time line envisaged in Passport Seva objectives.   The 
manpower shortage and infras tructural shortcomings continue to pose challenge 
in meeting the desired service levels. It is clarified, however, that passport 
printing is initiated after  a clear Police Report  is received electronically and the 
Granting Officer/PV Reviewer  at the Pas sport Office gives go -ahead in the 

28 
 
system.  It is not necessary to receive  the hard copy  for initiating passport 
printing save in those cases where police verification is still in manual mode.” 
 
46. The Committee  note that the manpower shortage and infrastructure 
shortcomings are always being quoted by the Ministry as an excuse for their failure 
in adhering to the timeline in passport delivery system.  The continuous persuasion 
by the Committee to improve these fields has not shown the desired results.  Though 
the Ministry in its response ha s stated that it is not necessary to receive the hard 
copy of PVRs to initiate passport printing , however, t he Committee, are aware of 
several instances at various RPOs wherein, the officials wait for receipt of 
hardcopies of PVRs for initiating the printing of passport.  The Committee would, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should conduct test check s across RPOs to 
ascertain the fa ctual position in this regard and ensure that across all RPOs /POs 
passport printing is initiated, once PVRs are uploaded by Department of Police  and 
there are no delays in printing and dispatch of passports thereafter.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 The Committee also note that the Ministry in its reply is silent on the issue of 
developing better synergy between RPOs and the service provider.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like to be apprised about the steps being taken in this direction and 
outcome thereof. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
47. Since the onset of the Passport Seva Project, the Committee ha d taken a strong 
objection to closing of multiple channels of submission and ha d clearly expressed their 
opinion that existence of PSKs alone w ould lead to centralization of the system. In 
context of the  passport system going online, the Committee had  also often deliberated 
upon the existence of digital divide, lack of infrastructure and accessibility of hardware 

29 
 
and online connectivity particularly in rural India. The Committee were  also aware that 
there was an immediate need to assist/f acilitate those applicants who were not 
accustomed to computers or not having regular access to computers in filing 
applications, uploading relevant documents, payment of fee as well as seeking 
appointments. In view of the se practical considerations as well as availability of 
infrastructure and trained personnel and wide network, the Committee over the years 
had been strongly recommending the Ministry that the Speed Post Centres should be 
co-opted and reinvented to be used as channels for submission of forms online as well 
as for capturing of  biometric data so that passport services are made accessible to those 
in distant areas as well as in rural hinterland. 
48. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“It is submitted that the Ministry is actively pursuing the matter of co -opting 
services of Speed Post Centres  (SPCs)  and Head Post Offices (HPOs)  to enable 
applicants, especially in the rural hinterland  to apply for filing passport 
applications online . The necessary internal approvals have since been obtained 
and  the Ministry has written to the Secretary, Department of Posts to confirm that 
requisite IT and non -IT infrastructure is in place to enable the applicants to file 
passport applications online, make payment online and obtain appointment. The 
Secretary, Deptt of Posts, in a meeting with the Ministry‟s officials,   did not 
appear  inclined to the Ministry‟s proposal,  expressing  manpower and 
infrastructural constraints. The Mi nistry, however,  continues to   pursue  the 
matter.  It would still be mandatory for applicants to appear in person at 
concerned PSKs to give their photographs and biometrics and complete passport 
application submission procedure.”   
49. The Committee not e that the Ministry ha s been assuring the Committee that 
consultation with the Department of Post s has been held and had furnished a 
blueprint regarding involvement of Speed Post Centres and District Head Post Offices 
for filling of form for passports online and scheduling of appointment.  Durin g the 
sitting of the Committee held on 16.12.2013 the Ministry had assured the Committee 
that it would be in a position to start this facility in 2 -3 months and that it has  
received a concrete proposal from Department of Post s.  However, the Ministry has 
now informed that Secretary, Department of Post s does not appear inclined to the 
Ministry‟s proposal .  The Committee would like to be enlightened on the issue and 

30 
 
would like to urge the Ministry to look into the diffe rences that developed in the 
matter and pursue the same with the Department of Posts for reasonable conclusion. 
  Further, the Committee are also not convinced with the Ministry‟s reply that 
even if Depart ment of Posts accepts to file passport applications  online, it would still 
be mandatory for applicants to appear in person at concerned PSKs to give their 
photographs and biometrics and complete passport application submission 
procedure.  The Committee are of the view  that if the applicant is unable to giv e 
biometric data at the SPCs/HPOs and ha s to visit the PSK s, the objective of 
involvement of SPCs/HPOs is defeated.   Therefore, efforts should also be made to 
provide these facilities in these places.  T he Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter. 
(Recommendation No.16) 
 
50. The Committee  had felt  that the Ministry ha d been ambivalent about the 
existence and role of DPCs/SPCs in the new system.   The Committee had observed 
that inspite of more than one and a half year of completion of setting up and 
operationalisation of 77 PSKs in the country in June 2012, the Ministry was yet to 
decide upon the status and role of DPCs/SPCs. The Ministry in a written submission in 
2012 had assured the Committee that recognition of Speed Post Cen tre and e -seva 
Kendra would start in 2 -3 months and the Ministry had further stated that they had a 
concrete proposal from Ministry of IT and this was done in Hyderabad on trial basis. 
However, not much progress ha d been made so far and the Committee did not approve 
the casual approach of the Ministry on the issue of consultations with the India Post in 
that regard.  The Ministry had formulated a p lan as well as procedure that might  be 
followed in SPCs/HPOs however, that  proposal was still awaiting internal  approvals.  
The Committee had hoped that the proposal would be  worked upon  and properly 
formulated without any further delay involving all the stakeholders. The Committee 
had urged the Ministry to actively pursue the issue with India Post and various Sta te 
Governments and ensure that DPCs and designated HPOs are adequately equipped with 
infrastructure, IT hardware, broadband connectivity and personnel and it was not 
proved as another adhoc step by the Ministry.  

31 
 
51. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“ (i) As stated in reply to the preceding Recommendation of the Hon‟ble 
Committee, it is reiterated that the Ministry continues to  pursue  the matter of co-
opting services of Speed Post Centres  (SPCs)  and Head Po st Offices (HPOs)  to 
enable applicants, especially in the rural hinterland.  
(ii)  The  District Passport Cells (DPCs) which are under the administrative control 
of respective State/UT Govts.  were co-opted in 2001,  to enable citizens located 
far away fr om Passport Offices, to submit passport applications nearer home. 
However, over the years, it was realised that the   D PCs were taking  unduly long  
to send the application forms to the concerned RPOs and there was no traceability 
because of manual movement. The passport applications received through DPCs  
were invariably  incomplete and  full of errors and often accompanied by  
insufficient or incorrect supporting documents. This resulted in  protracted  
correspondence by RPOs  with applicants leading to d elay in issue of passports 
and wastage of  resources.  This also led  to pendency of passport applications at 
the RPOs  and delay in passport issuance. As there was no centralised passport 
database, there was always a possibility of  submission of more tha n one passport 
application from different locations resulting in issue of multiple passports to 
unscrupulous elements.  Moreover, only Fresh Passport applications were 
received at DPCs  and,  in any case,  one had to travel to the concerned RPO for 
Re-issue of passport or for Miscellaneous  Passport Services. The DPCs were 
relevant when the system was manual but  now with the implementation of PSP, it 
is mandatory for citizens to apply for passports online and to appear in person at 
PSKs to complete passpor t application submission procedure. Therefore,  the 
DPCs   have been gradually closed down and only very few in remote areas like 
Leh are functional.     As an alternative to t he DPCs,  the Ministry in association 
with  M/s. CSC e-Governance Services India Limited {which is promoted by the 
Department of Electronics and Infor mation Technology (DeitY)},   has   
commenced accepting  Passport   applications online  through the vast network of 
over one lakh Common Services Centers (CSCs) across rural hinterland.  The 
initiative would  also largely bridge the digital divide in the country. The CSC 
Scheme was approved by the Government of India in September 2006 for setting 
up  Internet enabled centers in rural areas under the National e -Governance Plan 
(NeGP).  The CSCs are the delivery points for Government, Private and Social 
Sector services in the areas of agriculture, health, education, banking, insurance, 
pension, utility bill payments, entertainment, etc. to rural citizens of India at their 
doorstep.  The passport related services  have been  added as part of their bouqu et 
of services.   The CSCs  facilitate filling and uploading of Passport application 
form, payment of applicable fee (through debit/credit card or  through SBI 
internet banking/challan mode) and s cheduling of appointment for  visit to the 

32 
 
PSK,  at nominal charge not exceeding Rs. 100/ -.  As per the appointment 
schedule, an applicant will necessarily have to visit the PSK for completion of 
application submission process (including collection of digi tal 
photographs/biometrics, verification of supporting documents and approval). Th e 
services through CSCs   are  available throughout the week, including during the 
weekend. 
iii. The services were  launched in pilot mode on 19 th March, 2014 at 15 select 
CSC locations in Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand  and  till  31st August, 2014, more 
than 15,000  passport service related applications have been filed onlin e with the 
Passport Offices across the country . As the awareness  among the citizens about  
filing  passp ort applications online through CSC network increases across the 
country, the Ministry‟s initiative  will lead to increased outreach for citizens.  The 
Passport Portal  as well as the CSC Portal  carries information about launch of the 
said service.  Steps are being taken to publicise the availability of CSCs for online 
filing of passport applications.  
iv. The Ministry has also drawn up a plan to  organize Passport Seva Camps  
periodically  at various places to take the passport services closer home.” 
 
52. The Ministry in its reply has  pointed out problems with the District Passport 
Cells ( DPCs).  The Committee, however, are of the opinion that all the problem s 
highlighted by the Ministry viz. taking unduly long time to send application, 
untracebility, error s and incorrect/insufficient documents, lack of centralized 
passport database, possibility of submitting  more than one application etc., stands 
irrelevant since the system has gone online.    The Committee, therefore, are of the 
opinion that the problems h ighlighted by the Ministry viz. DPC do not hold much 
ground.   The Ministry has also stated that Dist rict Passport Cells were under 
administrative control of respective State/UT Governments and instead as an 
alternative to DPC, the Ministry has commenced a project for accepting passport 
applications online through the vast network of over one lakh Common Service 
Centres (CSCs).   

33 
 
 The Committee appreciate Ministry‟s strategy of involvement of Common 
Service Centres in this Project . The Committee, however, w ould like to suggest the 
Ministry to rethink about its views on non-involvement of DPC, especially in view of 
the new situation appearing before the Ministry in the aftermath of non -interest of 
Department of Post s in being involved as a channel for filling  forms online. The 
Committee would suggest to the Ministry to revisit and redefine the role of District 
Passport Cells in view of the system going online  and facilitate the people with one 
more option for submission of applications for passports. 
The Committee would also desire to know about the performance of CSCs 
and the timeframe fixed for participation of more CSCs in this Project. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
53. The Committee had taken note of the Ministry's initiative to redress the 
greviances of the applicants and had welcomed initiatives like organization of Passport 
Melas by various RPOs. The Committee were informed that during the year 2012, 
Passport Melas were conducted by 24 RPOs at 62 locations and 83 Passport Melas 
were conducted by 26 Passport Offices during the year 2013. The Committee had noted 
that such Passport Melas were random and were held only at few places. Moreover, the 
Committee had observed that there was no clear cut policy for organizing Passport 
Melas, the Committee  had, therefore, r ecommended that Ministry should pronounce a 
policy basically giving a priority to the Passport Offices where citizens were facing the 
problem of very long appointment dates. 
The Committee had also desired that Ministry should ensure that all the passport 
applications collected during the  Passport Melas particularly during the tranistory 
phase of Passport Seva Project were processed expidiously and were not kept pending 
because such practice  defeats the very objectives behind organizing such Melas. 
54. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Ministry has directed all the Passport Offices to keep organizing Passport 
Melas on weekends from time to time to address  any  appointment challenge  due 
to seasonal variati ons or sudden spurt in demand. . During 1 st January –  20th 
September, 2014,    164  Passport Melas were organized during the weekends  

34 
 
across the country by various Passport Offices  and  95,782   passport applications 
were accepted for processing.   During May – June, 2014,  Passport Seva Camps 
were  organized   Karimnagar   at which 581   applications were accepted for 
processing. The applications collected during Melas and Passport Camps are not 
distinct from the ones accepted at PSKs during normal working days and these are 
processed in the same way as others.   The Ministry has also drawn up a plan to  
organize Passport Seva Camps  periodically  at various places to take the passport 
services closer home.” 
55. The Committee note that RPOs organize Passport Melas or Passport Seva 
camps to address appointment challenge due to seasonal v ariations or sudden spurt 
in demand.  But it is not clear whether these applications are also processed on 
priority basis or not  and what are the processes completed at the cen tre and for 
what processes the applicants have to visit RPOs/PSKs .  The Committee, therefore, 
would like to reiterate that the Ministry should ensure that all the passport 
applications collected during the Passport Melas are processed expediously and are 
not kept pending because such practice defeats the very objectives behind 
organizing such Melas. 
Further, the Committee are of the view that rather than drawing a plan for 
organizing Passport Seva Camps periodically, the Ministry should come up with a 
concrete policy regarding organization of such camps on monthly/bimonthly basis 
particularly in far off areas.  The Committee would further like to reiterate that the 
new policy provision should be there wherein priority is given to those Passport 
Offices where the citizens are facing the problem of very long appointment dates. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
56. The Committee had observed that in the earlier system registered and reputed 
travel agents/agencies were recognized/authorized to assist in filling the form, 
depositing the form and fee on behalf of the applicants and for that they were taking a 

35 
 
nominal charge prescribed by the RPOs. They were regulated by administrative orders 
and were also liable for any mistake or mischief done by them but in the new system 
their role ha d been redefined tre ating them as middlemen.  They were  now free like 
other cybercafé owners to charge any amount from the applicants seeking their 
assistance in filing applications or getting appointments without any control of passport 
authorities. The Committee had also observed that when Government was in search of 
multiple channels to facilitate the applicants on payment of nominal charge, the 
Ministry should relook at the role of these reputed agencies who might work as 
authorized centers on payment of nominal fee fixed by the authorities. The Committee 
did not found anything contrary to the philosophy of e -governance in legalizing th ose 
agencies for their limited regulated role to prevent the exploitation of applicants by 
anyone. Therefore, the Ministry should think to define the role of agents to facilitate the 
prospective applicant‟s alongwith incorporating the SPC/DPC/citizen service centers in 
the passport network.  
57. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“It is submitted that the travel agents, like any other individual or internet café 
operator or the CSCs   co-opted   recently as stated above, are free to access the 
Passport Portal to assist citizens in filing passport applic ations online, making 
payments and obtaining appoin tment.   The Ministry no longer feels the need to 
recognize some agents across the country and allotting them log-in IDs, as was the 
practice earlier, as the Portal is web -based unlike the previous NIC system.  The 
Government had taken a conscientious decision in November 2010 to make the 
new regulation  universal and non -discriminatory so  that an applicant  may 
approach any travel agency, whether or not a member of IATA, TAAI or any other 
body of  travel agents,  to see k assistance for online registration/enquiry under the 
PSP.    The Ministry‟s stand had been contested by travel agents  in the Special 
Civil Application No. 917 & 919/2012 filed by Association of Recognised 
Passport Agents (ARPA)  of Gujarat, in the Gujar at High Court, Ahmedabad, 
whereby the petitioners  prayed for  (i) restoration of status quo ante  and 
continuance of submission of passport applications by travel agents, (ii) access to 
the new system through log -in, (iii) special counters for travel agent s in the 
PSKs/RPO and (iv) stay on the implementation of PSP.  None of the prayers of  
ARPA was accepted by the Hon‟ble High Court.  In a detailed judgment dated 
15th March, 2012.  Relevant extracts are reproduced below :-- 
“ Para 20 :   …… Neither Section 5 nor any other provision of the Act envisages 
any role on the part of the passport agent in the process of issuance of passport.   
…  There is no provision in the Act for allowing any agent appointed by 
individuals to deal with the passport office and on  whom any rights have been 
conferred by any of the provisions of the  Act. 

36 
 
21. In the backdrop of the aforesaid statutory position as well as from the facts 
and contentions noted hereinabove, it is apparent that the claim of the petitioners 
is not based on any statutory or contractual rights, but is based upon the doctrine 
of legitimate expectation. The plea of legitimate expectation would be required to 
be considered  in terms of the earlier policy and the impact of the change of the 
policy under the Passport Seva Project. 
……………………………………………………. 
29 ……..It is manifest that the earlier policy giving recognition to the members of 
the petitioner associations as recognized passport agents does not cause any 
obligation on the respondents to continue with the same system………..nor does it 
create any vested right in favour of the members of the petitioner associations to 
continue submitting applications on behalf of their clients under the earlier 
system……  
34.  Reverting to the facts of the present case, the overridin g reason of public 
policy is writ large on the face of the policy itself which is made in the public 
interest and in the interest of national security. Thus, where the state action is as 
a public policy or is in the public interest, unless the action taken  amounts to an 
abuse of power, the concept of legitimate expectation  would have no role to play. 
……………….. 
37……….. the new policy /system has been introduced on the basis of the 
recommendation of an expert body after an in -depth study of the subject matter . 
The policy…….cannot be said to be capricious and not being informed by any 
reason whatsoever, nor can it be clearly held  to be an arbitrary and founded on 
mere ipse dixit of the executive functionaries nor does the same offend other 
constitutional provisions or come into conflict with any statutory provisions. In the 
circumstances, there is no warrant for interference with the policy decision of the 
executive functionary of the State. 
……………….. 
39. In the light of the above discussion, this court is of th e  view that the 
petitioners are not entitled to any of the reliefs claimed in the petitions. ……As to  
whether or not the members of the petitioner associations can be integrated 
within the system can only be decided by the respondent no. 1.  
 

37 
 
40. Subject to the aforesaid, the petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed. 
…….The interim relief granted earlier shall stand vacated.” 
 
In view of the foregoing, the Ministry is not inclined to create a class within a 
class of travel agents  or to „legalise‟ a fe w select ones by allotting login IDs or 
application quotas  as all travel agencies are equal in the field and no accreditation 
is required from the Passport Office or Ministry of External Affairs.” 
 
58. The Committee has never asked the Ministry to provide  login to the reputed 
travel agents or to establish any special counter for them; rather they had asked the 
Ministry to define their role in the new system and incorporate them as a recognized 
option where applicants can visit and complete the filling of a pplications and getting 
the appointment after payment of a nominal fee. 
   The Committee understand that as per  the judgement quoted by the 
Ministry, it is well within the purview of the Ministry to integrate the authorized 
travel agents within the current  system.  The Committee are aware that today the 
cyber cafés and the agents are charging exorbitant amount of money from the 
applicants at various stages like filling online application, payment of online f ee and 
generating appointments. 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry can authorize reputed  
travel agents across the country, including in the rural hinderland, who may charge 
the minimum fee as decided by the Ministry so as to  facilitate the applicants 
particularly,  in light of low access to computers, credit/debit cards and net banking 
in the  public.  The agent may be able to facilitate the public with filling online form, 
uploading documents depositing fee online and generating appointment only. The 
Committee are of the view that once the a gents are legalized, it would be easy to 

38 
 
regulate them as in cases of charging of exorbitant amount or any other problem, 
the citizens would be in a position to lodge a complaint and the Ministry would also 
be in a position to take appropriate action or bl acklist such agents or their  security 
deposits can be confiscated.  The Committee, however, at the same time would like 
to caution the Ministry to ensure that such authorized agents have no role in the 
system after generating appointment online. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
59. The Committee had observed that under the Passport Seva Project there was no 
effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism. The Passport Adalats were not being 
organized on regular basis and more cases were being referred for appeal at Chief 
Passport Officer's level. The Committee, therefore, were  of the view that the Ministry 
should work upon establishing responsive and effective Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism at RPO/PO level. Moreover, the Committee  had desired that the grievance 
of applicants were heard and resolved within the normal procedure of working of the 
RPO/PO. The Committee  had also note d that the cases were being  referred to the 
Passport Issuing Authority (PIA) for appeal. The Committee ha d been informed that 
PIA were vested with quasi-judicial authority and had  power to revoke/impound  
passport and the appeal cases were  disposed off as per prescribed guidelines. The 
Committee had noted that the average time taken for disposal of cases for appeal was 
three months to six months. The Com mittee were of the opinion that the cases where 
information had not been consciously hidden by the applicant or the criminality was 
not involved, such cases should be dealt at the level of the Passport Officer only and 
should not be referred at CPO level a s Regional Passport Officers/Passport Officers 
were empowered to deal with such cases.  The Committee had further suggested that 
in cases of non -criminality or unintentionally non -furnishing of information in such 
cases applicant should be imposed a minimum monetary penalty or if time penalty was 
imposed, it should include time since the filling of application at RPO b ecause the 
passport issuance had already been delayed due to delay in considering the case. 
60. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“(i) Under the Passport Seva Project (PSP), the Ministry has put in place a 
strengthened Grievance Redressal system  whereby a National Call Centre with a 
toll free number (1800 -258-1800), operating in 17 languages and on  24X7 basis, 
has been set up to cater to dissemination of information about various services, 
handling of grievances and citizen feedback,  which at present works on a central 

39 
 
system platform.  Also a helpdesk has been set up which can be accessed by 
citizens through the www.passportindia.gov.in portal and where suggestions and 
grievances can be sent and also monitor its status online. Such grievances are 
being forwarded directly to the concerned Passport Offices for redressal in time 
bound manner. It presen tly handles approximately 20, 000 calls per day out of 
which 42% are in Hindi and 29% in English. 
 
   (ii)    A Public Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC) has been established in 
CPV Division  under the supervision of the Joint Secretary (Passport Seva 
Project) and Chief Passport Officer. It deals with grievances recieved through 
telephone, e-mail and post, as also references from various Government offices 
such as President‟s Secretariat, Prime Minister‟s Office, Cabinet Secretariat, 
Central Vigilance Commissio n and Parliament Secretariat. In addition, all 
Passport Offices handle public grievances through the Centralized Public 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAM) website of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.  The latest posit ion on their 
applications, alongwith directions for further action, is posted on this website, 
which can be easily accessed by the public for its benefit.  CPGRAM is being 
monitored by PGRC.   During the period 1.4.2014 to 31.08.2014,    4383  public 
grievance petitions were received out of which 3748 were disposed off.  
 
      (iii)   Information and Facilitation Counters, Public Grievance Cell and Help 
Desks have been set up in Passport Offices to assist applicants and to attend to 
grievances/complaints ex peditiously. The complaint/suggestion boxes are also 
installed on strategic locations at Passport Offices and Passport Seva Kendras. 
The names, addresses and phone number of the Public Grievance Officer are also 
displayed in the Passport Offices.  There is  a Public Grievance redressal 
mechanism in all Passport offices to enquire into and redress any complaints from 
citizens in a timeframe.  
 
(iv)   It is submitted that Ministry‟s efforts in improving redressal of public 
grievances have been appreciated by t he nodal agency i.e. the Department of 
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. In a letter dated 3 December 
2013 addressed to  Hon‟ble EAM, Hon‟ble MoS for Personnel, Public Grievances 
& Pensions has written: 
 
“…On the basis of data generated on the online Centralised Public Grievances 
Redress and Monitoring System, as on 21.11.2013, your Ministry has been found 
to have improved significantly in reducing the pendency of public grievances . I 
congratulate on this and wish to place on record my appreciat ion for the 
commendable effort put in by your Ministry in this regard…” 

40 
 
 
(v)   As far as Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation on the  disposal of cases at 
the level of Passport Office is concerned, Ministry would like to reiterate here that 
Passport Offices have been given the powers to dispose off the cases at their level 
by imposing appropriate penalty.  Only those cases, where the appellant is not 
convinced with the decision of the Passport authorities, are transferred to the 
Chief Passport Officer for further action.  It is also submitted that   after refusal of 
passport by the Passport authority, the applicant appeals to the higher authority 
i.e.  the Chief Passport Officer under Section 11 of the Passport  Act.  The appeal 
cases, dealt at Headquarters are given top priority and  the Ministry  holds  appeal  
sessions  once a month. The average time taken for dispo sal of appeal cases 
would thus be reduced further.” 
 
61. The Committee take note of Ministry‟s reply that Passport Offices have bee n 
given the po wer to dispose of  cases at their level by imposing appropriate penalty.  
The Committee, however, have come across cases where applicants are invariably 
asked to go for appeal even in crystal clear cases where guidelines are available 
regarding resolution o f case or there is a clear provision for particular sum of 
penalty.  The Committee have also  come across the case wherein the penalty had 
been imposed and collected yet thereafter the case was referred for appeal.  Thus, in 
view of the prac tice followed ac ross the RPOs/PO s, the Committee would like to 
recommend that the Ministry should give clear cut directions to the RPOs/POs to 
use the given powers to dispose of the cases at their level.   
Moreover, the Committee would also like to reiterate that the appe al cases 
should be disposed of as per prescribed guidelines in a time bound manner.  The 
Committee note that the Ministry is silent on Committee‟s suggestion that in case of 
time penalty, the time should include time since the filling of application at RPO .  
The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate the same. 

41 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
62. The Committee had observed that unauthorized touts/agents were still active in 
the new system and were taking the advantage of difficulties being faced by the 
applicants at each stage of the process. That  included charging very high amount for 
submission of applications online, taking dates and clearance of PVR. Under the new 
system, there were more opportunities for such elements to harass the applicants. The 
Committee had also come across advertisements in media as well as reports of 
exploitation by touts who act as facilitations and charge exorbitant sum from the 
applicants. The Committee were not satisfied with the information furnished by the 
Ministry about the me asures undertaken to mitigate the situation. The Committee had 
urged the Ministry to pursue the matter with concerned police officers and conduct 
surprise raids to curb the mushrooming of agents/touts around the PSKs/RPO. 
Furthermore, the Committee were also aware of the malpractice by few officials of 
Department of Police and Postal Departments during the process of police verification 
and delivery of passports respectively. In this context, the Committee had urge d the 
Ministry to take up the matter with concerned authorities.  At the same time, the 
Committee had stressed upon the need for verification of the antecedents of the 
employees of the Service Provider that were  attached with the Passport Seva Project 
and conduct regular checks to ensure that those officials and officials from the Ministry 
of External Affairs/RPO were not involved in nefarious activities. 
63. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“(i) As  regards, exploitation by touts/agents, it is submitt ed that the Passport 
Portal has exhaustive information on the documentation required for application 
submission procedure. The citizens can also seek passport -related information 
from the  National Call Centre (Toll Free 1800 -258-1800) which has facility o f 
communication in 17 languages or can access mPassport Seva App. An e -mail 
based Help Desk is also available. These measures are aimed at educating the 
public and minimising the role of middlemen. 
(ii)  The Ministry had issued a circular on 6 th June 2013  directing the Passport 
Offices to  approach the local police for conducting raids around PSKs/RPOs for 
nabbing touts operating in the area. The instructions  have been reiterated on 17 th 
April, 2014. The RPOs have also been directed to send a monthly report  on the 
outcome of their efforts in this regard.  The RPOs have written to the concerned 
police officials to conduct raids to eliminate tout menace.  The Passport Portal 
also carries advisory for the public not to fall prey to machinations of touts who 
promise „speedy‟ service.   
 

42 
 
(iii)   As regards malpractices by police and postal employees, necessary remedial 
action can be taken by the respective administrative Ministries/Departments only.  
In case specific cases of malpractice are pointed out, the Minis try would forward 
these to concerned authorities.  
 
(iv)   The Ministry would like to infor m the Hon‟ble Committee that the Service 
Provider has   been   having  the antecedents of their employees verified. deployed 
at the PSKs  and Passport Offices…” 
 
 
64. The Committee take note of Ministry‟s reply regarding directing RPOs/POs 
to approach the local Police for conducting raids against PSKs/RPOs for nabbing 
touts operating in the area and the direction issued to RPOs to send a monthly 
report on the outcome of said efforts.  In this context, the Committee would like to 
be apprised whether the said report is being received on monthly basis from various 
RPOs.  The Committee would like to be enlightened about the finding as well as the 
impact of the exercise.  F urther, the Committee would like to recommend to the 
Ministry to engage/depute persons from within the Department for the specific 
purpose to keep vigilance on the surroundings of Passport Seva Kendras/Regional 
Passport Offices/Passport Offices and with th e help of the local authori ties such 
elements can be controlled and such deputed persons can also conduct surprise 
visits in order to know the ground reality. 
Further, the Committee are not convinced with the Ministry‟s reply 
regarding malpractices by poli ce and postal employees.  The Committee are aware 
that such practices are rampant.  Since, these practice s adversely affect Ministry‟s 
image and give adverse publicity to the entire passport issuance process, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to take up the issue with the concerned Ministry and 
the State Governments/UTs.  

43 
 
The Committee note that as per copy of Verification Reports furnished by 
the Ministry, one criminal case has been found regarding one employee.  The 
Committee would like to know as to what a ction has been taken in this regard.  
Moreover, the Committee would further like to clarify that the Committee also 
stressed upon the need to conduct regular checks to ensure that officials of s ervice 
provider and the Ministry/Regional Passport Office are not involved in nefarious 
activities.  The Committee would like to be enlightened about what action has been 
taken by the Ministry/Regional Passport Offices in this regard? 
 
 (Recommendation No. 22) 
 
65. The Committee had informed that Indian Missions/Post s were still working 
under the old application system maintained by NIC and the data was migrated into 
PSP system as part of Central Database (PRIDE). The Committee had noted that the 
Ministry ha d prepared a blueprint for establishing a unified globalized view of the 
entire passport issuance system, however, the Committee had observed that inspite of 
launching the Project, so far no view had been  taken on the issue of integration of 
Indian Missions/Posts in the Passport Seva Portal/Project. As a result, in the 
Missions/Posts, the application forms were still being filled in order to renew the 
passport and any information required in connection with issuance of passports take too 
much tim e, for example the Committee had  noted that seven adalats were held in 
Jalandhar wherein 8350 applications or complaints were received and most of the cases 
were pending due to non -receipt of reply from Missions/Posts.  The Committee  had, 
therefore, desire d that the Passport Seva Project should be linked with the Indian 
Missions/Posts at the earliest so that data was  available on real -time basis and also to 
reduce the delay owing to awaiting information from Missions/Posts abroad in case of 
applicants whose earlier passports were issued/reissued by Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad.   Further, the Committee were of the view that availability of data on real time 
basis would also facilitate in case of reissue of Passport/rendering of miscellaneous 
services in case the applicant who had already been issued his /her passport from Indian 
Mission abroad and ha d further requirement for reissue his/her Indian passport in any 
other country.  
 

44 
 
66. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“ The Ministry would like  to inform  Hon‟ble Committee that a team  led by Joint 
Secretary(PSP) & Chief Passport Officer  / Director (PV & PSP)  and comprising 
representatives of NIC and Service Provider has  vi sited the Missions in Paris, 
Tashkent and Dubai    to study the technical and logistical challenges involved in 
integration of Missions/Posts abroad w ith Passport Seva. The techno -commercial 
proposal in this regard is under preparation and the integration  is likely to be 
attained by the end of this  financial year.” 
 
 
67. The Committee would like to convey their displeasure that such an important 
task of integrating Indian Missions/Posts with the Passport Seva Project was 
overlooked by the Ministry and even now, the techno -commercial proposal is under 
preparation.  The Committee hope that the Ministry would expedite the process of 
decision making in this regard and come up with the final outcome at the earliest.  
Based upon the past trend in execu tion of Passport Seva P roject, the Committee 
does not share Ministry‟s view that the integration is likely to be attained by  the end 
of this  financial year .  The Committee would, therefore, like to suggest that the 
Ministry should adopt a realistic view and furnish the details of the Ministry‟s 
roadmap alongwith the target timelines to achieve integration of all Missions/Posts 
with the PSP and stick to that. 
(Recommendation No.23) 
68. The Committee in their Report in the past ha d taken up the issue of quality of 
passport booklets. The Committee were informed that the Ministry ha d taken up the 
issue of improving the quality and e nhancing security features in Indian Passport 
Booklets with Indian Security Press (ISP), Nasik. The Committee, however, fe lt that 
not much had been done by ISP, Nasik in terms of improving the physical quality of the 
Passport booklets particularly, binding  which had led to problems during immigration 
check for Indian citizen abroad. The Committee  had, therefore, recommend ed that 
Ministry must pursue the matter with ISP, Nasik to improve the binding of the booklets. 
The Committee ha d also come across the new s reports about short supply of passport 

45 
 
booklets in various RPOs. The Committee  had, therefore, suggest ed the Ministry to 
take up the matter with ISP, Nasik for regular supply of desired quantity of Passport 
Booklets so that the printing of passport would not be delayed due to non-availability of 
passport booklets. 
69. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“(i) The Ministry shares the concern of  the  Hon‟ble Committee over the less 
than satisfactory quality and s ecurity features  of Indian Passport booklets.   Over 
the last decade, the  Ministry has been taking up these  issues with the Indian 
Security Press (ISP), Nashik and its parent body Security Printing, Minting and 
Coin India Limited (SPMCIL), New Delhi, esp ecially   the issue of weak binding 
of passports that comes  off the cover easily.  The Ministry has also been taking 
up with ISP the issue of   enhancing security features in the passport booklets as 
per global standards.   The Ministry has advised ISP  to procure and use reverse 
lock stitch machines, as per global norms,  so as to ensure that stitches in 
passports do not come off.   The design and stitching of the Indian passport were  
reviewed at a joint MEA -ISP meeting held on 16 th April, 2014.   The  ISP h as 
promised to design, develop and produce better designed passport booklets with 
stronger bonding   by the end of this year.  
(ii)    There was a temporary shortage of passport booklets which created 
some backlog in issuance of passports. This was because   ISP Nashik, which is 
the sole supplier of passport booklets to all Passport Offices in India and abroad, 
had stopped production of booklets twice (Dec 2013 – Feb 2014 and April 2014 – 
mid June 2014) due to shortage of a raw material (HAUV laminate film) imported 
from abroad. Due to prompt measures taken by the  Ministry, ISP Nashik  started 
regular supplies of passport booklets to Passport Offices in July 2014.  By mid -
August 2014, all the Passport Offices had  adequate stock of passport booklets. 
Further, the   Ministry has also increased the annual indent for blank passport 
booklets for the year 2014-15 to 20 million in order to create a strategic reserve of 
10 million booklets to meet any future exigency.   All the arrears on account of 
print pendency due to shortage of booklets have been wiped out due to  intensive  
efforts  by  the Passport Office officials.” 
70. The Committee take note of efforts made by the Ministry in regard to improve the 
quality and security features in passport booklets.  The Com mittee, however, are aware 
that passports are still being issued on the same type of poor quality booklets.  In view of 
Indian Security Press‟s (ISP ) assurance to the Ministry, the Committee hope that the 

46 
 
desired changes would be carried out by ISP and Ministry would constantly follow up the 
issue with ISP and inform the Committee accordingly. 
The Committee take strong note of the shortage of passport booklets on  atleast 
two occasions in the recent past which have caused great inconvenience to Indian citizens 
needing to travel abroad urgently .  In this context, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should constantly monito r the situation and maintain continuous 
communication with ISP. Furthermore, the Committee appreciate the Ministry‟s strategy 
to procure booklets in advance and maintain a strategic reserve  so as to avoid such 
situation in future.  The Committee hope that the Ministry actually execute its plan 
expeditiously.   

47 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMEDNATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No.3) 
The Committee observe that based on the feasibility study conducted by National 
Institute for Smart Government (NISG),  the Government had approved to set up 77 
PSKs across the country on the Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.   The Committee 
also observe that the only criteria to decide the location of PSKs was the number of 
applications received by the Passport Offices during 2001 -2005 from the areas under 
their jurisdiction. Thereafter, it has been decided to open 16 Passport  Seva Kendras 
because many of the areas including most of the North Eastern States remained 
uncovered.  Even after that there is a huge demand from various other places for 
opening of PSKs or PSLKs in view of difficulties being faced by people in the inter ior 
areas in the country.  Due to such demands the Ministry has again asked NISG to 
conduct another study to decide the places for opening of more PSKs/PSLKs during the 
phase II of the Project. The Committee strongly criticize the approach of the Ministry in 
deciding the places for opening of PSKs and keeping no provision for identifying other 
places which require such facilities which was evident due to closure of multiple 
channels of submission, particularly in the rural and interior areas.  Simultaneousl y, the 
Committee also do not approve the policy of opening of more than one Kendra in same 
districts and ignoring other places particularly, the far off districts and the North 
Eastern States. 
The Committee would, therefore, like to stress that while decid ing the location 
for opening of PSKs/PSLKs in Phase II, apart from volume of applications received at 
Regional Passport Offices/Passport Offices other criteria like number of applications 
received from particular districts/areas and distance/connectivity e tc. should also be 
considered so that the PSKs are evenly located, passport issuance facility is made easily 
accessible to the applicant and they may not need to travel long distance for the same, 
particularly, in view of the fact that the PSK is the only channel for capturing biometric 
data as per the existing model of Passport Seva Project. In view of the present scenario 
of lack of alternative channels of submission of forms as well as for capturing of the 
biometric data, the Committee would like to urge  the Ministry of External Affairs to 
engage with NISG so that the Report is expedited and is finalized at the earliest. 
The Committee observe that Andaman and Nicobar Islands is not yet included 
in the Passport Seva Project. The Committee note that one of the objectives of the 
Passport Seva Project is to render services through simplified procedure and conditions 
of comfort for passport seeking public. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 

48 
 
Ministry should particularly look into the problems being faced b y the applicants from 
Andaman and Nicobar Island as well as Lakshwadeep and address the issues at the 
earliest. Further, the Committee strongly recommend that during phase II of the 
Passport Seva Project, the Ministry must strive to establish PSK/PSLK in e ach Union 
Territory.  
Reply of the Government 
(i)   It is submitted that  the location of PSKs under PSP was  based on a study 
conducted by the National Institute for  Smart Government (NISG) in 2007 . 
The study had taken into account the number of passport applications received   
in the years preceding 2006, from  regions under the jurisdiction of respective  
Passport Offices, while recommendin g locations of the PSKs.   In view of 
high number of passport applications from certain cities  and districts, more 
than one PSK was set up there. As regards North -east states, the position is as 
follows: 
(a) Passport services are being rendered  in Aizawl since July 2012 through 
Passport Applicatio n Collection Centre (PACC). The IT infrastructure of 
PACC would be upgrad ed to PSLK as soon as financial concurrence for 
setting up IT infrastructure is received. 
(b) The civil and electrical works undertaken by Meghalaya  State PWD   for 
PSLK Shillong have been completed.   It is likely to be  launched  by mid -
October, 2014.  On trial basis, applications are already being accepted.   
(c)     The site for PSLK Gangtok has been finalized and financial concurrence has 
been received for civil and electrical works to be carried out by the Sikkim 
PWD. Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
(d)     Lease Deed for the PSLK   Agartala is under finalisation   after which civil and 
electrical works would be carried out and IT infrastructure installed.   Likely 
to be  operationalised  during 2014-15. 
(e) A site has been identified in  Imphal and  lease deed is being  finalized  with 
Manipur Govt. Expected to be made operational during 2014-15. 
(f) A site has been   identified in Itanagar and lease deed is under discussion 
with the State Govt.  Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
(g)  Following a proposal  from the former Chief Minister of Manipur that the 
PSLK may be set up in  Dimapur  instead of Kohima as Dimapur has better 
connectivity and many State Govt offices are located there, the matter was 
taken up with the State Govt.  by the Ministry. The State Govt has conveyed 
that the PSLK may be set up in  Dimapur.  Likely to be operationalised 
during 2014-15. 
 

49 
 
(ii)     The  Study R eport on setting up additional PSKs/PSLKs has been received 
from the NISG and has been approved by the  Ministry.  In keeping with its 
recommendations,    the Ministry has  decided to open a PSK each in Indore 
(Madhya Pradesh) and Solapur (Maharashtra) to increase the outreach of 
passport services besides adding more counters in various PSKs to augment  
their  handling capacity.  The Ministry has also drawn up a plan to  organize 
Passport Seva Camps at various places to take the passport services closer 
home. 
(iii) I.  As regards the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation to set up a PSK/PSLK 
in each UT (Delhi and Chandigarh already have PSKs), it would be useful to  
consider the following :--- 
(a) Andaman & Nicobar Islands : Population – 3,79,944 ; Approx.  annual 
passport workload  -3000 i.e. less than 13 per working day   ; passports are 
issued by Andaman & Nico bar Administration, Port Blair which  acts as 
Passport Issuing Authority and passport booklets are supplied by RPO Kolkata. 
The Ministry  has plans to integrate PSP system with that of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Admn. Along with integration of Missions/Posts abroad. 
 
(b) Lakshadweep Islands: Population – 64,429 ;  Approx. annual passport 
workload - 1113 i.e. less than 5 per working day ; Passport needs of citizens of 
Lakshadweep are met by PSK Kochi which is about 300 -400 kms away.   The 
RPO, Cochin would be  org anizing Passport Seva  Camp  in Lakshadweep 
periodically to collect passport applications from the citizens. 
 
(c)     Daman and Diu  : Population – Daman (1.9 lakh) and Diu (52,000) ; Approx.  
annual passport    workload (Daman) – 2794 i.e. 12 per working day and 
annual passport workload (Diu) – 3320 i.e. 14 per working day. Citizens from 
Daman travel to Mumbai which is approximately 175 kms away and citizens 
from Diu travel to Rajkot which is 22 0 kms away. It is proposed to organize 
Passport Seva Camps  pe riodically in   Daman .   The   Camps will also cater 
to the needs of the people  of Dadra & Nagar Haveli which is close to Daman. 
(d) Dadra & Nagar Haveli – Population 3,42,853;   Approx. annual passport 
workload  is 804 i.e. less than 4 per working day.  Passport needs of citizens 
are met by  PSKs in  Mumbai which is 180 kms away. The   Camps  in Daman 
will also cater to the needs of the people  of Dadra & Nagar Haveli   as it is 
close to Daman. 

50 
 
(e) Puducherry: Population -12,44,464 ; Annual passport work load – 15,212 i.e. 
64 applications per working day ; A  Passport Application Collection Centre is 
functioning at Puducherry. The Passport Application Collection Centre in 
Puducherry  would  be upgraded to a PSLK.  The  UT Govt. has been 
requested to provide additional  space for expansion of the existing facility. 
 
II.   The approximate cost of  procurement and  installation of IT equipment for  each 
PSLK is Rs.64.5 lakh besides recurring expenditure of Rs.33.6 lakh  per annum 
towards technical and other ma npower. The leasing of site and expenditure on 
office furniture, furnishings, maintenance and security are additional.  As  the 
number of passport applications from Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu and Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli  is very low, it would not be economicall y prudent to  have a 
permanent establishment  there.  The passport needs of citizens there can be met 
by holding Passport Seva Camps. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 The Committee note that the prospective applicants have been facing great difficulties 
in the very first step of getting passport i.e. in seeking online appointment in most of 
the PSKs. The Committee also observe that in order to streamline the online 
appointment system, various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry but in 31 PSKs 
it is still a challenge, where applicants get an appointment after a gap of 10 to 58 days.  
In this regard, the Ministry has clarified that problems faced in obtaining appointments 
has no relation with the portal or the software. The system can generate even a million 
appointments and that it is a matter of demand and supply and the appointments are 
released as per handling capacity of particular PSK. The Committee wonders as to why 
the number of slots had not been increased in the past when it is in the hands of the 
Ministry and service provider? In Committee's view organizing the Passport Melas or 
Passport Seva Camps at sites other than PSKs may be a temporary arrangement to give 
appointments but it may not resolve the problem.  The Committe e, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should seriously examine the issue of handling capacity 
of each PSK and find a solution to ensure the generation of additional slots with the 
service provider and take initiative to ensure that the capacit y of PSK is enhanced 
appropriately or new PSKs are set up with sufficient manpower to cater to the needs of 
enhanced number of applicants across the country. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that handling capacity of a PSK depends not only on the nu mber of 
counters  but also the availability of manpower to man these counters.   Whereas it is 

51 
 
much easier for the Service Provider to recruit manpower from the open market and 
deploy them at the private counters, the Govt. counters have to be manned by th e 
Central Passport Organisation (CPO) officials where   intake is governed by 
Recruitment Rules.  Obtaining the services of officials from other Govt. deptts on 
deputation  also cannot be resorted to beyond a limit.  CPO officials being from the 
Govt. are also entitled to various kinds of leave and absence of even one person at PSK 
impinges on handling capacity. During festival season also, appointments have to be 
curtailed as many officials are not available.  Nevertheless the Ministry has increased 
the appointments in various PSKs in the last few weeks. As on 16 th September, 2014, in 
25  PSKs the appointment was available the next day;  in 5 PSKs from 2 to 7 days ; in 
14 PSKs   from 8 to 14 days; in 4 PSKs from 15 to 20 days; in 12 PSKs from 21 to 30 
days; in 13 PSKs from 31 to 45 days;  in 2 PSKs  from  46 to 60 days and in 4 PSKs 
beyond 60 days(appointment window opened beyond 60 days on experimental basis).   
The Ministry has stepped   up its efforts  for organizing passport melas and camps 
regularly to meet passport demand and  from 1-1-2014 to  20-9- 2014,   164 melas were 
organized   at which  95,782  passport applications we re accepted for processing. A 
detailed  Passport Seva Camp plan is being drawn up for launch in October 2014.   
Challenges in setti ng up of new PSKs to meet rising passport demand, have already 
been indicated in ATRs 3-5…. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.8) 
The Committee note that as a measure to curb the tendency of 'No Show Cases', the 
Ministry has introduced provi sion of online payment of fee through SBI chalans, 
debit/credit cards etc. and this step has shown welcome results and such cases have 
come down to 1.2 percent from 30 percent.  However, the Committee may  not deny the 
fact that a large section of the population is not electronically connected to the Banks or 
are not in procession of debit/credit cards of State Bank of India.  They are also facing 
difficulty in deposition of fee through their SBI cards.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that initiatives sho uld be taken to incorporate the credit/debit cards of more 
popular nationalized/private banks for the purpose of online payment of passport fee to 
facilitate the applicants. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that  for online payment of passport fees,  debit/credit cards of all the 
nationalized/private banks are accepted. Only for e -banking, State Bank of India 
payment gateway is open. State Bank branches cover almost entire India and payment 
can be easily made through SBI Challan.   It is added that the  Ministry in consultation 
with the Deptt. of  IT,  has co -opted  Common Service Centre network  comprising 
1,00,000 outlets across the country to provide  more access points to citizens, especially 

52 
 
in the rural hinterland, to file passport applicants online  and where passport fees can be 
deposited in cash also. The Ministry has written to the Secretary, Department of Posts 
to confirm that requisite IT and non-IT infrastructure is in place to enable the applicants 
to file passport applications online, make pa yment online and obtain appointment.  A 
sum of Rs.100/ - per passport application  would be paid by the Ministry to India Post 
for the said services. The Secretary, Deptt of Posts, in a meeting with the Ministry‟s 
officials,   did not appear  inclined to th e Ministry‟s proposal,  expressing  manpower 
and infrastructural constraints. The Ministry, however,  continues to   pursue  the matter 
of co-opting services of Speed Post Centres  (SPCs)  and Head Post Offices (HPOs)   
to enable applicants, especially in t he rural hinterland, to enable filing of passport 
applications online. It would  still be mandatory for applicants to appear in person at 
concerned PSKs to give their photographs and biometrics and complete passport 
application submission procedure. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.11) 
Despite a provision of tracking of status of application through website, the Committee 
have come across several instances wherein the Passport applicant is not able to know 
the correct status of his/her appl ication as the status is not regularly updated on the 
website.  This is particularly true for the applicants whose cases are referred to the 
RPO/Policy Section or the cases those are closed after the expiry of one year term and 
they are running from pillar  to post to know the status of their applications. On being 
asked, the Ministry has informed that the portal is maintained by TCS in consultation 
with the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, feel that there is clear -cut lack of 
communication between the R PO and the Service Provider which is leading to non -
availability of correct/current status of the applications on the website.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like to suggest the Ministry to maintain and ensure proper flow of 
information between the RPO a nd the Service Provider so that the status is updated on 
real time basis. Similarly, the Committee would also like to suggest to the Ministry to 
engage with the service provider as well as the Department of Police so that it is 
ensured that the updated sta tus reflected at the portal mentions the exact level and 
reason for keeping the application pending and to guide the applicant about any need to 
meet the concerned officers in the RPO or Police Station. 
Reply of the Government 
In consultation with the Serv ice Provider, the software has been modified   to enable 
the applicants to ascertain  status of  their passport application   indicating the reasons  
such as (i) data entry modification, (ii) change of photograph  and  (iii) documents 
resubmission  etc. alo ng with the advice whether the applicant has to visit the PSK or 
the Passport Office.  The applicant is also informed at print  stage that the passport will 

53 
 
be dispatched after   print and  quality check. At dispatch stage, the Speed Post ref. no. 
is also conveyed to enable the applicant to keep track of dispatch by India Post.  The 
status of passport application when it is sent for  police verification  (PV)  is already 
accessible to applicants. As the police verification process  in states is not fully 
computerized  and no centralized database for PV is available at present, it  may  not be 
possible to indicate the  level where the applications   would b e pending in the police 
department. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.16) 
The Committee, h owever, feel that the Ministry has been ambivalent about the 
existence and role of DPCs/SPCs in the new system.   The Committee observe that 
inspite of more than one and a half year of completion of setting up and 
operationalisation of 77 PSKs in the count ry in June 2012, the Ministry is yet to decide 
upon the status and role of DPCs/SPCs. The Ministry in written submission in 2012 had 
assured the Committee that recognition of Speed Post Centre and e -seva Kendra would 
start in 2 -3 months and the Ministry fu rther stated that they had a concrete proposal 
from Ministry of IT and this was done in Hyderabad on trial basis. However, not much 
progress has been made so far and the Committee do not approve the casual approach 
of the Ministry on the issue of consultat ions with the India Post in this regard.  Now, 
they have formulated a plan as well as procedure that may be followed in SPCs/HPOs 
however, this proposal is still awaiting internal approvals.  The Committee hope that 
this proposal is worked upon  and proper ly formulated without any further delay 
involving all the stakeholders. The Committee urge the Ministry to actively pursue the 
issue with India Post and various State Governments and ensure that DPCs and 
designated HPOs are adequately equipped with infrast ructure, IT hardware, broadband 
connectivity and personnel and it is  not proved as another adhoc step by the Ministry.  
Reply of the Government  
 (i)  As stated in reply to the preceding Recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee, 
it is reiterat ed that the M inistry continues to  pursue  the matter of co -opting 
services of Speed Post Centres  (SPCs)  and Head Post Offices (HPOs)  to 
enable applicants, especially in the rural hinterland.  
(ii)  The  District Passport Cells ( DPCs) which are under the administrati ve control 
of respective State/UT Govts.  were co-opted in 2001,  to enable citizens located 
far away from Passport Offices, to submit passport applications nearer home. 
However, over the yea rs, it was realised that the   D PCs were taking  unduly 
long  to send the application forms to the concerned RPOs and there was no 
traceability because of manual movement. The passport applications received 

54 
 
through DPCs  were invariably  incomplete and  full of errors and often 
accompanied by  insufficient or incorrect supporting documents. This resulted 
in  protracted  correspondence by RPOs  with applicants leading to delay in 
issue of passports and wastage of  resources.  This also led  to pendency of 
passport applications at the RPOs  and delay in passport issuance. As there was 
no centralised passport database, there was always a possibility of  submission 
of more than one passport application from different locations resulting in issue 
of multiple passports to unscrupulous elements.  Moreover, only Fresh Passport 
applications were received at DPCs  and,  in any case,  one had to travel to the 
concerned RPO for Re -issue of passport or for Miscellaneous  Passport 
Services. The DPCs were relevant when the system was manual but  now with 
the implementation of PSP, it is mandatory for citizens to apply for passports 
online and to appear in person at PSKs to complete passport application 
submission procedure. Therefore,  the DPCs   have been gradually closed down 
and only very few in remote areas like Leh are functional.     As an alternative to 
the DPCs,  the Ministry in association with  M/s. CSC e -Governance Services 
India Limited {which is promoted by the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology (DeitY)},   has   commenced accepting  Passport   
applications on line  through the vast network of over one lakh Common 
Services Centers (CSCs) across rural hinterland.  The initiative would  also 
largely bridge the digital divide in the country. The CSC Scheme was approved 
by the Government of India in September 2006 fo r setting up  Internet enabled 
centers in rural areas under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP).  The CSCs 
are the delivery points for Government, Private and Social Sector services in the 
areas of agriculture, health, education, banking, insurance, pens ion, utility bill 
payments, entertainment, etc. to rural citizens of India at their doorstep.  The 
passport related services  have been  added as part of their bouqu et of services.   
The CSCs  facilitate filling and uploading of Passport application form, 
payment of applicable fee (through debit/credit card or  through SBI internet 
banking/challan mode) and scheduling of appointment for  visit to the PSK,  at 
nominal charge not exceeding Rs. 100/ -.  As per the appointment schedule, an 
applicant will necessarily have to visit the PSK for completion of application 
submission process (including collection of digital photographs/biometrics, 
verification of supporting documents and approval). Th e services through CSCs   
are  available throughout the week, including during the weekend. 
(iii) The services were  launched in pilot mode on 19th March, 2014 at 15 select CSC 
locations in Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand  and  till  31st August, 2014, more than 
15,000  passport service related applications have been filed onlin e with the  
Passport Offices across the country. As the awareness  among the citizens about  
filing  passport applications online through CSC network increases across the 

55 
 
country, the Minist ry‟s initiative  will lead to increased outreach for citizens.  
The Passport Portal  as well as the CSC Portal  carries information about launch 
of the said service.  Steps are being taken to publicise the availability of CSCs 
for online filing of passport applications.  
(iii) The Ministry has also drawn up a plan to  organize Passport Seva Camps  
periodically  at various places to take the passport services closer home.  
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
The Committee observe that under the Passport Seva Project there is no effective 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism. Now the Passport Adalats are not being organized on 
regular basis and more cases are being referred for appeal at Chief Passport Officer's 
level. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that the Ministry should work upon 
establishing responsive an d effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism at RPO/PO 
level. Moreover, the Committee desire that the grievance of applicants are heard and 
resolved within the normal procedure of working of the RPO/PO. The Committee also 
note that the cases have been referre d to the Passport Issuing Authority (PIA) for 
appeal. The Committee have been informed that PIA are vested with quasi -judicial 
authority and has power to revoke/impound passport and the appeal cases are disposed 
off as per prescribed guidelines. The Commit tee have noted that the average time taken 
for disposal of cases for appeal is three months to six months. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the cases where information has not been consciously hidden by the 
applicant or the criminality is not involved, such cases should be dealt at the level of the 
Passport Officer only and should not be referred at CPO level as Regional Passport 
Officers/Passport Officers are empowered to deal with such cases.  The Committee 
further suggest that in cases of non -criminality or unintentionally non -furnishing of 
information is there, in such cases applicant should be imposed a minimum monetary 
penalty or if time penalty is imposed, it should include time since  the filling of 
application at RPO because the passport issuance has already been delayed due to delay 
in considering the case. 
Reply of the Government 
 (i)  Under the Passport Seva Project (PSP), the Ministry has put in place a 
strengthened Grievance Redressal system  whereby a National Call Centre with 
a toll free n umber (1800 -258-1800), operating in 17 languages and on 24X7 
basis, has been set up to cater to dissemination of information about various 
services, handling of grievances and citizen feedback,  which at present works 
on a central system platform.  Also a h elpdesk has been set up which can be 
accessed by citizens through the www.passportindia.gov.in portal and where 

56 
 
suggestions and grievances can be sent and also monitor its status online. Such 
grievances are being forwarded directly to the concerned Passpor t Offices for 
redressal in time bound manner. It presently handles approximately 20, 000 
calls per day out of which 42% are in Hindi and 29% in English. 
 
   (ii)    A Public Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC) has been established in CPV 
Division under the sup ervision of the Joint Secretary (Passport Seva Project) 
and Chief Passport Officer. It deals with grievances recieved through telephone, 
e-mail and post, as also references from various Government offices such as 
President‟s Secretariat, Prime Minister‟s O ffice, Cabinet Secretariat, Central 
Vigilance Commission and Parliament Secretariat. In addition, all Passport 
Offices handle public grievances through the Centralized Public Grievance 
Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAM) website of the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.  The latest position on their 
applications, alongwith directions for further action, is posted on this website, 
which can be easily accessed by the public for its benefit.  CPGRAM is being 
monitored by PGRC.  During the period 1.4.2014 to 31.08.2014,    4383  public 
grievance petitions were received out of which 3748 were disposed off.  
 
      (iii)   Information and Facilitation Counters, Public Grievance Cell and Help Desks 
have been set up in Passport Offices to assi st applicants and to attend to 
grievances/complaints expeditiously. The complaint/suggestion boxes are also 
installed on strategic locations at Passport Offices and Passport Seva Kendras. 
The names, addresses and phone number of the Public Grievance Office r are 
also displayed in the Passport Offices.  There is a Public Grievance redressal 
mechanism in all Passport offices to enquire into and redress any complaints 
from citizens in a timeframe.  
 
(iv)   It is submitted that Ministry‟s efforts in improving re dressal of public grievances 
have been appreciated by the nodal agency i.e. the Department of 
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. In a letter dated 3 December 
2013…. addressed to  Hon‟ble EAM, Hon‟ble MoS for Personnel, Public 
Grievances & Pensions has written: 
 
“…On the basis of data generated on the online Centralised Public Grievances Redress 
and Monitoring System, as on 21.11.2013, your Ministry has been found to have 
improved significantly in reducing the pendency of public grievances . I cong ratulate 
on this and wish to place on record my appreciation for the commendable effort put in 
by your Ministry in this regard…” 
 

57 
 
(v)   As far as Hon‟ble Committee‟s  recommendation on  the  disposal of cases at the 
level of Passport Office is concerned, M inistry would like to reiterate here that 
Passport Offices have been given the powers to dispose off the cases at their level 
by imposing appropriate penalty.  Only those cases, where the appellant is not 
convinced with the decision of the Passport authori ties, are transferred to the 
Chief Passport Officer for further action.  It is also submitted that   after refusal of 
passport by the Passport authority, the applicant appeals to the higher authority 
i.e.  the  Chief Passport Officer under Section 11 of the Passport  Act.  The appeal 
cases, dealt at Headquarters are  given top priority and  the Ministry  holds  appeal  
sessions  once a month. The average time taken for disposal of appeal cases 
would thus  be reduced further. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
The Committee observe that unauthorized touts/agents are still active in the new system 
and are taking the  advantage of difficulties being faced by the applicants at each stage 
of the process. This includes charging very high amount  for submission of applications 
online, taking dates and clearance of PVR. Under the new system, there are more 
opportunities for such elements to harass the applicants. The Committee  have also 
come across advertisements in media as well as reports of expl oitation by touts who act 
as facilitations and charge exorbitant sum from the applicants. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the information furnished by the Ministry about the measures undertaken 
to mitigate the situation. The Committee would like to ur ge the Ministry to pursue the 
matter with concerned police officers and conduct surprise raids to curb the 
mushrooming of agents/touts around the PSKs/RPO. Furthermore, the Committee are 
also aware of the malpractice by few officials of Department of Polic e and Postal 
Departments during the process of police verification and delivery of passports 
respectively. In this context, the Committee would like to urge the Ministry to take up 
the matter with concerned authorities.  At the same time, the Committee wou ld like to 
stress upon the need for verification of the antecedents of the employees of the Service 
Provider that are attached with the Passport Seva Project and conduct regular checks to 
ensure that these officials and officials from the Ministry of Exter nal Affairs/RPO are 
not involved in nefarious activities. 
Reply of the Government 
 (i)  As regards, exploitation by touts/agents, it is submitted that the Passport Portal 
has exhaustive information on the documentation required for application 
submission p rocedure. The citizens can also seek passport -related information 
from the  National Call Centre (Toll Free 1800 -258-1800) which has facility of 
communication in 17 languages or can access mPassport Seva App. An e -mail 

58 
 
based Help Desk is also available. Th ese measures are aimed at educating the 
public and minimising the role of middlemen. 
(ii)  The Ministry had issued a circular on 6 th June 2013  directing the Passport 
Offices to  approach the local police for conducting raids around PSKs/RPOs 
for nabbing touts operating in the area. The instructions  have been reiterated on 
17th April, 2014. The RPOs have also been directed to send a monthly report on 
the outcome of their efforts in this regard.  The RPOs have written to the 
concerned police officials to con duct raids to eliminate tout menace.  The 
Passport Portal also carries advisory for the public not to fall prey to  
machinations of touts who promise „speedy‟ service.   
 
(iii)   As regards malpractices by police and postal employees, necessary  remedial 
action can be taken by the respective administrative Ministries/Departments 
only.  In case specific cases of malpractice are pointed out, the Ministry would  
forward these to concerned authorities.  
 
(iv)   The Ministry would like to infor m the Hon‟ble Comm ittee that the Service 
Provider has   been   having  the antecedents of their employees  verified. 
deployed at the PSKs  and Passport Offices… 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.21) 
 
The Committee observe that Passport Offices have been facing continuous staff crunch. 
The Committee also find that under the new system of passport issuance, the Passport 
Offices have to  play a back office role and the staff available with the Passport Offices 
is to be posted at PSKs as well as RPOs. The Committe e, however, have observed 
during their study visits to Passport Offices that there is no balanced distribution of 
staff between both the locations.  The Committee note that on one hand, there is 
reduction of work at RPO and on the other hand the Ministry h as accepted that due to 
staff crunch they are unable to release more appointments at Passport Seva Kendras. It 
clearly shows that there is a need of proper planning for deputation of staff at RPO and 
PSKs. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry sho uld undertake Passport Office 
specific studies to know the workload and requirement of manpower at particular PO or 
PSK and ensure optimal utilization of human resource in these offices. The Committee 
are sure that with the existing manpower and newly crea ted 348 posts the Ministry will 
be able to handle the system efficiently. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is constantly striving to maintain balance between the staff strength at PSKs 
and Passport Offices by dynamically moving the officials available in the system  for 

59 
 
optimizing output.   During January, 2014, out of 768 Govt. counters, 563 were manned 
i.e. about 73% whereas during August 2014, the occupancy was 623 out of 776 i.e. over 
80%.    The productivity of  the Verification Officers has gone u p from 114 passport 
applications per day to 123 and that of Granting Officers from 132 to 140 applications 
per day during April – August 2014.  It is also submitted that  the passport issuance has 
gone up by 36% during the period from 2009 to 2013  whereas  the  staff strength has 
been increased by 15% only. It is also submitted that the Union Cabinet had approved 
inter alia  increase in staff strength by 39 personnel for every one lakh increase in 
passport applications. At this rate, the strength should have  been increased by 693 
personnel whereas in fact it was only  348.  The Ministry‟s proposal,  in keeping with the 
Cabinet‟s said approval,  for automatic augmentation in staff strength to keep pace with 
increase in passport services,  was not agreed to by th e Ministry of Finance. The Ministry 
has been in constant touch with the Staff Selection Commission to  expedite recruitment 
of staff. However, as the procedure for recruitment stands at present, it takes more than 
15 months since the date of placing indent,  to actually deploy an offi cial.   From January 
2014 till 20th September, 2014,  49 Assistants were promoted as Superintendents, 82 
Passport Granting Officers were promoted as  Asstt Passport Officers (APOs)   and 17 
APOs   were promoted as Deputy Pass port Officers.  The Ministry‟s recent  decision to 
affix stamped signatures in passports in place of  physical signatures is likely to free up 
some gazetted  officers who would be deployed to optimize output. 
 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.23) 
The Committee in their Report in the past have taken up the issue of quality of passport 
booklets. The Committee are informed that the Ministry has taken up the issue of 
improving the quality and enhancing security features in Indian Passport Booklets with 
Indian Security Press (ISP), Nasik. The Committee, however, feel that not much has been 
done by ISP, Nasik in terms of improving the physical quality of the Passport booklets 
particularly, binding which has led to problems during immigration check for  Indian 
citizen abroad. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry must pursue the 
matter with ISP, Nasik to improve the binding of the booklets. The Committee have also 
come across the news reports about short supply of passport booklets in various  RPOs. 
The Committee therefore, suggest the Ministry to take up the matter with ISP, Nasik for 
regular supply of desired quantity of Passport Booklets so that the printing of passport is 
not delayed due to non-availability of passport booklets. 
Reply of the Government 
 (i)  The Ministry shares the concern of  the  Hon‟ble Committee over the less than 
satisfactory quality and security features  of Indian Passport booklets.  Over the last 

60 
 
decade, the  Ministry has been taking up these  issues with the Indian Security Press 
(ISP), Nashik and its parent body Security Printing, Minting and Coin India Limited 
(SPMCIL), New Delhi, especially   the issue of weak binding of passports that 
comes  off the cover easily.  The Ministry has also been taking up with ISP the  
issue of   enhancing security features in the passport booklets as per global 
standards.  The Ministry has advised ISP  to procure and use reverse lock stitch 
machines, as per global norms,  so as to ensure that stitches in passports do not 
come off.  The design and stitching of the Indian passport were  reviewed at a joint 
MEA-ISP meeting held on 16 th April, 2014.   The  ISP has promised to design, 
develop and produce better designed passport booklets with stronger bonding   by 
the end of this year.  
(ii)    There was a temporary shortage of passport booklets which created some 
backlog in issuance of passports. This was because  ISP Nashik, which is the 
sole supplier of passport booklets to all Passport Offices in India and abroad, 
had stopped production of booklets twice (Dec 2013 – Feb 2014 and April 
2014 – mid June 2014) due to shortage of a raw material (HAUV laminate 
film) imported from abroad. Due to prompt measures taken by the  Ministry, 
ISP Nashik  started regular supplies of passport booklets to Passport Offices in 
July 2014.  By mid -August 2014, all the Passport Offices had  adequate stock 
of passport booklets. Further, the   Ministry has also increased the annual 
indent for blank passport booklets for the year 2014 -15 to 20 million in order 
to crea te a strategic reserve of 10 million booklets to meet any future 
exigency.   All the arrears on account of print pendency due to shortage of 
booklets have been wiped out due to  intensive  efforts  by  the Passport Office 
officials. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 

61 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMEDNATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
 
-NIL- 

62 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMEDNATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No.1) 
The Committee are happy to note that as a part of the national e -governance plan of the 
Government, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has embarked on the ambitious 
mission Passport Seva Project to ma ke the passport issuance system more efficient.  The 
Committee, however, take note of the undue delay in execution of the Project in the 
beginning. At the same time, the Committee note that before embarking upon the project, 
the Ministry had overlooked cer tain aspects which led to significant financial 
implications/burden on the Ministry as well as created a chaotic situation during the 
period of transformation from old system to the new system. Now, they have successfully 
established 77 Passport Seva Kendr as (PSKs) in different parts of the country in first 
phase of the Project to handle the work of passport and are in the process of opening 
Passport Seva Laghu Kendras (PSLKs) in North Eastern States and other areas.   The 
Committee, however, are of the stro ng opinion that the Ministry had not appropriately 
dwelt upon the implications of centralization  of passport application deposit process and 
the system going online in view of digital divide and lack of infrastructure and 
connectivity in the country partic ularly, in semi -urban and rural areas.   In the second 
phase of the project the Government proposes to open more Centres.   The Committee, 
therefore, desire that in view of the experience of the Phase -I and the requirement  of 
infrastructure and connectivi ty, the Ministry must dwell upon the project in its various 
dimensions and holistically examine them in its entirety and come up with concrete 
policy decision on various issues before embarking on the next Phase.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of  Hon‟ble Committee has  been taken note of   and  it is submitted 
that the Ministry is committed to providing Passport services in a more efficient, timely 
and transparent manner. It is also submitted that  with a view to address the challenge of 
digital divide  and to provide more access points for filing passport applications online, 
especially in the rural hinterland,   the Ministry in association  with M/s. CSC e -
Governance Services India Limited {which is promoted by the Department of Electronics 
and Information Technology (DeitY)},  has facilitated  online  filing of  passport  
applications,  through the vast network of over one lakh Common Service Centres 
(CSCs) across the country. The CSCs are the delivery points for Government, Private and 
Social Sector services in the areas of agriculture, health, education, banking, insurance, 
pension, utility bill payments, entertainment, etc. to rural citizens of India at their 
doorstep.  The passport related services have now been added as part of their bouq uet of 

63 
 
services.   The CSCs  facilitate filling and uploading of Passport application form, 
payment of applicable fee (through debit/credit card or through SBI internet 
banking/challan mode) and scheduling of appointment for  visit to the PSK,  at nominal 
charge not exceeding Rs. 100/-.  As per the appointment schedule, an applicant will have 
to visit the PSK for completion of application submission process (including collection of 
digital photographs/biometrics, verification of supporting documents and app roval). The 
services through CSCs are available throughout the week, including during the weekend.  
The Ministry has also decided to open a PSK each in Indore (Madhya Pradesh) and 
Solapur (Maharashtra) to increase the outreach of passport services besides a dding more 
counters in various PSKs to augment  their  handling capacity.  The Ministry has also 
drawn up a plan to  organize Passport Seva Camps  periodically  at various places to take 
the passport services closer home. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
The Committee note that the Ministry has accepted that once when on the passport seva 
portal details are filled online and documents are scanned and uploaded and appointments 
are obtained, experience of applicants at PSK is very satisfa ctory.  But the feedback 
available to the Committee and media reports deny this claim.  The experience of  
applicants are similar at PSKs also and many applicants are called again and again for 
want of one or other document and feel harassed. The Committee  desire that to minimize 
this problem, there should be a process of e -verification of documents prior to the 
designated day for appointments in cases where the documents have already been 
uploaded by the applicants.  The Committee hope that Ministry alongw ith Service 
Provider would come up with technological solution to this problem as this small step by 
the Ministry may facilitate to end the problems of a large number of applicants. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that the Passport Portal has exten sive information on the requirement of 
supporting documents for the guidance of applicants. The applicants are required to bring 
original documents along with a copy thereof to the PSK at the appointed time/day where 
these are verified by the Govt Official . The applicant may be  required to make another 
visit only when the original document itself is of doubtful nature or incomplete in some 
respect.   In view of the fact that original documents in any case have to be produced 
before the Verifying Officer, p re e -verification  of documents would not be of help. 
However, with a view to simplify  passport application submission procedure, it has been 
decided to accept registered rent agreement also as a   proof of address.  It  has also been  
decided  w.e.f. 1st August, 2014 to do away with ink signatures on  passports  and replace 
these with stamped signatures to save  time and manpower.   The Ministry has also 

64 
 
introduced the system of self -attestation of documents replacing the requirement of 
attestation by gazetted officers.  
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.10) 
The Committee note that in each PSK, officials from RPO are present as Passport Issuing 
Authority (PIA) as well as the employees of TCS to conduct the front end activities. 
However, the Committee have often come across instances that a large number of cases 
are being referred to RPO in the name of policy matters.  From the figures provided by 
the Ministry, the Committee find that on an average three cases per PSK per day are 
referred to RPO.  The Committee have serious doubts on the figures provided by the 
Ministry in this regard.  However, figures of an average per day per PSK at all India level 
may not give conclusive results because this problem is RPO/PSK specific.  In such 
instances the applicants have to suffer a lot particularly, if he/she is a resident of one 
particular district and has to visit another district where PSK is located and if referred to 
RPO, the applicant has to travel to the third district leading to unnecessary has sle and 
stress. In this context, the Committee are dismayed to take note of Ministry's justification 
given for referring large number of cases that if the officials at Passport Seva Kendras 
dwell too long on certain cases, it would lead to delay even in le ss difficult cases. The 
Committee note that though the Ministry has come out with comprehensive guidelines so 
that various queries are resolved at the end of PSK only and the applicants are not 
referred to RPO in large number but with no impact. The Commit tee, thereafter, would 
like to suggest the Ministry to relook and review the role of Granting Officers so as to 
empower them to consider maximum number of cases except very complex cases and 
resolve then and there at PSK level.  If required, the assistance  of policy section may be 
provided there itself.  The Committee also have apprehension and certain information 
that there may be understating between the Granting Officer and the query resolving 
officer which can result into referring a large number of cas es from the table of a 
particular Granting-Officer at a particular PSK to policy section for query resolution for 
their gains. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should observe and 
analyze such cases RPO/PSK-wise and Granting Officer-wise to reach any conclusion.   
Reply of the Government 
It is s ubmitted that Granting Officers  (Superintendents/Passport Granting Officers) are 
Gazetted officers of CPO, having nearly 20  years‟ experience of passport work and it is 
felt that they are equipped to  handle all sorts of cases. Most of the  PSKs are headed by 
Asstt Passport Officers and their expertise is also available.  However, in case of doubtful 
supporting documents or some other complexity, it becomes necessary to refer the case to 
the RPO which has a policy section and works under the Head of Passport Office.  It 
would not be practicable to deploy „policy sections‟  at each PSK as  in many cases there 

65 
 
are more than one PSK under the concerned Passpo rt Office due to shortage of 
manpower. The Minis try   is cognizant of complaints of wrong doing  and  appropriate 
action  is taken against  errant officials.  As desired by the Hon‟ble Committee, a test 
check by  the Ministry on the passport applications received during  April–  August, 2014 
by the Passp ort Offices in Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai 
reveals that  the PSKs under them cumulatively  received  11,75,041  applications out of 
which  50,146 cases were escalated to the respective Passport Office. This comes to 4.3%  
which  does not appear significant.  It is also submitted that escalation of cases is part of 
normal bureaucratic procedure and due diligence and  in Ministry‟s view, escalation 
helps  in supervision and monitoring  of work and affords learning experience to ju nior 
officials. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.14) 
The Committee observe that as per the timeline fixed under the Passport Seva Project for 
issuance of passport (fresh or reissue) is 3 working days in case of 'no' or 'post police 
verification cases' and for the `pre -verification cases', it  is 3 working days plus the time 
taken for Police Verification and for passports under Tatkal Scheme, it is next working 
day excluding the day of submission.  But as informed by the Ministry 68% of norm al 
passports are dispatched within 7 days and 90% within 15 days, excluding time taken for 
police verification while in case of Tatkal Passport 73% are dispatched within three days 
and 96% within seven days.  While analyzing the factors responsible for del ay, the 
Committee observe that so far the Ministry of External Affairs has mentioned that delay 
in receiving Police Verification Report is one of the major factor for delays.  The 
Committee observe that major factor responsible for delay in receipt of Poli ce 
Verification Reports but other delays at PSK/RPO level also contributes significantly. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that initiatives should be taken to minimize the 
time in forwarding the file as well as dispatch of passports.  The Committe e have a clear 
opinion that by streamlining the functioning of RPOs and developing better synergy 
between RPO and TCS, the Ministry may be able to reduce the time taken and proceed in 
the direction of achieving the desired target of service delivery.  
 Moreover, the Committee note that in DPHQ/SPHQ Model, PVRs are uploaded 
by the concerned police and thereafter, the hardcopy is sent to the RPO after a long 
period.  The Committee, however, have observed that the process of passport printing is 
initiated at t he RPO only after the receipt of physical copy of PVR.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should not wait for the physical copy and in order 
to expedite the process, passport printing should be initiated once PVR are uploaded by 
the Department of Police or are received online by the RPO. 
 

66 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is always striving to reduce the time taken to issue passport and to attain the 
desired time line envisaged in Passport Seva objectives.   The manpower shortage and  
infrastructural shortcomings continue to pose challenge in meeting the desired service 
levels. It is clarified, however, that passport printing is initiated after  a clear Police 
Report  is received electronically and the Granting Officer/PV Reviewer  at the Passport 
Office gives go -ahead in the system.  It is not necessary to receive  the hard copy  for 
initiating passport printing save in those cases where police verification is still in manual 
mode. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Since the onset of the Passport Seva Project, the Committee have taken a strong objection 
to closing of multiple channels of submission and have clearly expressed their opinion 
that existence of PSKs alone will lead to centralization of the system. In con text of the 
passport system going online, the Committee have also often deliberated upon the 
existence of digital divide, lack of infrastructure and accessibility of hardware and online 
connectivity particularly in rural India. The Committee are also aware  that there is an 
immediate need to assist/facilitate those applicants who  are not accustomed to computers 
or not having regular access to computers in filing applications, uploading relevant 
documents, payment of fee as well as seeking appointments. In v iew of these practical 
considerations as well as availability of infrastructure and trained personnel and wide 
network, the Committee over the years have been strongly recommending the Ministry 
that the Speed Post Centres should be co -opted and reinvented to be used as channels for 
submission of forms online as well as for capturing of  biometric data so that passport 
services are made accessible to those in distant areas as well as in rural hinterland. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that the Minis try is actively pursuing the matter of co -opting services of 
Speed Post Centres  (SPCs)  and Head Post Offices (HPOs)  to enable applicants, 
especially in the rural hinterland to apply for filing passport applications online. The 
necessary internal approvals have since been obtained and  the Ministry has written to the 
Secretary, Department of Posts to confirm that requisite IT and non -IT infrastructure is in 
place to enable the applicants to file passport applications online, make payment online 
and obtain appointment. The Secretary, Deptt of Posts, in a meeting with the Ministry‟s 
officials,   did not appear  inclined to the Ministry‟s proposal,  expressing  manpower and 
infrastructural constraints. The Ministry, however,  continues to   pursue  the matter .  It 
would  still be mandatory for applicants to appear in person at concerned PSKs to give 

67 
 
their photographs and biometrics and complete passport application submission 
procedure.   
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
The Committee tak e note of the Ministry's initiative to redress the greviances of the 
applicants and welcome initiatives like organization of Passport Melas by various RPOs. 
The Committee were informed that during the year 2012, Passport Melas were conducted 
by 24 RPOs at 62 locations and 83 Passport Melas were conducted by 26 Passport 
Offices during the year 2013. The Committee note that such Passport Melas are random 
and are held only at few places. Moreover, the Committee observe that there is no clear 
cut policy for org anizing Passport Melas, the Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Ministry should pronounce a policy basically giving a priority to the Passport Offices 
where citizens are facing the problem of very long appointment dates. 
The Committee also desire that Min istry should ensure that all the passport 
applications collected during the  Passport Melas particularly during the tranistory phase 
of Passport Seva Project are processed expidiously and are not kept pending because such 
practice  defeats the very objectives behind organizing such Melas. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has directed all the Passport Offices to keep organizing Passport Melas on 
weekends from time to time to address  any  appointment challenge   due to seasonal 
variations or sudden spurt in demand.. During 1st January –  20th September, 2014,    164  
Passport Melas were organized during the weekends  across the country by vari ous 
Passport Offices  and  95,782   passport applications were accepted for processing.   
During May – June, 2014,  Passport Seva Camps were  organized   Karimnagar   at which 
581  applications were accepted for processing. The applications collected during Melas 
and Passport Camps are not distinct from the ones accepted at PSKs during normal 
working days and these are pr ocessed in the same way as others.   The Ministry has also 
drawn up a plan to  organize Passport Seva Camps  periodically  at various places to take 
the passport services closer home. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
The Committee obse rve that in the earlier system registered and reputed travel 
agents/agencies were recognized/authorized to assist in filling the form, depositing the 
form and fee on behalf of the applicants and for that they were taking a nominal charge 
prescribed by the RPOs. They were regulated by administrative orders and were also 
liable for any mistake or mischief done by them but in the new system their role has been 

68 
 
redefined treating them as middlemen.  They are now free like other cybercafé owners to 
charge any am ount from the applicants seeking their assistance in filing applications or 
getting appointments without any control of passport authorities. The Committee also 
observe that when Government is in search of multiple channels to facilitate the 
applicants on payment of nominal charge, the Ministry should relook at the role of these 
reputed agencies who may work as authorized centers on payment of  nominal fee fixed 
by the authorities. The Committee do not find anything contrary to the philosophy of e -
governance in legalizing these agencies for their limited regulated role to prevent the 
exploitation of applicants by anyone. Therefore, the Ministry should think to define the 
role of agents to facilitate the prospective applicants alongwith incorporating the 
SPC/DPC/citizen service centers in the passport network.  
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that the travel agents, like any other individual or internet café operator or 
the CSCs   co-opted   recently  as stated above,  are free to access the Passport P ortal to 
assist citizens in filing passport applications online, making payments  and obtaining 
appointment.   The Ministry no longer  feels the need  to  recognize  some  agents across 
the country  and allotting them log -in IDs, as was the practice earlie r, as the Portal is 
web-based unlike the previous NIC system.  The Government had taken a conscientious 
decision in November 2010 to make the new regulation  universal and non-discriminatory 
so  that an applicant  may approach any travel agency, whether or not a member of IATA, 
TAAI or any other body of  travel agents,  to seek assistance for online 
registration/enquiry under the PSP.    The Ministry‟s stand had been contested by travel 
agents  in the Special Civil Application No. 917 & 919/2012 filed by As sociation of 
Recognised Passport Agents (ARPA)  of Gujarat, in the Gujarat High Court, Ahmedabad, 
whereby the petitioners  prayed for  (i) restoration of status quo ante and continuance of 
submission of passport applications by travel agents, (ii) access t o the new system 
through log-in, (iii) special counters for travel agents in the PSKs/RPO and (iv) stay on 
the implementation of PSP.  None of the prayers of  ARPA was accepted by the 
Hon‟ble High Court.  In a detailed judgment dated 15 th March, 2012.  Relevant extracts 
are reproduced below :-- 
“ Para 20 :   …… Neither Section 5 nor any other provision of the Act envisages any role 
on the part of the passport agent in the process of issuance of passport.   …  There is no 
provision in the Act for allowing an y agent appointed by individuals to deal with the 
passport office and on whom any rights have been conferred by any of the provisions 
of the  Act. 
21. In the backdrop of the aforesaid statutory position as well as from the facts and 
contentions noted herei nabove, it is apparent that the claim of the petitioners is not 
based on any statutory or contractual rights, but is based upon the doctrine of legitimate 

69 
 
expectation. The plea of legitimate expectation would be required to be considered  in 
terms of the earlier policy and the impact of the change of the policy under the Passport 
Seva Project. 
……………………………………………………. 
29 ……..It is manifest that the earlier policy giving recognition to the members of the 
petitioner associations as recognized passport agents doe s not cause any obligation on 
the respondents to continue with the same system………..nor does it create any vested 
right in favour of the members of the petitioner associations to continue submitting 
applications on behalf of their clients under the earlier system……  
34.  Reverting to the facts of the present case, the overriding reason of public policy is 
writ large on the face of the policy itself which is made in the public interest and in the 
interest of national security. Thus, where the state action is as a public policy or is in the 
public interest, unless the action taken amounts to an abuse of power, the concept of 
legitimate expectation  would have no role to play. 
……………….. 
37……….. the new policy /system has been introduced on the basis of the 
recommendation of an expert body after an in -depth study of the subject matter. The 
policy…….cannot be said to be capricious and not being informed by any reason 
whatsoever, nor can it be clearly held  to be an arbitrary and founded on mere ipse dixit 
of the exe cutive functionaries nor does the same offend other constitutional provisions 
or come into conflict with any statutory provisions. In the circumstances, there is no 
warrant for interference with the policy decision of the executive functionary of the 
State. 
……………….. 
39. In the light of the above discussion, this court is of the  view that the petitioners 
are not entitled to any of the reliefs claimed in the petitions. ……As to  whether or not the 
members of the petitioner associations can be integrated withi n the system can only be 
decided by the respondent no. 1.  
40. Subject to the aforesaid, the petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed. …….The 
interim relief granted earlier shall stand vacated.” 
 
In view of the foregoing, the Ministry is not inclined t o create a class within a 
class of travel agents  or to „legalise‟ a few select ones by allotting login IDs or 

70 
 
application quotas  as all travel agencies are equal in the field and no accreditation is 
required from the Passport Office or Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 

71 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMEDNATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
(Recommendation No.2) 
The Committee take a note of payment made to each agency on the basis of per passport 
and find that charges paid to TCS for conducting front -end activity in regard to issue of 
new passport range from Rs. 171.87 to Rs.199.00 while for miscellaneous services, it 
ranges  from Rs. 77.61 to Rs. 103.23 and Rs. 100.00 per passport application was paid to 
India Post for accepting and forwarding the application to the concerned RPO. The 
Committee further observe that the payment made to Department of Police for Police 
Verification (PV) is only Rs.100.00 in cases where it is received within 21 days, while it 
is only Rs. 25 .00, if  Police Verification Report (PVR) is received after 21 days. The 
Committee are of the opinion that in view of the tedious nature of the job and the time 
taken by the police officials in actually visiting residences of applicants, verifying 
documents and also visiting references in case it is required and involvement of CID in 
carrying out verification in certain case, the Ministry should enhance the rates paid to 
police for carrying out verification.  
The Committee also note that i n the new system under the Passport Seva 
Project, the DPHQ/SPHQ are expected to be e -connected but several States are still 
following manual process of sending police verification reports which usually take 
more than 21 days for which police is paid Rs. 25 only for each PVR. The time taken in 
some States/Union Territories like Andhra Pradesh and Delhi is very less. The Ministry 
should treat that as model and implement it in all the States so that the time taken for 
police verification is reduced to minimum days.      
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry would like to inform  Hon‟ble Co mmittee  that the reimbursement to 
Police  for verification of personal particulars and antecedents  of applicants is  being  
increased from Rs.100/- to Rs.150/- per passport ap plication  provided that states/UTs 
implement DPHQ model and t he verific ation report  is  received within 21 days of 
making reference to Police.  In case the verification report is received after 21 days, the 
reimbursement would be restricted to Rs.50/ -.  T his has been done to encourage state 
police to  implement DPHQ model and to  complete verification process in a time -
bound manner without delay. The matter of delay  in police verification  was raised by 
Foreign Secretary in a meeting of Chief Secretaries of State / UT Govts. on  13th March, 
2014. A Presentation on Police Verification (PV)  had also  been made  by the Ministry 
before the Chief Secretaries.  Subsequently, a handout containing suggestions/proposals 
to State/UT Govts.   for speeding up verificati on and emphasizing the need for setting 

72 
 
up  the preferred DPHQ mo del,  is being finalised . It is reiterated that setting up IT 
infrastructure for Police Verification Reports (PVRs) is the responsibility of the 
States/UT Govts. and the Ministry can only imp ress upon them to do so with a view to 
improving governance in the c ountry.  As of now,  475 districts have adopted the 
DPHQ model.  The Ministry  has also prepared a detailed draft  „Manual on  Police 
Verification for Passports‟ for dissemination to State/ UT Govts. to   introduce uniform 
and speedy procedures and practices. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.4) 
1.42 The Committee over the years have been expressing their concern over non -
availability of PSKs in the North -Eastern States during  the Phase I of the Project.  
Considering the genuine requirement of satisfying the needs of these States, the 
Ministry has come up with the proposal for establishment of Passport Seva Laghu 
Kendras and have been assuring the Committee over early execution of the proposals of 
PSLKs in the capitals of these States. The Committee, however, note that the Ministry 
had assured the Committee to establish Mini -PSK/PSLK in Aizwal by December 2010 
and Mini -PSKs in other North Eastern States by end of December 2011.  But the 
Committee find that only one PSLK has started functioning in Aizwal since July 2012 
and projects at other places are in various stages of inception and execution. The 
Committee are  dismayed to note that even after a continuous persuasion by the 
Committee through their Reports and on the spot visits, the Ministry has not been able 
to do much in establishing the PSLKs in the North -Eastern States and they have not 
even finalized or located/identified sites at Agartala, Imphal, Itanagar and Kohima.  I n 
view of the urgent need of the people of North Eastern States, the Committee strongly 
criticize such casual approach of the Ministry and desire that immediate steps should be 
taken to expedite the work related to the establishment of PSLKs in North -Eastern 
States  and complete them in the shortest possible time in association with respective 
State Governments . 
Reply of the Government 
As mentioned in   ATR 3 , sub -para (i) , the position regarding PSLKs in  North-east 
states, the position is as follows: 
a. Passport services are being rendered  in Aizawl since July 2012 through Passport 
Application Collection Centre (PACC). The IT infrastructure of PACC  would be 
upgraded to PSLK as soon as financial concurrence for setting up IT infrastructure is 
received. 

73 
 
b.  The civil and electrical works undertaken by Meghalaya  State PWD   for PSLK 
Shillong have been completed.   It is likely to be  launched  by mid -October, 2014. On 
trial basis, applications are already being accepted.  
c.  The site for PSLK Gangtok has been fina lized and financial concurrence has been 
received for civil and electrical works to be carried out by the Sikkim PWD. Likely to 
be operationalised during 2014-15. 
d.  Lease Deed for the PSLK   Agartala is under finalisation   after which civil and 
electrical works would be carried out and IT infrastructure installed.   Likely to be  
operationalised  during 2014-15. 
e. A site has been identified in  Imphal and  lease deed is being  finalized  with Manipur 
Govt. Expected to be made operational during 2014-15. 
f.  A site has been   identified in Itanagar and lease deed is under discussion with the 
State Govt.  Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
g. Following a proposal  from the former Chief Minister of Manipur that the PSLK may 
be set up in  Dimapur  instead of  Kohima as Dimapur  has better connectivity and 
many State Govt offices are located there, the matter was taken up with the State Govt.  
by the Ministry. The State Govt has conveyed that the PSLK may be set up in  
Dimapur.  Likely to be operationalised during 2014-15. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
The Committee observe that the decision of opening of PSLKs was taken up by the 
Ministry at later stage and these are not covered under the provisions of Passport Seva 
Project.  The full responsi bility for their setting up rests with the Ministry which is 
required to provide full financial, manpower, infrastructural and technical support.  It is 
more surprising to note that the work related to establishment of all the proposed 
PSLKs were to be completed in June, 2012, but due to multiplicity of factors, the work 
relating to PSLKs is very slow and has been delayed.  The Committee also note that 
although Ministry feels that there is need of new revenue model of PSLKs even then, 
the Ministry has not t aken any initiative to develop any such system till date and there 
are delays in implementation of these projects.  The Ministry of External Affairs has 
also not approached the Ministry of Finance to obtain funds for these PSLKs. More 
surprisingly, they do  not have any such intention because recently they have curtailed 
the issue of obtaining indication about revenue model from the purview of NISG study.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of External Affairs should prepare 
the desired revenu e model on priority basis for the proposed 16 PSLKs and other 
PSLKs likely to be established in future and obtain the funds for preparing proposals 
for Cabinet so that these projects are not delayed more.  
 

74 
 
Reply of the Government 
The NISG has suggested a revenue model for additional PSKs/PSLKs which are 
beyond the scope of PSP. The PSP envisaged setting up  on PPP basis 77 PSKs by the 
Service Provider,  which were to deal with passport applications from all the regions in 
India covered by 37 Passport Offices.  The Ministry has, therefore, to find a way so that 
while setting up additional PSKs, it is not faced with a legal challenge by the Service 
Provider. The matter is under discussion with the Service Provider. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.6) 
The Committee note that there is a provision for holding regular tripartite meeting 
between officers of Passport Office, Department of Police and Postal Department at 
local level. The Committee, however, observe that there is lack of any such mech anism 
at the central level. The Committee understand that most of the issues pertaining to the 
passport services have to be dealt at the level of state government as well as locally, yet 
there are many issues which require involvement/coordination of the c oncerned 
Ministries of the Government of India particularly to maintain a uniformity in the 
system in all the States.  The Committee are of the view that during such deliberations a 
holistic view of the matter related to passport may be taken and issues may be discussed 
at length as well as in -depth so as to reduce the procedural hurdles and difficulties in 
the system arising out of non -communication/non-timely communication between 
various concerned Ministries/Departments to make the system more pragmatic and 
practical. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of External Affairs should 
establish a coordination mechanism at Central level involving Ministry of Home 
Affairs and Ministry of Communication with a view to share the views and maintain 
uniformity in the procedure of Police Verification and delivery of passport to the 
citizens. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry keeps in regular touch with the Ministry of Home Affairs for security 
dimensions of passport issuance process and Deptt. of IT for t he implementation of the 
e-governance project. Since policing is a State subject, the Ministry has to work with 
different State Governments for police verification process. A meeting of the Chief 
Secretaries of State/UT Governments was also taken on 13 th March 2014 by Foreign 
Secretary which dealt with this  issue amongst others.   As desired by Hon‟ble 
Committee,   a coord ination mechanism has been set up at Central level   for 
maintaining uniformity in the procedure for police verification for speedy deli very of 
passport services. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 

75 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
The Committee observe that smooth and efficient Police Verification is the key to 
successful implementation of the Passport Seva Project (PSP).  Under PSP, there is a 
provision to electronically receive and update the Police Verification Reports. The 
matter has been taken up by the Foreign Secretary with Chief Secretaries of 
State/Union Territory Governments and during interaction of CPV Division Officials 
with DGPs/Police Comm issioners.  But the pace of establishment of electronic 
connectivity with State Police Headquarters and District Police Headquarter is very 
slow and that is why in most of the States there is no success in reducing the period for 
receiving the PVR. Moreove r, the Committee have come across instances where they 
have found that different procedures and levels are being followed in process of Police 
Verification in different States which is perhaps one of the reasons for delays in 
obtaining PVRs.   The Committe e have been continuously asking the Ministry to make 
sincere efforts to shift to District Police Headquarters (DPHQs)/State Police 
Headquarters (SPHQs) Model and in all the States to ensure uniformity in approach and 
process across the country. The Committ ee, therefore, would like that the issue of 
establishing e -connectivity with the respective State Governments and other issues 
related to Police Verification should be taken up in coordination with Ministry of Home 
Affairs of the Government of India.  The Committee would also suggest that Ministry 
should come up with the model procedure for police verification by circulating a draft 
to all States to seek their opinion/suggestion on the procedures to be followed and 
amendments to be made in the Police Verifi cation process to make it more pragmatic. 
Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that the Model procedure for Police 
Verification is followed by all the States/Union Territories.  
  Further, in view of the  technological changes and changing nature and  profile 
of crime and including crimes by juveniles, the Committee are of the view that efforts 
should also be made to connect the Passport Seva Project with Crime and Criminal 
Tracking System (CCTNS) network, which is being implemented by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted once again that it is for the State/UT govts to  take policy decision  for 
improving police verification process and invest in necessary infrastructure to  shift to 
DPHQ/SPHQ model. The Ministry has bee n exhorting the State/UT Govts to speed up 
the requisite processes in this regard. Till 31 st August, 2014, out of 724 police districts 
in the country,  480   districts have  adopted  DPHq model. In the Chief Secretaries 
Conference held in New Delhi on 13 th March, 2014, Foreign Secretary had emphasized 
on the need to adopt DPHQ model. A Presentation  on Police Verification was also 
made by JS(PSP) & CPO at the Conference. A  „Draft Standard Operating Procedure 

76 
 
for Conducting Police Verification‟  was circula ted amongst the Chief Secretaries so 
that they could consult the respective Home Secretaries and Directors General of Police 
and implement the suggested measures. As regards integration  with CCTNS being 
implemented by MHA, it is submitted that Passport Se va System is connectivity -ready 
but the CCTNS itself is still not complete and MHA is unable to have connectivity. The 
CCTNS being a centralised database, cannot be integrated with Passport Seva till it is 
fully and finally implemented.  The Ministry has b een  impressing upon the MHA  to 
provide   the said connectivity  at the earliest. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No.13) 
During the course of examination, the Committee have come across many issues 
relating to Police Verifications Forms. Fo r example the forms are auto -generated and 
there is no option for comments/remarks so as to qualify the reasons and once a 'no' is 
recorded in the form a rejected Police Verification Report is generated.  Similarly, there 
is a column pertaining to ongoing police case on the applicant but there is no column 
for making remarks or qualify it, wherein there is a need to make segregation on the 
basis of small and petty crimes or heinous crimes or to mention 'no objection for 
granting of passport by Police'. More over, there is no column in the Form regarding 
mobile number of the applicant on which police could inform the applicant about the 
time and date for verification The Committee, therefore, have a view that such 
important lacuna/shortcomings in the Form shou ld be discussed with the police 
authorities and Forms should be appropriately modified. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that the particulars  of applicants that are   auto -generated by the System 
for police verification, include mobile number of ap plicants including those of  the 
„references‟  mentioned in the Passport Application Form. The  Police Verification 
Form   is  also being  modified  and the methodology to answer the queries therein have 
been  amplified in the „ Draft Standard Operating Pro cedure for Conducting Police 
Verification‟  besides the detailed „Manual on  Police Verification for Passports‟ which 
is being worked upon taking into account the concerns of the Committee. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
The Committee are informed that Indian Missions/Posts are still working under the old 
application system maintained by NIC and the data is migrated into PSP system as part 
of Central Database (PRIDE). The Committee note that the Ministry has prepared a 
blueprint for e stablishing a unified globalized view of the entire passport issuance 
system, however, the Committee observe that in spite of launching the Project, so far no 

77 
 
view was taken on the issue of integration of Indian Missions/Posts in the Passport 
Seva Portal/P roject. As a result, in the Missions/Posts, the application forms are still 
being filled in order to renew the passport and any information required in connection 
with issuance of passports take too much time, for example the Committee have noted 
that seven adalats were held in Jalandhar wherein 8350 applications or complaints were 
received and most of the cases were pending due to non -receipt of reply from 
Missions/Posts.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Passport Seva Project should 
be linked with the Indian Missions/Posts at the earliest so that data is available on real -
time basis and also to reduce the delay owing to awaiting information from 
Missions/Posts abroad in case of applicants whose earlier passports were 
issued/reissued by Indian Miss ions/Posts abroad.   Further, the Committee are of the 
view that availability of data on real time basis would also facilitate in case of reissue 
of Passport/rendering of miscellaneous services in case the applicant who has already 
been issued his /her pas sport from Indian Mission abroad and has further requirement 
for reissue his/her Indian passport in any other country.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry would like  to inform  Hon‟ble Committee that a team led by J oint 
Secretary(PSP) & Chief Passport O fficer / Director (PV & PSP)  and comprising 
representatives of NIC and Service Provider has  visited the Missions in Paris, Tashkent 
and Dubai    to study the technical and logistical challenges involved in integration of 
Missions/Posts abroad w ith Passpor t Seva. The techno -commercial proposal in this 
regard is under preparation and the integration is likely to be attained by the end of this  
financial year. 
(File No. CPV/PMU/125/67/2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
 28th November, 2014                                                                   Chairperson,          
7 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)               Standing Committee on External Affairs. 
                                                                 
 
 

78 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 25th NOVEMBER, 2014 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 25 th November, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
     Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
4. Shrimati Rakshatai Khadse 
5. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
7. Shri Magantti V. Rao (Babu) 
8. Md. Salim 
9. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
10. P.R. Senthilnathan 
11. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
12. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
     Rajya Sabha 
 13. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
 14. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 15. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 16. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 17.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 18.  Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 
       Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Cyril John   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani   - Additional Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 

79 
 
3. Thereafter, th e Chairperson informed the Committee about sad demise of  
Shri Murli Deora, MP, Rajya Sabha and Member of the Committee and adopted Condolence 
Resolution followed by silence. 
 
4.   XXXX   XXXXX   XXXXX 
 
5. The Committee then took up for consideration the d raft Report on a ction taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (15 th 
Lok Sabha) on the subject „Passport Seva Project – Targets and Achievements‟. The Chairperson 
invited the Members to offer their su ggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The 
Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted the draft Report with 
minor modification. 
6.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports incorporatin g the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
   
  The Committee then adjourned. 

80 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE TWNETY FIFTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)OF 
THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
                              
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                               23 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, w hich have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3,7,8,11,16,19,20,21 and 23.  
 Total-09 
      Percentage:  39.13% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government replies. 
Recommendation Nos. NIL. 
Total-00 
 Percentage: 00.00% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,9,10,14,15,17 and 18. 
Total- 07 
 Percentage: 30.43% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  2,4,5,6,12,13 and 22. 
                    Total-07 
Percentage: 30.43%                                                          