 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora’] 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018 /Pausa, 1939 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2017-18) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
18 
 

 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘ India’s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora’] 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on   5.1.2018 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 5.1.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018 / Pausa, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO.  131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2018 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................  21 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...………………………………… 33   
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  34 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………  36 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on    3.01.2018…………        43                                                           
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (16th Lok Sabha)………………………………………………..  45 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2017-18) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 7. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Jose K. Mani 
12. Shri P.R. Senthil Nathan 
 13. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 15. Shri Magannti Venakateswara Rao  
 16. Shri Mohd. Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 18. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 19. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 20. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 21. Vacant 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
 26. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 27. Smt. Kanimozhi 
 28. Shri C.M. Ramesh  
29. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy   
30. Dr. Karan Singh 
 31. Shri D. P. Tripathi  
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri P. C. Koul     –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3.       Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha   –   Additional Director  
4. Shri Janmesh Singh   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2017-18) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora’. 
 
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to the Parliament on 23 November, 2016. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 28 November, 2017. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report on Action Taken at their Sitting held 
on    3 January, 2018. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Append ix-I 
to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                   DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                     
3 January, 2018                                                                                Chairperson,                                 
13 Pausa,1939 (Saka)                                                Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirteenth Report 
on the subject „India‟s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora‟  which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on 
the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 23November, 2016. 
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs 
on all the 1 3Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
RecommendationNos.  3, 4, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 13  Total- 07 
 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL        
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:- 
Recommendation No.  6     Total- 01 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:- 
Recommendation Nos.  1,2,5,8 and 9   Total- 05 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report 
should be furnished to them at an early date. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations. 

2 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Need for a policy to enhance soft power diplomacy 
5.  The Committee had noted that Soft Power is the ability of a country to achieve 
foreign policy objectives through cultural  attraction rather than through force, coercion or 
indeed large deployments of money. While culture and history are at the centre of this 
approach, various political, economic and technological factors are equally significant. India 
is endowed with enormou s soft power resources in the form of a vibrant culture, our art, 
artifacts, tangible and intangible heritage, practices like Yoga, meditation, Indian TV and 
cinema, information and technology exports, our democracy, our pluralism and a thriving 
diaspora. In spite of having vast soft  power resources at its disposal, it c ame as a matter of 
regret for the Committee that we as a country had not been able to put these resourcesto 
adequate use in matters of foreign policy. The Committee wasaware that the Governm ent 
and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) ha d made concerted efforts to promote 
India‟s soft power, its values, traditions, literature, languages, philosophy, art forms through 
a variety of mediums including electronic and print publications, li ve performances etc. 
Through those efforts, the image of India overseas had seen a major overhaul from that of “a 
land of snake charmers ” to one of an emerging knowledge hub and IT superpower. Still, 
there were missing links regarding India abroad, and in certain cases there was the prejudice 
of prevailing stereotypes. The Committee had found that we ha d been lagging behind in 
cultural diplomacy and th at lacuna should be removed at the earliest. It is widely believed 
that India‟s soft power until now has fu nctioned independently of Government policies and 
that the world‟s reckoning of our soft power is by default rather than by design. The 
Committee was of the view that the Government ha d been able to leverage our country‟s 
soft power only in a fragmented wa y without the backing of a cohesive policy or 
commensurate financial resources. The Committee had, therefore, recommend ed that the 
Ministry formulate a comprehensive and well -structured policy delineating India‟s soft 
power resources and their articulation  abroad. The Ministry of External Affairs and the 
ICCR should extensively and in a sustained manner employ the resources at their disposal to 
propagate an image of India that augments our natural historical appeal, empowering our 
diplomacy and foreign policy.  
 

3 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that  
Committee‟s recommendation, which emerged out of discussions with the Committee in 
two sittings regarding formulating a comprehensive and well -structured policy on India‟s 
Soft Power Projection is accepted. It is apprised that ICCR is working with MEA to d raft a 
policy paper on the same.  
 
7. The Committee had expressed their concern over the fact that despite having a 
rich repertoire of soft power resources , India has not been able to deploy them 
adequately for appropriate diplomatic dividends and there has been a policy vac uum 
in leveraging soft power diplomacy. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that 
the Ministry formulate a comprehensive and well -structured policy delineating India’s 
soft power resources and their articulation abroad.  In its reply, the Ministry has 
agreed on the need for formulating a comprehensive and well structured policy on 
India’s soft power projection and submitted that ICCR is working with the Ministry to 
draft a policy paper in this regard. It is difficult for the Committee to countenance that 
the Ministry is actually serious in formulating the policy because, from the reply it 
appears that even after a lapse of one year, drafting process is yet to start. In view of 
the state of India’s soft power diplomacy any further delay in rectifying the situation is 
not desirable. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should finalize a 
comprehensive policy on leveraging our soft power diplomacy expeditiously through 
consultations with other stakeholders.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Measuring the effectiveness of India’s Soft Power 
8. The Committee had noted that the concept of soft power has acquired currency not 
only in the field of academics but also in the field of int ernational relations and diplomacy. 
Though soft power is an intangible component of a State‟s power and it is difficult to 
measure its definite impact, a study could establish the linkages between our soft power and 
tangible outcomes in the field of diplom acy. Such a study could point towards the ways in 
which India could leverage its soft power ; without such a linkage , soft power will remain a 
mere non -operational concept in India‟s diplo matic doctrine. The Ministry had  also 

4 
 
conceded that it is worthwhile to explore devising an objective method of assessing 
effectiveness of soft power capabilities and their tangible foreign policy outcomes, such as 
through the development of a „soft power matrix‟. The Committee was of the opinion that 
soft power, while very useful in itself, is only one possible instrument for enhancing our 
global role, and should be accompanied by an appropriate use of hard power . As such, t he 
Committee had deemed it desirable for the Ministry to st udy the tangible foreign policy 
outcomes of soft power and to devise, thereafter, a blue print for deploying it more 
effectively in the future . In itself, soft power carries no currency unless it is contextually 
driven and guided by certain objectives. As stated above, t he Committee had also 
recommended that the Government should develop a „soft power matrix‟ at the earliest, in 
order to measure the effectiveness of India‟s soft power.  
 
The Ministry had stated  that there was substantial scope for the impro vement of 
India‟s image in neighbouring States. Even while fully endorsing the idea that we cannot fix 
all our problems with our neighbours through soft power engagement alone, the Committee 
had felt that some amount of soft power might be beneficial in improving our relations with 
our neighbours. Going by India‟s „Neighbourhood First‟ policy, the Committee had also 
recommended that India should selectively exercise its soft power in neighbouring states for 
better diplomatic traction. 
 
9. The Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that  the 
Committee‟s recommendation with regard to (i) undertaking a study to establish the 
linkages between our soft power and tangible outcomes in the field of diplomacy and (ii) 
develop “Soft Power Matrix” to measure outcomes of initiatives undertaken for India‟ s Soft 
Power Projection is accepted. ICCR is initiating work on the same.  
  
As regards the „Neighbourhood First‟ policy, the Committee‟s recommendation that 
“India should selectively exercise its soft power in neighbouring states for better diplomatic 
traction” is accepted and the same has been shared with the concerned Territorial Divisions 
for further action.   

5 
 
10. The Committee had asked the Ministry to study the tangible foreign policy 
outcomes of soft power through a “soft power matrix ” along with ach ieving better 
diplomatic traction through selective exercise of soft power in India’s diplomatic 
neighbourhood. The Committee are unhappy to note that even after a year from the 
date that the Report was forwarded to the ICCR, the Council is still in the pr ocess of 
initiating work in that direction. The development of a “soft power matrix” should not 
have taken this much time, particularly when it was brought to the Committee’s notice 
at the time of examination of the subject , by the ICCR, that the Council was already 
conducting a performance review of its functioning to understand how its efforts over 
the years ha ve translated into tangible foreign policy returns. The Committee, 
therefore, deem it necessary  to reiterate  that the work to develop a “ soft powe r 
matrix” should be completed without wasting any more time.  
 As regards selective exercise of soft power in neighbouring States, t he Ministry 
has informed that it has shared the Committee’s recommendation with concerned 
Territorial Divisions for further action. In Committee’s opinion, f orwarding the 
recommendation to the concerned Territorial Division does in no way constitute any 
action taken on the part of the Ministry . The Ministry should follow up with these 
Divisions about the actual action taken by them and to communicate the same to the 
Committee. The Committee , therefore, would desire that the Ministry should furnish 
complete replies in future and also the details of actual action taken by each Territorial 
Division regarding the selective use of so ft power in neighbouring States as 
recommended by the Committee.  
(Recommendation No. 4) 
Budgetary requirements of ICCR 
11. The Committee had noted that the ICCR is the nodal organization for the projection 
of India‟s soft power abroad, and ever since its establishment in 1950, it has emerged as the 
principal governmental organization for our cultural engagement with the world and for 
promoting our culture in all its magnificence through various activities. The Committee 
were, however, disappointed to note that budgetary  support granted to the ICCR had  not 
been adequate. A budget of Rs. 192 crores was allocated to ICCR in BE 2015-16, a sum that 

6 
 
was retained at the same level in RE 2015 -16. During BE 2016-17, the budgetary allocation 
was enhanced to Rs. 215.80 crores. Despite an increase of 12.40%, the amount was still 
insufficient if the allocation is compared to the other similar g overnment-supported 
organizations engaged in the dissemination of culture for their respective countries across 
the world. By the Ministry‟s own admission, ICCR was being forced to resort to juggle its 
limited resources to make do with the meagre budget and it w ould notionally require at least 
Rs. 500 crore to meet the financial needs associated with its expanding mandate. The 
Committeehad,therefore, recommended that the budget of the ICCR should be sufficiently 
increased as such a move will go a long way in assisting us in leveraging our country‟s soft 
power and all its vast potential.  
 
The Committee had also noted that during the budget exercise, the gap betwe en RE 
demand and allocation was not much. It point ed to the fact that at present there was no 
institutional capacity within the ICCR for ingesting huge funds. Such a situation d id not sit 
well with the continuous (and necessary) demands for enhanced budget ary allocations. The 
Committee had,therefore, recommended that to enable a  more realistic planning, the ICCR 
should also ramp up its institutional capacity to utilise in the best possible manner any 
enhanced allocation.  
 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that the 
Recommendation of the Committee is accepted and action is being taken by the Finance 
Division of MEA. ICCR on its part has established a smooth coordination process with all 
the Territorial Divisions. During BE 2016-17, the budgetary allocation has been enhanced to 
Rs. 215.80 crores. The delays related to the release of agency funds were 
addressedthroughregular meetings chaired by AS (FA) with the Territorial Divisions and 
ICCR representatives. This helpe d facilitate the smooth release of the agency funds , as a 
result of which the ICCR has shown improvement in its expenditure  profilefor thefinancial 
year 2016-17. However, while Rs. 215.80 crores was allocated, the allocation was brought 
down to Rs.185.37 at RE stage, whereas ICCR‟s total annual expenditure was Rs.193.37 
crores (subject to reconciliation and audit). The MEA has allocated Rs.233.14 crores to 
ICCR for financial year 2017 -18. ICCR has also put in various systems in place for 

7 
 
streamlining the financial management within ICCR , and  is working with the MEA to 
revamp its institutional capacity to utili se the enhanced budget. A proposal for the creation 
of additional relevant posts and recruitment is also under process.  The ICCR has also 
initiated the use of technology to further streamline and improv e its  financial discipline  
through the following: 
 
a) Since expenditure incurred at ICCR‟s Regional Offices and Culture Centre are not 
tracked in MEA‟s IMAS, ICCR is developing its own independent Integrated  
Accounting System in order to monitor releases, expenditure and accounting in real 
time. 
b) ICCR has developed a Scholarship Portal to track processes involved and 
expenditure incurred from the first step of Admission till a student finish es his/her 
course i n India. A portal called “ICCR Scholarship Admissions to Alumni (A2A) 
Portal” will address the collection of Utili sation Certificates online, which would 
assist in the timely submission of the same to Agencies in order to process releases at 
their end. 
c) A total of nine ICCR programmes have been identified foron boarding through the 
Direct Benefit Transfer portal, which tracks details of beneficiaries under these nine 
schemes and monitors fund transfers through electronic systems. 
d) All payments are now made electronically.  
 
13. In view of the fact that the ICCR is the nodal organization for the projection of 
India’s soft power abroad , the Committee had expressed concern over inadequate 
budgetary support granted to the organization. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the Government suff iciently enhance s ICCR’s budget. 
Simultaneously, ICCR had been exhorted to  ramp up its institutional capacity to 
utilise the budget. In its reply, the Ministry has stated that the Finance Division of 
MEA is ta king requisite action  but no substantial change has been reported in the 
actual budgetary situation. It is disconcerting to note that the BE allocation of Rs. 
215.80 crore for 2016 -17 was brought down to Rs. 18 5.37 crore at RE stage and MEA 
has allocated only Rs. 233.14 crore to ICCR for financial year 2017-18. The Committee 

8 
 
opine that such a miniscule increase is not going to make any substantial change in the 
ICCR’s budgetary profile and its ability to fulfill its expanding mandate. Hence, the 
Committee would once again like to impress upon MEA the need to provide adequate 
budgetary support to the ICCR and to enhance its institutional capacity. Without such 
measures, the cause of India’s soft power diplomacy will continue to suffer.  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Human Resources Management in ICCR 
14. The Committee had noted that t he ICCR was facing massive shortages in manpower 
and clubbed with inadequate budgetary support, the organization‟s role and work was hugely 
limited. The Committee were surprised to note that seats were lying vacant both at the level of 
the headquarters and field offices -- against three posts of Deputy Directors General (DDGs), 
that time only one post was occupied. All the three posts of Directors were vacant. Similarl y, 
against 251 sanctioned posts of ICCR cadre at various levels, only 178 posts covering the 
Headquarters (HQ) in Delhi, Regional Offices (ROs) and Indian Cultural Centers (ICCs) 
abroad were filled. Even the ICCR ‟s engagement of  96 personnel at various lev els in the 
organisation as outsourced support as well as an additional 8 consultants  proved to be 
inadequate. It was ironic to the Committee  that at a time when the ICCR had  embarked upon 
an expanded mandate, it remained handicapped in terms of manpower. It was the Committee‟s 
contention that without adequate human resources, the demands of the ICCR for enhanced 
budget will not be adeq uately justified. It was concerning to the Committee to learn that 
despite the Finance Ministry‟s sanctioning of 44 posts for  the ICCR, th ose posts could not be 
filled as the Council did not have its recruitment rules in place. The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that the ICCR should expedite steps to fill its existing vacant posts and only 
thereafter seek sanction for more posts from the Finance Ministry.  
 
The Committee had urged the ICCR to take exceptional care in ensuring that the  
necessary processes were in place to select and appoint the  most appropriate candidates to 
head its cultural centers overseas. To the Committee, the candidate‟s ability to connect with 
the countries in which they are located was imperative. 
 

9 
 
The Committee was aware that given the nature of work in the ICCR , a successful 
candidate must possess a strong understanding and passion for  Indian culture, as well as a 
strong suite of organization and communication skills . As such, the Committee desired that i t 
should be ensured that not only were the most eligible candidates selected to various posts, but 
that they were also given the right orientation and training to handle their work responsibly and 
productively. The Committee had also recommend ed that the ICCR should set up a search 
panel to suggest names of eminent persons from various fields of culture who were eligible to 
fill the vacant seats of Directors at ICCs.  
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that  the 
Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. To apprise the Committee presently , ICCR and 
Administration Division of MEA are working together towards strengthening ICCR‟s 
manpower situation. Following steps have been taken so far: 
 
a) MEA has ensured deputing a Senior IFS officer to the post of Director General, who 
will be responsible to  take the new vision forward and streamlin e the necessary  
processes in coordination with the MEA. 
b) The post of one more DDG was filled in January 2017, which was lying vacant since 
September 2015. 
c) Senior DPC was conducted and ICCR officers were promoted to Director level, 
thereby ensuring that posts of Directors are filled. 
d) Action has been initiated to fill 38 vacancies in ICCR cadre by Direct Recruitment at 
staff level through various recruitment agencies.  
e) The Committee‟s recommendation with regard to fill ing the posts of Directors at 
Indian Culture Centres has been taken seriously. Search Committee was set up for 
selection of eminent persons from various fields of culture for filling the posts of 
Directors at ICCs. Selection is being done in two phases. Candidates selected in the 
first round are in the process of being deployed to those ICCs where the post has 
been lying vacant for a longer period of time. 
f) ICCR has submitted a proposal for the creation of 200 new posts to strengthen 
ICCR‟s structure at different levels.  

10 
 
g) The possibilities for s trengthening the Regional Offices by raising the level of 
Regional Directors and supplementing their roles with more staff are currently being 
studied. 
h) Training for existing ICCR personnel with FSI has been planned. 
 
16. While noting the massive shortages in manpower faced by ICCR, the 
Committee had recommended expedit ious steps to fill the  vacant posts in the 
organization. Towards this end the Ministry has replied that it has initiated action to 
strengthen ICCR’s manpower situation by ensuring the placement of a Senior IFS 
Officer at the post of DG, posting of one DDG and promotion at Direc tor level. Some 
initiatives have been taken to fill 38 vacancies in ICCR cadre by direct recruitment at 
staff level  through various recruitment agencies but no timeline has been mentioned 
for this recruitment drive and also for filling the posts of Directors of ICCs. As such, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the current status of the recruitment 
process at staff level, as well as for the selection of Directors for ICCs. Simultaneously, 
the Committee should also be informed about the status of c reation of the 200 new 
posts mentioned in the Action Taken Reply, for which, again, no timelines have been 
mentioned by either ICCR or the MEA. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Safety issues of African students in India 
17. The Committee had noted that t he ICCR provided 24 scholarships annually in 
various fields to students from various parts of the world for graduate, postgraduate, 
doctoral and post -doctoral courses. Out of th ose, 8 scholarships were funded through its 
own budget and 16 scholarship schemes were being managed by the ICCR under funding 
from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of AYUSH. The Committee ha d also 
noted that this growing agency work (for administering scholarship schemes) and untimely 
release of funds for implementing the s ame was an important factor in crippling the ICCR. 
The Committee was distressed to note that in the past few years, funds spent by the ICCR on 
agency work were reimbursed in the following Financial Year. However, that was made part 
of ICCR‟s budget allocation for the next FY and not reimbursed as an additional amount 
that was spent. The Committee d id not approve of such an approach on the part of the 

11 
 
Ministries concerned as they add ed to the financial woes of an alread y funds-starved ICCR. 
The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Ministry of External Affairs should abide by 
the view taken by the Foreign Secretary regarding advance payment of 75 percent of the 
money to the ICCR on account of Agency work. The Commit tee had also desired that other 
Ministries should accept the same arrangement as a pre-condition to any agency work.  
 
Given the large financial outlay under its scholarship programme and its long -term 
impact on India‟s soft power, the Committee was of the opinion that special attention should 
be paid to the welfare and well being of foreign scholars while they are in India. Incidents 
like the one that took place in Noida, involving an attack on African students, should not be 
allowed to be repeated by faci litating better coordination with the concerned State 
Governments. It was also held imperative that the culprits behind these attacks should be 
brought to book.  
 
By virtue of awarding scholarships to a wide array of foreign students, the ICCR has 
managed to create a pool of scholars around the world, many of whom have distinguished 
themselves in various walks of life. The Committee had opined that those individuals could 
prove to be long term assets in promoting our image abroad as India‟s de facto cultura l 
brand ambassadors in their own countries. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that 
the work related to the establishment of an ICCR Alumni Groups should be expedited and a 
status report in that regard be furnished to the Committee.  
 
18. The Minist ry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that  the 
Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. The Committee has been informed that since the 
past three years , several steps have been taken to streamline the entire Scholarship 
Programme. Some of the steps worth mentioning include: 
 
a) Streamlining of the fee structures for colleges and institutes under State and Central 
Universities vis-à-vis ICCR‟s Scholarship. 
b) On recommendation of the three-member committee chaired by Prof Sunaina Singh, 
VC Nalanda University , the  screening and empanelment of good quality institutes 

12 
 
(on the basis of various criteria – educational facilities, courses, faculty, residential 
facilities...) is currently underway. Th is exercise will help weed out poor quality 
institutes/colleges and empanel those faring better on the pre-defined criteria instead. 
c) Guidelines for implementing the Scholarship Programme have been revisited and 
collated. 
d) ICCR and MEA‟s Finance Division are closely working with the Territorial 
Divisions with regard to the timely release of agency funds for  the execution of the 
Agency‟s Scholarship programme. There has been some improvement.  
e) The e ntire management of the Scholarship Programme would henceforth be on a 
digitized platform, connecting the Applicant, Missions, Territorial Divisions, 
Finance Division, ICCR Head Quarter (Delhi) and ICCR‟s Regional Offices through 
theA2A (Admissions to Alumni) ICCR Scholarship Portal , which has been 
developed for this purpose. The Portal is proposed to be launched by September 
2017. The Scholarship Portal would also address aspects related to financial 
management with Regional Offices and Territorial Divisions.  
 
19. The Committee had spe cifically observed the anomalies in payments made by 
ICCR  on account of Agency Work and asked about the provision of advance payment 
of 75 percent of the money to ICCR for such work but the Ministry has only 
mentioned about some improvements and not respo nded to this suggestion of the 
Committee which was also in consonance with the views of the Foreign Secretary in 
this regard. Similarly, the Ministry has also omitted any response to the  concern of the 
Committee over the incidents of attacks on African students and action taken towards 
the welfare and well being of foreign scholars studying in India. Incidents of this kind  
not only sully the image of India abroad,  but they also have a tendency to neutrali se 
whatever little relative advantage we have in the African R egion for cultural 
diplomacy. In this situation, the Committee note with concern that sporadic incidents 
of violence against students from Africa have occurred in various parts of the country. 
The Committee would, therefore, reiterate that sufficient steps should be taken by the 
Government to ensure safety and security of African students in coordination with 
concerned State Governments. In addition, the Committee should also be informed 

13 
 
about the initiat ives taken by the Ministry to resolve the issue of reimbursement of 
payments made by ICCR for Agency Work for administering scholarship schemes. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) 
 
20.  The Committee had noted that in order to promote the awareness and appreciation of 
India‟s rich cultural heritage abroad, the ICCR currently operates 37 Indian Cultural Centres 
(ICCs) across the globe. The ICCs are a principal instrument of India‟s institutional cultural 
outreach abroad and project our s oft power in a wide number of ways. These Centres are 
located in countries where we have significant strategic, economic, political and cultural 
interests, as also countries with large communities of Indian origin. The Committee was 
surprised to note that despite these parameters in place , we still do not have a Cultural 
Centre in the ent ire Gulf Region. The Committee had therefore, recommend ed that a 
Cultural Centre should be opened in the Gulf in view of India‟s strong and sustained 
strategic and cultural  ties with the region. The Committee had also recommend ed that 
stalled projects in Washington, Paris and Hanoi should be executed without further delay. 
While the Committee fully underst ood that acquiring Government property abroad was a 
complicated exercise involving legal and extra -legal factors, the type of inordinate delay as 
in Washington could not be countenanced. The Committee had felt that i t should, therefore, 
be ensured that a mechanism is established so that such delays do not hamper future 
projects.  
 
It had been stated that the ICCR is currently exploring the possibility of establishing 
Regional Cultural Centres abroad in select cities which could cover a group of countries in 
the region instead of any single country alone. The Committee had asked the ICCR to tread 
with caution in th at regard, given the serious limitations of manpower in the organization. 
So far, human resources have proved to be an issue when it c ame to the ICCs, both in terms 
of quality and quantity. Catering to a wider geograp hic region involving several countries 
and cultures would not be an easy proposition in these circumstances. The Committee had, 
therefore, desire d that such a decision should not be implemented in haste and proper 
consideration should be given to all relev ant factors. The Committee had also desired that 

14 
 
the findings of the Performance Audit of the ICCs should be communicated to the 
Committee at the action taken stage.  
 
21. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated that the policy 
decision to acquire / construct Indian Culture Centres abroad lies with ICCR. Once the 
decision is taken and conveyed to the Global Estate Management (GEM) Division of the 
Ministry of External Affairs, the project preparation begins with selection of  property on the 
basis of requirements projected by ICCR, in consultation with the concerned Mission / Post.  
After following all necessary steps, the Centre is handed over to ICCR / Mission or Post 
abroad, on its completion. Culture Centre in Hanoi was in augurated last year and is now 
functional. Works on ICC projects in Washington and Paris are on. ICCR is examining the 
possibility of opening Culture Centre in Gulf in consultation with the Missions and t he 
relevnt Territorial Division. The Committee‟s recommendation that the ICCR may exercise 
caution with regard to opening Regional Culture Centres has been taken note of and 
accepted. 
 
22. On the basis of the role played and vital functions performed by the Indian 
Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad, the Committ ee had inter-alia recommended to open 
one such Centre in the Gulf and to expedite the work in the Cultural Centres at 
Washington, Paris and Hanoi. The Committee  are pleased to note that the Cultural 
Centre in Hanoi has finally been made functional and hope s that the Ministry will 
draw from its experience from this project’s completion to expedite the ICC projects 
in Washington and Paris. The Committee  are constrained to note that even after the 
lapse of one year since the presentation of the Report, the Ministry is still dilly-dallying 
on the issue of opening a Cultural Centre in the Gulf. It is frustrating for the 
Committee to note that despite making a clear case for the opening of such a Centre on 
account of the region’s rich cultural ties with India and significant diaspora presence, 
and with all necessary parameters having been met, the Ministry is still at the stage of 
examining the possibility of opening  a C ultural Centre in the Gulf. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry take immediate steps in the matter to expedite the 
project. 

15 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Empanelment of Artists 
23. The Committee had noted that sending Indian Cultural troupes outside the country is 
an important part of the activities of the ICCR. These troupes perform in countries across 
the world and such performances play a significant role in projecting our soft power. It was, 
therefore, important that artists of quality and distinction in any art form should be given 
opportunities to showcase their tal ent overseas. The Committee had  observed during visits 
to Regional Offices of the ICCR that empanelment of artists was often not guided by a 
pronounced policy, particularly in terms of the inclusion of unique art and dance forms on 
the verge of extinction. It was also noted that a large number of empanelment applications 
were pending both at the level of the Regional Offices (ROs) and the Headquarters. Such a 
trend wa s not reassuring for  our long term soft power ambitions and therefore, the 
Committee had desired that all matters related to the empanelment of artists should be 
resolved expeditiously and the entire system made more transparent. The Co mmittee had 
also recommended that a performance audit of the functioning of ICCR‟s Regional Offices 
(ROs) should be undertaken by the Ministry urgently in order to ensure that the quality of 
the artists who get empanelled and seek to perform outside India is of the highest order.  
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that  the 
Recommendation of Committee was noted and action has been taken on the same.  ICCR 
carried out empanelment process in January and February 2017 wh erein the experts ‟ 
committees screened all the pending applications for empanelment. It was decided that the 
second round of empanelment will be conducted soon. ICCR is currently in the process of 
reviewing its empanelment policy to include more genres,  as well as  younger and new er 
artists who are received more enthusiastically by foreign audience s. ICCR is also in the 
process of empanelling the choreographers who would be able to produce choreographies 
and productions based on contextual demands overseas. 
 
25. While observing the unsatisfactory state of affairs in the ICCR ’s handling of 
empanelment related matters, the Committee had recommended e xpeditious 
resolution of the matter  and emphasized the need to make the procedure more 

16 
 
transparent. On the basis of the reply furnished by the Ministry, it seems that all the 
pending applications for empanelment have been screened but no mention has been 
made about the policy opted for empanelment, nor on the number of empanelments 
made from each region. The Committe e should be apprised about the outcome of the 
screening. The Committee consider it important to emphasize that proper 
empanelment is the first step towards showcasing our rich cultural legacy abroad. As it 
is intrinsically related to soft power diplomacy, the Committee restate their desire that 
the Ministry should publish a transparent policy regarding the empanelment of artists 
at the earliest. In addition, it should also be ensured that  a consultation with the artist 
fraternity is organized before any such policy is finalized. 
  
Finally, it is a matter of regret for the Committee to note that the Ministry has 
failed to respond to their recommendation on the need for performance audit of the 
functioning of ICCR’s Regional Offices. It is perplexing that the Ministry has omitted 
any mention in its response to such an impor tant part of the recommendation. As has 
been noted earlier in this report as well, the Committee, while regretting this lack of 
response on the part of the Ministry, desire  that it should be ensured in future that the 
Ministry furnishes only complete and comprehensive replies.  
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Imperative for diversifying tools of cultural diplomacy 
26. The Committee had noted that cultural diplomacy should also embrace the culture of 
ideas, showcase India‟s democracy and diversity and avoid being seen as propaganda. For 
that reason it was held imperative that speakers and experts from a wide range of 
backgrounds and disciplines be identified to be sent abroad to address foreign audienc es, 
thereby showcasing India‟s pluralism and freedom of expression, including freedom of the 
press. In addition to music and dance, India‟s soft power should also embrace the attraction 
of words and ideas, including contemporary and classical literature, t hereby projecting India 
to those wishing to know more in depth about the country and its culture.  
 

17 
 
27. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that  the 
recommendation is noted. Most of the matters related to literature are handled by the 
Ministry of Culture and the XP Division of MEA. 
 
28. The Committee had recommended that the repertoire of India’s soft power 
should be further widened by including dedicated speakers and by diversifying the 
themes so as to include India’s pluralism, freedom of expression, freedom of press and 
also contemporary and classical literature. It is disappointing that the Ministry has not 
initiated any action on this recommendation besides noting it and adding that most of 
the matters related to li terature are handled by the Ministry of Culture and XP 
Division of MEA. It was imperative that while furnishing the reply, the concerned 
Ministry/Division should have been consulted. The entire purpose of Action Taken 
Replies is defeated when they do not e nunciate any action taken. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should forward this matter to the other Ministry 
and Division referred to and resubmit a consolidated reply on the action taken on the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Role of diaspora in Soft Power 
29. The Committee had noted that t he Diaspora is an indispensable partner in promoting 
our country‟s soft power. We are fortunate to have a large diaspora across the globe that has 
preserved Indian customs as living traditions. As per the Ministry, the ICCR has encouraged 
its Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) and our Missions abroad to actively engage with the 
diaspora, which has emerged as a focal point during recent high l evel foreign visits. It wa s, 
therefore, imperative that India‟s soft power is projected through these communities. The 
reach of the diaspora is not only wide in terms of its geographic coverage, but also in terms 
of its influence in the economy and society of host countries. The Ministry has bee n 
partnering with established cultural and academic institutions of the diaspora with scholars, 
eminent Indians, professionals and experts. It had appeared  to the Committee that such 
programmes we re largely driven by the initiative of the local Mission or the particular 
Indian Cultural Centre . Therefore, the Committee had  recommended that instead of this 
short-term, ad-hoc approach, the Ministry of External Affairs should develop a blueprint for 

18 
 
engaging meaningfully with the Diaspora in leveraging our soft  power abroad through a 
broader and more systematic policy.  
 
In addition, the Committee had also found that the Gulf Region is not only important 
to India from an economic and strategic perspective, but also as home to a large number of 
Indians, especiall y migrant workers. Unlike other regions of the world where the Indian 
diaspora has cultivated considerable clout, the position of migrant workers in the West and 
the Gulf is not strong. This requires better collaboration and coordination in all possible 
ways as they may be the best messengers of India‟s soft power in that part of the world. The 
Committee therefore, consider ed it essential that special focus should be laid on 
disseminating soft power under the „Link West‟ policy through the diaspora in that region.  
 
30. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply , has stated that the report 
is factually correct from the OIA -1 Division‟s perspective.  It is apprised that the Indian 
Missions and Posts in the Gulf region are pro -actively engaged in the projection of India‟s 
soft power in countries of the region through various initiatives including in the promotion 
of Indian culture, “Make in India ” initiatives etc. in close collaboration with the resident 
Indian community and local chambers of business and industry. Furthermore, there are 
specific Diaspora Engagement Programmes such as Know India Programme, Study India 
Programme etc. to familiarize those interested with Indian art and culture, heritage, history, 
economy and overall development. 
 
  The overseas Indian community is growing and stands at nearly 31.25 million 
overseas Indians living abroad – 13.4 million NRIs and 17.85 million Persons of  Indian 
Origin. They are settled in virtually every corner of the world and every country. In recent 
years, the Indian community abroad has also moved to new destinations outside India, and 
into new professions and fields. Wherever they are, Indians migrat ing abroad have taken 
with them the essence of India, its culture, cuisine, healing powers of Yoga and Ayurveda, 
the beats of Bollywood, all of which continue to have a deep impact on the local landscape 
which they live in. Indian migrant workers, students  and professionals abroad are, therefore, 
integral elements of India‟s soft power.  

19 
 
   
The Indian diaspora, especially in developed countries in the Western hemisphere 
and in South East Asia , have risen to positions of power and influence in various sphere s of 
life – politics; business; science & technology; R&D; the arts and culture; etc. They are 
making their voiced heard, and they speak up for India, on issues of concern to the country 
of their origin. Recognising their contributions in foreign countries , not just to their local 
economies, but also in promoting a positive image about India, the Ministry is now engaging 
with the Diaspora in a more sustained and regular manner, especially on issues which are of 
significance to the Government. The 10 Pravasi  Bharatiya Divas Conferences initiated in 
2016 provided platforms on which domain experts among the Diaspora could engage 
directly with policymakers and stakeholders in India. Similarly , the Indian Missions abroad 
are also engaging with the Diaspora in a m ore regular manner, seeking their insights, 
suggestions and discussing their problems. Through these regular dialogue mechanisms, the 
Government is also able to leverage the Indian Diaspora on issues of concern to us.  
   
At the same time, the young Indian Diaspora is of special significance in the context 
of soft power. The Ministry is engaging with the young overseas Indian community through 
programs such as the Know India Programme, the Bharat Ko Janiye  Quiz and the 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Chi ldren. The Ministry has also launched pages and 
groups on social media platforms, especially Facebook, to connect with various young 
Indian Diaspora members worldwide.  
   
The Ministry has noted the Committee‟s comment that efforts to engage with Indian 
diaspora are largely driven by the Indian Missions/Consulates or the Indian Cultural Centres. 
The Ministry would like to comment that since the Indian Missions, Consulates and Cultural 
Centres, are extensions of the Ministry itself, these are the best and m ost appropriate 
platforms through which we can leverage our soft power abroad. At the same time, the 
Missions/Consulates are working closely with other stakeholders such as the Indian 
community organizations; local Municipalities and foreign Governments; c orporate sector; 
universities; Indian student bodies; organizations promoting Indian culture and heritage, to 
promote India‟s culture abroad. By doing so, the Ministry and Missions are able to maximize 

20 
 
the resources at hand and ensure that our efforts to l everage soft power are more sustainable 
in the long run.  
 
 The Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards conferred by the Government on overseas 
Indians, recognizing their achievements in various fields, including art and culture, also 
serve the purpose of motivating the Diaspora to continue their efforts in cultural promotion.  
 
31. The Committee had noted that the diaspora is an indispensible partner in 
promoting India’s soft power but it has not been adequately leveraged so far for want 
of necessary thrust and planning. Therefore, the Committee had recommended 
drawing up a blueprint for engaging meaningfully with the diaspora. In its reply, the 
Ministry has enumerated various steps taken to engage with Indian diaspora where the 
major role appears to be played by the concerned Indian missions/consulates or the 
Indian Cultural Centres . The Committee also understand  that these are extensions of 
the MEA and the associated implementing agencies, but wants to emphasize that the 
basic thrust and direction ought to be given by the Ministry itself. At present, the 
Ministry’s efforts of projecting India’s soft power appear to be inadequate. It is in this 
context that the Committee had recommended that the Ministry  draw up a blueprint 
in this direction. This blueprint will envisage different thrust areas for different 
parts/countries of the world , incorporating the varying profiles of the diaspora. Then 
this blueprint can be adequately implemented at the level of the respective 
Missions/Posts. Only such a nuanced understanding of our intervention requirements 
will translate into concrete results i nvolving the influence of our diaspora. The 
Committee would, therefore, reiterate that such a blueprint for engaging meaningfully 
with the diaspora should be formulated by the Ministry at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
 The Committee observe that apart from using conventional means of soft power in the 
form of culture and heritage, India has started importing new elements into its repertoire of 
soft power. It is an articulation of the Ministry‟s conceptualization of India n culture as a 
dynamic concept. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has been trying to go 
beyond Nye‟s formulation of soft power by shifting focus from the „tools‟ in hand to 
„approaches and methods‟ of using soft power. The Government‟s in itiative to showcase 
India‟s soft power to the world by successfully organizing the International Yoga Day on 21st 
June across the globe was an expression of this approach. Such an approach will definitely go 
a long way in stamping India‟s enduring image i n the minds of people across continents. With 
the changing nature of global engagements, the manner in which we present our image 
overseas should also be flexible.  
 
 But in order to achieve this, a great deal of ground work will need to be done and a 
mere change in phraseology will not be adequate. It is informed that at present, on an average, 
only 60 Missions are sending Annual Action Plans to the ICCR. In the Commit tee‟s opinion, 
this is a major handicap in adequate planning and in the leveraging of our soft power 
resources. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that in order to mainstream soft 
power projections, each Mission should necessarily submit its Annual Plan to the ICCR and 
soft power projections should be a definitive agenda item at annual HoMs/Regional HoMs 
Conferences.  
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has considered Development Partnerships as an 
effective means to project soft power. But in a nu mber of cases, while announcements are 
made at the highest levels, funds are not available in time. The Committee in earlier Reports 
had expressed anguish over such delays in disbursals, in project execution and in the lack of 
effective monitoring, and her e again the Committee would strongly reason that Development 

22 
 
Partnerships should be handled carefully because they have the potential to create a favourable 
image of India overseas.  
 
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that these partnerships should be handled 
with utmost diligence along with the expeditious release of funds for the equally expeditious 
execution of projects.  
 
The Committee also recommend that India being the birthplace of Mahatma Gandhi, 
we should propagate his values and philosophy through embassies in all parts of the world in a 
sustainable manner in the long term. In a world divided by strife and conflict, the path of non -
violence and peace lit by Mahatma Gandhi decades ago could awaken nations around the 
globe to India‟s message once again. In addition, Gandhian values of environmental 
consciousness, “small is beautiful” and moral living have once again become relevant to global 
public discourse. There could be no better time to revive interest in the Father of our Nation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. In this recommendation the action points 
are recognized for three Divisions of the Ministry.  
 
a) Annual Action Plan : It is apprised that as far as Annual Action Plans for Soft Power 
Project is concerned, ICCR has initiated the action with the Missions. ( Action by 
ICCR). 
 
b) HoMs/Regional HoMs Conferences: Soft Power Projection has been made a mandatory 
agenda item for discussions at annual HOMs/ Regional HOMs Conference wherein 
various Divisions involved in the process participate and brainstorm. ( Action by ICCR, 
Administration, XP and ED Division) 
 
c) Development Partnership: Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. The main focus 
of development assistance has been the countries in our neighbourhood, S outh-East 
Asia and Africa. India is also expanding its development assistance reach to distant 
areas as the Caribbean, Latin America, Mongolia, Pacific Island Countries, etc. The 

23 
 
main instruments of India‟s development assistance include Infrastructure and  
Development projects, Technical Consultancy, Disaster Relief and Humanitarian aid, 
as well as capacity-building programmes for civilian and military training under Indian 
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC). Implementing development 
projects abroad sometimes witness challenges, including  political uncertainty, security 
concerns, unpredictable site conditions, delays in land acquisition, statutory approvals, 
lack of  skilled manpower;  frequent changes in scope of work , etc. In order to av oid 
delays in implementation of projects, several steps including close 
supervision/monitoring of work by the project management consultants; regular review 
through multiple monitoring mechanisms, including review committee, bilateral 
working committee etc ., facilitation of clearances, approvals and security by Host 
Governments as well as coordination of implementation are being taken. These 
mechanisms would be further strengthened.  
 
d) Values of Mahtma Gandhi : ICCR accepts Committee‟s recommendation to propagate 
values of Mahatma Gandhi through embassies in a suitable manner.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
 The ICCR is the nodal organization for the projection of India‟s soft power abroad, and 
ever since its establishment in 1950, it has emerged as the principal governmental organization 
for our cultural engagement with the world and for promoting our culture  in all its 
magnificence through various activities. The Committee are, however, disappointed to note 
that budgetary support granted to the ICCR has not been adequate. A budget of Rs. 192 crores 
has been allocated to ICCR in BE 2015 -16, a sum that was reta ined at the same level in RE 
2015-16. During BE 2016 -17, the budgetary allocation has been enhanced to Rs. 215.80 
crores. Despite an increase of 12.40%, the amount is still insufficient if the allocation is 
compared to the other Government supported organi zations world over which are engaged in 
the dissemination of culture for their respective countries. By the Ministry‟s own admission, 
ICCR is being forced to resort to juggle its limited resources to make do with the meagre 

24 
 
budget and it will notionally re quire at least Rs. 500 crore to help it meet its expanding 
mandate. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the budget of the ICCR should be 
sufficiently increased as such a move will go a long way in assisting us in leveraging our 
country‟s soft power and all its vast potential.  
 
The Committee have also noted that during the budget exercise, the gap between RE 
demand and allocation is not much. It points to the fact that at present there is no institutional 
capacity within the ICCR for ingesting huge fun ds. Such a situation does not sit well with the 
continuous (and necessary) demands for enhanced budgetary allocations. The Committee 
would therefore, recommend that in the interests of more realistic planning, the ICCR should 
also ramp up its institutional  capacity to utilise in the best possible manner any enhanced 
allocation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Recommendation of the Committee is accepted and action is being taken by the 
Finance Division of MEA. ICCR on its part has established smooth coordination with all the 
Territorial Divisions. During BE 2016 -17, the budgetary allocation has been enhanced to Rs. 
215.80 crores. The delays in release of agency funds were addresses by regular meetings 
chaired by AS FA) with the territorial Divisions a nd ICCR. This helped in getting the agency 
funds released in time as a result ICCR has shown improvement in its expenditure in financial 
year 2016-17. Though Rs. 215.80 crores was allocated, however the allocation was brought 
down to Rs.185.37 at RE stage,  whereas ICCR‟s total annual expenditure was Rs.193.37 
crores (subject to reconciliation and audit). MEA has allocated Rs.233.14 crores to ICCR for 
financial year 2017 -18. ICCR has also put in various systems in place for streamlining the 
financial management within ICCR. ICCR is working with MEA to revamp its institutional 
capacity to utilize the enhanced budget. Proposal for creation of posts and recruitment is under 
process. ICCR has also initiated use of technology in streamlining and improving financia l 
discipline:  
 

25 
 
e) Since expenditure incurred at ICCR‟s Regional Offices and Culture Centre are not 
tracked in MEA‟s IMAS, ICCR is developing its independent Integrated Accounting 
System in order to monitor releases, expenditure and accounting in real time. 
 
f) ICCR has developed a Scholarship Portal to track processes involved and expenditure 
incurred from the first step of Admission till a student finish his/her course in India. A 
portal called ICCR Scholarship Admissions to Alumni (A2A) Portal will address 
collection of Utilization Certificates online, which would assist in timely submission of 
the same to Agencies in order to process releases at their end. 
 
g) A total of nine ICCR programmes have been identified to be onboarded on Direct 
Benefit Transfer portal, which tracks details of beneficiaries under various these nine 
schemes and monitor fund transfers through electronic systems. 
 
h) All payments made electronically.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
The Committee are aware of budgetary constraints faced by the ICCR and its crippling 
effect on desired outcomes. It is, therefore, imperative that some fresh thinking outside the box 
should be invested in making the programmes of the ICCR financially susta inable. Across the 
world, the trend has been for Governments to withdraw from direct spending on culture. The 
Committee are pleased to note that ICCR has started entering into Public Private Partnerships 
(PPP) in some of our Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) to address resource and manpower 
crunches. The Committee desire that the ICCR should enter into institutional partnerships with 
reputed and select cultural organizations from across the world in order to avail of reciprocal 
arrangements related to hosting of troupes and programmes. Such partnerships would go a 
long way in easing the logistics of the ICCR in the face of growing budgetary cuts.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. ICCR is expanding the scope of including 
more partners for delivering its mandate. The partnerships vary from counterpart foreign 

26 
 
organizations to State Governments in India, other line Ministries, related autonomous  bodies, 
think tanks, Universities in India and overseas. Partnerships are being utilised for: 
 
a) Running the Culture Centres overseas. 
b) Sharing the cost of Indian Studies Chairs (With Universities overseas) 
c) Executing the Programme (Festivals, Conferences, Seminars…) 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
 Cultural diplomacy should also embrace the culture of ideas, showcase India‟s 
democracy and diversity and avoid being seen as propaganda. For this reason it is 
imperative that speakers and experts from a wide range of backgrounds and disciplines be 
identified to be sent abroad to address foreign audiences, thereby showcasing India‟s 
pluralism and freedom of expression, including freedom of the press. In addition to music 
and dance, India‟s soft power should also embrace the attraction of words and ideas, 
including contemporary and classical literature, thereby projecting India to those wishing to 
know more in depth about the country and its culture.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendation is noted. Most of the matters related to literature are handled by t he 
Ministry of Culture and the XP Division of MEA. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
 The Committee understand that culture is a wide field that encompasses a number of 
Ministries/Departments. In such a scenario it is inevitable that the mandate of one organization 
will overlap with that of another. At least in the field of culture it is al most impossible to 
conceive a water tight compartmentalization of responsibilities between the ICCR/MEA and 
other line Ministries. On various aspects related to culture the MEA/ICCR must work with the 
Ministries of Culture, Tourism, Human Resource Development, AYUSH etc. For example, the 
Ministry of Culture‟s primary mandate in terms of bilateral cultural relations is in the context 

27 
 
of formulating Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEPs) with countries abroad and ensuring its 
implementation with the help of vari ous implementing agencies (ICCR being one of them). 
While the Committee agree with the Ministry‟s contention that duplication should be avoided 
through a clearer definition of roles, at times it becomes difficult to define them in isolation 
with one other. During oral deposition the Foreign Secretary admitted that despite coordinated 
efforts among Ministries where the DG, ICCR and Secretary, Culture meet and discuss issues, 
there remain gaps in coordination. It is imperative that all concerned Ministries fi nd ways to 
work together, particularly in light of limited resources. The Committee would, therefore, 
strongly recommend that much more emphasis be given to the issue of coordination among 
various line Ministries in order to achieve the highest order of fu nctional efficiency, and that a 
Co-ordinating Committee of Ministries dealing with cultural diplomacy be established to meet 
not less than once in two months. A field like Cultural Diplomacy requires that various 
Ministries/Departments do not operate in si los. In order to achieve this, the Committee‟s 
proposal aims to create a fixed mechanism for effective coordination between MEA/ICCR and 
other line Ministries involved in the task of dissemination of culture and goodwill to people 
outside India. All should work together to strengthen the soft power diplomacy of the country.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendation is noted. As has been highlighted in ICCR/MEA‟s responses earlier 
to the Committee, ICCR strongly feels that there should be greater clarity of role amongst the 
Ministries which should be inducted in the “Rules of Business”. It is further informed that: 
a) ICCR has signed MOU with Ministry of Culture and carries out meetings with officers 
of Ministry of Culture from time to time.  
b) ICCR‟s Governing Body chaired by President ICCR comprises of Secretaries (or their 
representatives) from the MEA, Ministry of Culture, Ayush, HRD, Commerce and 
Tourism who together play major role in terms of Soft Power Projection overseas. 
Governing Body meetings are held twice a year to discuss various matters.  
c) It is proposed that a Coordination Committee chaired by Director General, ICCR with 
Joint Secretaries from the Ministries dealing with cultural diplomacy as members is set 
up at functional level, which can meet atleast quarterly. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 

28 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
 
 The Public Diplomacy Division had been merged with the External Publicity Division 
in January, 2014 to form a new entity called External Publicity and Public Diplomacy 
Division. Before the merger, the erstwhile Public Diplomacy Division complemented the 
ICCR in showcasing our soft power resources and in building an understanding and 
appreciation of India‟s foreign policy. Following the merger, the functions of the two 
Divisions have been coalesced to a significant level and the Committee are afraid that the  long 
term requirements of public diplomacy may stand subordinated to the expediency of providing 
a platform for external publicity and responding to the urgent and immediate requirements of 
the news of the day. While being in favour of working towards ach ieving synergy, the 
Committee would specifically recommend that it should be ensured that the matters related to 
public diplomacy are not given short shrift under the new entity. In particular, since the Joint 
Secretary (XP) is bound to be preoccupied prin cipally with urgent matters, a senior official 
should be appointed under him tasked solely with stewardship of India‟s public diplomacy 
activities.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Following the merger of the erstwhile Public Diplomacy Division with the External 
Publicity Division, the post of Director (XPD), was specifically created to steward India‟s 
public diplomacy activities under the overall supervision of Joint Secretary (XP).   Director 
(XPD) is assisted by four Deputy Secretary/Under Secretary level officers in this work, viz., 
OSD (PD), who oversees the work of procurement and distribution of publicity -oriented 
printed material such as books & publication of MEA‟s flagship bi -monthly magazine „India 
Perspectives‟, Under Secretary (PD), who oversees the work of audio -visual publicity, Under 
Secretary (Digital Diplomacy), who oversees the work of digital diplomacy including publicity 
through social media platforms such as Facebo ok, Twitter, Youtube etc., and Under Secretary 
(XP), who looks after the work of other outreach activities such as the „Distinguished Lecture 
Series‟.  
 
 Publicity activities of the External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division mainly fall 
into the following categories: 

29 
 
 
a) Public diplomacy outreach efforts through audio-visual means. 
 
b) Public diplomacy through procurement and commissioning of publicity -oriented books 
and magazines. 
 
c) Publication of the Division‟s flagship bi-monthly magazine „India Perspectives‟ 
 
d) Publicity through digital diplomacy including social media. 
 
e) Public diplomacy through other outreach activities such as „Distinguished Lecture 
Series‟ by retired diplomats/serving officers at the central universities and renowned 
educational institutions of India.  
 
 Ever since the merger of the two Divisions, XPD Division has ensured that the matters 
related to public diplomacy are given utmost importance at all times and the momentum of 
India‟s public diplomacy activities is continued furth er with greater impetus.  An analysis of 
the work output of the unified External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division compared 
with that of the erstwhile Public Diplomacy Division prior to 2014, would present a clearer 
picture in this regard.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
 The Diaspora is an indispensable partner in promoting our country‟s soft power. We 
are fortunate to have a large diaspora across the globe that has preserved Indian customs as 
living traditions. As per the Ministry, the ICCR has encouraged its Indian Cultu ral Centres 
(ICCs) and our Missions abroad to actively engage with the diaspora, which has emerged as a 
focal point during recent high level foreign visits. It is, therefore, imperative that our soft 
power of India is projected through these communities. T he reach of the diaspora is not only 
wide in terms of its geographic coverage, but also in terms of its influence in the economy and 
society of host countries. The Ministry has been partnering with established cultural and 
academic institutions of the diaspora with scholars, eminent Indians, professionals and experts. 
It appears to the Committee that such programmes are largely driven by the initiative of the 
local Mission or the particular Indian Cultural Centre. Therefore, the Committee would 

30 
 
recommend that instead of this short -term approach, the Ministry of External Affairs should 
make a blueprint for engaging meaningfully with the Diaspora in leveraging our soft power 
abroad through a broader and more systematic policy.  
 
The Gulf Region is not only imp ortant to India from economic and strategic 
perspectives, but also as home to a large number of Indians, especially migrant workers. 
Unlike other regions of the world where Diaspora has considerable clout, the position of 
migrant workers in the West and th e Gulf is not strong. This requires better collaboration and 
coordination in all possible ways as they may be the best messengers of India‟s soft power in 
that part of the world. The Committee therefore, consider it essential that special focus should 
be laid on disseminating soft power under the „Link West‟ policy through the diaspora in that 
region.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The report is factually correct from the OIA -1 Division‟s perspective.  It is apprised 
that the Indian Missions and Posts in the Gu lf region are pro-actively engaged in projection of 
India‟s soft power in countries of the region through various initiatives including promotion of 
Indian culture, Make in India initiatives etc. in close collaboration with the resident Indian 
community an d local chambers of business and industry. Furthermore, there are specific 
Diaspora Engagement Programmes such as Know India Programme, Study India Programme 
etc. to familiarise with the art and culture, heritage, history, economy and development of 
India. 
 
  The overseas Indian community is growing and stands at nearly 31.25 million overseas 
Indians living abroad – 13.4 million NRIs and 17.85 million Persons of Indian Origin. They are 
settled in virtually every corner of the world and every country. In recent years, the Indian 
community abroad has also moved to new destinations outside India, and into new professions 
and fields. Wherever they are, Indians migrating abroad have taken with them the essence of 
India, its culture, cuisine, healing powers of Yoga and Ayurveda, the beats of Bollywood, all of 
which continue to have a deep impact on the local landscape which they live in. Indian migrant 
workers, students and professionals abroad are, therefore, integral elements of India‟s soft 
power.  

31 
 
 
  The Indian Dia spora especially in developed countries in the Western hemisphere and 
in South East Asia have also risen to positions of power and influence, in various spheres of 
life – politics; business; science & technology; R&D; the arts and culture; etc. They are making 
their voiced heard, and they speak up for India, on issues of concern to the country of their 
origin.  
 
  The Ministry is engaging with the Diaspora in a more sustained and regular manner, 
especially on issues which are of significance to the Governme nt. The 10 Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas Conferences initiated in 2016 provided platforms on which domain experts among the 
Diaspora could engage directly with policymakers and stakeholders in India. Similarly the 
Indian Missions abroad are also engaging with th e Diaspora in a more regular manner, seeking 
their insights, suggestions and discussing their problems. Through these regular dialogue 
mechanisms, the Government is also able to leverage the Indian Diaspora on issues of concern 
to us.  
 
  The young Indian Diaspora is of special significance in the context of soft power. The 
Ministry is engaging with the young overseas Indian community through programs such as the 
Know India Programme, the Bharat Ko Janiye  Quiz and the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children. We also launched social media platforms, especially Facebook, to connect 
with various young Indian Diaspora members worldwide.  
 
  The Ministry has noted the Committee‟s comment that efforts to eng age with Indian 
Diaspora are largely driven by the Indian Missions/Consulates or the Indian Cultural Centres. 
The Ministry would like to comment that since the Indian Missions, Consulates and Cultural 
Centres, are extensions of the Ministry itself, these a re the best and most appropriate platforms 
through which we can leverage our soft power abroad. At the same time, the 
Missions/Consulates are working closely with other stakeholders such as the Indian community 
organizations; local Municipalities and forei gn Governments; corporate sector; universities; 
Indian student bodies; organizations promoting Indian culture and heritage, to promote India‟s 

32 
 
culture abroad. By doing so, the Ministry and Missions are able to maximize the resources at 
hand and ensure that our efforts to leverage soft power are more sustainable in the long run.  
 
 The Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards conferred by the Government on overseas 
Indians, recognizing their achievements in various fields, including art and culture, also serve 
the purpose of motivating the Diaspora to continue their efforts in cultural promotion.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 (Recommendation No. 6) 
 The ICCR provides 24 scholarships annually in various fields to students from various 
parts of the world for graduate, postgraduate, doctoral and post -doctoral courses. Out of these, 
8 scholarships are funded through its own budget and 16 scholarship schem es are being 
managed by the ICCR under funding from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of 
AYUSH. The Committee have noted that this growing agency work (for administering 
scholarship schemes) and untimely release of funds for implementing th e same is an important 
factor in crippling the ICCR. The Committee are distressed to note that in the past few years, 
funds spent by the ICCR on agency work were reimbursed in the following Financial Year. 
However, this was made part of ICCR‟s budget alloc ation for the next FY and not reimbursed 
as an additional amount that was spent. The Committee do not approve of such an approach on 
the part of the Ministries concerned as they add to the financial woes of an already fund 
starved ICCR. The Committee would , therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs 
abide by the view taken by the Foreign Secretary regarding advance payment of 75 percent of 
the money to the ICCR on account of Agency work. The Committee would also desire that 
other Ministries should accept the same arrangement as a pre-condition to any agency work.  
 
Given the large financial outlay under its scholarship programme and its long term 
impact for India‟s soft power, the Committee are of the opinion that special attention should be 
paid to the welfare and well-being of foreign scholars while they are in India. Incidents like the 
one which took place involving attacks on African students should not be allowed to be 
repeated through better coordination with the concerned State Governments . It is also 
imperative that the culprits behind these attacks should be brought to book.  
 
By virtue of awarding scholarships to a wide array of foreign students, the ICCR has 
managed to create a pool of scholars around the world, many of whom have distin guished 
themselves in various walks of life. In the Committee‟s opinion, these individuals can prove to 

35 
 
be long term assets in promoting our image abroad as India‟s de facto cultural brand 
ambassadors in their own countries. The Committee would, therefore,  recommend that the 
work related to establishment of ICCR Alumni Groups should be expedited and a status report 
in this regard be furnished to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. Committee is informed that since past three 
years several steps have been taken to streamline the entire Scholarship Programme. Some of 
the steps worth mentioning include: 
 
a) Streamlining of fee structures of colleges and institutes under State and Central 
Universities vis-à-vis ICCR‟s Scholarship. 
b) On recommendation of three -member committee chaired by Prof Sunaina Singh, VC 
Nalanda University screening of and empanelment of good quality institutes (on the 
basis of various criteria – educational facilities, courses, faculty, residential facilities...) 
is currently underway. The exercise will undertake weeding of poor quality 
institutes/colleges and empanelling those faring the best on above criteria. 
c) Guidelines for implementing the Scholarship Programme have been revisited and 
collated. 
d) ICCR and MEA‟s Finance Division are closely working with the territorial divisions 
with regard to release of agency funds in time for execution of Agency‟s Scholarship 
programme. There has been some improvement.  
e) Entire management of Scholarship Programme  would henceforth be on a digitized 
platform, connecting the Applicant, Missions, Territorial Divisions, Finance Division, 
ICCR Head Quarter (Delhi) and ICCR‟s Regional Offices on A2A (Admissions to 
Alumni) ICCR Scholarship Portal which has been developed for the purpose. The 
Portal is proposed to be launched by September 2017. Scholarship Portal would also 
address aspects related to financial management with Regional Offices and Territorial 
Divisions.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
 

36 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
  Soft Power is the ability of a country to achieve foreign policy objectives through 
cultural attraction rather than through force, coercion or indeed large deployments of money. 
While culture and history are at the centre of this approach, various politica l, economic and 
technological factors are equally significant. India is endowed with enormous soft power 
resources in the form of a vibrant culture, our art, artefacts, tangible and intangible heritage, 
practices like Yoga, meditation, Indian TV and cinema , information and technology exports, 
our democracy, our pluralism and a thriving diaspora. In spite of having vast soft power 
resources at its disposal, it comes as a matter of regret for the Committee that we have not been 
able to put them to adequate us e in matters of foreign policy. The Committee are aware that 
the Government and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) has made concerted efforts 
to promote India‟s soft power, its values, traditions, literature, languages, philosophy, art forms 
through a variety of mediums including electronic and print publications, live performances 
etc. Through these efforts, the image of India overseas has seen a major overhaul from that of a 
land of snake charmers to one of an emerging knowledge hub and IT super power. Still, there 
are missing links regarding India abroad, and in certain cases there is the prejudice of 
prevailing stereotypes. The Committee find that in all these decades we have been lagging 
behind in cultural diplomacy and this lacuna should be re moved at the earliest. It is widely 
believed that India‟s soft power until now has functioned independently of Government 
policies and the world‟s reckoning of our soft power is by default rather than design. The 
Committee are of the view that the Governme nt has been able to leverage our country‟s soft 
power only in a fragmented way without the backing of a cohesive policy or commensurate 
financial resources. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry formulate a 
comprehensive and well -structured policy delineating India‟s soft power resources and their 
articulation abroad. The Ministry of External Affairs and the ICCR should extensively and in a 
sustained manner employ the resources at their disposal to propagate an image of India that 
augments our natural historical appeal, empowering our diplomacy and foreign policy.  

37 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Committee‟s recommendation, which emerged out of discussions with the Committee 
in two sittings regarding formulating a comprehensive and well -structured policy on India‟s 
Soft Power Projection is accepted. It is apprised that ICCR is working with MEA to draft a 
policy paper on the same.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
  Today the concept of soft power has acquired currency not only in the field of 
academics but also in the field of international relations and diplomacy. Though soft power is 
an intangible component of a State‟s power and it is difficult to measure its definite impact, a 
study could establish the linkages between our soft power and tangible outcomes in the field of 
diplomacy. Such a study could point towards the ways in which India could leverage its soft 
power without such a linkage, soft power will remain a mere non -operational concept in 
India‟s diplomatic d octrine. The Ministry has also conceded that it is worthwhile to explore 
devising an objective method of assessing effectiveness of soft power capabilities and their 
tangible foreign policy outcomes, such as developing a „soft power matrix‟. The Committee 
are of the opinion that soft power, while very useful in itself, is only one possible instrument 
for enhancing our global role, along with appropriate use of hard power, and it should where 
possible be used in conjunction with the latter. The Committee wou ld deem it desirable for the 
Ministry to study the tangible foreign policy outcomes of soft power and to devise, thereafter, 
a blue print for deploying it looking ahead. In itself, soft power carries no currency unless it is 
contextually driven and guided by certain objectives. The Committee would also recommend 
that the Government should come out with a „soft power matrix‟ at the earliest, in order to 
measure the effectiveness of India‟s soft power.  
 
The Ministry states that there is substantial scope for the improvement of India‟s image 
in neighbouring States. Even while fully endorsing the idea that we cannot fix all our problems 

38 
 
with neighbours through soft power engagement alone, the Committee feel  that some amount 
of soft power may be beneficial in improving our relations with our neighbours. Going by 
India‟s „Neighbourhood First‟ policy, the Committee would also recommend that India should 
selectively exercise its soft power in neighbouring states for better diplomatic traction.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Committee‟s recommendation with regard to (i) undertaking a study to establish the 
linkages between our soft power and tangible outcomes in the field of diplomacy and (ii) 
develop “Soft Power Mat rix” to measure outcomes of initiatives undertaken for India‟s Soft 
Power Projection is accepted. ICCR is initiating work on the same.   
 
 As regards „Neighbourhood First‟ policy, Committee‟s recommendation that “India 
should selectively exercise its soft power in neighbouring states for better diplomatic traction” 
is accepted and the same has been shared with concerned Territorial Divisions for further 
action.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The ICCR faces massive shortages in manpower at present and clubbed with 
inadequate budgetary support, the organization‟s role and work is hugely limited. The 
Committee are surprised to note that seats are lying vacant both at the level of the headquarters  
and field offices-- against three posts of Deputy Directors General (DDGs), at present only one 
post is occupied. All the three posts of Directors are vacant. Similarly, against 251 sanctioned 
posts of ICCR cadre at various levels, only 178 posts covering the Headquarters (HQ) in Delhi, 
Regional Offices (ROs) and Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad are filled. Even when the 
ICCR has engaged 96 personnel at various levels as outsourced support and 8 consultants, this 
has proved to be inadequate. It sounds  ironic that at a time when the ICCR has 41 embarked 
upon an expanded mandate, it remains handicapped in terms of manpower. It is the 
Committee‟s contention that without adequate human resources, the demands of the ICCR for 
enhanced budget will not be adeq uately justified. It is not reassuring that when the Finance 
Ministry sanctioned 44 posts for the ICCR, these posts could not be filled as the Council did 

39 
 
not have its recruitment rules in place. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the ICCR 
should exp edite steps to fill already vacant posts and only thereafter seek sanction for more 
post from the Finance Ministry.  
 
The Committee urge the ICCR to take exceptional care in ensuring that the most 
appropriate persons are appointed to head the cultural centres overseas. Their ability to connect 
with the countries in which they are located is imperative. 
 
The Committee are aware that work in the ICCR requires a person‟s ability to handle 
culture and asks for attendant skills and aptitude along with knowledge. It should, therefore, be 
ensured that not only are the most eligible candidates selected to various posts, but also that 
they are given the right orientation and training to handle their work responsibly and 
productively. The Committee also recommend that the ICCR should set up a search panel to 
suggest names of eminent persons from various fields of culture who are eligible to fill the 
vacant seats of Directors at ICCs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Committee‟s recommendation is accepted. To apprise the  Committee presently ICCR 
and Administration Division of MEA are working together towards strengthening ICCR‟s 
Manpower situation. Following steps have been so far ensured: 
 
a) MEA has ensured deputing Senior IFS officer at the post of Director General who 
would take the new vision and streamlining process forward in coordination with the 
MEA. 
b) Post of one more DDG was filled in January 2017, which was lying vacant since 
September 2015. 
c) Senior DPC was conducted and ICCR officers were promoted to Director level, thereby 
ensuring that posts of Directors are filled. 
d) Action has been initiated to fill  38 vacancies in ICCR cadre by Direct Recruitment at 
staff level through various recruitment agencies.  

40 
 
e) Committee‟s recommendation with regard to filling the posts of Di rectors at Indian 
Culture Centres has been taken seriously. Search Committee was set up for selection of 
eminent persons from various fields of culture for filling the posts of Directors at ICCs. 
Selection is being done in two phases. Candidates selected i n the first round are in the 
process of being deployed to the ICCs where post has been vacant for long. 
f) ICCR has submitted proposal for creation of 200 new posts to strengthen ICCR‟s 
structure at different levels.  
g) Strengthening the Regional Offices by raising the level of Regional Directors and 
supplementing with more staff is currently being studied. 
h) Training for existing ICCR personnel with FSI has been planned. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
 In order to promote the awareness and appreciation of India‟s rich cultural heritage 
abroad, the ICCR currently operates 37 Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) across the globe. The 
ICCs are a principal instrument of India‟s institutional cultural outreach abro ad and project our 
soft power in a wide number of ways. These Centres are located in countries where we have 
significant strategic, economic, political and cultural interests as also countries with large 
communities of Indian origin. The Committee is surprised to note that despite these parameters 
in place we still do not have a Cultural Centre in the entire Gulf Region. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a Cultural Centre should be opened in the Gulf in view of India‟s 
strong and sustained strategic and cultural ties with the region. The Committee also 
recommend that stalled projects in Washington, Paris and Hanoi should be executed without 
further delay. While the Committee fully understand that acquiring Government property 
abroad is a complicated e xercise involving legal and extra -legal factors, the type of inordinate 
delay as in Washington cannot be countenanced. It should, therefore, be ensured that a 
mechanism be established so that such delays do not hamper future projects.  
 
It has been stated that the ICCR is currently exploring the possibility of establishing 
Regional Cultural Centres abroad in select cities which could cover a group of countries in the 
region instead of any single country alone. The Committee ask the ICCR to tread with cautio n 
in this regard, given the serious limitations of manpower in the organization. So far, human 

41 
 
resources have proved to be an issue when it comes to the ICCs, both in terms of quality and 
quantity. Catering to a wider geographic region involving several co untries and cultures would 
not be an easy proposition in these circumstances. The Committee would, therefore, desire that 
such a decision should not be implemented in haste and proper consideration should be given 
to all relevant factors. The Committee wou ld also desire that the findings of the Performance 
Audit of the ICCs should be communicated to the Committee at the action taken stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) Policy decision to acquire / construct Indian Culture Centres abroad lies with ICCR. 
Once, the decision is taken and conveyed to the Global Estate Management (GEM) Division of 
the Ministry of External Affairs, the project preparation begins with selection of property on 
the basis of requirements projected by ICCR, in consultation with the concerned Mission / 
Post.  After following all necessary steps, the Centre is handed over to ICCR / Mission or Post 
abroad, on its completion. Culture Centre in Hanoi was inaugurated last year and is now 
functional. Works on ICC projects in Washington and Paris are on. ICCR is examining the 
possibility of opening Culture Centre in Gulf in consultation with the Missions and territorial 
division. Committee‟s recommendation th at ICCR may exercise caution with regard to 
opening Regional Culture Centres has been taken note of and accepted. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
 Sending Indian Cultural troupes outside the country is an important part of the 
activities of the ICCR. These troupes perform in countries across the world and such 
performances play a significant role in projecting our soft power. It is, therefore, important that 
artistes of quality and distinction in any art form should be given opportunities to showcase 
their talent overseas. The Committee have observed during visits to Regional Offices of the 
ICCR that empanelment of artists was often not guided by pron ounced policy, particularly in 
terms of the inclusion of unique art and dance forms on the verge of extinction. It was also 
noted that a large number of empanelment applications were pending both at the level of the 
Regional Offices (ROs) and the Headquarters. Such a trend is not reassuring for long term soft 
power ambitions and therefore, the Committee desire that all matters related to the 

42 
 
empanelment of artists should be resolved expeditiously and the entire system made more 
transparent. The Committee al so recommend that a performance audit of the functioning of 
ICCR‟s Regional Offices (ROs) should be undertaken by the Ministry urgently in order to 
ensure that the quality of the artists who get empanelled and seek to perform outside India is of 
the highest order.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendation of Committee was noted and action has been taken on the same.  
ICCR carried out empanelment process in January and February 2017 wherein the experts 
committees screened all the pending applications for empa nelment. It was decided that the 
second round of empanelment will be conducted soon. ICCR is currently in the process of 
reviewing its empanelment policy to include more genres, younger and new artists who are 
received more enthusiastically by the foreign audience. ICCR is also in the process of 
empanelling the choreographers who would be able to produce choreographies and 
productions based on the contextual demands overseas.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/21/2016] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                   DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                      
3 January, 2018                                                                                Chairperson,                                  
13 Pausa,1939 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
Appendix I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2017-18) HELD ON 3 JANUARY, 2018 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 3 January, 2018 from 16 00 hrs. to 1755 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 3. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 5.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 6. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri P.R. Senthil Nathan 
 9. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 11. Shri Mohd. Salim 
 12. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 13. Smt. Supriya Sule  
 14. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
15. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
16. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy   
17. Dr. Karan Singh 
 Secretariat 
  
 1. Shri P.C Koul    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  

44 
 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on : (i) Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report on the subject „India‟s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora‟ (ii)        XXXXXX    
XXXXXX XXX  
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. The 
Committee adopted the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports on Action 
Taken incorporatin g the suggestions made by the members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
Appendix II 
 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations     13                                                              
              
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  3, 4, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 13. 
  
 Total-07 
Percentage:  53.84% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.     NIL 
Total-00 
 Percentage: 00 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 6 
Total- 01 
 Percentage: 7.69 % 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
 Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos  1, 2, 5, 8 and 9 
                                                 
Total- 05 
Percentage: 38.46% 
 