 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2015-16] 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2015/KARTIKA, 1937 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
9 
 

 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2015-16] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18th November, 2015 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30th November, 2015 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd December, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
            November, 2015/KARTIKA, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-2016)……......        (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..                 (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………….                      1                                                                    
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
  by the Government………………………………......           26 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…                           32 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………..                         33 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………..              36           
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held on 20.10.2015.......                            43                                                         
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs  
(16th Lok Sabha) ......................                   45   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-16) 
 
Sl. No.   Name of Members 
  
 1.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6.  Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.   Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 9.  Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 10.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11.  Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 12.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14.  Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17.  Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18.  Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20.  Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21.  Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 23.  Shri H.K. Dua 
 24.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 25.  Smt. Kanimozhi 
 26.  Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 27.  Shri C.M. Ramesh  
 28.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 29.  Shri D. P. Tripathi 
 30.  Shri Pavan Kumar Varma  
 31.  Vacant 
                           
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cyril John  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Committee Officer 
(ii) 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on External Affairs (201 5-16) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth Report                
(16th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2015-16. 
 
2. The Fifth Report was presented  to the Parliament  on 28th April, 201 5. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations containe d in the 
Report were received on 8th September, 2015. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting held 
on 20th October, 2015. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 6th Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                               DR. SHASHI THAROOR,           
6th November, 2015                                                               Chairperson,                                  
15 Kartika, 1937 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)                                                

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Fifth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th April, 2015. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 
all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3,6,9 and 11 
 Total-06 
 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government replies. 
 
NIL 
Total- 00 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 4, 13,14 and 16 
 
Total- 04 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect o f which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 5,7,8,10, 12 and 15 
Total-06 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I 
and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Repo rt should be 
furnished within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations. 
 
(Recommendation No. 1 and 2) 
Uneven utilization of funds by the Ministry and poor spending trend 
5. The Committee had observed that the allocation made to the Ministry at the BE stage for 
the year 2014-15 was Rs. 148.98 crore which was reduced to Rs. 99.00 crore at the RE stage. The 
Committee had also noted that the actual utilization during 2014 -15 was only Rs. 62.33 crore and 
it could not spend Rs. 36.67 crore and once again had failed badly to utilize even the RE 
allocation. The Committee were also not convinced with the arguments put forth by the Ministry 
that the major part of the allocation was incurred in the last quarter because the expenditure for 
flagship events like PravasiBhartiya Divas (PBD), Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children 
(SPDC), Know India Programme (KIP) and Promotion of Cultural Ties with  Diaspora (PCD) was 
booked in the last quarter. The Committee had noted that during 2014 -15 the Ministry had 
proposed to utilize Rs.54.16 crore (anticipated) during the last quarter. However, the total 
expenditure envisaged under those aforementioned heads  would add upto Rs. 26.15 crore only. 
The Committee, thereafter, were critical of the poor and uneven expenditure pattern of the 
Ministry continuously for the last several years. That trend created an impression that everything 
was not going well in the Mi nistry and the Financial Management required significant 
improvement. In those circumstances, the view had been gaining ground that perhaps the Ministry 
had failed to justify its creation and fulfill the objectives for which it was created. The Committee, 
thereafter, had desired that the Ministry should improve its working and make all possible efforts 
to utilize the allocated budget during 2015 -16 through proper planning and regular monitoring. 
Moreover, the Committee were of a firm view that the Ministry should spread their expenditure 
pattern more evenly even within the constraints of organizing those events towards the end of the 
year.  
 
6. The Committee had also noted that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry for the year 
2015-16 (BE) had been reduc ed to Rs. 118.17 crore from that of Rs. 148.98 crore during 2014 -
15(BE). Such a reduction on a BE to BE basis had not taken place during  the last five years and 
the Ministry had failed to give convincing reasons for the budgetary cuts it had to endure. Th e 
Committee had considered that poor spending trend of the Ministry during 2014 -15 would have 

3 
 
been the most important reason for lower allocation during 2015 -16, as the Ministry had managed 
to spend only Rs. 44.84 crore till December, 2014 against the redu ced RE of Rs. 99.00 crore. The 
Committee had noted that the Ministry had promised to implement various schemes vigorously 
during the Financial year 2015 -16 but had cautioned that if the Ministry continued the same trend, 
it might not be able to get require d funds even as supplementary Demands for Grants. The 
Committee, therefore, had desired that the Ministry should substantially improve its spending 
mechanism and try to prove their commitment towards the implementation of schemes relating to 
the welfare of the Diaspora and emigrant workers so that they might be able to get additional funds 
at the RE stage during the current financial year.  
 
7. On the issue of uneven utilization of funds by the Ministry, in their action taken reply, the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''The recommendation is related to expenditure pattern under various heads in the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. Several factors during the last financial year 
resulted in reduced expenditure during the said financial year. However, this Ministry is 
making concerted efforts to utilize the allocated budget for the year 2015-16 in full. 
 
The expenditure pattern during the current financial year shows encouraging trend. For 
example, Rs 7.05 crores has already been ut ilized under PBD head against BE of Rs 
7.53 crores (i.e. 93% utilization)  
The Ministry has also moved re -appropriation proposal for Rs.6.80 crores to clear 
pending bills relating to PBD bills of 2014-15.  
 IDF –OI and OIFC are reorienting themselves and w ill be seeking a more 
sustained and pro -active engagement with the Indian Diaspora. Given their expanded 
scope of activities for 2015 -16, it is envisaged that they will not only spend the funds 
that are allocated to them at BE 2015-16 stage, but also need additional allocations. 
MOIA is planning to launch its media campaign for 2015 -16 on the theme of safe and 
legal migration with an estimated expenditure of about Rs 8crores in media campaign on 
TV and Radio by December 2015. It is expected that additional funds may be needed for 
the media campaign at RE 2015-16 stage.'' 
 
8. In regard to Committee's recommendation on poor spending trend of the Ministry, the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 ''The recommendation is related to expenditure pattern under various heads in the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. The Committee‟s recommendation that the 
Ministry should substantially improve its spending mechanism, has been noted in MOIA 
for guidance. Current status in this regard is briefly mentioned in the reply to 
Recommendation No. 1.'' 

4 
 
9. While analyzing the Budget of the Ministry, the Committee were critical for the poor 
and uneven expenditure trend of the Ministry. They had also desired that the Ministry 
should improve its working and m ake all possible efforts to utilize the allocated budget 
during 2015 -16 through proper planning and regular monitoring. From the action taken 
replies, the Committee have noted that the Ministry has taken some steps to improve its 
spending mechanism during the current financial year. It has already utilized Rs. 7.05 crore 
under Pravasi Bhartiya Divas head against the BE of Rs. 7.53 crore and has also moved re -
appropriation proposal for Rs. 6.80 crore to clear pending bills relating to Pravasi Bhartiya 
Divas bills for the year 2014 -15. However, the Ministry has not elaborated upon any 
measures to spend their funds more evenly during the current financial year. The Committee 
are displeased to note the expenditure is being forwarded to the next fiscal and perhap s the 
Ministry is clearing the Bills of the previous year under the grants of the current year 
because this trend defeats the very purpose of the budgetary exercise. The spirit of the 
Committee's recommendation was not just restricted to the Ministry makin g full utilization 
of its budgetary allocation but to improve its overall working also. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should not carry forward the expenditure it had 
incurred during the previous year and it should be settled w ithin the same financial year. 
The Committee would also reiterate that the Ministry should ensure proper utilization of its 
budgetary allocation under each head and spread their expenditure more evenly throughout 

5 
 
the year by instituting sufficient monitori ng mechanism.  Further, the Committee also desire 
the Ministry to streamline its working pattern.  
 (Recommendation No. 3) 
Reduced spending under the Head Secretariat- General Services 
10. The Ministry was allocated a sum of Rs. 40.36 crore during 2014 -15 (BE) for expenditure 
on salaries, wages, office expenses, rents and automation of the Secretariat and field offices of 
POEs. The Committee had taken a serious view to note that for those routine office expenses, the 
allocation was reduced to Rs. 28.73 crore at the RE stage and that regrettably the Ministry was able 
to spend only Rs. 15.59 crore till the end of third quarter of the year under that head, and they 
proposed to spend Rs. 13.14 crore during the last quarter of the year. That clearly showed that t he 
Ministry was not even able to spend the allocation made for administrative expenses of the 
Ministry. That revealed a major administrative failure of the Ministry and the Committee found it 
as another example of lopsided spending pattern of the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, had 
not approved of such expenditure trend even for routine administrative purposes and had 
recommended that the Ministry should take all initiatives to maintain a uniform spending pattern 
across each quarter under that head, as the sub -heads there were not subject to fluctuating 
expenditure.  
 
11.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''Out of a sum of Rs. 40.36 crores during 2014 -15 under Establishment, Rs. 12.83 crores 
was a llocated for e -Migrate project under the Head Information Technology (Office 
Expenditure). More than 79% of the total savings made under the 
Secretariat/Establishment head has been on account of delay in e -Migrate project going 
live. In addition, savings h ave been on account of reduced spending on overtime 
allowance (66%), medical expenses (44%), domestic travel (44%), foreign travel (50%). 
The Ministry has noted the recommendation as regard to taking initiative and 
maintaining uniform spending pattern acro ss each quarter for the various Heads under 
the Secretariat/Establishment head.'' 
 
12. The Committee had expressed their unhappiness over the poor spending of the 
Ministry even for routine office expenses like salaries, wages, office expenses, rents and 
automation of the Secretariat and field offices of Protector of Emigrants (PoEs). As per the 

6 
 
reply furnished by the Ministry, Rs. 12.83 crore was allocated for the e -Migrate Project 
under the Head Information Technology (Office Expenditure) and more than 79%  of the 
total savings made under the Secretariat/Establishment head has been on account of delay in 
the e-Migrate Project going live. However, the Committee are aware that the e -Migrate 
project was rolled out on 26th May, 2014 in PoE, Delhi and it was rolled out in all the PoEs in 
phases by 25 th September, 2014. In light of the above facts, the Ministry may elaborate as to 
the head under which the expenditure for the roll -out of the e-Migrate project was incurred, 
if it was not incurred under the Head Infor mation Technology (Office Expenditure)? The 
Ministry may also clarify whether the reduced spending on various items like overtime 
allowance, medical expenses, domestic travel and foreign travel had been on account of some 
proactive measures being adopted b y the Ministry to effect austerity or it simply reflects the 
inability of the Ministry to spend the requisite funds under these items? The Committee 
would also like to reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry should repeat this type of 
spending pat tern during 2015 -16 and take all initiatives to maintain a uniform spending 
across each quarter under this head.  
(Recommendation No. 4) 
International Conferences/Meetings 
13. The Committee had observed that the amount of Rs. 1.00 crore was allocated to th e 
Ministry during 2014 -15 under the sub -head „International Conferences/ Meetings‟ and it was 
reduced to Rs. 10.00 lakh at RE stage. The Ministry had reasoned that it could not organize any 
Conference/ Meeting during the year, therefore, funds could not be  spent for that purpose. The 
Committee had strongly criticized the Ministry for not organizing any Meeting or Conference 

7 
 
related to Diaspora engagement and discussions with counterparts from the foreign countries and 
also for finalization of Agreements/ MOUs during the year. The Committee had also noted that for 
the year 2015 -16, the Ministry had got an allocation of Rs. 0.76 crore, but there was no advance 
planning of Conferences/ Meetings also. The Committee, thereafter, had strongly recommended 
that the Ministry should conduct advance planning for all the Conferences/ Meetings to be 
organized during the financial year alongwith the proposed expenditure well in advance, keeping 
in view its requirements of Diaspora engagements and holding discussions with i ts foreign 
counterparts to avoid such failure in organizing any Conference/ Meeting during 2015-16 also. 
 
14. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''This recommendation is related to the International S eminars/ Conferences and 
planning the proposed expenditure well in advance. The Committee‟s 
recommendation regarding drawing up a schedule of seminars/conferences to be 
organised during the financial year are noted for future guidance.'' 
 
15. The Committee  had recommended that the Ministry should conduct advance 
planning for all the Conferences/Seminars to be organized during the year along with the 
proposed expenditure well in advance. However, the Committee are concerned to note that in 
all these years th e Ministry has not moved an inch beyond noting down the Committee's 
recommendation for future guidance. The Ministry had given an identical reply on this issue 
to the Committee's recommendation contained in their Third Report. In this scenario it will 
be difficult for the Committee to take the words of the Ministry beyond their face value. The 
Committee would, therefore, once again strongly recommend that the Ministry should start 
acting on its promises and should resort to judicious planning of the Confere nces/Seminars 
to be organized during the current year and onwards.  
 
 

8 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra 
16. The Committee had observed that the project for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra 
in New Delhi had been delayed inordinately. The  previously announced target date for completion 
was the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas, 2015 and the same could not be adhered to. Then the Ministry 
planned to get the building inaugurated on 15 August, 2015 after finishing the work of furnishing 
and finishing. The Committee had hoped that the Ministry would undertake all out efforts in order 
to ensure that the project was finished well within the new deadline. The Committee had viewed 
that it would not be a tall order for the Ministry to accomplish that mission a s in the past it was 
held up due to lack of funds and that time the Ministry had evinced satisfaction at the availability 
of funds at its disposal for the completion of work.  
 
17. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''Efforts are being made to complete the work of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra so that it is 
ready for inauguration as early as possible.  The construction works is nearly complete 
and we are taking steps to make the building functional.'' 
 
18. The Committee note that the Ministry is shifting the deadline for finishing the project 
of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra again and again. The Ministry had set up the latest deadline of 
15th August, 2015 and the same had not been adhered to due to the laxity of th e Ministry. 
The Committee are unable to understand the reasons for this tardy progress when the 
Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs had submitted in March, 2015 that the civil 
work of the Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra was almost complete. Now, after s ix months , the 
Ministry has submitted the same status that the construction work is nearly complete. What 
makes the failure of the Ministry even more glaring is the fact that in the past the project 
was stated to be held up due to lack of funds and this ti me the Ministry had evinced 
satisfaction at the availability of funds. In this scenario, it is difficult for the Committee to 

9 
 
believe that the Ministry is making serious efforts to finish the project even by the extended 
time and the Pravasi Bhartiya Kendr a still remains a dream for NRIs/PIOs. The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should initiate all out efforts to make the 
Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra functional positively before the end of this year.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Data on NRIs/PIOs 
19. The Committee had noted that after the decentralization of work related to printing and 
dispatch of the OCI cards, there would be no role of MOIA in the Overseas Citizenship of India 
Scheme at all. The Committee were not in agreement with such deci sion where the Ministry had 
been kept devoid of any role in such an important matter relating to Indian Diaspora. The 
Committee had strongly felt that with such decision the country might lose the goodwill which we 
expect from the Indian Diaspora. The Comm ittee had clear view that without the involvement of 
MOIA in the scheme, the engagement with the Diaspora and earning their goodwill might not be 
possible. The Committee, therefore, had desired a stronger and defined role of the Ministry in that 
scheme particularly in the scrutiny part and implementation of the scheme as a whole. 
 The Committee were happy to note that the Ministry had already started the exercise of 
updating the data of NRIs and PIOs from different parts of the world. It had been felt by th e 
Committee that the absence of such a comprehensive data base was a major lacuna in the framing 
of policies on various issues affecting the Diaspora and in implementing the same. The Committee 
had therefore recommended that this exercise should be expedit ed and concluded at the earliest 
and the Committee should also be apprised about the same. 
 
20.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''The decision to decentralize the printing and dispatch of OCI docu ments to Indian 
Missions/ Posts abroad/MEA has been taken with a view to reduce the time line 
involved in the issue of OCI Cards.  Government aims to reduce this period to 7 days 
and this can be possible only if the card is printed in the Missions/Posts it self.  
However, notwithstanding transfer of the printing work to MEA, this Ministry will 
continue to discharge other functions entrusted to it under the Allocation of Business 
Rules, with regard to Overseas Citizen of India card holders.   
 The MOIA has al ready completed the exercise to compile data of NRI and PIO 
population in 206 countries/independent territories and the revised list has been 

10 
 
uploaded on MOIA‟s website. The population of overseas Indians is presently over 28 
million of which around 60% comprise Persons of Indian origin (PIO). Revision of this 
data will be undertaken from time to time.''  
 
21. The Committee are pleased to note that as per strong desire of the Committee, the 
Ministry has completed the exercise of compiling the data of NRI/PI O population in 206 
countries/independent territories and the revised list has been uploaded on the website of 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. The Committee also appreciate the efforts of the 
Ministry in finishing this extensive exercise in a time-bound manner. The Committee are of a 
considered opinion that it must not be seen as static data, rather the Ministry should 
undertake measures to update this at regular interval s. The Committee would also 
recommend that this data should be used as base for po licy formulation and identifying the 
issues related to the Diaspora in particular Regions/countries of the world.  
 The Committee would also recommend that various issues related to the smooth 
implementation of the merger of Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) and Overseas Citizens of 
India (OCI) cards should be addressed immediately in consultation with other stakeholder 
Ministries.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Awareness campaign/Media Plan 
22. The Committee were aware that the Ministry had been running an awareness  campaign 
since 2007 in order to create wider awareness among the general public on a variety of issues 
related to legal, safe and orderly migration. But, the Committee were not impressed at all with the 
justification given by the Ministry that during the whole year 2014 -15 the Ministry did not 
undertake any media awareness campaign as it was reviewing the campaign in order to make it 

11 
 
more effective. The Committee had, thereafter, recommended that the Ministry should proceed to 
conduct a yearlong effective media campaign with the defined objectives of creating awareness 
about legal, safe and orderly migration and cautioning people about illegal practices being faced by 
migrants including harassment and desertion by NRI spouses. In that regard, the Committee had 
specifically desired that the nature of assistance being provided to deserted/abandoned NRI wives 
should be modified and advertised widely. The Committee also recommended that the amount of 
financial assistance for such suffering women should also be e nhanced and they should be 
suitablely educated about such enhancements. The Committee were also aware that social media 
has emerged as a very viable platform for public exchange today and its rising use among the new 
generation was beyond dispute. The mess ages floated on social media are more amenable to easy 
dissemination and recall.  
 The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should come out with a 
blueprint to make extensive use of social media tools in that regard to benefit the would -be 
emigrants and to educate them about legal and safe migration. The Committee had desired that the 
Ministry should commission an independent study to assess the impact of those media campaigns 
and to undertake reviews of the broader goals from time to tim e. The Committee had also desired 
that those media campaigns should be undertaken in Hindi and other prominent regional languages 
to increase the outreach of those campaigns to the wider public.  
 
23. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''For Financial Year 2015 -16 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has an allocation of 
Rs. 9.50 crore for Awareness Campaign/Media Plan.  
2.   The Ministry has reviewed and re -oriented media awareness plan of the Ministry  
and for 2015 -16, the Ministry proposes to undertake a media campaign in Television, 
Radio including in regional languages especially in states where the problems 
pertaining to migrant workers are most prevalent.  
3.  The campaign for 2015-16 in multiple media is proposed to be conducted on the 
theme of Safe and Legal migration  of the Indian Migrant workers to foreign countries 
for employment and other important issues. 
4.  The campaign will enhance awareness about the precautions to be taken before 
migrating, ways of ensuring safe and legal migration and also inform about MOIA's 
Toll-free help lines which provide information and advice to intending migrants.  
5. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs proposes to organize a workshop in 
New Delhi on issues faced by Indian Women married to NRIs/PIOs,  in coordination 
with the National Commission for Women and the NRI Departments/ Commissions of  
concerned State Governments. 
6.  MOIA has a scheme for providing legal and financial assistance to Indian women 
deserted by their Non -ResidentIndians(NRIs)andPersonsofIndianOrigin(PIOs) overseas 

12 
 
spouse.  MOIA has taken note of the committee‟s recommendation that there should be 
review of the scheme for future guidance. 
7.  Ministry has also taken note of the committee‟s  recommendation that Ministry 
should make extensive use of social media tools in our media awareness campaign; and 
that an independent study could be constituted to   study the impact of this Ministry‟s 
media campaign for future guidance.'' 
 
24. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should proceed to conduct a year 
long effective media campaign with the defined objectives of creating awareness about 
various aspects related to safe and orderly migration. The Ministry in its action taken reply 
has only alluded to certain actions which it proposes to undertake for the above mentioned 
ends. But the Committee observe that even after passing of five months during the current 
financial year, the Ministry has not yet started to roll out the proposed media campaign. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should embark upon its media campaign for 
the year for reaching out to the targeted audience in an effective way without wasting any 
further time. Similarly, in response to the Committee's recomm endation on a need to make a 
blueprint to make extensive use of social media tools in the awareness campaign and to 
constitute an independent study to know the impact of campaign, the Ministry has merely 
replied that it has taken note of the Committee's re commendation in this regard. The 
Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry should desist from giving such vague 
and incomplete replies. The Committee reiterate that the work relating to preparation of a 
blueprint to tap the social media platform  for creating awareness and commissioning of an 
independent study to study the impact of these media campaign should be undertaken by the 
Ministry without any further delay.  

13 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
                Promotion of Cultural ties with Diaspora 
25. The Committee had noted that the Ministry had failed to spend even a small amount of Rs. 
5 crore allocated during 2014 -15 for a very important scheme for Promotion of Cultural ties with 
Diaspora. The Committee had understood that culture and language pl ay a major role in the lives 
of the people and communities and it was the common thread which could bind people belonging 
to otherwise diverse persuasions. But it appeared, the Ministry had no planning to foster cultural 
ties with the Diaspora.  The Committee were happy to note that the allocation for the year 2015 -16 
under the scheme has been enhanced by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, had desired that 
the Ministry should prepare a set of programmes through which they could help reinforce the 
cultural identity of People of Indian Origin in meaningful ways. In that regard, the Committee had 
also suggested the Ministry should undertake their programmes in active collaboration with India 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) by using their physical pre sence in a number of countries 
and engagement in similar activities. 
 The Committee had also suggested that the Ministry should explore the idea of opening 
stalls at major Airports of the world showcasing and promoting Indian culture to a larger 
population including the Diaspora. The Committee were of the view that those stalls might have 
the potential to emerge as major points of engagement with the Diaspora in the long run.   
 
26. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''A substantial part of the allotment under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with 
Diaspora was for the Ghadar Memorial Project in San Francisco. Doubts had 
arisen on the cost proposed for renovation of the memorial. There are several 
issues w hich require consultation with the Overseas Indian Communities at the 
local level. This is being planned.  The initial estimate received for renovation was 
approximately Rs.37 Crores.   
Further, ICCR has now been requested to identify the scope of various joint   
activities through which MOIA could help reinforce the cultural identity of 
Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) in meaningful ways. The Ministry of Civil 
Aviation has also been addressed to understand the feasibility of opening stalls at 
major airports  of the world for sharing & promoting Indian Culture to a larger 
population including the Indian Diaspora.''  
 
27. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken some credible steps to address the 
issues put forth by the Committee in their recommendation r egarding promotion of cultural 

14 
 
ties with Indian Diaspora. It has already requested ICCR to identify the scope of various 
joint activities and has also addressed the Ministry of Civil Aviation to understand the 
feasibility of opening stalls at major airport s of the world. The Committee had also 
recommended that the Ministry should prepare a set of programmes through which they 
could help reinforce the cultural identity of People of Indian Origin in meaningful ways. The 
Committee are constrained to note that in its reply, the Ministry has failed to elaborate any 
measures taken in this direction, apart from the renovation of the Ghadar Memorial Project 
in San Francisco. The Committee are of a considered view that allocations under this scheme 
should not be exha usted in a single big ticket project but multiple small and viable theme 
based projects reflecting the local cultures of the Indian Diaspora should also be supported 
by the Ministry.  
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Suraksha Yojana 
28. The Co mmittee had noted the Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi SurakshaYojana (MGPSY) was 
launched in May, 2012 and was already available for workers to subscribe across India and UAE. 
The Committee however, were constrained to note that the Ministry had so far been success ful in 
enrolling only 1265 workers under the scheme. Further, the Ministry had not made any budgetary 
allocation for the scheme for 2015 -16 on the ground that it was considering a revamp of the 
scheme to make it a Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for O verseas Indian Workers. The 
Committee were of the considered view that even when the revamp of the scheme was being 
considered, it should not have come in the way for allocating sufficient funds to the scheme. Not 
allocating any fund was like halting a sch eme and preventing the new subscribers joining the 
scheme till it was revamped. The Committee, therefore, had desired that the Ministry should come 
out with the revamped scheme and till then new interested subscribers should be enrolled in the 
existing sch eme and contribution of Government should continue for old as well as new 

15 
 
subscribers. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry should augment its media campaign 
and other efforts in order to make the scheme attractive to ECR and Non-ECR workers alike. 
 
29.       In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''The account Head for MGPSY is as under: 
Demand No. 70-Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, 
2061- External Affairs (Major Head) 
00.800 – Other Expenditure (Minor Head) 
03 – Other Schemes (Sub Head), 
00.03 – Other Items. 
03.03.50 – Other Charges (Object Head) 
under which Rs.  1, 50,00,000 in BE 2015-16. 
2. Steps are being undertaken to revamp the MGPSY scheme. Secretary, MOIA 
has already held two meeti ngs with the stakeholders of MGPSY to discuss the 
issues arising in the implementation of the scheme. An important issue is that the 
„NPS lite‟ scheme, which was a component of MGPSY, has been discontinued. 
This has been replaced with the Atal Pension Yoja na (APS) which has certain 
different scheme inclusions, eligibility and implementation modalities.  
3. The suggestion regarding creating awareness on the scheme is noted for 
guidance.'' 
 
30. During examination of Demands for Grants (2015 -16), the Committee  had observed 
from the Outcome Budget (2015 -16) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs that no 
allocation was made under the Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Suraksha Yojana (MGPSY) for the 
year 2015 -16. However, as per the action taken reply in the detailed Dem ands for Grants 
(2015-16), an allocation of Rs. 1.5 crore has been made for the scheme under the Object Head 
03.03.50 (Other Charges). The Committee strongly feel that the simple statement 'Other 
Charges' does not indicate that the amount will be spent for  this purpose. Therefore, they 
desire the Ministry to look into this discrepancy and explain the reasons for the same 
alongwith the mode in which they want to spend this amount.  
 The Committee has also been informed that 'NPS lite' scheme which was a component 
of MGPSY has been replaced with Atal Pension Yojana (APS) which has certain different 
scheme inclusions, eligibility and implementation modalities. The Committee are afraid that 
due to overlap, this change will lead to a lot of confusion in the minds  of emigrants. The 

16 
 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that vigorous media campaign should be 
undertaken by the Committee to increase the awareness about the revamped scheme 
amongst emigrants.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Know India Programme (KIP) 
31. The C ommittee had observed that the Know India Programme (KIP) was an important 
vehicle for an engagement with the next generation of the Indian Diaspora and for fostering their 
close bond with contemporary India. The Ministry had been able to organize five suc h 
programmes during the year 2014 -15. The Committee were further pleased to note that the 
Ministry had enhanced the budgetary allocation for the programme from Rs. 4.50 crore during 
2014-15 to Rs. 8.00 crore for 2015 -16 and was also considering an increase  in the number of 
participants and enriching its content.  The Committee were of the opinion that the platform of KIP 
offers the Government a very good opportunity to engage with the new generation of Diaspora. 
KIP could prove to be an effective vehicle fo r continuous engagement with the next generation of 
influential Diaspora as many of them will become opinion makers in their respective countries in 
the coming years. Thereafter, the Committee were of the opinion that the Ministry should use 
innovative com munication tools like social media to stay in touch with the participants of the 
programmes once the programme comes to an end and the participants return to their respective 
countries. 
 The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry should make the programme more 
broad based so as to include more number of States in its programme. The Committee had wanted 
to ensure that the programme reflected the diversity of the country and not a partial impression. 
Care should be taken to enhance the educational aspects of the KIP so that  did not get reduced to a 
mere tourist programme.  
 
32. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''Know India Programme (KIP), an engagement programme with the next generation of 
the Indian Diaspora and for fostering their close bond with contemporary India is being 
revised. It has been decided to increase the no. of editions of the programme from 4 to 
18 per year and the duration of the programme has also been increased from 21 to 25 
days. State Governments have also been requested for hosting KIPs in their states.  The 
Committee‟s recommendation for use of social media to stay in touch with the 
participants once the Programmes are over, is noted for further guidance.  Presently 
KIP participants get educational inputs from the Indian Institute of Public 

17 
 
Administration (IIPA) & Council for Cultural Research & Training (CCRT) in Delhi in 
the class room sessions The Ministry has also written to State Governments stating that 
there shoul d be interaction between the participants & students in State Universities 
during the State leg of the KIP.'' 
 
33. The Committee are pleased to be informed that the number of editions of the Know 
India Programme (KIP) has been increased from 4 to 18 per ye ar and that the duration of 
the programme has also been increased from 21 to 25 days. In order to expand the outreach 
of the programme, the Ministry has also requested the State Governments for hosting KIPs 
in respective States. The Committee would want th e KIP to be spread out in all the major 
States covering different regions of the country rather than it being concentrated in only few 
particular States because it is the considered opinion of the Committee that the Ministry 
would fail to showcase diversit y and plurality of India unless it spreads out the programme 
to all the regions of the country. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should persistently pursue the proposal of hosting KIPs with the State 
Governments and find out ways and means for making them stakeholders in the project. The 
Committee would also like to listen about the action on the part of Ministry on the use of 
social media to stay in touch with the participants after completion of programmes.  
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) 
34. The Committee had observed that the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children 
(SPDC) had been running since 2006 -07 and a total of 760 candidates had availed of the 
scholarship since inception o f the scheme. However, the Committee were distressed to note that 
the number of applications received under the programme was continuously decreasing. For the 
year 2014-15 only 190 applications had been received from the Diaspora Children which looked 
quiet inadequate in view of the fact that the Ministry was considering a proposal to increase the 
number of scholarships from 100 to 200. The Committee had, thereafter, reiterated their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should analyze the reasons for lo sing the interest by Diaspora 
children for scholarships offered under this scheme, including the standing and accreditation of the 

18 
 
institutions and the type of courses being offered to the students and also take remedial steps. The 
Committee had also recom mended that the Ministry should set up kiosks showcasing the main 
features of the SPDC during the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) celebrations so that a larger number 
of Diaspora were acquainted with the scheme. The Committee had also recommended that the 
Ministry should take steps to improve its spending pattern under the scheme.   
 
35.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have stated as under: 
''The SPDC Scheme is being revised so that scholarships are given to those students  
who secure admission in reputed colleges/universities across India. This measure 
may improve the number, quality and quantity of applicants under the scheme. There 
will be one year holiday for 2015 -16 i.e. there would not be any scholarships given 
for a f resh batch during 2015 -16 and the new revised scheme will be implemented 
from 2016 onwards. However, the existing students (admitted in previous years) 
would continue for the existing scholarships in view of the commitments already 
made as per the present scheme.  The recommendations of the committee for setting 
up Kiosks showcasing the main features of the SPDC during the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas (PBD) celebrations is noted for future guidance.  Grant of scholarship to 
selected students, is a committed expe nditure and the Ministry will disburse this 
amount to all eligible scholars annually.''   
36. The Committee have learnt that the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children  
(SPDC) Scheme is being revised so that the scholarships are given to those students  who 
secure admission in reputed colleges/universities across India. However, the Committee are 
not sure whether the Ministry would be able to meet the proposed aims and objectives under 
the revamped scheme? The Committee have serious doubts about the numb er of NRI/PIO 
students who would be able to secure admissions to these premier educational institutes on 
merit, given the differences in curriculum and emphasis in the educational system of various 
countries. In the opinion of the Committee it would be wor thwhile for the Ministry to collect 
information about the number of NRI/PIO students who apply to appear in the examination 
for admission in these institutions during last few years  and their success rate before it 
modifies the criterion for the scholarsh ip programme. They also desire the Ministry to 
maintain the database and update it on a regular interval. The primary objective of the 
SPDC scheme is to provide educational facilities to the Overseas Indian students by creating 

19 
 
goodwill and it should not a mount to mere disbursal of the scholarship. The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make a provision for reservation of 
some seats in these educational institutes for the NRI/PIO students under the revamped 
scheme.  
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre 
37. The Committee were aware that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs had set up an 
Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) as a not -for-profit trust in partnership with the 
Confederation of Indian Indu stry (CII). The Centre is a „one -stop shop‟ and seeks to serve the 
interests of the Overseas Indian Community and has the mandate to cover areas of Investment 
Facilitation and Knowledge Networking. The Committee were pleased to note that OIFC had been 
successful in organizing two economic engagement meeting with the Indian Diaspora in Bahrain 
and London where more than 500 participants were enrolled. The Committee, however, felt that a 
lot had to be done in order to increase the outreach of the Centre with an objective to attract more 
and more investments from the Diaspora to India. The Committee had, therefore, strongly 
recommended that OIFC should also take immediate steps to widely publicize the „Make in India‟ 
programme of the Government to the Diaspora.  The Committee had also hoped that the lower 
allocation for the year 2015 -16 would not be a hurdle in running the Centre and that it was in line 
with the original mandate of OIFC to move gradually to a self -sustaining business model. The 
Committee had also wanted to be apprised about the impact of the new model on the functioning 
of OIFC. 
 
38. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''In 2015 -16 the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre will facilitate a sust ained and 
proactive engagement of the overseas Indians with the Indian economy, through some 
new programmes and initiatives ; and through active engagement with the State 
Governments to offer their investment projects to the Overseas Indians. The new 
Programmes & Initiatives include : 
    Organising “Investor Connect meets”  in select foreign countries  with 
prominent overseas Indians; Indian Diaspora corporate leaders and decision makers to 
focus their attention on the Indian market.  
    Organizing visits to India by business delegations led by overseas Indians.  
    Know Indian Economy programme  to provide young Diaspora Entrepreneurs 
an insight into the Indian economy, market and business environment, in partnership 
with a business School in India.  

20 
 
    India C orporate Internship programme for senior level students of Indian -
origin in MBA, Science & Technology courses,  to provide them an opportunity of 
work experience in India‟s premier corporate organizations. 
2. While OIFC was expected to move towards self -sustainability over a period of time, 
the Governing Council of OIFC recommended in July 2015 that given OIFC‟s role 
and scope of activities under the Action Plan for 2015 -16, the Government would 
have to continue its support to OIFC with adequate budget alloc ation to enable 
outreach events outside India, and seek participation of overseas Indians in the new 
initiatives. 
3. In order to promote the „Make in India‟ programme of the Government, OIFC would 
supplement the efforts of the Department of Industrial Poli cy and Promotion, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry by working with “Invest India” a body set -up the 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry and FICCI to promote Make in India.'' 
 
39. The Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) has a mandate to guide the Overse as 
Indians for finding better investment avenues in India and the Committee are pleased to note 
that the Centre has expanded the scope of its activities to reach out to a larger number of 
Overseas Indians. Towards this end, the OIFC  had organized two econ omic engagement 
meetings with the Indian Diaspora in Bahrain and London where more than 500 participants 
were enrolled. The Committee would desire that more number of such economic engagement 
meetings should be held in other parts of the world also. The Co mmittee are of a considered 
opinion that OIFC can play a stellar role in popularizing 'Make in India' programme of the 
Government and a lot of funds and planning would be required for this purpose. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the capacit y of OIFC should be suitably 
enhanced and the Government should continue to provide budgetary support to the Centre 
until it is able to shift to a self-sustaining business model.  
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
       Overseas Indian Centres 
40. The Committee had understood that the aim of the Overseas Indian Centres was to extend a 
host of counselling services to Overseas Indian workers and towards that end the centres in Abu 
Dhabi, Kuala Lumpur and Washington had been opened. But the Committee had confirmed 

21 
 
information that even those three centres were not working effectively. Secretary, MOIA had also 
accepted the position and has underlined the reason for that as lack of clear mandate for those 
offices. Moreover, the Ministry also had no information about the exact number of workers 
benefitted through those centres. The Committee had, thereafter, desired that the Ministry should 
immediately work out a clear and unambiguous mandate for those centres by holding consultations 
with Cabinet Secretariat / other stake holder Ministries as well as asking the NRI beneficiaries 
themselves. The Committee also felt that those centres have been instrumental in engaging and 
helping the Overseas Indian Community and therefore, desired that more such Centres should be 
opened particularly in the countries with significant Diaspora population.  
 
41. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''The Committee‟s recommendations have been noted for future guidance. Further 
steps would be taken in consultation with the stakeholders concerned.'' 
 
42. The Committee had recommended that a clear mandate for the Overseas Indian 
Centres should be worked out and more such Centres should be opened. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the Minis try has simply noted the recommendation for future 
guidance and has not yet initiated any concrete action in this direction. With the surge in 
number of Overseas Indians and availability of exact data about them, there is now a very 
strong ground for the e xpansion and unhindered working of these Centres in order to give 
them assistance and timely relief. By not expeditiously acting on the recommendation of the 
Committee the Ministry has deprived the Overseas Indians of critical assistance in certain 
countries and any further delay on the matter would not be warranted. The Committee 
would, therefore, strongly reiterate that the Ministry should urgently work out a clear and 
unambiguous mandate for these Centres and open more such Centres particularly in the 
countries with significant Diaspora population.  
 
 
 

22 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
The Swarnapravas Yojana/ Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
43. The Committee had observed that the SwarnapravasYojana was an ambitious programme 
of the Ministry to impart skill developmen t for overseas employment to the Indian youth during 
the 12 th Five Year Plan. The scheme had been renamed as „Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana‟. The 
Plan Scheme seeks to adhere to the broad objectives of skill development in India, as envisioned in 
the National Skill Development Policy, 2009 as the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs had been 
identified to train 5 million people by 2022 under this policy. For the 12 th Five year Plan the total 
project cost envisaged was Rs. 137 crore and during the five years 2. 08 lakh youth were to be 
trained under the scheme with the Government incurring a cost of Rs. 7500 per person for training. 
The Committee were unhappy to note that the Ministry had not made any progress in 
implementation of the scheme. The Committee furthe r noted that the Pilot Project titled “Skill 
Development Initiative for Potential Migrants from North Eastern States of India” was launched by 
the Ministry in 2011 which had failed to achieve its targets in terms of training for requisite skills 
for overse as employment and for placement for overseas employment. It appeared that the 
Ministry would be missing the target for training youth under the scheme. In fact, the Ministry 
could not spend a single Rupee during 2014-15. 
 The Committee had, therefore, reco mmended that the Ministry should take lessons from 
the failure of the pilot project and work out a joint strategy along with specially created Ministry 
i.e. the Ministry of skill Development and Entrepreneurship, towards the end objective of 
providing better Overseas employment opportunities under the scheme by utilizing the allocated 
plan funds during remaining two years of the current Plan period.  
 
44.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''All recommendations of the Standing Committee on External Affairs have been noted 
for guidance. The Ministry is taking urgent steps for implementation of the Scheme 
expeditiously in consultation with the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship.''  
 
45. The Committee while criticizing the Ministry for its failure to implement the 
Swarnapravas Yojana/Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana had recommended that it should take 
lessons from its past failures and work out a joint strategy along with the Ministry of Skill 

23 
 
Development and Entrepreneurship. However, the Committee are concerned to note that the 
Ministry has not bothered to take any credible steps beyond noting it down for guidance. If 
the Ministry cannot execute the recommendations of the Committee in letter and  spirit then 
no purpose would be served with the task of noting them down. In the case of the Pravasi 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana, the critical time had been allowed to go waste by the Minist ry as the 
scheme is yet to take-off. With barely one and a half years of  the plan period still remaining, 
what credible results can be gained from the scheme is anybody's guess? The Committee 
would, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take urgent steps for the implementation of 
the Project and the problems faced in impl ementation should be communicated to the 
Committee at the action taken stage.  
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
        Emigration Management Bill 
46. The Committee were hopeful that the Draft Emigration Management Bill would overhaul 
the basic architecture of emigration in the country. The Committee had welcomed that initiative of 
the Ministry which was long overdue in view of the significant transformations in the processes 
and dynamics of emigration in the recent past. The Committee had understood that the Draft  Bill 
had undergone consultations with other Ministries/ Agencies to arrive at a consensus. The 
Committee were happy to note that the draft of the Bill was at finalization stage. The Committee 
had, therefore, urged the Ministry to expedite the inter -Ministerial consultations once the final 
draft was ready and to ensure that the Bill was discussed with the Committee before being 
introduced in the Monsoon Session of the Parliament. 
 
47. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''The draft of the Emigration Management Bill is at final stage however before it is 
sent for consultations with other Ministries/ Agencies, an overview has to be taken 
by the Ministry afresh. 
The recommendation of the Committee for discu ssion of Bill with it before it is 
introduced in the Parliament has been noted.''  
 

24 
 
48. The Committee are dismayed to note that the introduction of the Emigration 
Management Bill in Parliament has been long delayed and now the Ministry has once again 
failed to adhere to the deadline of introducing it during the monsoon session of the 
Parliament. The Committee are aware that Inter -Ministerial consultations on this matter 
were already completed once but now the Ministry has stated that before it is sent for 
consultations with other Ministries/Agencies, an overview has to be taken by the Ministry 
afresh. The Committee have failed to understand as to how many times the Bill has to be 
renewed and discussed? The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to fix a t ime frame to 
complete the consultation process and introduce the Bill in the next session of the Parliament 
positively.  
(Recommendation No. 16) 
Prime Minister's Global Advisory Council (PMGAC) 
 
49. The Committee had welcomed the initiative of the Governme nt to constitute the Prime 
Minister‟s Global Advisory Council of people of Indian origin (PMGAC -OI) which is a platform 
for the Prime Minister to draw upon the experience, knowledge and wisdom of eminent people of 
Indian Origin in diverse fields from acros s the world. The Committee were hopeful that such a 
body would be instrumental in enhancing the sense of participation within the Diaspora and in the 
long run its recommendations could act as guiding light for the Ministry in formulating and 
implementing i ts policies and programmes. The Committee had also recommended that the 
Membership of the Council should truly reflect the diversity of Indian Diaspora by incorporating 
eminent persons representing various fields and geographical regions and their recommen dations 
should be taken seriously to enhance and strengthen the engagement and participation of Overseas 
Indians.  
  
50. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
''The recommendation of the Standing Committ ee that PMGAC should truly 
represent the diversity of the Indian Diaspora and incorporate eminent persons 
representing various fields and geographical areas is noted for future guidance.  
 
The recommendation of the PMGAC has guided the Ministry in its intr oduction of 
several schemes/initiatives for diaspora engagement.  These include (i) setting up of 

25 
 
the India Development Foundation for Overseas Indian (IDF. OI) for strengthening 
the institutional mechanism for promoting philanthropy and sound development in 
India by the Overseas Indian Community (ii) Creating data base of Overseas Indian 
by getting data from Indian Missions abroad (iii) Having a special session on Youth 
during the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas to forum on the changes taking place in the 
second & third generation of the Diasporas & other issues (iv) holding a Regional 
PBD in Sydney in November 2013 and (v) Study India Programme.'' 
 
51. The PMGAC was mandated to play a stellar role in drawing upon the experience, 
knowledge and wisdom of eminent per sons of Indian origin in diverse fields for a better two 
way engagement between India and Overseas Indians. The Committee also understand the 
contribution of the Council in guiding the Ministry in its introduction of several 
schemes/initiatives for Diaspor a engagement in the past.  The Ministry has simply noted 
their recommendation to make the Council a true platform represented by eminent persons 
from various fields and geographical areas. It appears that the Ministry has stopped taking 
interest in the activities of the Council as it is still to be reconstituted.  The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that the PMGAC should be reconstituted without any further delay 
under intimation to the Committee. 
 
 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee had observed that  the allocation made to the Ministry at the BE stage for 
the year 2014-15 was Rs. 148.98 crore which was reduced to Rs. 99.00 crore at the RE stage. The 
Committee had also noted that  the actual utilization during 2014 -15 is only Rs. 62.33 crore and it 
could not spend Rs . 36.67 crore and once again had  failed badly to utilize even the RE allocation. 
The Committee were  also not convinced with the arguments put forth b y the Ministry that the 
major part of the allocation is incurred in the last quarter because the expenditure for flagship 
events like Pravasi  Bhartiya Divas (PBD), Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children (SPDC), 
Know India Programme (KIP) and Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCD) was booked in 
the last quarter. The Committee had noted that  during 2014 -15 the Ministry propose to utilize 
Rs.54.16 crore (anticipated) during the last quarter. However the total expenditure envisaged under 
those aforementioned heads would add upto  Rs. 26.15 crore only. The Committee, therefore, were 
critical of the poor and uneven expenditure pattern of the Ministry continuously for the last several 
years. This trend creates an impression that everything is not going wel l in the Ministry and the 
Financial Management requires significant improvement. In those circumstances, the view is 
gaining ground that perhaps the Ministry has failed to justify its creation and fulfill the objectives 
for which it was created. The Committee, therefore, had desired  that the Ministry should improve 
its working and make all possible efforts to utilize the allocated budget during 2015 -16 through 
proper planning and regular monitoring. Moreover, The Committee were  of a firm view that the 
Ministry should spread their expenditure pattern more evenly even within the constraints of 
organizing those events towards the end of the year.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation is related to expenditure pattern under various heads in the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs. Several factors during the last financial year resulted in reduced 
expenditure during the said financial year. However, this Ministry is making concerted efforts to 
utilize the allocated budget for the year 2015-16 in full. 
The expenditure pattern during the current financial year shows encouraging trend. For example, 
Rs 7.05 crores has already been utilized under PBD head against BE of Rs 7.53 crores (i.e. 93% 
utilization) The Ministry has also moved re -appropriation proposal for Rs.6.80 crores to clear 
pending bills relating to PBD bills of 2014-15.  

27 
 
IDF –OI and OIFC are reorienting themselves and will be seeking a more sustained and pro -active 
engagement with the Indian Diaspora. Given their expanded scope of activities for 2015 -16, it is 
envisaged that they will not only spend the funds that are allocated to them at BE 2015 -16 stage, 
but also need additional allocations. 
MOIA is planning to launch its media campaign for 2015 -16 on the theme of safe and legal 
migration with an estimated expenditure of about Rs 8crores in media campaign on TV and Radio 
by December 2015. It is expected that additional funds may be needed for the media campaign at 
RE 2015-16 stage. 
(F.No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
The Committee also note that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry for the year 2015 -16 (BE) 
has been reduced to Rs. 118.17 crore from that of Rs. 148.98 crore during 2014 -15(BE). Such a 
reduction on a BE to BE basis has not taken place during  the last five years and the  Ministry has 
failed to give convincing reasons for the budgetary cuts it had to endure. The Committee consider 
that poor spending trend of the Ministry during 2014 -15 would have been the most important 
reason for lower allocation during 2015 -16, as the Mi nistry had managed to spend only Rs. 44.84 
crore till December, 2014 against the reduced RE of Rs. 99.00 crore. The Committee note that the 
Ministry has promised to implement various schemes vigorously during the Financial year 2015 -
16 but would like to caution that if the Ministry continues  the same trend, it may not be able to get 
required funds even at supplementary Demands for Grants. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should substantially improve its spending mechanism and try to prove  their 
commitment towards the implementation of schemes relating to the welfare of the Diaspora and 
emigrant workers so that they may be able to get additional funds at the RE stage du ring the 
current financial year.    
Reply of the Government 
The recommen dation is related to expenditure pattern under various heads in the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs. The Committee‟s recommendation that the Ministry should substantially 
improve its spending mechanism, has been noted in MOIA for guidance. Current stat us in this 
regard is briefly mentioned in the reply to Recommendation No. 1. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 

28 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Ministry was allocated a sum of Rs. 40.36 crore during 2014 -15 (BE) for expenditure 
on salaries, wages, office expenses,  rents and automation of the Secretariat and field offices of 
POEs. The Committee had taken a serious view to note that for those routine office expenses, the 
allocation was reduced to Rs. 28.73 crore at the RE stage and that regrettably the Ministry was able 
to spend only Rs. 15.59 crore till the end of third quarter of the year under this head, and they 
propose to spend Rs. 13.14 crore during the last quarter of the year. This clearly shows that the 
Ministry is not even able to spend the allocation made f or administrative expenses of the Ministry. 
This reveals a major administrative failure of the Ministry and the Committee find it as another 
example of lopsided spending pattern of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, had not approved 
of such expenditur e trend even for routine administrative purposes and recommend ed that the 
Ministry should take all initiatives to maintain a uniform spending pattern across each quarter 
under this head, as the sub-heads here are not subject to fluctuating expenditure.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Out of a sum of Rs. 40.36 crores during 2014 -15 under Establishment, Rs. 12.83 crores was 
allocated for e -Migrate project under the Head Information Technology (Office Expenditure). 
More than 79% of the total savings made under the S ecretariat/Establishment head has been on 
account of delay in e -Migrate project going live. In addition, savings have been on account of 
reduced spending on overtime allowance (66%), medical expenses (44%), domestic travel (44%), 
foreign travel (50%). The Ministry has noted the recommendation as regard to taking initiative and 
maintaining uniform spending pattern across each quarter for the various Heads under the 
Secretariat/Establishment head. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee note that after the decentralization of work relating to printing and dispatch 
of the OCI cards there will be no role of MOIA in the Overseas Citizenship of India Scheme at all. 
The Committee are not in agreement with such decision where the Ministr y has been kept devoid 
of any role in such an important matter relating to Indian Diaspora. The Committee feel strongly 
that with such decision the country may lose the goodwill which we expect from the Indian 
Diaspora. The Committee have clear view that w ithout the involvement of MOIA in the scheme, 
the engagement with the Diaspora and earning their goodwill may not be possible. The Committee, 

29 
 
therefore, desire a stronger and defined role of the Ministry in this scheme particularly in the 
scrutiny part and implementation of the scheme as a whole. 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has already started the exercise of 
updating the data of NRIs and PIOs from different parts of the world. It had been felt by the 
Committee that the absence of suc h a comprehensive data base is a major lacuna in the framing of 
policies on various issues affecting the Diaspora and in implementing the same. The Committee 
would therefore recommend that this exercise should be expedited and concluded at the earliest 
and the Committee should also be apprised about the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The decision to decentralize the printing and dispatch of OCI documents to Indian 
Missions/ Posts abroad/MEA has been taken with a view to reduce the time line involved in the 
issue of OCI Cards.  Government aims to reduce this period to 7 days and this can be possible only 
if the card is printed in the Missions/Posts itself.  However, notwithstanding transfer of the printing 
work to MEA, this Ministry will continue to discharge  other functions entrusted to it under the 
Allocation of Business Rules, with regard to Overseas Citizen of India card holders.   
The MOIA has already completed the exercise to compile data of NRI and PIO population 
in 206 countries/independent territories and the revised list has been uploaded on MOIA‟s website. 
The population of overseas Indians is presently over 28 million of which around 60% comprise 
Persons of Indian origin (PIO). Revision of this data will be undertaken from time to time.  
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
The Committee note the Mahatma Gandhi PravasiSurakshaYojana (MGPSY) was launched in 
May, 2012 and is already available for workers to subscribe across India and UAE. The Committee 
however, are constrained to note that the Ministry has so far been successful in enrolling only 1265 
workers under the scheme. Further, the Ministry has not made any budgetary allocation for the 
scheme for 2015 -16 on the ground that it is considering a revamp of the scheme to make it a 
Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for Overseas Indian Workers. The Committee are of the 
considered view that even when the revamp of the scheme is being considered, it should not have 
come in the way for allocating sufficient funds to the scheme. Not all ocating any fund is like 
halting a scheme and preventing the new subscribers joining the scheme till it is revamped. The 

30 
 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should come out with the revamped scheme and till 
then new interested subscribers should  be enrolled in the existing scheme and contribution of 
Government should continue for old as well as new subscribers. The Committee also desire that 
the Ministry should augment its media campaign and other efforts in order to make the scheme 
attractive to ECR and Non-ECR workers alike. 
Reply of the Government 
The account Head for MGPSY is as under: 
Demand No. 70-Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, 
2061- External Affairs (Major Head) 
00.800 – Other Expenditure (Minor Head) 
03 – Other Schemes (Sub Head), 
00.03 – Other Items. 
03.03.50 – Other Charges (Object Head) 
under which Rs.  1, 50,00,000 in BE 2015-16. 
 Steps are being undertaken to revamp the MGPSY scheme. Secretary, MOIA has already 
held two meetings with the stakeholders of MGPSY to discuss the issue s arising in the 
implementation of the scheme. An important issue is that the „NPS lite‟ scheme, which was a 
component of MGPSY, has been discontinued. This has been replaced with the Atal Pension 
Yojana (APS) which has certain different scheme inclusions,  eligibility and implementation 
modalities.  
 The suggestion regarding creating awareness on the scheme is noted for guidance. 
 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee observe that the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) has 
been running since 2006 -07 and a total of 760 candidates have availed of the scholarship since 
inception of the scheme. However, the Committee are distressed to note that the number of 
applications received under the programme is continuousl y decreasing. For the year 2014 -15 only 
190 applications have been received from the Diaspora Children which looks quiet inadequate in 
view of the fact that the Ministry is considering a proposal to increase the number of scholarships 
from 100 to 200. The Committee would therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should analyze the reasons for losing the interest by Diaspora children for scholarships 
offered under this scheme, including the standing and accreditation of the institut ions and the type 
of courses being offered to the students and also take remedial steps. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry should set up kiosks showcasing the main features of the SPDC 

31 
 
during the PravasiBhartiya Divas (PBD) celebrations so tha t a larger number of Diaspora are 
acquainted with the scheme. The Committee would also recommend that the Ministry should take 
steps to improve its spending pattern under the scheme.   
Reply of the Government 
The SPDC Scheme is being revised so that schola rships are given to those students who 
secure admission in reputed colleges/universities across India. This measure may improve the 
number, quality and quantity of applicants under the scheme. There will be one year holiday for 
2015-16 i.e. there would not  be any scholarships given for a fresh batch during 2015 -16 and the 
new revised scheme will be implemented from 2016 onwards. However, the existing students 
(admitted in previous years) would continue for the existing scholarships in view of the 
commitments already made as per the present scheme.  The recommendations of the committee for 
setting up Kiosks showcasing the main features of the SPDC during the PravasiBharatiya Divas 
(PBD) celebrations is noted for future guidance.  Grant of scholarship to selec ted students, is a 
committed expenditure and the Ministry will disburse this amount to all eligible scholars annually.   
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

33 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee observe that the amount of Rs. 1.00  crore was allocated to the Ministry 
during 2014-15 under the sub -head „International Conferences/ Meetings‟ and it was reduced to 
Rs. 10.00 lakh at RE stage. The Ministry has reasoned that it could not organize any Conference/ 
Meeting during the year, the refore, funds could not be spent for that purpose. The Committee 
strongly criticize the Ministry for not organizing any Meeting or Conference related to Diaspora 
engagement and discussions with counterparts from the foreign countries and also for finalizat ion 
of Agreements/ MOUs during the year. The Committee also note that for the year 2015 -16, the 
Ministry has got an allocation of Rs. 0.76 crore, but there is no advance planning of Conferences/ 
Meetings also. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend t hat the Ministry should conduct 
advance planning for all the Conferences/ Meetings to the organized during the financial year 
alongwith the proposed expenditure well in advance, keeping in view its requirements of Diaspora 
engagements and holding discussio ns with its foreign counterparts to avoid such failure in 
organizing any Conference/ Meeting during 2015-16 also. 
Reply of the Government 
This recommendation is related to the International Seminars/ Conferences and planning 
the proposed expenditure well i n advance. The Committee‟s recommendation regarding drawing 
up a schedule of seminars/conferences to be organised during the financial year are noted for 
future guidance. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
The Committee understand that  the aim of the Overseas Indian Centres is to extend a host of 
counselling services to Overseas Indian workers and towards this end the centres in Abu Dhabi, 
Kuala Lumpur and Washington have been opened. But the Committee have confirmed information 
that even these three centres are not working effectively. Secretary, MOIA has also accepted the 
position and has underlined the reason for this as lack of clear mandate for these offices. 
Moreover, the Ministry also has no information about the exact number of w orkers benefitted 

34 
 
through these centres. The Committee would therefore, desire that the Ministry should 
immediately work out a clear and unambiguous mandate for these centres by holding consultations 
with Cabinet Secretariat / other stakeholder Ministries as well as asking the NRI beneficiaries 
themselves. The Committee also feel that these centres have been instrumental in engaging and 
helping the Overseas Indian Community and therefore, desire that more such Centres should be 
opened particularly in the countries with significant Diaspora population.  
Reply of the Government 
The Committee‟s recommendations have been noted for future guidance. Further steps 
would be taken in consultation with the stakeholders concerned. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee observe that the SwarnaPravasYojana is an ambitious programme of the 
Ministry to impart skill development for overseas employment to the Indian youth during the 12 th 
Five Year Plan. The scheme has now been renamed as „Prava siKaushalVikasYojana‟. The Plan 
Scheme seeks to adhere to the broad objectives of skill development in India, as envisioned in the 
National Skill Development Policy, 2009 as the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has been 
identified to train 5 million peo ple by 2022 under this policy. For the 12 th Five year Plan the total 
project cost envisaged is Rs. 137 crore and during the five years 2.08 lakh youth are to be trained 
under the scheme with the Government incurring a cost of Rs. 7500 per person for traini ng. The 
Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry has not made any progress in implementation of 
the scheme. The Committee further note that the Pilot Project titled “Skill Development Initiative 
for Potential Migrants from North Eastern States of In dia” was launched by the Ministry in 2011 
which had failed to achieve its targets in terms of training for requisite skills for overseas 
employment and for placement for overseas employment. Now it appears that the Ministry would 
be missing the target for training youth under the scheme. In fact, the Ministry could not spend a 
single Rupee during 2014-15. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take lessons from the 
failure of the pilot project and work out a joint strategy along with specially created Ministry i.e. 
the Ministry of skill Development and Entrepreneurship, towards the end objective of providing 
better Overseas employment opportunities under the scheme by utilizing the allocated plan funds 
during remaining two years of the current Plan period.  

35 
 
Reply of the Government 
 All recommendations of the Standing Committee on External Affairs have been noted for 
guidance. The Ministry is taking urgent steps for implementation of the Scheme expeditiously in 
consultation with the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship.  
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee welcome the initiative of the Government to constitute the Prime 
Minister‟s Global Advisory Council of people of Indian origin (PMGAC -OI) which is a platform 
for the Prime Minister to draw upon the experience, knowledge and wisdom of eminent people of 
Indian Origin in diverse fields from across the world. The Committee are hopeful that such a body 
will be instrumental in enhancing the sense of participation within the Diaspora and in the long run 
its recommendations could act as guiding light for the Ministry in formulating and implementing 
its policies and programmes. The Committee also recommend that the Membership of the Council 
should truly reflect the diversity of Indian Diaspora by incorporating eminent persons representing 
various fields and geographical regions and their recommendations should be taken seriously to 
enhance and strengthen the engagement and participation of Overseas Indians.   
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee that PMGAC should truly represent the 
diversity of the Indian Diaspora and incorporate eminent persons representing various fields and 
geographical areas is noted for future guidance.  
The recommendation of the PMGAC has guided the Ministry in its introduction of several 
schemes/initiatives for diaspora engagement.  These include (i) setting up of the India 
Development Foundation for Overseas Indian (IDF. OI) for strengthening the i nstitutional 
mechanism for promoting philanthropy and sound development in India by the Overseas Indian 
Community (ii) Creating data base of Overseas Indian by getting data from Indian Missions abroad 
(iii) Having a special session on Youth during the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas to forum on the changes 
taking place in the second & third generation of the Diasporas & other issues (iv) holding a 
Regional PBD in Sydney in November 2013 and (v) Study India Programme. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 

36 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee observe that the project for construction of Pravasi  Bhartiya Kendra in 
New Delhi has been delayed inordinately. The previo usly announced target date for completion 
was the PravasiBhartiya Divas, 2015 and the same could not be adhered to. Now the Ministry 
plans to get the building inaugurated on 15 August, 2015 after finishing the work of furnishing and 
finishing. The Committe e now hope that the Ministry would undertake all out efforts in order to 
ensure that the project is finished well within the new deadline. In the Committee‟s view it would 
not be a tall order for the Ministry to accomplish this mission as in the part it wa s held up due to 
lack of funds and this time the Ministry has evinced satisfaction at the availability of funds at its 
disposal for the completion of work.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Efforts are being made to complete the work of Pravasi  Bhartiya Kendra so that it is ready 
for inauguration as early as possible.  The construction works is nearly complete and we are taking 
steps to make the building functional. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee are aware that the Ministry ha s been running an awareness campaign since 
2007 in order to create wider awareness among the general public on a variety of issues related to 
legal, safe and orderly migration. But, the Committee are not impressed at all with the justification 
given by the  Ministry that during the whole year 2014 -15 the Ministry did not undertake any 
media awareness campaign as it was reviewing the campaign in order to make it more effective. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should proceed to conduct a yearlong 
effective media campaign with the defined objectives of creating awareness about legal, safe and 
orderly migration and cautioning people about illegal practices being faced by migrants including 
harassment and desertion by NRI spouses. In this reg ard, the Committee would specifically desire 
that the nature of assistance being provided to deserted/abandoned NRI wives should be modified 
and advertised widely. The Committee also recommend that the amount of financial assistance for 

37 
 
such suffering wome n should also be enhanced and they should be suitable educated about such 
enhancements. The Committee are also aware that social media has emerged as a very viable 
platform for public exchange today and its rising use among the new generation is beyond dis pute. 
The messages floated on social media are more amenable to easy dissemination and recall.  
 The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should come out with a 
blueprint to make extensive use of social media tools in this regard to bene fit the would -be 
emigrants and to educate them about legal and safe migration. The Committee would desire that 
the Ministry should commission an independent study to assess the impact of these media 
campaigns and to undertake reviews of the broader goals f rom time to time. The Committee also 
desire that these media campaigns should be undertaken in Hindi and other prominent regional 
languages to increase the outreach of these campaigns to the wider public.  
 
Reply of the Government 
For Financial Year 2015 -16 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has an allocation of Rs. 
9.50 crore for Awareness Campaign/Media Plan.  
2.    The Ministry has reviewed and re -oriented media awareness plan of the Ministry and for 
2015-16, the Ministry proposes to undertake a media c ampaign in Television, Radio including in 
regional languagesespecially in stateswhere the problems pertaining to migrant workers are most 
prevalent.  
 3.  The campaign for 2015 -16 in multiple media is proposed to be conducted on the theme of 
Safe and Legal migration of the Indian Migrant workers to foreign countries for employment and 
other important issues. 
 4.  The campaign will enhance awareness about the precautions to be taken before migrating, 
ways of ensuring safe and legal migration and also inform about MOIA's Toll -free help lines 
which provide information and advice to intending migrants.  
5. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs proposes to organize a workshop in New Delhi on 
issues faced by Ind ian Women married to NRIs/PIOs,  in coordination wit h the National 
Commission for Women and the NRI Departments/ Commissions of  concerned State 
Governments. 
6.  MOIA has a scheme for providing legal and financial assistance to Indian women deserted by 
their Non -ResidentIndians(NRIs)andPersonsofIndianOrigin(PIOs) overseas spouse.  MOIA has 
taken note of the committee‟s recommendation that there should be review of the scheme for 

38 
 
future guidance. 
7.  Ministry has also taken note of the committee‟s recommendation that Ministry should 
make extensive use of soci al media tools in our media awareness campaign; and that an 
independent study could be constituted to   study the impact of this Ministry‟s media campaign for 
future guidance.  
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee note that  the Ministry has failed to spend even a small amount of Rs. 5 
crore allocated during 2014 -15 for a very important scheme for Promotion of Cultural ties with 
Diaspora. The Committee understand that culture and language play a major role in the lives of the  
people and communities and it is the common thread which can bind people belonging to 
otherwise diverse persuasions. But it seems, the Ministry has no planning to foster cultural ties 
with the Diaspora.  The Committee are happy to note that the allocation for the year 2015-16 under 
the scheme has been enhanced by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should prepare a set of programmes through which they can help reinforce the cultural identity of 
People of Indian Origin in meaningful ways. In this regard, the Committee would also suggest that 
the Ministry should undertake their programmes in active collaboration with India Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR) by using their physical presence in a number of countries and 
engagement in similar activities. 
 The Committee would also like to suggest that the Ministry should explore the idea of 
opening stalls at major Airports of the world showcasing and promoting Indian culture to a larger 
population including the Diaspora. The Committ ee are of the view that these stalls may have the 
potential to emerge as major points of engagement with the Diaspora in the long run.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 A substantial part of the allotment under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora was 
for the Ghadar Memorial Project in San Francisco. Doubts had arisen on the cost proposed for 
renovation of the memorial. There are several issues which require consultation with the Overseas 
Indian Communities at the local level. This is being planned.  The initial estimate received for 
renovation was approximately Rs.37 Crores.   

39 
 
Further, ICCR has now been requested to identify the scope of various joint   activities through 
which MOIA could help reinforce the cultural identity of Persons of Indian Origin (P IOs) in 
meaningful ways. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has also been addressed to understand the 
feasibility of opening stalls at major airports of the world for sharing & promoting Indian Culture 
to a larger population including the Indian Diaspora.   
  (File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee observe that the Know India Programme (KIP) is an important vehicle for 
an engagement with the next generation of the Indian Diaspora and for fostering their close bond 
with contemporary India. The Ministry had been able to organize five such programmes during the 
year 2014 -15. The Committee are further pleased to note that the Ministry has enhanced the 
budgetary allocation for the programme from Rs. 4.50 crore during 2014 -15 to Rs. 8.00  crore for 
2015-16 and is also considering an increase in the number of participants and enriching its content.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the platform of KIP offers the Government a very good 
opportunity to engage with the new generation of Di aspora. KIP can prove to be an effective 
vehicle for continuous engagement with the next generation of influential diaspora as many of 
them will become opinion makers in their respective countries in the coming years. Therefore, the 
Committee are of the op inion that the Ministry should use innovative communication tools like 
social media to stay in touch with the participants of the programmes once the programme comes 
to an end and the participants return to their respective countries. 
 The Committee would also recommend that the Ministry should make the programme more 
broad based so as to include more number of States in its programme. It should be ensured that the 
programme reflects the diversity of the country and not a partial impression. Care should be taken 
to enhance the educational aspects of the KIP so that is does not get reduced to a mere tourist 
programme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Know India Programme (KIP), an engagement programme with the next generation of the 
Indian Diaspora and for fostering their close bond with contemporary India is being revised. It has 
been decided to increase the no. of editions of the programme from 4 to 18 per year and the 
duration of the programme has also been increased from 21 to 25 days. State Governments have 

40 
 
also been requested for hosting KIPs in their states.  The Committee‟s recommendation for use of 
social media to stay in touch with the participants once the Programmes are over, is noted for 
further guidance.  Presently KIP participants get educational inputs  from the Indian Institute of 
Public Administration (IIPA) & Council for Cultural Research & Training (CCRT) in Delhi in the 
class room sessions The Ministry has also written to State Governments stating that there should 
be interaction between the partici pants & students in State Universities during the State leg of the 
KIP. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee are aware that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has set up an 
Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) a s a not -for-profit trust in partnership with the 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII). The Centre is a „one -stop shop‟ and seeks to serve the 
interests of the Overseas Indian Community and has the mandate to cover areas of Investment 
Facilitation and Kno wledge Networking. The Committee are pleased to note that OIFC has been 
successful in organizing two economic engagement meeting with the Indian Diaspora in Bahrain 
and London where more than 500 participants were enrolled. The Committee, however, feel tha t a 
lot has to be done in order to increase the outreach of the Centre with an objective to attract more 
and more investments from the Diaspora to India. The Committee would therefore, strongly 
recommend that OIFC should also take immediate steps to widely  publicize the „Make of India‟ 
programme of the Government to the Diaspora. The Committee would also hope that the lower 
allocation for the year 2015-16 will not be a hurdle in running the Centre and that it is in line with 
the original mandate of OIFC to move gradually to a self -sustaining business model. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the impact of the new model on the functioning of 
OIFC. 
Reply of the Government 
1. In 2015-16 the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre will facilitate a sustai ned and proactive 
engagement of the overseas Indians with the Indian economy, through some new programmes and 
initiatives; and through active engagement with the State Governments to offer their investment 
projects to the Overseas Indians. The new Programmes & Initiatives include : 

41 
 
 Organising “Investor Connect meets” in select foreign countries  with prominent overseas 
Indians; Indian Diaspora corporate leaders and decision makers to focus their attention on 
the Indian market.  
 Organizing visits to India by business delegations led by overseas Indians.  
 Know Indian Economy programme  to provide young Diaspora Entrepreneurs an insight 
into the Indian economy, market and business environment, in partnership with a business 
School in India.  
 India Corporate Inter nship programme for senior level students of Indian -origin in MBA, 
Science & Technology courses, to provide them an opportunity of work experience in 
India‟s premier corporate organizations. 
2. While OIFC was expected to move towards self -sustainability over a period of time, the 
Governing Council of OIFC recommended in July 2015 that given OIFC‟s role and scope of 
activities under the Action Plan for 2015-16, the Government would have to continue its support to 
OIFC with adequate budget allocation to enabl e outreach events outside India, and seek 
participation of overseas Indians in the new initiatives. 
3. In order to promote the „Make in India‟ programme of the Government, OIFC would 
supplement the efforts of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promoti on, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry by working with “Invest India” a body set -up the Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry and FICCI to promote Make in India. 
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 The Committee are hopeful that the Draft Emi gration Management Bill will overhaul the 
basic architecture of emigration in the country. The Committee would like to welcome this 
initiative of the Ministry which is long overdue in view of the significant transformations in the 
processes and dynamics of emigration in the recent past. The Committee understand that the Draft 
Bill had undergone consultations with other Ministries/ Agencies to arrive at a consensus. The 
Committee are happy to note that the draft of the Bill is at finalization stage. The Comm ittee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to expedite the inter -Ministerial consultations once the final draft is 
ready and to ensure that the Bill is discussed with the Committee before being introduced in the 
Monsoon Session of the Parliament.  
 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
The draft of the Emigration Management Bill is at final stage however before it is sent for 
consultations with other Ministries/ Agencies, an overview has to be taken by the Ministry afresh. 
 The recommendation of the Committee for discussion of Bill with it before it is introduced 
in the Parliament has been noted.  
(File No. H-11021/04/2015-P&C) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                          DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
......November,2015                                                                             Chairperson,  
......Kartika, 1937 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 

43 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 20th  OCTOBER, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20 th October, 2015 from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
3. Prof (Dr) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
6. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
9. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
10. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
13. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
14.  Dr. Karan Singh 
15. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
16. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on: (i) XXX XXX 
XXX XXX XXX XXX (ii)  XXX XXX XXX XXX  (iii) A ction taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifth Report on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2015-16.  

44 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in 
the draft Reports. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Comm ittee adopted the 
draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members.  It was also decided that since Parliament is 
not in session the Chairperson may present the reports to the Hon'ble Speaker under Rule 71A of 
the Directions by the Speaker with a request to permit the printing, publication and circulation of 
the Reports under Rule 280 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of B usiness in Lok Sabha and 
subsequently, these Reports will be presented to both the Houses of the Parliament after 
commencement of the next session.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF 
THE STAN DING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                 16 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,6,9 and 11 
 Total-06 
 
Percentage:  37.50% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government replies. 
 
NIL                  Total - 00 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply  of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 4,13,14 and 16 
Total- 04 
 
 Percentage: 25% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of Government are 
still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 5,7,8,10,12 and 15 
Total-06 
 
Percentage: 37.50% 
 
 
 