 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2015-16] 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/AGRAHAYANA, 1937 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
10 
 

 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2015-16] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
            December, 2015/AGRAHAYANA, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
COEA NO. 122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-2016)……......        (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..                 (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………….                      1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted                             
  by the Government………………………………......           32 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…                           61 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………..                         63 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………..             67         
ANNEXURE 
Schedule of Events for Tendering Process of Package 1 Tender of Phase I  
Construction of Nalanda University's Master Plan        ......                                    76 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I.        Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held on 21.12.2015                          77                                                              
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the  Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs  (16th 
Lok Sabha)           ....................................                                                                     79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-16) 
 
Sl. No.   Name of Members 
  
 1.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6.  Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.   Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 9.  Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 10.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11.  Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 12.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14.  Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17.  Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18.  Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20.  Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21.  Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 23.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 24.  Smt. Kanimozhi 
 25.  Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 26.  Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 27.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 28.  Shri D. P. Tripathi 
 29.  Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 30.  Vacant  
 31.  Vacant 
                           
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cyril John  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Under Secretary 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on External Affairs (201 5-16) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth Report                
(16th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2015-16. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented  to the Parliament  on 28th April, 201 5. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 19th November, 2015. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting held 
on 21st December, 2015. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on 
External Affairs (16th Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                               DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                                   
21 December, 2015                                                               Chairperson,                                  
30  Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)                                                

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contain ed in their Six th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2015 -16) of the Ministry of External Affairs which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th April, 2015. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos  1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 19, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29,   
33, 34, 36, 37, 38 and 40 
 Total-23 
 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies. 
 
Recommendations No.  32 
Total- 01 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 17, 20, 22 and 39 
Total- 04 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3, 5, 6, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 25, 30, 31 and 35 
Total-12 
 
3. The Committee desire that final  replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I 
and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the G overnment on some of their 
observations/recommendations. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee had observed that during Budget Estimates 2014 -15, the Ministry of 
External Affairs had sought an allocation of Rs. 26,111.23 crore; however, the actual allocation at 
the Budget Estimate(BE) stage was Rs. 14,730.39 crore. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended to the Ministry to vigorously pursue substantially enhanced allocations at Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage. The Committee, however, were dismayed to note that instead of increasing 
the allocation, in an unprecedented move, the budgetary allocation of the Ministry  of External 
Affairs was reduced by Rs. 2,110.39 crore at RE stage. This reduction was in spite of the fact that 
the Ministry had registered an expenditure of 68% in BE till December, 2014 and had actually 
sought an additional allocation of Rs. 2999.30 cro re at RE stage. The Committee were concerned 
to note that in spite of the intervention made at the level of External Affairs Minister, the situation 
was not improved. The Committee were unhappy to note that even at the supplementary stage, no 
cash supplementary was provided initially to the Ministry. 
 The Committee were particularly dismayed to note that there was substantial reduction in 
allocation at the RE stage when there were several visits by Head of Government/Minister of 
External Affairs and require ment of more resources by the concerned Missions/Posts and 
resources to execute the commitments for aid/ assistance made with various countries as well as 
several high level visits to India by foreign dignitaries and commitmen ts made therein. The 
Committee were distressed to take note of the lukewarm attitude of the Government of India and 
in particular the Ministry of Finance towards the conduct of India's foreign policy and hope d that 
this approach would change during the current Financial Year. 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''Ministry acknowledges the concern shown by the Hon‟ble Committee regarding 
the budgetary challenges faced by it. There has also been practically no 
augmentation in the Non Plan allocation in 2015-16. The Ministry would continue 
to actively liaise with the Ministry of Finance in seeking additional funds allocated 
in Supplementary Demands/Revised Estimates.'' 

3 
 
7. The Committee are concerned to note that despite their repeated recommendations 
for enhancement of Budget allocation for the Ministry of External Affairs to meet India's 
international obligations, the situation has not improved and practically there is no 
augmentation in the Non-Plan allocation in 2015-16. The Ministry has shown its helplessness 
by stating that it will continue its efforts to liaise with the Ministry of Finance for seeking 
additional funds at supplementary Demand/Revised Estimates. 
 The Committee wish to express their dis appointment at this approach of  the 
Ministry of Finance for providing such meagre allocations at  the Revised Estimates stage 
instead of suitably increasing it.  The Committee strongly feel that due to such an 
unreasonable attitude of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of External Aff airs will once 
again be forced to cut short  the execution of international commitments for aid/assistance 
and the functions of Mission/posts will also repetitively affected . The Committee, therefore,  
wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation to  the Government to impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance the need to suitably enhance allocations at the Supplementary Demands 
and Revised Estimates stage of 2015-16 and at BE during the year 2016-17. 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
8. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of External Affairs during the Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2015 -16 had sought an allocation of Rs. 20,034. 62 crore comprising a Plan 
component of Rs. 5,583.69 crore and a Non -Plan component of Rs. 14,450.93 crore. The 
Committee, however, were distressed to note that the proposed budgetary allocation was only Rs. 
14,966.83 crore with a Plan component of Rs. 5,336.20 crore and Non -Plan component of Rs. 
9,630.63 crore. The Committee were concerned that the budgetary allocation during BE 2015 -16 
was only 1.6% more than the ove rall BE 2014-15 allocation and wa s 25.3% less than the sought 
budgetary allocation. The Committee were deeply concerned about the budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry and wondered whether that allocation was reflective of the priority being attached by the 
Government of India to foreign policy, particularly when India aspire d to be a big power in the 
twenty-first century and was the third largest emerging economy. Considering the global nature of 
the Ministry's engagement, the task laid before the Ministry and the responsibility to execute 

4 
 
India's aid commitments and the nature of the Ministry's expenditure, the Committee  had strongly 
recommended that the Government should ensure the predictability and full funding of the 
Ministry at the BE stage itself. The Committee, however, were of the firm opinion that in view of 
substantially reduced allocation as compared to the allocation sought by the Ministry at BE stage, 
the Ministry of Finance should allocate suitably enhanced allocat ions to the Ministry at the RE 
2015-16 stage. The Committee, had therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs 
pursue the request for enhanced budgetary allocation not only with the Ministry of Finance but 
also at the highest level at RE 2015 -16 stage as well as well as during discussions for BE 2016 -
17. 
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
 "Ministry would continue to actively pursue the request for enhanced allocations with 
the Ministry of Finance in Supplementary Demands/Revised Estimates of 2015 -16. 
The Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation is also expected to give the necessary 
fillip to the Ministry‟s cause." 
10. In view of the fact  that against the projected amount of Rs. 20034.62 crore fo r the 
Ministry of External Affairs, the allocations made at Budget Estimate s stage of 2015-16 was 
Rs. 14,966.83 crore( both plan and non -plan) only, the Committee had expressed their 
concern over such budgetary mismatch  considering the global nature of the Ministry's 
engagement. The Committee had , therefore,  recommended the Government to ensure the 
predictability and full funding of the Ministry at Budget Estimate s stage itself. However, in 
view of the reduction of allocations at Budget Estimate s 2015-16 aga inst the projected 
amount, the Committee had desired the Ministry of Finance to suitably enhance the 
allocation at Revised Estimate stage.  
 But the Committee are concerned to note that although the Ministry of Finance in its 
Budget Circular 2016-17 has asked the Ministry to convey its proposal for Revised Estimate 
and Budget Estimate s by 23 rd October, 2015, in the action taken replies furnished to the 
Committee on 19 th November, 2015, the Ministry of External Affairs has simply stated that 
it will continue  to actively pursue the request for enhanced allocations with the Ministry of 
Finance in Supplementary Demand/Revised Estimates for the year 2015 -16, without 
mention of any specific proposal sent to the Ministry of Finance for obtaining additional 

5 
 
funds at Supplementary Demands/RE stage 2015-16 and BE 2016-17 and the response of the 
Ministry of Finance thereon. The Committee, therefore, do not approve such inaction on the 
part of the Ministry and reiterate that the Ministry should chalk out its budgetary 
requirements well in advance and pursue the same with Ministry of Finance . The 
Committee also call on the Government of India to ensure it  through all the available 
methods. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this direction.  
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
11. The Committee had noted that due to the lack of resources available with the Ministry of 
External Affairs, expenditure under several Heads relating to aid to various countries had been 
reduced and the payments were curtailed/deferred to the next Financial Year i.e. 2015 -16. The 
Committee were concerned to take note of the lack of additional allocation during BE 2015 -16 to 
the Ministry of External Affairs to accommodate for last year's payment as well as any provision 
for new announcements/commitments to be made a t international f ora. The Committee we re 
concerned at the paradox of pursuing an active foreign policy and simultaneously, cutting the 
allocations of Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the 
Government should ensure that the Ministry's allocation was in tune with the Government's policy 
and under no circumstance the Ministry wa s forced to adhere to the economy cut at RE stage on 
lines of other Ministries/Departments in view of peculiar character of the Ministry's expenditure. 
The Committee had further recommended a substantial enhancement of the budgetary allocation 
at RE 2015 -16 stage in tune with the requirements and commitments for aid/assistance being 
made internationally. The Committee had further recommend ed that if new international 
commitments were made during the first three quarters of the financial year then the Ministry 
must be provided additional grants at the Supplementary Grants stage and the cash supplementary 
might be provided to the Ministry for f ulfilment of those international commitments. The 
Committee had reiterated that the Ministry of Finance must not jeopardize the nation's prestige in 
this manner. 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 

6 
 
 ''The Ministry will continue its efforts with the Ministry of Finance to secure 
additional funds in order to give effect to the various foreign policy initiatives 
made at the highest levels.''   
 
13. While noting the paradox of pursuing wide-ranging foreign po licy initiatives  and 
simultaneously cutting the allocations of Ministry of External Affairs, the Committee had 
recommended that the Government should ensure that the Ministry’s allocation is in tune 
with the Government’s international commitments made at the highest levels and under no 
circumstances should the Ministry be forced to adhere to severe cuts at Revised Estimate s 
stage, causing delay in implementation of these international projects;  indeed, substantial 
enhancement should be made at Revised Estimate s stage. In response to this, the Ministry 
has just stated that it would continue its efforts with the Ministry of Finance to secure 
additional funds  without mention of any concrete efforts made in this regard and the  
outcome thereof. The Committee , therefore, would like to reiterate that the Ministry must 
engage with the Ministry of Finance to ensure and secure  allocations at Revised Estimates 
2015-16 stage and Budget Estimates 2016 -17 with the specific mandate of ful filling the 
requirements of international projects/aid commitment s made at the highest level. Should 
the Ministry of Finance continue to prove intractable, the Ministry of External Affairs 
should bring the matter to the attention of the Prime Minister sinc e the nation's credibility 
has been undermined. 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
14. The Committee had noted that several commitments were made by the Prime Minister 
during Financial year 2014-15, but the economic implications were not factored in the allocations 
at R E 2014 -15 stage. The Committee we re doubtful whether the full financial implication of 
Prime Min ister's announcement for aid/assistance ha d been accommodated in the budgetary 
allocation during BE 2015 -16. The Committee we re concerned about such lack of allocation by 
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore,  had recommended that the Ministry should 
engage with the Ministry of Finance for obtaining additional resources and give due priority to 
execution of the international commitments made at the highest levels.  

7 
 
 Furthermore, in view of the several international commitments made at the level of Head 
of State/Head of Government/External Affairs Minister, the Committee had suggested that the 
Ministry must keep the concerned offices apprised about the pace of the project as well as 
constraints, if any, in implementation of the projects including  the financial constraints due to 
lack of allocation by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee had viewed that, involvement of the 
concerned high offices may facilitate taking up the issue of lack of allocation with the Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''The advice of the Hon‟ble Committee has been taken note of. Ministry would 
continue to engage with the Ministry of Finance in order to obtain additional funds 
to further the commitments made.  Ministry would also continue to appraise the 
Ministry of Finance about these commitments and the pace of the projects, and 
also involve the high offices concerned in taking up the issue of augmentation of 
resources with the Ministry of Finance.''  
 
16. The Committee were concerned about lack of allocations by the Ministry of Finance 
towards the Prime Minister’s announcement for aid/assistance during the year 2014 -15 and 
2015-16. The Committee were of the strong view that by not providing the allocations,  
India’s prestige at the international  fora will definitely face a serious setback. Agreeing to 
the recommendations of the Committee, t he Ministry of External Affairs has stated that it 
will continue to engage with the Ministry of Finance for obtaining ad ditional funds and 
would continue to apprise the Ministry of Finance about the pace of such projects and 
commitments by involving high officers. The Ministry however has not submitted the status 
report of such projects and efforts made so far in this regar d.  The Committee, therefore, 
may b e furnished with the full details and outcome in this regard within 3 months of 
presentation of this report.  
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
17. The Committee had taken note of the budgetary cuts during RE 2014 -15 for aid/assistance 
to countries under various Heads. The Committee had noted that provision for grants/projects 

8 
 
were made in allocation during BE 2014 -15, yet grant assistance to Bangladesh, Myanmar and 
Palestine was deferred to the Financial Year 2015 -16 due to budgetary cuts du ring RE 2014 -15. 
The Committee were of the view that such delays in execution of commit ments/project adversely 
reflected upon India's credibility. In the  context of the severe financial constraints faced by the 
Ministry over the years and its impact on execution of the projects abroad, the Committee in their 
previous Report had suggested to create a separate Head for announcement of aid/assistance made 
by Head of State/Head of Government/Minister of External Affairs. The Committee had observed 
that not much progress had  been made in this regard except for issuing of a letter and a reminder 
by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, had reiterated that Ministry should pursue the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance for creation of this Head and ensure availability of sufficient funds 
under this Head.  
 The Committee had further suggested to the Ministry to engage with Ministry of Finance 
to explore the possibility of bifurcation of Ministry's  budget to include allocations earmarked for 
the internal usage of the Ministry in one part while a separate budget for all the 
international/bilateral commitments for aid and assistance so that the aid and assistance 
programme were not affected by the economy cut by the Ministry of Finance, which had  over the 
years become a regular feature at RE stage.  
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''Ministry has taken up the matter of opening a new head of account to 
accommodate the budget relating to high level commitments once again with the 
Ministry of Finance by flagging the issue to the Joint Secretary (Budget).   
2. The possibility of bifurcatin g the Ministry‟s budget as suggested by the 
Hon‟ble Committee would also be explored in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance. The Hon‟ble Committee would be apprised of the outcome in due 
course.'' 
 
19. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken u p the matter of opening a new 
Head of Account to accommodate the budget relating to commitments of aid/assistance with 
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee treat this step as very essential because the creation 

9 
 
of a separate Head of account with dedicate d matching allocation would ensure the 
execution of aid/assistance program me without any hindrance and ensure that nation’s 
prestige is not jeopardized. The Committee, therefore, desire that  the Ministry should keep 
pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Finance until the purpose is achieved and try its 
creation in the Budget 2016 -17 positively.  Similarly, the Ministry should also explore every 
possibility of bifurcating the budget of the Ministry to include allocations earmarked for 
internal usage in one part and budget for all international commitments for aid and 
assistance in the other, and apprise the Committee about the outcome in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
20. The Committee had taken  note of th e steps taken by the Central Passport Organization 
regarding filling the gap between the sanctioned cadre strength and the present working strength 
by recruitment of 450 Data Entry Operators in lieu of vacant non -gazetted posts at Group 'B' and 
'C' level. The Committee, however, had noted that th at was just a stop gap arrangement and the 
Ministry should pursue the matter with the Department of Personnel for conducting recruitment 
for vacant non -gazetted posts at the earliest. Moreover, the Committee had sug gested that the 
Ministry must ensure conducting of due security clearance and checking of credentials for the 
Data Entry Operators, thus engaged. The Committee had also noted that the Ministry had  issued 
instructions to Passport Offices to rotate the CPO o fficials between PSKs and PBOs but since 
long they ha d not been able to finalize a transfer policy governing CPO officials in view of the 
changed requirement of manpower at the PSKs and PBOs. The Committee, therefore, had desired 
that the transfer policy f or CPO should be finalized on priority basis considering the functional 
requirements both at PSKs and PBOs.  
21. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''It is submitted that as regards recruitment for vacant n on-gazetted post, the 
Ministry  has been constantly pursuing the matter with  the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC).   The  SSC has conducted examinations  for the post of Lower 
Division Clerks (LDC) and Assistants in 2014 and 2015, which is still under 

10 
 
process.  After completion of all the relevant formalities, the nominations and 
appointments  of LDCs and Assistants are expected  by December 2015.   
 
2. The Ministry would like to inform the Hon‟ble Committee  that  the 
process of security clearance and checking of credentials of Data Entry Operators 
is undertaken directly  by the Service Provider.  
 
3. The Transfer Policy  relating to  Central Passport Organization personnel  
has been revised in March, 2015 in supersession of the earlier policy guidelines 
framed in 2010, keeping in view the functional requirements of officials both at 
PSKs and PBOs.''    
 
22. The Committee observe that the recruitment pr ocess is in progress to fill up the 
vacant non -gazetted post s in the Central Passport Organisation (CPO), through the Staff 
Selection Commission (SSC) and is likely to be completed by December, 2015.  It is however 
not clear what the requirement is and how  many staff are likely to be appointed because 
there is a significant gap between the sanctioned staff strength and actual working strength.  
The Committee should be conveyed the exact position  in this regard.  The C ommittee are 
also not satisfied with the process of leaving the security clearance checking of credentials of 
data entry operators with the service provider. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should conduct due security clearances and checking of credentials of the Data 
Entry Operators by itself.  Similarly, with regard to transfer policy of the personnel o f the 
Central Passport Organisation, the Ministry has only informed the Committee that the 
transfer policy has been revised in March, 2015.  The Committee would however like to  be 
informed about the changes incorporated in the policy and whether the new policy is 
capable to cater to the functional requirements both at PSKs and PBOs. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
23. The Committee had noted that under the budgetary Head 'Entertainment Charges' 
expenditure was incurred on extending hospital ity to foreign dignitaries. It was  praiseworthy to 
note that in spite of several high profile high level visits by foreign dignitaries there was no 
significant rise of expenditure under th at Head and rather the allocation at RE stage was reduced 
to Rs. 39.00 crore during 2014-15. The Committee, however, had also noted that only time-bound 

11 
 
bills were prioritized by the Ministry. The Committee had conveyed displeasure over the practice 
of keeping the bills pending and building liabilities for the next Financial Year. The Committee  
had, therefore, recommend ed that immediate steps should be taken for the early settlement of 
pending bills. The Committee were of the opinion that in view of several such visits the budgetary 
allocation under th at Head should be increased at RE 2015 -16 stage so that the Ministry would 
able to timely process the bills.  
 
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance and enhanced 
requirements will be reflected in the RE stage so that expenditure incurred in the current 
financial year is not required to be deferred." 
25. In view of the practice of keeping the bills pending under the budgetary head 
‘Entertainment Charges’ and building liabilities for the next financial year, the Committee 
had desired that the Ministry should take adequate steps for an early settlement of pending 
bills and to pursue with the Ministry of Finance the  suitable enhancement of allocations at 
Revised Estimate for the year 2015 -16 for timely settlement of  pending bills. In response 
thereto, the Ministry has simply submitted that the recommendation o f the Committee has 
been noted for compliance and enhanced requirements will be reflected at the Revised 
Estimates stage.  
 The Committee understand that by the time of submission of action taken replies, the 
Ministry must have submitted the Supplementary Demands or Demands for RE 2015 -16.  
But t he Ministry has not mentioned anything about the proposal sent to the Ministry of 
Finance and its response thereto. Therefore, the Committee desire to be informed about the 
concrete action taken in pursuance of their recommendations.  
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
26. The Committee had noted that in spite of the overall cut in the budget allocation at RE 
stage, there was 10.35% increase under the Head 'Embassies and Missions' in view of high level 
visits by Indian Government, mandatory expenses and depreciating value of the Rupee. The 
Committee had further noted that there was  an increase of 23.61% during BE 2015 -16 over BE 

12 
 
2014-15 in the allocations under that Head. The Committee we re of the view that the increased 
allocation were not in tune with the role and functions assigned to these Miss ions/Embassies. The 
Committee, therefore, had recommended that the allocation under th at Head should be 
substantially enhanced at the RE stage. The Committee howe ver, we re distressed to note that 
there was no separate head to cater to improvement of servic es in the Missions and Posts. The 
Committee had noted that Indian Missions/Posts form India's residential diplomatic presence in 
the host country as well as first contact point for locals as well as Indians residing th ere. The 
Committee, therefore, we re of  the view that the Government should adequately focus on 
streamlining the procedure in the Indian Missions/Posts and ensure high standards of services 
rendered by them. The Committee  had  suggested the Ministry to have a mechanism to receive 
feedback from the general public regarding rendering of services by each Missions/Posts. In 
context of finalizing e -Samiksha, the Committee had suggested to the Ministry to initiate and 
complete the project in a time bound manner. The Committee had noted that the portal would be 
an effective tool in evaluating performance of Missions/Posts. The Committee, therefore, had 
suggested to the Ministry that on the basis of web data analysis the criteria like public perception 
and public feedback should also to incorporat ed. The Committee  had further suggest ed to the 
Ministry to explore the possibility of an engagement with the State Governments for reporting of 
consular grievances.  
 
27. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''MEA e -Samiksha, an online interface between the Missions/Posts and 
Headquarters has been made operational by the Ministry with the objective of 
bringing in greater synergy between Ministry and Missions, including on delivery 
of public services.  Another web portal online Consular Grievances Monitoring 
System named MADAD , also has provision of receiving public perception and 
feedback, including appreciation and suggestions , in order to improve the 
grievance mechanism system.  As far as engagement with the St ate Governments 
for reporting of consular grievances is concerned, the Branch Secretariats in 
Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad and Kolkata have been associated with this portal 
for registration of consular grievances and its follow up. The portal is designed t o 
accept suggestions from any registered user, who can be an individual or an 
organisation.'' 
 

13 
 
28. The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of their recommendations, the 
Ministry has streamlined its proc edure and mechanisms like e-Samiksha and  an online 
consular grievances monitoring portal named MADAD has been put in place. Moreover, the 
Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad and Kolkata have also been 
associated with the portal for registration of consular grievances and its follow up. The 
portal is designed to accept suggestions from any registered user who can be an individual 
or an organization.  The Committee desire that other States from where more and more 
people go abroad for jobs should also be associated with the portal.  The  Committee had 
noted that the allocation under the head Embassies and Missions' was enhanced during BE 
2015-16 over BE 2014 -15.  However, the Committee had not found it in tune with the role 
and  functions assigned to these Missions/Posts.  Accordingly, th ey had recommended that 
allocation under this head should be enhanced suitably at RE stage. But the Ministry’s reply 
is silent with regard to the efforts made by it for enhancement of allocations at the Revised 
Estimates stage. Therefore, the Committee des ire the Ministry to apprise them about the 
action taken in this regard.  
 
 (Recommendation No. 13) 
 
29. The Committee had taken note of the collaborative effort of the Ministry of External 
Affairs and the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs of launch of web portal online Consular 
Grievances Monitoring System named MADAD for extending a helping hand to Indians abroad 
requiring consular assistance, consular grievance tracking and follow up. In view of the 
involvement of two Ministries, the Committee were of the view that the Ministry should establish 
a coordination mechanism and channels of communication between the two Ministries and also 
come up with identifiable timelines with Standard Operating Procedures regarding the process t o 
be followed once a grievance was received.  
 Moreover, in view of the process of registering the new domain and thereafter transfer of 
web-portal, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should engage with the concerned 
authorities for an early registration of the domain name as well as to ensure flawless transfer from 
the present portal. The Committee were of the view that efforts need ed to be made to give wider 
publicity to the portal. The Committee, therefore, had suggested that  the Ministry in collaboration 

14 
 
with the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should engage in a media campaign, particularly on 
social media, as well as flash the information of the portal on Passport Seva Portal and on 
websites of individual Missions/Posts.  
 
30. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance . Recently, the 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) in Gurgaon and Indian Workers Resource 
Centre (IWRC) in Dubai, operated by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, have also 
been authorised to assist grievants to lodge their grievances on this portal.  Setting up a 
dedicated Call Centre for MADAD is also under process. Soon the Madad Portal will also 
have facilities of a Mobile App for the benefit of the common man. 
 A web portal with the URL www.madad.gov.in has since been registered and we are in 
the process of transfer to the new domain. However, MADAD portal would continue to be 
accessed through Passport Seva portal as well. For  the purpose of wider publicity, 
MADAD Portal has been displayed by Indian Missions and Posts abroad prominently on 
their websites. In addition, Missions/Posts are also publicizing the MADAD portal in their 
interaction with the Indian community on various occasions. 
 A list of designated Welfare Officers in Gulf Countries with their contact numbers and 
other details as well as emergency contact phone numbers of all Indian Missions and Posts 
have also been placed on Missions/Posts and MEA websites. 
 The MADAD portal has provision for registering various categories of grievances, some 
of which are being handled by MOIA e.g. transportation of mortal remains, Indian 
nationals in jails, whereabouts unknown, recruitment complaints and martial disputes. A 
separate drop-box for MOIA is being created, following which MOIA related grievances 
would automatically be transferred to the MOIA worklist." 
 
31. The Committee observe that the MADAD portal has a provision for registering 
various categories of grievances includin g those under the purview of MOIA.  As stated by 
the Ministry, they are creating a separate drop -box for MOIA where all MOIA grievances 
would automatically be transferred to MOIA work list.  Moreover, the Overseas Workers 
Resource Centre (OWRC) in Gurgaon a nd Indian Workers Resource Centre (IWRC) in 
Dubai operated by the MOIA have been authorized to assist petitioners to lodge their 
grievances on this portal.  The Committee, however, find that the grievances related to 
MIOA are of very serious nature and require urgent action on the part of Missions/Posts 

15 
 
which is possible only with coordination between both the Ministries.  The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their important recommendation that the Ministry should come up with 
identifiable timelines with a standard operating procedure to be followed for the redressal 
of the grievances and desire the response of the Ministry in this regard at the earliest.   
 The Committee note that the Ministry has initiated the process of transfer to the new 
domain and  should engage with the concerned authorities for an early registration of the 
domain name as well as to ensure flawless transfer from the present portal.  The Committee 
also desire that along with display o n the website of Indian Missions/Posts, the new d omain 
should be promoted  during the interaction of Missions/Posts abroad with the Indian 
community on various occasions.  The Ministry should also take  steps to actively use the 
print/electronic media and other social media for spreading awareness about the portal.  
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
32. The Committee had observed that requests were being received by the Ministry for 
opening of new Indian Missions/Posts and these we re being processed and considered by 
territorial divisions concerned without any coherent policy. The Committee were of the view tha t 
Government should consider tho se proposals positively and strive to have representation of India 
in all the countries, and that limitations in terms of finances and human resources should not be a 
constraint while opening India's new Missions/Posts in those countries where India was currently 
unrepresented. The Committee had also suggest ed that the Ministry should come up wit h a 
concrete policy regarding establishment of new Embassies/Missions abroad. 
 
 Furthermore, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should take up the long pending 
issue of the proposed new Diplomatic Enclave with the Delhi Development Authority. The 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should also formulate a policy regarding 
allotment of land to Foreign Missions/Posts as per international conventions and had also 
suggested to dwell upon the practice regarding provision of reciprocity in this regard.   
 
33. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 

16 
 
"The Ministry of External Affairs is committed to expanding ties with other 
countries through opening new Embassies and Consulates in consultation with the 
Host Government. The recommendations of the Committee in this regard have been 
noted.  
2. Ministry is in constant touch with DDA and has sent letters No. 
2832/COP/2015 dated 24th June and 9th July 2015 to Chief Engineer (Dwarka) 
requesting confirmation tha t the rates of offer of land conveyed by them to this 
Ministry are valid for the financial year 2015 -16. The policy to determine the terms 
and conditions based on which land will be offered to Foreign Diplomatic Missions/ 
International Organisations in the  2nd Diplomatic Enclave is in final stages of 
approval. As soon as the policy is firmed up, Ministry will conduct an outreach 
programme involving Missions and International Organisations based in New Delhi.  
While framing the policy, Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee regarding the provision of the principle of reciprocity to be invoked in 
each case." 
 
34. In view of the fact  that requests were being received in the Ministry for opening of 
new Indian Missions/Posts abroad and th ese were being processed and considered by the 
concerned territorial divisions without any coherent policy, the Committee had  desired that 
the Ministry of External Affairs should come up with a concrete policy regarding 
establishment of new embassies/missions abroad. But the Ministry has only stated that MEA 
is committed to expanding ties with other countries through the opening of new embassies 
and consulates in consultation with  the host Government , without pronouncing any policy . 
Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ministry 
should come up with a concrete and coherent policy in this regard.  
 The Committee further note that the policy to d etermine the terms and conditions 
for offering land to foreign diplomatic missions/international organizations is in the final 
stages of approval. The Ministry is also in constant touch with DDA for allotting land for 
the new diplomatic enclave. The Committee desire the Ministry to  expedite the matter and 
come to an early decision in this regard.  
 
 

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
35. The Committee ha d taken note of the efforts being made by the Ministry to ensure reach 
of application collection/submission services to every nook and corner of the country and 
involvement of Common Service Centres. The Committee we re happy to note that the Ministry, 
along with India Post had launched a pilot project in Ahmedabad and Head Post Office 
Ahmedabad had commenced online filing of Passp ort application. The Committee we re hopeful 
that based on the outcome of th at pilot project, the matter would be taken up for roll  out across 
other post offices in the country.  The Committee, however,  had suggested to the Ministry to 
pursue the matter with India Post so as to ensure online filing of applications not only at the Head 
Post-Office but also that th at facility would be made available at all the post offices across India 
particularly in the hinterland and rural areas. The Committee had also suggest ed that the 
possibility of reputed Travel Agents/Agencies to p roviding assistance in cities might  be 
considered to applicants on similar fixed charges, as was being done by CSCs in cities m ight also 
be considered sincerely with a view to stop exploitation of passport seekers by internet cafe 
operators and Travel Agents.  Tho se may be identified as places where citizens could get t he 
facility on payment of nominal fixed charges with suitable penal provisions in case  of 
irregularities.  
        
36. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''It is submitted that despite Ministry‟s best efforts, India Post have expressed 
inability for providing facility of online filing of passport applications @Rs.100/ - 
per application. India Post also seems to have dearth of manpower and technical 
resources. As regards authorising travel agents, it is r eiterated that the Passport 
Portal (www.passportindia.gov.in) is accessible by anyone, anywhere at any time . 
The travel agents are free to assist passport seekers in filing passport applications 
online just like any Common Service Centres (CSCs), internet cafe operators or 
any other person.  At no stage the Ministry has stated or held that such assistance 
by travel agents of any standing, is illegal. Moreover,  authorising or  giving 
license to  a few travel agents and regulating their service charges, woul d also go 
against the  tenet of ‟Minimum Government, Maximum Governance‟.'' 
 
37. In order to supplement the efforts being made by the Ministry to ensure 
collection/submission of application for passports  in every nook and corner of the country 

18 
 
and involvement of Common Service Cent res, the Committee had desired the Ministry to 
pursue the matter with India Post so as to ensure online filling of applications through all 
the post offices across India, particularly in the hinterland and rural areas. T he Committee 
had also suggested consideration of the possibility of reputed travel agents/agencies to 
provide assistance in the cities on payment of a fixed charge in order to stop exploitation of 
passport applicants by the internet café operators and unauthorised agents. The Committee 
are concerned to note that despite  the Ministry’s best efforts, India Post have expressed 
their inability to provide facilities of online filling of passport application by paying Rs. 100 
per application on account of dearth of manpower and technical resources.  
               The Committee agree with the Ministry that passport portal is accessible by 
anywhere at any time. However, still, people in the rural areas and other hinterlands do not 
have computers/internet and sometimes they do not have any knowledge of how to obtain 
access to the passport portal. Therefore, they seek the assistance of travel agents/agencies 
operating the internet  and in the process are being exploited and charged exorbita ntly for 
filling applications and getting dates . The main intention of the Committee’s 
recommendation to authorize reputed travel agents/agencies  to render necessary assistance 
to the passport applicants was to stop their exploitation by the internet café operators and 
other persons. In this connection, the Committee do not accept the viewpoint expressed by 
the Ministry that authorizing or giving license to few travel agents and regulating their 
service charges would go aga inst the tenet of minimum government and maximum 
governance. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to explore the possibilities of 
having a list of reputed travel agents/agencies so as to render possi ble assistance to the 
passport applicants by paying a nominal amount as decided by the Ministry.  
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
38. The Committee had noted that from 25 th November, 2015 Foreign Governments might 
deny visa or entry to any person travelling with a non -machine Readable Passport (MRP) and the 
older Indian Passports issued with a validity of 20 years fall ing under non -MRP category. The 
Committee had taken note of Ministry's reply that as a result of Ministry's sustained campaign, the 
figure of handwritten passports ha d come down  from 2.86 lakh passport in December, 2014 to 
2.62 lakh passport as on 20 th March, 2015. The Committee had suggested that in view of the 

19 
 
approaching deadline and the vast number of passport holders falling in the category, the Ministry 
should engage in a media campaign as well as highlight the issue at the Social Media so as to 
make citizens aware. The Committee had further recommend ed to the Ministry to flash this 
information on the Passport Seva Portal as well as on the website of Ministry of External Affairs 
and all the Missions for awareness of concerned persons.  
   
39. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"The Ministry is cons tantly monitoring the situation related to issuance of Machine 
Readable Passports in lieu of Non -Machine Readable Passports. The Hon‟ble 
Committee‟s recommendations related to going for a media campaign and 
highlighting the issue at the social media in ord er to make the citizens aware  have 
been noted for compliance . In accordance with Hon‟ble Committee 
recommendation, the Ministry would flash this information (which was earlier 
circulated on the Passport Portal and also for Missions/Posts abroad vide circul ar 
dated 23rd December, 2014) on the Passport Seva Portal, all websites of Ministry of 
External Affairs and of Mission/Posts abroad." 
40. In view of the deadline of 25 th November, 2015 being overrun for denial of visa or 
entry to any person travelling with non-Machine Readable Passport (MRP), the Committee, 
in view of 2.86 la khs of handwritten passports and decision of the foreign Governments to 
deny visa to any person tr avelling with non -Machine Readable Passport (MRP), had 
recommended that the Ministry engage in a media campaign a s well as highlight the issue 
on social media to generate awareness among the citizens. They had also desire d the 
Ministry to flash this inform ation on the Passport Seva portal as well as on the website of 
the Ministry and the missions/posts abroad. However, the Committee note that the Ministry 
has made a note of  the recommendations for compliance and accordingly would flash this 
information on t he Passport Seva portal and websites of the Ministry of External Affairs  
and also of Missions/Posts abroad. However, the Ministry has not flashed this important 
message on the proposed websites and Passport Seva portal. The Committee take serious 
note of i t and wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that this should be 
done at the earliest without further delay.  
 

20 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
41. The Committee had noted that over the years, there was vast gap in Budgetary Estimates, 
the amount released and amount utilised under the Head 'Nalanda University'. The Committee had 
observed that even in BE 2015-16, the University had sought a sum of Rs. 313.21 crore, while the 
proposed BE 2015 -16 was Rs. 10 0 crore. The Ministry had  justified the BE 2015 -16 on account 
of commencement of teaching since September 2014, admissions to the new academic session, 
issue of letter of intent to successful bidder. The Committee had noted the extraordinary delay in 
commencement of construction activities and the delays in execution of construction project for 
which no responsibility ha d been fixed till then. The Committee, therefore, had suggested to the 
Ministry to fix the responsibility for the delay and take necessary action to streamline the 
construction process in a time bound manner. The Committee had further recommended that the 
Ministry should ensure that budgetary projection process was streamlined in the University so that 
realistic budgetary projections were made. The Committee had also desired that a blueprint 
regarding commencement and status report of the construction project along with timelines 
should be furnished to the Committee on regular basis.         
42. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
''The Ministry shares the Hon'ble Committee's concern at the extraordinary delay 
in the commencement of construction activities. Reasons for delay have already 
been explained in detail. As mentioned earlier, the stake ho lders faced various 
challenges in establishing a new institution and there was constant evolution of 
parameters for the execution of the Nalanda Project. As such, it is difficult to fix 
responsibility.  
2. The tender for preliminary work (Phase 1A), issued  on 17 February 2015 
had to be abandoned since it attracted only a single bid at a higher than estimated 
cost. The Ministry had to advise the University to re -tender work for the entire 
Phase 1 and issue a composite tender which was floated on 6 July 2015.  The 
University proposes to award the Letter of Intent to the successful bidder soon 
following which the work on site is expected to commence. A copy of the 
Schedule of Events provided by the University during the Governing Board's 
meeting held on 5 July 2015 is attached at Annexure. 
3. The University has also re-assessed its requirement of funds for the current 
financial year and made a realistic projection of Rs. 172.37 crore as against the 

21 
 
earlier estimate of Rs. 313.21 crore. The Ministry will henceforth keep the 
Committee informed of commencement of construction and status of the project on 
regular basis.'' 
 
43. The Committee while inter-alia recommending to streamline the budgetary 
projection process had also suggested that the Ministry fix the responsibility for the delay in 
implementation of  the Nalanda University Project . The Ministry however have submitted 
that in the case of Nalanda University, there was  a constant evolution of parameters for the  
execution of the project and hence i t is difficult to fix the responsibility. The Committee are 
not at all convinced by the justification given by the Ministry. The Ministry should have 
anticipated these challeng es before executing the project  of such a nature as they entail 
circumstances that could have been anticipated  when the University had availed  of a lot of 
time in planning the project.  It is a matter of surprise that despite the planning, t he tender 
could at tract no more than a single bid leading  to the cancellation of the tender. The  
exercise of the re -issue of the tender has already taken a lot of time and it would 
commensurately contribute to further delays in the project. The Committee would , 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should fix accountability for the delay in the Nala nda 
University project and take all initiatives necessary for the implementation of the project 
within a fixed time frame.  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
44. The Committee had noted that apart from Budgetary allocation of Rs. 302.89 crore during 
the BE 2014 -15, an additional allocation of Rs. 141.00 crore was sought during supplementary 
grants in anticipation of the South Asian University constructio n project. The Committee 
wondered as to why the additional resources were augmented when basic necessary clearances 
were awaited. The Committee did not support the approach being followed by SAU when a major 
portion of the land was in their possession since long, leaving small patches awai ting clearances.  
The Committee, therefore had desired that the construction plan should be modified at the earliest 
on the plot available with a view to commence the activities.  Simultaneously, they might have 
continued pursuing the case with concerned a uthorities to get clearances of the remaining portion 
of the land. 

22 
 
45. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"Government of India is committed to provide full capital costs including 100 acres 
of land for cons truction of the permanent campus of the South Asian University. 
Delhi Development Authority has transferred unencumbered land measuring 90.96 
acres so far.  
2. The university has informed that they have obtained the statutory approvals 
for its master plan of the project from Delhi Urban Arts Commission, South Delhi 
Municipal Corporation and the Airports Authority. They have also obtained the 
necessary environmental clearance.  Permission for felling trees is under process with 
the Department of Forest and Wild Life.    
3. The additional allocation of Rs. 141  crores was asked for on the premise that 
all clearances and permission would be in place soon and the project would require 
fresh infusion of funds to take off successfully. In fact, construction activit y 
commenced on 3rd June, 2015 with a ground breaking ceremony. A Legal notice has, 
however, been served by some individuals claiming the land to be under their 
ownership. Necessary action is being taken to deal with the matter through inter -
departmental consultations and legal counsel.  
4. The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee to prepare fresh lay out plan 
by making necessary changes with reference to land available for construction 
without any encumbrances has been noted. This may, however, require fresh approval 
from SDMC, CPWD etc. for the revised lay out plan. However, the Ministry is in 
consultation with the stakeholders and would exercise the best available option for 
completion of the project at the earliest." 
 
46. The Committee had recommended that the plan for the construction of a permanent 
campus of the South Asian University should be modified in light of the small patches of 
land still awaiting clearances. The Committee have been apprised that after the construction 
activity had commenced o n 3 rd June, 2015, a legal notice was served by some individuals 
claiming the land to be under their ownership.  This has led to further delay in the project.  
The Committee are of the considered opinion that once the land has been formally 
transferred to the Un iversity by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA), the University is 
the de jure owner of the land and such litigations by few individuals is nothing but dilatory 
tactics.  The Committee would therefore, recommend that an expeditious solution to this 
vexatious problem should be sought through legal counsel.  The Committee would further 
recommend that consultations at the highest level should be held with the SDMC, CPWD 

23 
 
and DDA for getting clearances and enabling the earliest possible completion of the proje ct. 
In the meantime the design could be suitably modified so as to permit construction of one 
part of the campus.  
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
47. The Committee had noted that over 60% of the budget of the Ministry was earmarked for 
developmental engagement with other countries via allocation under aid/ loans. The Committee, 
however, were dismayed to note that during RE 2014 -15, a reduction of Rs. 2190 crore was made 
in budgetary allocation under aid and loans to countri es, though an allocation of Rs. 400 crore 
was sought at the supplementary stage under the Head 'Aid to Afghanistan'. The Committee had 
noted that matching savings made under various Sub-Heads was used for allocation for utilization 
within the Ministry unde r the Heads Special Diplomatic Expenditure, Embassies and Missions, 
etc. The Committee  had expressed their concern over the Ministry's approach of cutting on 
international commitments towards maintaining relations with friendly countries and towards 
countries' commitments and developmental engagement with these countries in order to fulfil the 
internal needs of the Ministry and had desired that such practice should not continue because it 
directly affected the bilateral relation and prestige of the country. 
 
 
48. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''Due to reduction in overall allocation at RE stage during 2014 -15, almost all 
heads of account under „Major Head 3605 - Technical and Economic Cooperation‟ 
had to be reduced in order to comply with the ceiling mandated by the Ministry of 
Finance. Ministry, however, had to provide for the mandatory establishment 
expenses of the Missions/Posts abroad, and under the Special Diplomatic 
Expenditure which is discretionar y in nature.  These expenses could not be 
withheld, being mandatory in nature. However, to the extent possible, it was 
ensured that implementation of key projects would not suffer and important 
commitments were met by rolling over expenditure to next financial year.''  
 
49. The Committee had expressed serious concern over the Ministry's approach of 
cutting down budgetary resources  on international commitments while using the matching 
savings made under various Sub -Heads for utilization within the Ministry under the Heads 

24 
 
Special Diplomatic Expenditure, Embassies and Missions.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the justification given by the Ministry that the development funds were 
reduced in order to comply with the ceiling mandated by the Ministry of Finance and  
consequently, the Ministry had to provide for funds under the Special Diplomatic 
Expenditure.  The Committee have no objections in principle to the mandatory 
establishment expenses of the Missions/Posts abroad, as they are indispensible for running 
of the Foreign Affairs establishment.  However, the Committee opine that if fund cuts were 
to be effected due to the strictures of the Finance Ministry, then the same should be spread 
out among all the Heads.  Keeping out the head of Special Diplomatic Expenditure from t he 
purview of budgetary cuts not only amounts to a discretionary exercise but also defies logic.  
The Committee cannot assume that the Special Diplomatic Expenditure is more important 
and sacrosanct for the Ministry than announced aid commitments to other countries.  The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should refrain from reducing 
the funds under the Head 'Technical and Economic Cooperation ' and if all the  budgetary 
cuts are to be effected than the impact of such reductions should be spread out evenly, 
across all the heads. 
(Recommendation  No. 25) 
50. The Committee were concerned to note that due to the ceiling communicated by the 
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry had to reprioritize its budgetary resources and the fourth and 
final instalment of US $25 million cash grant to Bangladesh could not be released and it was 
proposed to provide it in the financial year 2015 -16.  But the Ministry had  not explained how did 
they propose to do the same.  The Committee, therefore,  had desired that the amount should be 
released in the first quarter of 2015-16 in order to honour the commitment.  
 The Committee had also noted that there was a significant progress in the implementation 
of  the Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link Project.  But there was no mention of progress on financing of 
the Indian portion of the project. The Committee  had, therefore, desired that the Ministry should 
pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Development of North East Region for 
confirmation on financing the cost of the project and ensure that due clearances  were taken from 
the concerned authorities for commencement of construction on the Indian side simultaneously.   
 

25 
 
51. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''The fourth and final installment of US$ 25 million cash grant to Bangladesh was 
released in full in April 2015 and formally handed over to Govt. of Bangladesh on 12 May 
2015.   
2. The financing of the Indian portion of the Akhaura -Agartala rail Link project is 
being pursued vigorously. DoNER has expressed its inability to finance this, owing to lack 
of jurisdictional mandate (land acquisition in States) and budgetary constraints on their 
side. Thereafter, M/o Railways[MoR] was requested by MEA to consider the 
implementation of Indian portion as a Project of National Importance. MoR has conveyed 
its inability to add any more such projects of national importance to its existing list of  
twelve.  The matter was discussed in a Committee of Secretaries meeting on 23 July 2015, 
chaired by Cabinet Secretary, where it was decided that MEA will move a note to the 
Ministry of Finance which would approve the funding and designate the Ministry to which 
these will accrue.  Construction of the Indian portion will commence thereafter.'' 
 
52. The Committee are pleased to note that the fourth and final instalment of US $25 
million cash grants to Bangladesh was released in full in April, 2015 and formally handed 
over to the Government of Bangladesh.  The Committee are, however, perturbed over the  
fate of their recommendation wherein the Committee had desired confirmation on financing 
of Indian portion of the Akhaura -Agartala Rail Link Project.  It has emerged that the 
Department of North Eastern Region (DoNER) and the Ministry of Railways (MoR) ha ve 
conveyed their inability to shoulder the responsibility of financing the project.  The 
Committee have now been informed that the Ministry of External Affairs will now move a 
note to the Ministry of Finance to approve the requisite funding and also desig nate the 
Ministry to which these will accrue.  In light of the fact that the Akhaura -Agartala Rail 
Link is of vital importance for further deepening of the Indo -Bangladesh ties, the 
Committee would recommend that the modalities for financing the Indian por tion of the 
Project should be worked out without any further delay.  
(Recommendation No. 30) 
53. The Committee had noted that under the Head 'Aid to African Countries' the BE for 2014 -
15 was Rs. 350 crore which was reduced to Rs. 145 cr ore while the BE for  2015-16 had been 
pegged at Rs. 200 crore. The Committe e we re concerned to note that in spite of pendency of 

26 
 
several projects and zero allocation for several projects under th at Head, the allocation ha d been 
reduced at BE 2015-16 as compared to BE 2014-15. Furthermore, the Committee were concerned 
about that slow or no progress in implementation of projects announced under India Africa Forum 
Summit I and II. The Committee, therefore, had suggested that the Government should engage 
with African Union regardi ng the constraints being faced in implementation of the projects and 
get them expedited. The Ministry had  stated that the announcements/identification of projects 
were demand driven and an important factor in India's political relations but it d id not appear to 
be true when the failure percentage of projects under IAFS -I and II were analysed.  The 
Committee had, therefore, strongly desired that while identifying the projects under IAFS III, the 
Ministry must ensure that projects were actually demand driven. In the Committee's view that was 
possible through more extensive ground work before the IAFS III, better engagement with 
African Union as well as the intended beneficiary countries at the stage of identification of project 
itself. 
54. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''Recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted. A comprehensive 
review of all the projects announced so far under India -Africa Forum Summit-I & 
II is currently underway in consultation with all the concerned 
Ministries/departments.  Based on this, a decision will be taken on the project that 
can be continued or dropped. Ministry had consulted the  African Union on the 
projects announced during IAFS-III.''  
55. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has consulted the African Union 
on the projects announced during the India Africa Forum Summit III.  Such a move would 
definitely go a long way towards ensuring that the projects under 'Aid to  African Countries' 
are actually demand -driven and hence make them more viable.  The Committee have been 
informed that a comprehensive review of all the projects announced so far under India -
Africa Summit -I & II is currently underway in consultation with a ll the concerned 
Ministries/Departments.  India has embarked on a plan to significantly make its presence 
felt in Africa.  In view of the urgency of engaging the African nations, the Committee would 
recommend that such a review should be expedited.  The ch anging global reality makes it 
mandatory for India to enhance the place of Africa at the centre of India's foreign policy 

27 
 
matrix and it is therefore, incumbent that the aid to African nations should be increased 
substantially. 
(Recommendation No. 31) 
56. The Committee had observed that our bilateral engagements with countries of Latin 
America and Caribbean Region had grown in the last few years and our political engagements had 
also intensified at the highest level.  Almost all the countries of the region ha d been supporting 
India at the International fora and many of them look up to Indian developm ent assistance.  The 
Committee were really concerned that a very small component of funds had been allocated under 
'Aid to Latin Am erican countries' and that too wa s reduced drastically at RE stage. The 
Committee had noted that during the recent visit of the President of Guyana, the Prime Minister 
had conveyed the Government of India's  decision to give US $ 10 million Line of Credit which 
had been approved by the Inter -Ministerial Standing Committee. However, sanction of Line of 
Credit of US $ 8 million had been held in abeyance pending availa bility of funds. The Committee 
were concerned at the Ministry's own admission that in absence of funds under the 'Aid to Latin 
American countries' budget, th at politically important project c ould not be implemented despite 
announcement at Prime Minister's level. The Committee had disapproved such approach of the 
Government on the issue of funds and recommend ed that due priority should be given to the 
projects announced at the highest l evel especially when it  related  to strategically important 
countries.   
 
 Furthermore, the Committee had also taken note of the status regarding implementation of 
another politically very important Project pertaining to assistance to upgrade and overhaul the 
ICT (Information, Communication and Technology) system of CARICOM Secretariat, which was 
originally set up  by In dia, the implementation of which was also dependent upon the availability 
of funds in the financial year 2015 -16. The Committee  had, therefore, recommend ed that the 
Ministry must take up the project on priority basis particularly, in view of the political 
significance of the project and budgetary requirement of only Rs. 15 crore over the span of two 
years. 
 
 

28 
 
 
57. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
''The recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee regarding budgetary 
requirements under this Head as well as the Project pertaining to assistance to 
upgrade and overhaul the ICT (Information, Communication and Technology) 
system of Caricom Secretariat  have been noted. Additional funds required under 
the Head will be sought at the RE stage and through Supplementary Demand for 
Grants. A technical evaluation team from the Ministry of Information Technology 
and Communication has held discussions with the official s of the CARICOM 
Secretariat when it visited Georgetown in the second half of  May 2015. Report of 
the Team is awaited. The Ministry would be undertaking  up gradation of ICT 
system of CARICOM Secretariat on priority basis in a time bound manner.'' 
 
58. The Committee had observed that lack of funds was a key factor in limiting India's 
outreach and bilateral engagement with countries of the Latin America and Caribbean 
Region.  The Committee are dismayed that the sanction of Line of Credit of US $ 8 million 
to Guyana had been kept in abeyance pending availability of funds.  The Committee had 
disapproved of such a diffident approach of the Government on the issue and would 
reiterate that due priority should be accorded to and projects announced at the highest le vel 
and the pledges should be observed scrupulously. 
 The Committee hope that the Ministry would be able to get the required funds for 
upgradation and overhaul of the Information Communication and Technology (ICT) system 
of CARICOM Secretariat at the RE stage and effectively implement it in light of the Report 
of the technical evaluation team from the Ministry of Information and Technology.  
Further, the Committee desire that they should be apprised about the outcomes of the 
project. 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
59. In view of lack of desired budgetary resources and Ministry's response regarding lack of 
avenues to make Indian Cultural Centres self sufficient, the Committee were of the view that 
ICCR should explore the possibility of generating additional resources. The Committee had taken 
note of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry/ICCR for partners and public private 
partnership. The Committee, therefore, had recommended to ICCR to explore the possibility and 

29 
 
study the matter in depth regarding  engagement with the local associations of Indians/PIOs for 
organising the events as well as for sponsorship of events. Moreover, the Committee had 
suggested that the Ministry/IC CR should develop basic parameters, Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) etc. with regard to engagement of local Indians/Indian Diaspora organisations. 
 
60. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
 
"Indian Missi ons/ Posts/ Cultural Centres abroad typically have to arrange for local 
hospitality for ICCR -sponsored cultural groups/delegates, i.e. boarding, lodging, and 
transport within the foreign country, venue and technical support for their performance, 
talk or other activities, and publicity. In countries where we have large diaspora this is 
generally done through Indian community and/or local associations. As recommended 
by the Committee, ICCR is consulting Indian Missions/Posts/Cultural Centres 
regarding develo ping basic parameters and procedures for engagement with Indian 
Diaspora organizations." 
 
61. The Committee are happy to note that acting on their recommendation, the ICCR is 
now in consultation with India Missions/Posts/Cultural Centres regarding developm ent of 
basic parameters and procedures for engagement with Indian Diaspora organizations.  The 
Indian diaspora has made its presence felt in major countries of the world and has 
contributed immensely to the respective host societies.  It is the considered opinion of the 
Committee that the dynamism of the Diaspora can be further tapped to popularize India's 
rich culture and heritage on foreign shores. The Diaspora organizations can themselves 
emerge as important stakeholders in safeguarding  Indian culture i n due course if they are 
given appropriate recognition.  Therefore, the Committee would recommend that the 
modalities for engaging the diaspora organizations should be formulated without any 
further delays and that they should also be consulted on the matter. 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 
 62. Capacity building through defence and civilian training programme under ITEC, SCAAP 
and Technical Cooperation Scheme under Colombo Plan is an integral part of India's 
developmental cooperation. The Committee had noted that the ITEC Programme had  completed 
50 years in operation. In Committee's view it was the appropriate occasion to conduct a 
comprehensive review of the programme including the decision making process, types of training, 
identification of institutions, etc. a nd carry out an objective assessment of the programme from 

30 
 
the perspective of achievement of India's foreign policy goals. It was also necessary to evaluate 
whether our programme was meeting the needs and expectations of the beneficiary countries. 
Furthermore, the Committee had suggested that the Ministry should critically analyse the requests 
received for training  from the beneficiary countries and accordingly review the type of training 
provided to include new and emerging areas of technology as per thei r requirements. The 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry must develop SOPs  regarding each step from the 
stage of  receipt of request from the beneficiary country up to the final conclusion and post -
conclusion feedback from the beneficiary country. The Committee had also note d that the last 
review regarding inclusion of institutions was done in 2008. The Committee, therefore, had 
desired that the Ministry should review the list of institutions and incorporate or exclude the 
institutions as per their performance and altered requirements.      
                                                             
63. The Ministry of External Affairs, in their action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"ITEC programme consists of capacity building courses conducted for partner 
countries.  The programme has completed 50 years of operation in 2014.  The capacity 
building courses are conducted at the request of partner countries. There is a system of 
regular and continuous review. No overall structural review seems to have been carried 
out, as the requirement for this was not felt.  The reason being, under ITEC, training in 
diverse areas such as Accounts, Audit, Banking and Finance courses, IT, 
Telecommunication and English Courses, Management Courses, SME/Rural 
Development Courses, Specialized Courses, Technical Courses and Environment and 
Renewable Energy Courses are already being covered and special courses are also 
conducted at specific request of ITEC partner countries.  
  
2. Ministry regularly evaluates the training programmes under ITEC/SCAAP /TCS 
Colombo Plan. The feedback  from participants are carefully analyzed to evaluate 
training courses. Inputs are examined to assess the course contents, duration and 
requirement of practical exercises/project works. The courses are evaluated on a yearly 
basis based on the popularity of  the course, i.e., number of participants received during 
that training period, feedback of the participants who attended the course, etc. 
Depending on the response received, the popular courses are continued and unpopular 
courses are discontinued in the next academic year." 
64. The Committee had inter-alia recommended to strengthen the ITEC programme by 
carrying out a comprehensive review of the programme and a review of the list of the 
participating institutions.  The Committee are not convinced with the arguments of the 

31 
 
Ministry that there is a system of regular and continuous review and no overall structural 
review was carried out as the requirement for this was not felt.  While observing that the 
last review regarding inclusion of institutions was done in 2008, the Committee opine that 
training needs in diverse fields like Accounts, Audit, Banking and Finance Courses, IT, 
Tele-Communications etc. are in fact evolving and some of the practices are liable to become 
obsolete.  With the rapid advancement in the fields related to Information Technology and 
Communications, it would be a worthwhile exercise to re -evaluate the training programmes 
at regular intervals to keep pace with such developments.  Moreover during the last eight 
years a number of new instit utes have come up which might be better equipped to meet the 
training requirements of the participant countries. In light of the above, the Committee 
would  strongly reiterate that a comprehensive review of the ITEC programme should be 
carried out.  Further, the list of the participating institutions should also be reviewed.  In the 
light of the dynamism which has been today imparted to each and every walk of life, it 
would be futile if the training programme is not reviewed at regular intervals. 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
 The Committee observe that during Budget Estimates 2014 -15, the Ministry of External 
Affairs had sought an allocation of Rs. 26,111.23 crore; however, the actual allocation at the 
Budget Estimate(BE) stage was Rs. 14,730.39 crore. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended to the Ministry to vigorously pursue substantially enhanced allocations at Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage. The Committee, however, are d ismayed to note that instead of increasing 
the allocation, in an unprecedented move, the budgetary allocation of the Ministry of External 
Affairs was reduced by Rs. 2,110.39 crore at RE stage. This reduction was in spite of the fact that 
the Ministry had r egistered an expenditure of 68% in BE till December, 2014 and had actually 
sought an additional allocation of Rs. 2999.30 crore at RE stage. The Committee are concerned to 
note that in spite of the intervention made at the level of External Affairs Ministe r, the situation 
was not improved. The Committee are unhappy to note that even at the supplementary stage, no 
cash supplementary was provided initially to the Ministry. 
 The Committee are particularly dismayed to note that there was substantial reduction i n 
allocation at the RE stage when there were several visits by Head of Government/Minister of 
External Affairs and requirement of more resources by the concerned Missions/Posts and 
resources to execute the commitments for aid/ assistance made with various countries as well as 
several high level visits to India by foreign dignitaries and commitments made therein. The 
Committee are distressed to take note of the lukewarm attitude of the Government of India and in 
particular the Ministry of Finance towards the  conduct of India's foreign policy and hope that this 
approach will change during the current Financial Year. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry acknowledges the concern shown by the Hon‟ble Committee regarding the 
budgetary challenges faced by it. There has also been practically no augmentation in the Non Plan 
allocation in 2015-16. The Ministry would continue to actively liaise with the Ministry of Finance 
in seeking additional funds allocated in Supplementary Demands/Revised Estimates. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015]] 
 

33 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs during the Budget Estimates (BE) 2015-
16 had sought an allocation of Rs. 20,034. 62 crore comprising a Plan component of Rs. 5,583.69 
crore and a Non-Plan component of Rs. 14,450.93 crore. The Committee, however, are distressed 
to note that the proposed budgetary allocation is only Rs. 14,966.83 crore with a Plan component 
of Rs. 5,336.20 crore and Non -Plan component of Rs. 9,630.63 crore. The Committee are 
concerned that the budgetary allocation during BE 2015-16 is only 1.6% more than the overall BE 
2014-15 allocation and is 25.3% less than the sought budgetary allocation. The Committee are 
deeply concerned about the budgetary allocation of the Ministry and wo nder whether this 
allocation is reflective of the priority being attached by the Government of India to foreign policy, 
particularly when India aspires to be a big power in the twenty-first century and is the third largest 
emerging economy. Considering the  global nature of the Ministry's engagement, the task laid 
before the Ministry and the responsibility to execute India's aid commitments and the nature of 
the Ministry's expenditure, the Committee strongly recommend that the Government should 
ensure the pr edictability and full funding of the Ministry at the BE stage itself. The Committee, 
however, are of the firm opinion that in view of substantially reduced allocation as compared to 
the allocation sought by the Ministry at BE stage, the Ministry of Finance  should allocate suitably 
enhanced allocations to the Ministry at the RE 2015 -16 stage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs pursue the request for enhanced budgetary 
allocation not only with the Ministry of Finance but  also at the highest level at RE 2015 -16 stage 
as well as well as during discussions for BE 2016-17. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry would continue to actively pursue the request for enhanced allocations with the 
Ministry of Finance in Supplementary Demands/Revised Estimates of 2015 -16. The Hon‟ble 
Committee‟s recommendation is also expected to give the necessary fillip to the Ministry‟s cause. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that out of the total BE 2015 -16 allocation of Rs. 14,966.83 crore, 
38.14% budget of the Ministry pertains to technical and economic cooperation with other 
countries, 22.7% pertains to loans to foreign governments and nearly 15.04% pertains to 
obligatory expenditure such as expenditure on  SDE, mandatory contribution to international 
organisations of which India is a Member, Grants in Aid, etc. The Committee observe that only 
21.8% of the total budgetary allocation of the Ministry is earmarked for the establishment cost 
including expenditure on the Ministry of External Affairs Secretariat and Missions/Posts abroad 
as well as the expenditure on the overall establishment of the Central Passport Organization and 

34 
 
0.73 percent on other expenditure. The Committee, therefore, note that even if expe nditure on 
Special Diplomatic Expenditure and Grants to various Institutions is included, less than 40 
percent of the Ministry's budget is meant for its consumption and most of the expenditure is 
meant to fulfil international commitments/obligations.  
 Furthermore, the Committee note that the revenue earned by the Ministry from Passport, 
Visa and other services was Rs. 4,044 crore till February, 2015 while the total establishment cost 
of the Ministry during the same period was Rs. 2,743 crore. The Committee , therefore, observe 
that the Ministry has earned more than 47% of expenditure on its entire establishment in India and 
abroad. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that in view of the peculiar needs of the 
Ministry as well as revenues generated by  the Ministry, the Government/ Ministry of Finance 
should pursue a policy of minimum reduction of budgetary allocation  vis-à-vis budgetary 
allocation sought by the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The advice of the Hon‟ble Committee has been taken note of. Ministry had taken a 
conscious decision to increase the passport fees a couple of years back, thereby contributing to the 
non-tax revenues of the Govt. of India. In spite of the Ministry‟s pointing out the fact that there is 
a case of ploughing back the revenues in order to deliver better services to the passport applicants, 
the RE 2014 -15 was drastically reduced. The Ministry has already projected its additional 
requirements in the I st Batch of Supplementary Demands for Gr ants (SDG) to the Ministry of 
Finance. The efforts would continue in the remaining batches of SDG and at RE stage as well.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
The Committee in their 14 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) had called upon the Ministry to 
recruit external applicants with relevant expertise for lateral entry into the Ministry up to and 
including the Joint Secretary level. The Committee are happy to note that a lateral entry scheme 
has been initiate d by the Ministry. The Committee, however, recommend that apart from the 
normal process of recruitment from other Government Departments, lateral entry should also be 
open to academia, think tanks, NGOs and the private sector. In addition to regular APARs,  the 
Ministry should conduct specified feedback regarding the role, efficiency and suitability of the 
such officers recruited/ deputed via lateral entry.  Furthermore, the Committee are of the view that 
the Ministry should also consider the policy of retai ning such personnel or continuation of their 
deputation particularly, for those candidates who are found suitable for the job and have gained 
suitable expertise. The Committee suggest that the Ministry should pursue the matter with 
Department of Personnel and Training rather than deputing new persons every two -three years 
and spare Ministry's resources on their placement and training.   

35 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has started the process of engaging consultants from the academia for its 
Policy, Planning and Research Division and has brought out an advertisement on June 29, 2015. 
The consultancy is for an initial period of three years which can be extended based on 
performance of the individual. The consultants would be engaged as International Rela tions 
experts in the Policy Planning & Research Division.         
    [File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee take note of the steps taken by the Central Passport Organization 
regarding filling the gap between the sanctioned cadre strength and the present working strength 
by recruitment of 450 Data Entry Operators in lieu of vacant non -gazetted posts at Group 'B' and 
'C' level. The Committee, however, note that this is just a stop gap arrangement and the Ministry 
should pursue the matter with the Department of Personnel for conducting recruitment for vacant 
non-gazetted posts at the earliest. Moreover, the Committee suggest that the Ministry must ensure 
conducting of due security clearance and checking of credentials for the Data Entry Operators, 
thus engaged. The Committee also note that the Ministry has issued instructions to Passport 
Offices to rota te the CPO officials between PSKs and PBOs but since long they have not been 
able to finalize a transfer policy governing CPO officials in view of the changed requirement of 
manpower at the PSKs and PBOs. The Committee, therefore, desire that the transfer policy for 
CPO should be finalized on priority basis considering the functional requirements both at PSKs 
and PBOs.  
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that as regards recruitment for vacant non -gazetted post, the Ministry  has 
been constantly pursuing the matter with  the Staff Selection Commission (SSC).   The  SSC has 
conducted examinations  for the post of Lower Division Clerks (LDC) a nd Assistants in 2014 and 
2015, which is still under process.  After completion of all the relevant formalities, the 
nominations and appointments  of LDCs and Assistants are expected  by December 2015.   
 
2. The Ministry would like to inform the Hon‟ble Co mmittee  that  the process of security 
clearance and checking of credentials of Data Entry Operators is undertaken directly  by the 
Service Provider.  
 
3. The Transfer Policy  relating to  Central Passport Organization personnel  has been 
revised in March, 2015 in supersession of the earlier policy guidelines framed in 2010, keeping in 
view the functional requirements of officials both at PSKs and PBOs.    
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 

36 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee note that out of the total budgetary allocation under the Head 'Training' 
only marginal expenditure of Rs. 1.21 crore, Rs. 1.88 crore and Rs. 1.08 crore has been made on 
the training of Indian diplomats/officials during 2011 -12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. The 
Committee note that the Ministry has often stated that special attention would be paid to training, 
yet the expenditure does not seem to be reflective of this approach. The Committee are also not 
convinced with the Ministry's reaso ning for non -implementation of the non -mandatory training 
programme. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry place due stress on the training 
of its diplomats/officials in accordance with the New Training Framework. Furthermore, the 
Committee a re appreciative of the Ministry's initiative for training of Indian Diplomats for 
updation and maintenance of social media and website of the Missions/Posts abroad. The 
Committee, however, desire that the Ministry should incorporate this training in the New Training 
Framework as well as provide this training to all the officers of the rank of Joint Secretary and 
above in the Ministry.        
Reply of the Government 
 
Since implementation of the MEA Training Framework (July 2013) started, there has been 
progressive escalation, indeed a quantum jump in the number of Indian diplomats/officials 
trained. The number of training programmes conducted by FSI as well as the number of training 
hours have also gone up significantly especially during 2014 -15. FSI could ac hieve all the above 
without an increase in expenditure, by introducing innovative and cost -effective methods of 
training delivery such as  (i) the use of webinar to reach officers across geographical and time -
zone barriers, (ii) regrouping target groups and  rationalizing the training content accordingly, and 
(iii) introducing greater flexibility in training methods to reduce disruption of normal work on 
account of training. Further,  training has been made mandatory for all officers/officials up to the 
rank of Director before proceeding on postings, thus ensuring larger participation in training. 
 
2. Information about the non -mandatory training programme including the procedure put in 
place for its utilization was disseminated through webinar and website to al l the officers. Taking 
note of the Committee‟s recommendations, further modalities will be worked out in consultation 
with Administration Division of the MEA to ensure better utilization. 
 
3. Media management including updation and maintenance of social me dia and website of 
mission/posts abroad is already included in training programmes for various levels of IFS officials 
/ officers and would be explicitly reflected whenever the Training Framework is revised. As 
recommended by the Committee, Mid -career training program for Joint Secretary and above too 
would ensure continued incorporation of this training. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
 

37 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
 The Committee observe that during RE 2014-15, allocation had been reduced in almost all 
the Heads due to economy cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee note that 
despite the increase in allocation under the Head 'Special Diplomatic Expenditu re (SDE)' at the 
RE stage as well as the supplementary grant stage, yet no cash supplementary was provided 
initially and the Ministry had to make arrangements for matching savings from within the 
resources of the Ministry. The Committee are concerned at th e Ministry of Finance's move of not 
proving cash supplementary initially.  Furthermore, the Committee note that under the Head 
Special Diplomatic Expenditure (SDE) though there is an increase in budgetary allocation during 
BE 2015 -16, as compared to RE 201 4-15, yet the Committee are of the opinion that all the 
resources needed for the security aspects of the foreign policy are not considered in these budget 
estimates. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Government that the allocation under this 
Head should be in consonance with the active foreign policy being pursued by the Government of 
India.  
 The Committee suggest that in view of the discretionary nature of expenditure and 
allocation based upon the functional requirement, the existing monitoring m echanism to oversee 
expenditure under this Head should be reviewed and further strengthened and more checks and 
balances should be created within.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is grateful to the committee for recommending to the Government that the 
allocation under this Head should be in consonance with the active foreign policy being persued 
by the Government of India. The Ministry has also noted the suggestion that the existing 
monitoring mechanism to oversee expenditure under this Head should be reviewed and further 
strengthened and more checks and balances should be created within.  
2. Accordingly, Foreign Secretary has commenced a monthly review of the expenditure 
under the SDE scrupulously to ensure that the expenditure incurred is as per th e political and 
security requirements of India. The review mechanism will be followed rigorously to ensure that 
the expenditure under SDE is incurred only for the purpose for which it has been sanctioned and 
is also kept within the amount approved.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee note that under the budgetary Head 'Entertainment Charges' expenditure is 
incurred on extending hospitality to foreign dignitaries. It is praiseworthy to note that in spite of 
several high profile high level visits by foreign dignitaries ther e is no significant rise of 
expenditure under this Head and rather the allocation at RE stage was reduced to Rs. 39.00 crore 

38 
 
during 2014-15. The Committee, however, also note that the Ministry has stated that only time -
bound bills were prioritized. The Committee would like to convey displeasure over the practice of 
keeping the bills pending and building liabilities for the next Financial Year. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that immediate steps should be taken for the early settlement of pending 
bills. The Committee are of the opinion that in view of several such visits the budgetary allocation 
under this Head should be increased at RE 2015 -16 stage so that the Ministry is able to timely 
process the bills.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendations of t he Committee have been noted for compliance and enhanced 
requirements will be reflected in the RE stage so that expenditure incurred in the current financial 
year is not required to be deferred.  
  The Committee note that in spite of the overall cut in the budget allocation at RE 
stage, there was 10.35% increase under the Head 'Embassies and Missions' in view of high level 
visits by Indian Government, mandatory expenses and depreciating value of the Rupee. The 
Committee further note that there is an increase of 23.61% during BE 2015 -16 over BE 2014 -15 
in the allocations under this Head. The Committee are of the view that the increased allocation are 
not in tune with the role and functions assigned to these Missions/Embassies. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the allocation under this Head should be substantially enhanced at the 
RE stage. The Committee however, are distressed to note that there is no separate head to cater to 
improvement of serv ices in the Missions and Posts. The Committee note that Indian 
Missions/Posts form India's residential diplomatic presence in the host country as well as first 
contact point for locals as well as Indians residing there. The Committee, therefore, are of the  
view that the Government should adequately focus on streamlining the procedure in the Indian 
Missions/Posts and ensure high standards of services rendered by them. The Committee suggest 
the Ministry to have a mechanism to receive feedback from the general public regarding rendering 
of services by each Missions/Posts. In context of finalizing e -Samiksha, the Committee suggest to 
the Ministry to initiate and complete the project in a time bound manner. The Committee note that 
this portal would be an effectiv e tool in evaluating performance of Missions/Posts. The 
Committee,  therefore, would like to suggest to the Ministry that on the basis of web data analysis 
the criteria like public perception and public feedback should also to incorporated. The 
Committee further suggest to the Ministry to explore the possibility of an engagement with the 
State Governments for reporting of consular grievances.  
 
MEA e-Samiksha, an online interface between the Missions/Posts and Headquarters has 
been made operational by the Ministry with the objective of bringing in greater synergy between 
Ministry and Missions, including on delivery of public services.  Another web portal online 
Consular Grievances Monitoring System named MADAD , also has provision of receiving public 

39 
 
perception and feedback , including appreciation and suggestions , in order to improve the 
grievance mechanism system. As far as engagement with the State Governments for reporting of 
consular grievances is concerned, the Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hy derabad and 
Kolkata have been associated with this portal for registration of consular grievances and its follow 
up. The portal is designed to accept suggestions from any registered user, who can be an 
individual or an organisation. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
The Committee note that in spite of the overall cut in the budget allocation at RE stage, there was 
10.35% increase under the Head 'Embassies and Missions' in view of high level visits by Indian 
Government, mandatory expenses and depreciating value of the Rupee. The Committee further 
note that there is an increase of 23.61% during BE 2015 -16 over BE 2014 -15 in the allocations 
under this Head. The Committee are of the view that the increased allocation are not in tune with 
the role and functions assigned to these Missions/Embassies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the allocation under this Head should be substantially enhanced at the RE stage. 
The Committee however, are distressed to note that there is no separate head to cater to 
improvement of serv ices in the Missions and Posts. The Committee note that Indian 
Missions/Posts form India's residential diplomatic presence in the host country as well as first 
contact point for locals as well as Indians residing there. The Committee, therefore, are of the  
view that the Government should adequately focus on streamlining the procedure in the Indian 
Missions/Posts and ensure high standards of services rendered by them. The Committee suggest 
the Ministry to have a mechanism to receive feedback from the general public regarding rendering 
of services by each Missions/Posts. In context of finalizing e -Samiksha, the Committee suggest to 
the Ministry to initiate and complete the project in a time bound manner. The Committee note that 
this portal would be an effectiv e tool in evaluating performance of Missions/Posts. The 
Committee,  therefore, would like to suggest to the Ministry that on the basis of web data analysis 
the criteria like public perception and public feedback should also to incorporated. The 
Committee further suggest to the Ministry to explore the possibility of an engagement with the 
State Governments for reporting of consular grievances.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MEA e-Samiksha, an online interface between the Missions/Posts and Headquarters has 
been made operational by the Ministry with the objective of bringing in greater synergy between 
Ministry and Missions, including on delivery of public services.  Another web portal online 
Consular Grievances Monitoring System named MADAD , also has provision of receiving public 
perception and feedback , including appreciation and suggestions , in order to improve the 

40 
 
grievance mechanism system. As far as engagement with the State Governments for reporting of 
consular grievances is concerned, the Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad and 
Kolkata have been associated with this portal for registration of consular grievances and its follow 
up. The portal is designed to accept suggestions from any registered user, who can be an 
individual or an organisation. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 The Committee take note of the collaborative effort of the Ministry of External Affairs 
and the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs of launch of web portal online Consular Grievances 
Monitoring System named MADAD for extending a helping hand to Indians abr oad requiring 
consular assistance, consular grievance tracking and follow up. In view of the involvement of two 
Ministries, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should establish a coordination 
mechanism and channels of communication between the two Ministries and come up with 
identifiable timelines with Standard Operating Procedures regarding the process to be followed 
once a grievance is received.  
 Moreover, in view of the process of registering the new domain and thereafter transfer of 
web-portal, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should engage with the concerned 
authorities for an early registration of the domain name as well as to ensure flawless transfer from 
the present portal. The Committee are of the view that efforts need to be m ade to give wider 
publicity to the portal. The Committee, therefore, suggest that  the Ministry in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs should engage in a media campaign, particularly on social 
media, as well as flash the information of the portal on Passport Seva Portal and on websites of 
individual Missions/Posts.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance . Recently, the 
Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) in Gurgaon and Indian  Workers Resource Centre 
(IWRC) in Dubai, operated by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, have also been authorised 
to assist grievants to lodge their grievances on this portal.  Setting up a dedicated Call Centre for 
MADAD is also under process. Soon the Madad Portal will also have facilities of a Mobile App 
for the benefit of the common man. 
2. A web portal with the URL www.madad.gov.in has since been registered and we are in 
the process of transfer to the new domain. However, MADAD portal would conti nue to be 
accessed through Passport Seva portal as well. For the purpose of wider publicity, MADAD 
Portal has been displayed by Indian Missions and Posts abroad prominently on their websites. In 
addition, Missions/Posts are also publicizing the MADAD porta l in their interaction with the 
Indian community on various occasions. 

41 
 
3. A list of designated Welfare Officers in Gulf Countries with their contact numbers and 
other details as well as emergency contact phone numbers of all Indian Missions and Posts have 
also been placed on Missions/Posts and MEA websites. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
 The Committee note that from 25 th November, 2015 Foreign Governments may deny visa 
or entry to any person travelling with a non -machine Readable Passport (MRP) and the older 
Indian Passports issued with a validity of 20 years fall under non -MRP category. The Committee 
take note of Ministr y's reply that as a result of Ministry's sustained campaign, the figure of 
handwritten passports has come down  from 2.86 lakh passport in December, 2014 to 2.62 lakh 
passport as on 20th March, 2015. The Committee suggest that in view of the approaching de adline 
and the vast number of passport holders falling in the category, the Ministry should engage in a 
media campaign as well as highlight the issue at the Social Media so as to make citizens aware. 
The Committee further recommend to the Ministry to flash  this information on the Passport Seva 
Portal as well as on all the websites of Ministry of External Affairs and the Missions for 
awareness of concerned persons.  
   
Reply to the Government 
 
The Ministry is constantly monitoring the situation related to issuance of Machine 
Readable Passports in lieu of Non -Machine Readable Passports. The Hon‟ble Committee‟s 
recommendations related to going for a media campaign and highlighting the issue at the  social 
media in order to make the citizens aware  have been noted for compliance . In accordance with 
Hon‟ble Committee recommendation, the Ministry would flash this information (which was 
earlier circulated on the Passport Portal and also for Missions/Post s abroad vide circular dated 
23rd December, 2014) on the Passport Seva Portal, all websites of Ministry of External Affairs 
and of Mission/Posts abroad.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
 The Committee note that major portion of Ministry's budget is earmarked for aid/loan to 
various countries. The Committee are also aware that assessment of development assistance 
projects is an ongoing process. A proposal for conducting a study of India's d evelopment 
cooperation is under finalization.  The Committee, however, are of the view that such study 
should include the assessment of its overall policy of developmental engagement and make 
necessary amendments while formulating the Aid Policy for India and for improvement of 
existing mechanism. The Committee further suggest that the Ministry should also consider the 

42 
 
impact of delay in execution of project/extension of grants on the relations with the beneficiary 
country as well as the public perception s hould also be considered while making an objective 
assessment.  In Committee's view the Policy and Planning Division within the Ministry may be 
assigned the work of conducting this assessment and if need be, the Division may involve various 
think tanks in this task. The Committee further suggest that this assessment should also 
incorporate an element of assessment of the standard and quality of the projects undertaken by the 
Ministry.   
 
 Furthermore, the Committee suggest that the Ministry should establish  a mechanism in 
place and develop a programme for management of data and overall information of India's 
international aid/bilateral/developmental cooperation, rather than just depending upon the ITEC 
portal and comprehensive data base of the Lines of Credit maintained by the Exim Bank of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, the Policy Planning & Research Division has already 
initiated an exercise to evaluate India‟s development cooperation with foreign countries.  The 
Division has initially sought assessments from the Indian Missions located in countries that are 
major recipients of India‟s development assistance.  Missions have been asked to detail the 
current state of our development partnerships with their countries of accredi tation, and also make 
recommendations for long -term planning of bilateral grant and credit based assistance projects.  
They have been asked to identify the areas where Indian assistance projects have been successful, 
and also identify the main problems fac ed in implementation of projects.  The inputs from the 
Missions, which are in the process of being received, will be analysed and an effort will be made 
to pick out the best practices as well as the constraints in respect of our aid policy.  On this basis,  
PP&R Division will suggest improvements at the policy and implementation levels that can help 
make our assistance projects more effective at advancing India‟s foreign policy goals in the 
beneficiary countries.  The recommendations will also suggest ways t o prevent delays in delivery 
of projects, and mechanisms to improve monitoring, evaluation and future maintenance of 
completed projects.  The PP&R Division will seek inputs from relevant external think-tanks while 
carrying out this evaluation exercise.  
 
2. The Ministry has established several mechanisms for monitoring projects undertaken in 
other countries. An assessment of  factors affecting timely and effective implementation of 
projects is also made, which provides guidance on how our systems and proce dures can be 
improved and future projects can be better prepared, appraised and delivered.  Ministry‟s inputs 
have been provided to the Ministry of Finance which is presently undertaking a renewal of the 
IDEAS scheme and revision of the LoC Operational Guidelines. 
3. The Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation has been noted. Efforts will be made to 
develop an in -house Management Information System and comprehensive database on Lines of 

43 
 
Credits and grant projects in the Ministry. The Ministry regularly evaluates  the training 
programmes under ITEC/SCAAP/TCS Colombo Plan. At present, it is in the process of upgrading 
its portal to make it an important and useful digital resource point for all its stakeholders. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 The Committee note that at the RE 2014 -15 stage, the budgetary allocation for aid to 
countries was reduced while there was an overall increase under 'Aid to Afghanistan'. The 
Committee further note that during the supplementary grant stage, Rs. 400 crore were sought for 
various projects/programmes in Afghanistan. The Committee, however, specifically observe that 
there is very poor utilization of funds under the Object Head  on 'Small Development Project'. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should also  give due importance to these 
projects along with the big infrastructure projects. The Committee also take note of delay in the 
project of  the construction of Parliament Building in Afghanistan as well as resultant cost and 
time overrun.  The Committee now hope that the Ministry would resolve the issue of cross 
variation due to currency value fluctuation with CPWD  and the project will be completed as per 
the target date of 30th September 2015.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Implementation of Small Development Projects (SDPs) in Afghanistan remains a priority 
for us as they are community -based projects in vulnerable border areas with direct and visible 
impact on community life. While Ministry gives due importance to SDPs, the inadequate 
allocation of funds under “Aid to Afghanistan” is making it difficult to take up projects under 
phase III of SDP. However, efforts will be made to secure additional funds at RE stage. Besides 
regular monitoring and review of progress by Project Monitoring Committee (PMC), concerned 
line Ministries of Government of Afghanistan, which are responsible for implementation of SDPs, 
will be requested through our Mission to ensure better utilisation of funds.  It may be added in this 
context that the bud get allocated under the Head “Aid to Afghanistan” is not adequate to even 
finance the two on -going projects, viz., Parliament Building and Salma Dam, which entered the 
final phase of completion.   
2. As regards Parliament Building project, the issue of cos t escalation on account, inter alia, 
of currency fluctuation is being addressed. CPWD, the project executing agency, has been asked 
to submit a Revised Cost Estimate proposal at the earliest so that it can be processed for necessary 
approvals. The project has entered final phase of construction and according to CPWD, it is likely 
to be completed by December 2015. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
 

44 
 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
 The Committee note that a large part of budgetary allocation under 'Aid/loan to countries' 
is earmarked for 'Aid/loan to Bhutan'. The Committee are dismayed to note that allocation was 
decreased substantially during RE 2014 -15 under all the three Sub -Heads. The Committee note 
that a reduction of Rs. 2002.41 crore has been made under t his Head. The Committee are not 
convinced with the Ministry's reply that the project managements have made their best efforts to 
speed up construction. The Committee are further not supportive of Ministry's approach of 
postponing of payments to contractors  due to shortage of funds, as it will unnecessarily lead to 
accumulation of liabilities for the next financial year.  In view of higher allocation by Ministry of 
Finance under Plan allocation during BE 2015 -16, the Committee recommend for an early 
settlement of pending bills and continue with progress of projects as per the fixed timeline. 
 
 Moreover, the Ministry in tandem with the Project Management should ensure that the 
work in the three ongoing HEPs namely, i.e., Punatsangchhu -I, Punatsangchhu -II and 
Mangdechhu projects is carried out as per schedule. The Committee note that construction work 
in these three projects is at peak stage and there are pending bills also.  The Committee also 
recommend that if need be, the Ministry should approach the Ministry  of Finance for more 
allocation at RE 2015-16 stage so that the progress in the project is not constrained due to lack of 
funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following PIB Consideration on 3 July 2015, Union Cabinet approval for the Revised 
Cost Estimate (RCE) for the ongoing 1200 MW Punatsangchu -I HEP for Rs. 9375.58 cr was 
obtained on 21 July 2015, to enable release of funds to the project. As regards the Punatsangchu -
II and the Mangdechu HEPs, these are proceeding on schedule and their RCE is also expec ted to 
be processed in CFY 2015 -16. Adequate budget allocation in CFY 2015 -16 for the three projects 
has been obtained, and no shortfall of funds is expected in CFY 2015 -16, barring any reduction at 
RE stage. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
 The Committee take note of budgetary reduction at RE 2014 -15 stage as well as low 
utilization of funds till December 2014. The Committee take note of the further extension of 
project completion date regarding the Port and Inland Waterway Terminal (IWT). Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must address the issues of concern with the 
contractor, if any, and engage with the Project Development Consultant to ensure that the pace of 
the project is maintained and there are no further delays. The  Committee further recommend that 

45 
 
the Ministry should engage with competent authority for approval of the changed parameters and 
the revised estimated cost at the earliest,  so as to ensure that the work for the road component of 
the project  is completed as per the schedule and there is no further delay in awarding the contract.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry as well as the Project Consultant are making all possible efforts to address 
the issues of concern raised by the Contractor so as to maintain the pace of the project and 
complete the Kaladan Port & IWT component of the project within the revised timeline.  
2. The meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to consider the Revised Cost 
Estimate (RCE) of the project was held on June 8, 2015. After securing EFC‟s concurrence, 
approval of the Cabinet will be requested before next steps can be taken including  award of the 
work of the Road component as well as additional items under the Port & IWT component of the 
project. All efforts will be made to regularly monitor and review the implementation of both road 
and additional Port & IWT components of the project.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 
 The Committee take note of the reduced allocation under the Head 'Aid to Nepal' despite 
the announcement for aid/assistance made at the Prime Ministerial level. The Committee further 
take note of the slow progress and lack of utilization of  funds in the Terai Road Project. The 
Committee are not convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for low utilization of 
funds in this regard. The Committee also note that there are  pending legal cases relating to one of 
the contractors with regard to idling of resources relating to the project. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry must review its policy and procedure in context of 
Projects in Nepal and resolve this case expeditiously through arbitration process. The Committee 
further suggest that the Ministry should also engage with the Government of Nepal for early 
resolution of the issues.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has been reviewing policies and procedures with the Government of Nepal 
to ensure effective implementation of projects in Nepal. The Arbitration process, which 
commenced on January 9, 2015 in respect of the Terai Road Project Packages 2 & 6 and on 
February 9, 2015 in respect of Packages 3, 4 & 5, are being pursued with due diligence and care. 
So far, eight hearings of Arbitral Tribunal have been held on Packages 2 & 6 and two hearings on 
Packages 3, 4 & 5.  A revised GOI-funded-GON-implemented modality for Packages 2 -6 of the 
Terai Roads Phase-I project is be ing worked out by GOI, with GOI commitment to be limited as 

46 
 
per existing DPR. Arbitration proceedings of Packages 2 -6 are underway. One road of Package 1 
under the earlier modality has been completed. 
 
2. The Ministry is working closely with the Government  of Nepal to resolve issues, as may 
arise, for timely completion of all the ongoing projects. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 The Committee note that the BE 2014 -15, RE 2014 -15 and BE 2015 -16 have been kept 
constant at Rs 500 crore. The Committee observe that during the recent visit by the Prime 
Minister, in Sri Lanka several announcements were made. According to the Ministry, th e 
economic implication of these announcements have been included in the BE 2015 -16. The 
Committee are not convinced with Ministry's reply  and doubt as to how the Ministry would be 
able to accommodate these announcements in the stagnant budgetary allocatio n especially, the 
grant of Line of Credit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must ensure that 
the implementation of the projects as well as Line of Credit is not be kept pending due to lack of 
funds at any stage. Furthermore, the Commit tee also desire that the Ministry should ensure the 
completion of the Housing Project for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) as per original timeline 
and hand over the houses  to the beneficiaries.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India is committed to assisting the Government of Sri Lanka in 
resettlement and rehabilitation of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Northern and Eastern Sri 
Lanka. In this regard, the Government has been implementing several developmenta l projects, 
particularly in the areas of development of rail and port infrastructure, connectivity and 
transportation, education, public health, housing, vocational training and economic revival and 
women‟s empowerment, particularly war widows.  
 
2. In June 2010, India‟s flagship project for construction for 50,000 houses, mainly for 
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Sri Lanka, was announced. The first phase, a Pilot Project 
for the construction of 1000 houses, was completed in August 2012 and ho uses were handed over 
to the beneficiaries . The second phase for construction of 45,000 houses for the Northern and 
Eastern was launched on the ground on 2 October 2012 and as of end June 2015 a total of 30,352 
houses have been completed, including achievi ng the target construction of 27,000 houses by end 
of 2014. The second phase of the project is expected to be completed by end 2015. As part of the 
project remaining 4000 houses will  be constructed in the Central and Uva Province for the 
upcountry/plantation Tamils. Modalities for implementation of the project are being finalised. 
 

47 
 
3. Government of India, based on the capacity to absorb the assistance project on ground in 
Northern Sri Lanka, has been allocating funds every year under „Aid to Sri Lanka‟ budg et head of 
the Ministry. During the Financial Year 2014 -15 the allocation was Rs 500 crores and the 
Ministry utilized the entire amount for implementation of several resettlement, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction projects for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Northern and Eastern Provinces 
of Sri Lanka. During the Current Financial Year (2015 -16) Government has allocated Rs 500 
crores under BE. The Ministry is of the view that the housing and other developmental projects in 
Sri Lankan will be implemen ted as per schedule and request for additional funds would be made, 
if required, at RE stage of the CFY.  
 
4. Government of India has extended Lines of Credit (LoC) of about US $ 800 million for 
the restoration of Northern Railway Lines. Projects in this r egard are progressing as per schedule. 
The railway line from Colombo to Jaffna has been restored and the „Yal Devi‟ train from 
Colombo to Jaffna resumed service after a gap of several decades on 13 October 2014. This line 
was further extended up to Kankesanthurai in January 2015. Prime Minister during his visit to Sri 
Lanka from 13-14 March 2015, inaugurated the railway station at Talaimannar and flagged off the 
Talaimannar- Madhu Road train service. During his visit to Sri Lanka from 13 -14 March 2015, 
Prime Minister announced a fresh LoC for the railway sector for USD 318 million. Agreements 
for utilization of the fresh LoC are yet to be concluded and funds will be disbursed by the EXIM 
Bank of India as being done in the case of US $ 800 million LoC. It is also reiterated that in so far 
as Lines of Credit are concerned Government of India‟s liability is limited to providing Interest 
Equalization Support (IES) to the lending bank – EXIM Bank of India, which is met by the 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance under the Indian Development and 
Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS). DEA had been consulted before the announcement was 
made.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
 
 The Committee note that BE 2014 -15 was projected at  Rs. 122.87 crore mainly to 
accommodate the Prime Minister's commitment of grant assistance of US$ 10 million to 
Palestine. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that the grant was not released in the 
wake of drastic reduction in Revised Estimates s tage. The Committee are not convinced with the 
Ministry's reasoning and  therefore, recommend that the grant assistance should be released 
during the first quarter of Financial Year 2015-16 itself to avoid further embarrassment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry projected US $ 9 million for release of the committed Aid to Palestine in its 
RE 2014-15.  Due to budgetary constraints in the FY 2014 -15, Ministry was able to release USD 

48 
 
4 million (out of the balance USD 9 million) in December 2014. The bala nce of USD 5 million 
has since been released in June, 2015.         
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 34) 
 
The Committee over the years have been recommending an increased budgetary allocation to 
ICCR and expansion of the network of Indian Cultural Centres. In the light of the active foreign 
policy being pursued by the Government and attempts to engage the Indi an Diaspora, the 
Committee had expected a greater vigour in expanding the footprint of India's soft power. The 
Committee, however, are concerned to note that due to economy cut during 2014-15, ICCR had to 
scale down its activities substantially, defer depl oyment of teachers in many cultural 
centres/Missions/Posts and even resort to closing of Indian Cultural Centres in Toronto, Abu 
Dhabi, Saudi Arabia and Sub -Centre at Lautoka. The Committee express their displeasure at the 
state of affairs with regard to I ndia's projection of its soft power to the world at large. The 
Committee, therefore, would like to strongly recommend that the Government should make 
allocations to ICCR in consonance with the Foreign Policy objectives being pursued by the 
Government. Moreover, the Committee would also like to suggest that the Government should 
formulate a clear vision for expansion and consolidation of India's soft power and accordingly 
devise  a strategy  and prepare a blueprint with time line for expansion of network of Indian 
Cultural Centres and the activities conducted therein. The Committee urge the Government to 
ensure the speedy completion of the Centres at Bali, Paris and Washington where the properties 
have already been acquired.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Mini stry has noted recommendation of the Committee with regard to the need for 
increased allocations to ICCR. In spite of the meagre augmentation under Non Plan in BE 2015 -
16, allocation for ICCR has been augmented by about 15% as compared to RE 2014 -15. 
Allocations under the head would be revisited at Revised Estimates stage, as per the needs, and 
subject to the ceiling of Ministry of Finance.   
 
UPDATED STATUS:  
Indian Cultural Centre, Paris 
 
Ministry has appointed the architect -consultant for renovations of the property through 
Ministry‟s prescribed selection procedure. The concept design of the renovations as a pproved by 
the ICCR was further detailed/developed by the architect -consultant and had submitted the 
preliminary design which has been formally approved by the Ministry. The architect -consultant 

49 
 
has submitted the proposal for local body approvals in Paris which is expected by the end of 
September 2015. 
 
2. The architect-consultant has prepared a time-line according to which the Renovations shall 
be completed by September 2016. Ministry is monitoring the project regularly. 
 
 
Cultural Wing, Washington DC 
 
 The Selection Committee appointed by the Ministry has finalised the Architect -Consultant 
for renovations of the property on July 11, 2015 and a formal letter of appointment is to be issued 
by the Mission by July 31, 2015 after approval by the Ministry. 
 
2. As per the discussion held with the selected architectural firm, the renovations project can 
be completed by December 2016. The architect -consultant will prepare a time -line for the 
renovations accordingly which shall be monitored by the Ministry for firm implementation. 
 
Indian Cultural Centre, Bali 
 
 Architect-consultant for Design and Construction of New Cultural centre appointed on 13 
January 2011. The Concept design and all the preliminary drawings have been approved by the 
Ministry after feedback from the ICCR. The architect-consultant has submitted the plans to Local 
body for their approval. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
 
 The Committee find that there is a need to expand footprints of ICCR in the countries with 
high proportion of People of Indian Origin (PIO) population. The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry/ICCR should also expand the base of their activities in the existing centres of these 
countries and take initiative to preserve and document Indian linkages to their heritage, language, 
script, cultural practices, traditions, the local heritage and the living heritage particularly in 
Caribbean region and South East Asian Region. Furthermore, the Committee suggest the Ministry 
dwell upon the ways to enhance linkages with Indian Diaspora and explore the possibility of 
coordinating with the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on this issue and exploring the 
possibility of being associated with Know India Programme, Schemes for Scholarships etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICCR is organizing events in countries with high proportion of PIOs. For instance, in this 
year alone, a three–day international conference on “Indian Diaspora and Cultural Heritage: Past, 

50 
 
Present & Future” was organized by ICCR from 11 -13 February 2015 in New Delhi, which was 
inaugurated by Hon‟ble External Affairs Minister, Smt. Sushma Swaraj.  The conference was 
attended by 43 scholars from 13 countri es (Canada, Fiji, Guyana, India, Kenya, Malaysia, 
Mauritius, New Zealand, Singapore, St. Vincent, Trinidad & Tobago, UK, USA). 
 
2. From 24-27 February 2015, ICCR organized an international Ramayana Mela, which was 
inaugurated by Hon‟ble Prime Minister of India at FICCI auditorium, New Delhi.  Troupes of 7 
countries which have largest diaspora or with which we have historic linkages (C ambodia, Fiji, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and Trinidad & Tobago) participated in the Mela.  The 
troupes also performed in 14 different cities of India (Ahmedabad, Allahabad, Ayodhya, Bhopal, 
Chandigarh, Chennai, Chitrakoot, Delhi, Jaipur, Kolkata, Lucknow, Noida, Patna and Varanasi).   
 
3. ICCR held an international conference on „Gandhi and his legacy: From Lawyer to 
Mahatma – How South Africa Shaped his Thought and Action and Gandhi‟s Impact on Africa‟ in 
collaboration with the Centre for In dian Studies in Africa at the University of Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg from 27-28 February 2015.  17 scholars from 4 countries (India, South Africa, UK 
& USA) participated in this conference. 
 
4. ICCR sponsored a delegation of Theravada Monks of Sri Lanka  for a “Dialogue on 
Vinay” in New Delhi on 18-19 March 2015. 
 
5. ICCR also supported a conference on “Indian Diaspora : Trajectories and Trans 
Nationalities” from 12-16 May at University of West Indies. 
 
6. ICCR facilitated the participation of two Indian scholars to participate in an international 
Conference on “Indo -Cambodian Relations through Buddhism”, which was organized by the 
Embassy of India, Phnom Penh during 4-6 June, 2015. 
 
7. ICCR is organizing an International Conference on “Shared Heritage as new Variable in 
the Indo-Korean Relations: Historicising the Legend of Princess from Ayodhya and its legacy” on 
14-15 July, 2015 in New Delhi.   
 
8. ICCR has extended its support to the ASEAN -India Centre at the Research and 
Information System for Developi ng Countries for organizing an international conference on 
“ASEAN-India Cultural Links” on 23 -24 July, 2015 at the India Habitat Centre, New Delhi.  10 
scholars each from South-East Asia and India will participate in the Conference. 
 
9. Hindi Professors an d Teachers have been deployed by ICCR in some countries which 
have large Indian diaspora (Trinidad & Tobago, Sri Lanka, Suriname and Thailand). 
 

51 
 
10. During the financial year 2014 -15, cultural groups from South East Asian countries and 
diaspora countries, including Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Nepal, Trinidad & Tobago, Indonesia, Fiji, 
Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, were hosted by ICCR.  Similarly, performing arts groups were 
sponsored by ICCR to give performances in countries with large Indian diaspora as also  in the 
South-East Asian Region on a regular basis.  Indian Arrival Day is celebrated by our ICCR‟s 
Cultural Centres located in Port of Spain, Paramaribo, Georgetown, Fiji and Mauritius every year.  
During this financial year also, ICCR -sponsored groups wi ll participate in major 
festivals/celebrations in countries with large Indian diaspora and ASEAN countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 37) 
 
The Committee note that the ITP Division was created within the Ministry of External Affairs  to 
give a definitive direction and focus to India's economic diplomacy strategy. While analysing 
various activities of the Division, the Committee are not convinced with its endeavours to 
promote India's interests and its role in conducting economic diplo macy. The Committee, 
therefore, want that the Ministry must strengthen the ITP Division and carry an assessment of its 
role and identify the ways in which the Division could be empowered to be an effective channel 
of India's economic diplomacy and also a f acilitator for enhanced technology promotion and 
transfer. The Committee also recommend that this Division must be assigned the work of 
formulating an economic diplomacy strategy for India in consultation with the  Policy Planning 
and Research Division of the Ministry for an effective role of India's Missions/Posts in carrying 
out market expansion activities with identifiable goals. 
 
  The Committee note that the ITP division had been allocated a budget of Rs. 5 crore for 
Market Expansion Activities which had been allocated to the Indian Missions to carry out 
investment promotion activities abroad. The Committee find it very inadequate for carrying out 
these activities by 183 Missions/Posts.  The Committee, therefore, desire that sufficient allocation 
should be made in proportion to the activities assigned to this Division to be carried out through 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has initiated necessary measures to strengthen the ITP Division by clearly 
defining the role of the Division, which includes the following:  
 
1) ITP Division will promote and facilitate foreign investment flows (FDI, FII, technology 
transfer and management) in coordination with Territorial Division, Missions and other 
Ministries in India.  
 

52 
 
2) Formulates strategies and programmes for carrying out inve stment promotion activities 
abroad. Actively participate in economic forums/exhibitions abroad which are aimed at 
promoting greater investments into India.  
 
3) Provide information and back -up support to Missions/Posts business and investment 
promotion activities through fortnightly updates on the Indian Economy, topical faxes on 
all investment related matters and funding.  
 
4) Collects feedback from Missions/Posts on foreign investor‟s perceptions of investment 
climate in India and share country/regional experie nces with the nodal Ministry for 
formulation of policy.  
 
5) Be the first port of call for foreign Investors visiting India. Assist investors in arranging 
meetings for foreign investors with relevant state governments  / departments / Business 
chambers etc. 
 
6) Assist foreign investors faced with procedure -related issues by liaising with relevant 
departments/agencies at the central and state governments.  
 
7) Assists Missions/Posts in giving focus and direction to seminars, workshops, road shows, 
meetings on investment. 
 
8) Work with Territorial Divisions on all bilateral economic -related issues, participate in 
relevant bilateral meetings, and undertake necessary follow up work.  
 
9) Work closely with Foreign Embassies in India in arranging investment -related seminars, 
facilitating visits, and meetings with relevant departments/agencies; understanding 
bottlenecks faced by foreign enterprises in doing business in India and working with 
relevant stakeholders to resolve the issues. 
 
10) Liaise with apex/regional industry chambe rs/associations, both in India and abroad, on 
matters relating to business promotion. Organize seminars and business events along with 
apex/regional industry chambers/associations not only abroad, but also in various cities of 
India.  
 
11) Organize region/country-specific briefing sessions to the leadership of India‟s corporate 
houses/business delegations by Foreign Secretary and other Secretaries and Heads of 
Divisions prior to any VVIP visit. 
 
12) Liaise with State Governments to ensure adequate and timely dissemination of 
information on incoming business/investment delegations. Actively work with the State 
Industrial Development Corporations and other related agencies to provide support when 
servicing foreign business/investment delegations.  
 

53 
 
13) Work with state governments by assisting  them in preparing for investment road 
shows/seminars abroad; participation in trade/investment exhibitions and economic 
forums such as World Economic Forum in Davos, Bo ao Forum for Asia, St. Petersburg 
International Economic Forum etc.  
 
14) Work with Public and Private -sector SEZs to help promote their zones internationally 
through Missions/Posts abroad.  
 
15) Actively work with Indian enterprises to promote their interests ove rseas by coordinating 
with Indian Missions/Posts to help identify opportunities for mergers and acquisitions, 
sourcing of raw materials, arranging of meetings and networking events, participation in 
conferences etc. 
 
16) Work closely with all economic ministri es to gain clarity on policy proposals and prepare 
presentations which are then circulated to Missions/Posts.  
 
17) To serve as knowledge platform on business environment and investment opportunities for 
Missions/Posts abroad through its flagship website www.indiainbusiness.nic.in.   
 
18) Work with leading management institutions  and consultancy firms  to bring out case 
studies / write-ups / publications on successful experiences of foreign businesses in In dia 
for dissemination among Missions/Posts. 
 
19) Provide funding  to Missions/Posts under the “Market Expansion Activities Budget” to 
organize business seminars, advocacy -related activities, hire consultants, prepare market 
surveys, promote filmmaking in India,  organize tourism events; and promotion of Yoga 
and traditional Indian medicine including Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani.  
 
20) Work with international agencies and institutions such as the World Bank, ADB etc., to 
understand international best practices of doing business and benchmarking the same 
against practices in India.  
 
21) Monitor, evaluate, and coordinate promotion of policies for attracting investments in 
sectors such as civil aviation, energy, transport, ports, highways, telecommunications, 
electronics, software, auto, tourism, food processing and other flagship projects.  
 
22) Interact with Civil Aviation Ministry on all matters relating to civil aviation and air 
services agreements (ASAs) with foreign countries/airlines.  
 
23) Servicing MEA‟s representation on Foreign Investment Promotion Board, Inter -
Departmental Committee of t he Department of Financial Services, Committee of 
Directions of the Department of Commerce & Industry, Projects Export Promotion 
Council, Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, India Trade Promotion Organization, 

54 
 
Engineering Export Promotion Council, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, Invest India and 
Global Innovation and Technology Alliance.  
 
24) Interacting with visiting business journalists and carrying out publicity on investment and 
economic-related issues through multi-media channels. 
 
25) Liaise with UNIDO Investment Promotion Programme, the World Association of 
Investment Promotion Agencies; and other investment 
 
2. In addition to the above, the ITP Division, which was previously part of the Energy 
Security Division has now been made an independent Division . Efforts have also been made to 
strengthen the Division by bringing in officers on deputation from the Revenue and Economic 
Services. The Division plans to have a total of 5 Deputy Secretaries and 4 Under Secretaries. 
Currently 3 Deputy Secretaries and 3 Under Secretaries have already been recruited. Interviews 
for the remaining will be completed at the earliest. The addition of officers on deputation from 
other Ministries is expected to bring more line experience to the Division.  
 
3. The 2015 HOMs Conference listed 13 action points for all our Missions/Posts worldwide. 
ITP Division has been made the nodal division for coordinating with our Missions/Posts on all 
these items.  Indian Missions/Posts are expected to undertake the following:  
 
1) Contribute directly to Flagship Projects of Govt. of India including “Make in India‟, 
Digital India, Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan, Ganga Rejuvenation, Smart Cities, Skill India, 
GIAN etc.  
 
2) Projecting India as an investment destination. ITP Division to assist Mi ssions/Posts with 
concrete proposals to actively seek FDI and technology transfer to India 
 
3) Developing MEA as a focal point for trade facilitation and trade queries and also for 
dispute resolution.  
 
4) Identify companies with technological capabilities to as sist India in developing a 
consortium approach towards Smart Cities.  
 
5) Promote Indian success stories to balance out negative perceptions about doing business in 
India. ITP to regularly bring out e-books for circulation among Indian Missions/Posts.  
 
6) Organizing events to provide networking opportunities, catalogue shows, product festivals 
to promote Indian tea, coffee, wine, mangoes etc.  
 
7) Organizing awareness programmes to address the issue of work permits and visas for 
Indian professionals. 
 

55 
 
8) Missions to be storehouse of information for Indian companies wanting to engage with 
foreign countries.  
 
9) Identify, facilitate, and keep track of important business houses/persons visiting India.  
 
10) Take concrete steps to leverage India‟s medical tourism – promote Ayush and other 
traditional systems of medicine.  
 
11) Facilitate regular videoconferencing of major local companies and chambers with Indian 
chambers at the national and state level and also with line Ministries and MEA as 
required.  
 
12) Involve Persons of Indian Origin in Flagship projects of Government of India.  
 
13) Leverage diaspora skills including for hiring top international faculty to teach for 3 -6 
months in Indian institutions.  
 
4. As recommended by the Standing Committee on External Affairs, ITP Division will be 
working with the Policy Planning and Research Division to come up with an economic diplomacy 
strategy.  
 
5. Regarding the budgetary requirements of the Division , the recommendations of the 
Committee have been duly noted. The allocation would be revisited at Revised Estimates stage, as 
per the needs, and subject to the ceiling of Ministry of Finance.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 38) 
 
 The Committee take note that the Policy, Planning  and Research Division of the Ministry 
is not directly engaged with the defining of long term strategic doctrine for India as well as road 
map for India's Foreign policy apparatus. The Committee are not convinced with the procedure 
being followed by the Di vision for strategic doctrine as well as in defining the national interests 
of India based on the feedback from concerned Territorial Divisions.  The Committee feel that 
isolated views of the Territorial Divisions may not contemplate the overall scenario a nd adopt a 
holistic approach. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Policy Planning and Research 
Division be strengthened and used as a think tank within the Ministry to define the strategic 
doctrine for India as well as to formulate a road map for India's foreign policy apparatus. The 
Committee further suggest that the Ministry should receive inputs from ICWA and RIS or other 
think tanks in defining and expounding to overall interests, goals and strategic doctrines for India.  
 
 

56 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry of External Affairs has initiated a major 
effort to strengthen the Policy Planning & Research Division, so that the Division can play its 
envisaged role of defining the long -term strategic doctrines  of India‟s foreign policy.  The 
Division‟s strength has been enhanced by deploying additional Foreign Service officers.  An 
effort is also underway to bring in officers from specialised arms/departments of GOI on 
deputation to the PP&R Division, in order to benefit from their domain expertise in areas. In 
addition, the PP&R Division is also in the process of recruiting 4 external international -relations 
experts as consultants to improve the Ministry‟s ability to monitor the strategic literature covering 
foreign policy issues and to deepen the Ministry‟s interface with the think tank community.   
2. PP&R Division has been tasked with developing India‟s policy stance vis -a-vis key 
partner countries, suggesting the pace and sequence of our engagement with diff erent countries 
over the coming years, and undertaking a continuous and forward -looking analysis of our 
principal foreign policy initiatives from a holistic and long -term perspective.  PP&R Division has 
also been mandated to increase MEA‟s outreach with do mestic and international think -tanks, to 
facilitate the building of partnerships between Indian and foreign think-tanks, and to steer Track-2 
dialogues with key partner countries.  PP&R Division would also be initiating broader policy -
planning dialogues wi th our key bilateral partners.  For carrying out these tasks, the PP&R 
Division would be working closely with relevant Territorial Divisions, but with an attempt to rise 
above the limited perspective of any particular Territorial Division.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
 The Committee are concerned over the growing instances of Indian fishermen being 
apprehended and imprisoned as well as firing being resorted by the security forces of 
neighbouring countries. Moreover, the Committee also express their concern over the pligh t of 
twelve Indian fishermen who are in jails of Bangladesh and 383 Indian Fishermen in jails of 
Pakistan. The Committee also take note of the efforts made by the Government of India in this 
regard and desire that more concerted efforts should be made by t he Government at the highest 
level for release of imprisoned fishermen in the jails of Bangladesh and Pakistan. The matter 
relating to acknowledgement of the imprisonment of 80 Fishermen by Pakistan should also be 
taken as priority. The Committee desire to be furnished with a status note in this regard.   
 The Committee also note that there are existing joint mechanisms with Sri Lanka but there 
is a need to hold regular meetings of the fishermen's associations of India and that of 
neighbouring countries. Th e Committee also  recommend that the Government should take 
initiative to establish similar Joint Working Groups, with Bangladesh and Pakistan.  Moreover, 

57 
 
the Committee suggest that the Ministry must engage the State Governments and local 
administration in the border areas so as to avert the possibility of such incidents. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Sri Lanka 
 
 Government of India (GoI) attaches the highest importance to the safety, security and 
welfare of Indian fishermen. Keeping in mind the humanitarian and livelihood dimension of the 
issue, GoI has impressed upon the Sri Lankan Navy to act with restraint, not  to fire on our 
fishermen and treat our fishermen in a humane manner.  
 
2. As soon as reports of apprehensions of Indian fishermen by Sri Lankan Navy are received, 
the Government immediately takes up the matter with the Government of Sri Lanka through 
diplomatic channels for expeditious release and repatriation of apprehended Indian fishermen. 
The number of Indian fishermen apprehended by Sri Lanka in 2012 was 197, in 2013 it was 676 
and in 2014 it stood at 787.  As a result of the Government‟s steadfast ef forts, all these fishermen 
were subsequently released and repatriated to India. Since January 2015, a total of 217 Indian 
fishermen have been apprehended by Sri Lankan authorities. This includes the 14 Indian 
fishermen apprehended on 1 June 2015 and 26 app rehended on 20 June 2015. Due to efforts of 
the Government, 177 of the apprehended 217 Indian fishermen have been released by the 
Government of Sri Lanka and repatriated to India. Government, through our High Commission in 
Colombo, is in touch with Sri Lan kan authorities for expeditious release and repatriation of these 
40 Indian fishermen. No cases of deaths of Indian fishermen in Sri Lankan waters have been 
reported since April 2011.  
 
3. There are several mechanisms in place to ensure cooperation and und erstanding between 
India and Sri Lanka in resolving the fishermen issue, such as the Joint Working Group, October 
2008 Understanding, Joint Committee on Fisheries and Fishermen Association Talks.  
 
4. In our bilateral meetings, including at the highest lev els, we have strongly taken up the 
matter of apprehension of Indian fishermen. Immediately after the visit of External Affairs 
Minister (6-7 March 2015) and prior to the visit of the Prime Minister (13 -14 March 2015) to Sri 
Lanka, all the Indian fishermen then in the custody of Government of Sri Lanka were released. 
   
5. Prime Minister, during his meeting with the President of Sri Lanka in Colombo on 13 
March 2015, pointed out that the issue of fishermen was a complex issue involving livelihood and 
humanitarian concerns on both sides and that India and Sri Lanka need to find a long term 
solution. As agreed during the meeting, the representatives of Fishermen‟s Associations of India 
and Sri Lanka met on 24 -25 March 2015 in Chennai. The representatives of Fis hermen‟s 
Associations had also met earlier on 27 th January 2014 and 12 th May 2014. Officials from the 
Government of India, the State Governments of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry were also present as 

58 
 
observers during these meetings. During the meeting on 24 Mar ch 2015, the Indian fishermen 
made several proposals to address this problem, including the phasing out of unsustainable fishing 
practices. However, the Sri Lankan side has recently conveyed its inability to accept these 
proposals on the ground that Indian  fishermen fishing in Sri Lankan waters would affect their 
livelihood.  
 
6. The need for creating greater awareness among our fishermen to avoid crossing over into 
Sri Lankan waters for their own safety and security has been felt. In this context, the Gove rnment 
is working with the concerned State Governments on the need to sensitise Indian fishermen to 
respect the International Maritime Boundary Line and to find a long term solution to the issue. 
 
7. Government of India remains engaged with the Government of Sri Lanka to ensure that 
fishermen on both sides can continue to pursue their livelihood in a safe, secure and sustainable 
manner.  
 
Bangladesh 
 
 There are several instances of fishermen from India and Bangladesh straying into each 
other‟s territory. Our Mission in Dhaka is continuously in contact with the Home Ministry and 
Foreign Ministry of Bangladesh for the release of Indian fishermen whenever they are arrested in 
Bangladesh waters.  Out of 117 fishermen arrested by Bangladesh Navy in 2015, Mission has got 
74 fishermen repatriated to India till date. There are, therefore, 43 Indian fishermen in Bangladesh 
jails, waiting to be released and repatr iated. Mission is in constant touch with the local authorities 
in this regard.  
 
2. Fishermen‟s issues have been discussed in the Joint Consultative Commission, Foreign 
Office Consultations and Home Secretary Level Talks, and have always been resolved amic ably.  
A MoU on cooperation between the two coast guards was signed during Prime Minister‟s visit to 
Bangladesh in June, 2015.  This MoU provides a framework for better coordination and 
understanding between our coast guards and we expect that fishermen re lated issues will also be 
addressed. 
Pakistan 
 As per the list of prisoners and fishermen exchanged with Pakistan on 1 July 2015, under 
India-Pakistan Agreement on Consular Access 2008, there are 355 fishermen believed to be 
Indian in Pakistani custody. (Subsequently, 163 fishermen were released on 3 August – See 
Below). 
2. Government regularly takes up with the Government of Pakistan the issue of early release 
and repatriation of Indian fishermen detained in Pakistani jails including at the highest level s. 

59 
 
Two recent high level engagements, at the level of Prime Minister by India, secured the release of 
277 Indian fishermen in a period of two months.   
 
1) Following Prime Minister‟s telephone call to Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on 16 
June 2015 to convey Ramzan greetings and our decision to release 88 Pakistani fishermen 
detained in Indian jails, Pakistan reciprocated by release of 113 Indian fishermen on 19 
June 2015. 
 
2) During Prime Minister‟s meeting with Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in Ufa 
(Russia) on 10 July 2015, India proposed to establish a mechanism for release of 
fishermen in each other‟s custody, along with their boats, within a period of 15 days by 
both sides. Following the meeting, 163 Indian fishermen were released by Pakistan on 3 
August 2015. 
3. Several bilateral arrangements have also been put in place. 
 
1) A Memorandum of Understanding signed on 03 October 2005 in Islamabad provides for 
establishing a communication link between Indian coast guard (ICG) and Pakistan 
Maritime Security agency (PMSA). The hotline is operational since 14 November 2006. 
 
2) An India Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners, comprising four retired judges from 
each side, set up in February 2008, recommend steps to be taken for humane treatment and 
expeditious release of prisoners of the respective countries in each other‟s jails. The 
committee last visited the Central Jails in Amritsar and Jaipur and Tihar Jail in New Delhi 
from 25-31 October 2013; it is Pakistan‟s turn to convene the next meeting. 
 
3) The Consula r Access Agreement signed on 21 May 2008 provides for notification of 
arrest, detention or imprisonment of national of one country to the other and providing for 
Consular Access within three months. 
 
4) During the Home/Interior Secretary talks held in 2011 an d 2012 in New Delhi and 
Islamabad respectively, it was agreed to set up a Joint Working Group (JWG) chaired by 
Director Generals of ICG and PMSA. The JWG meets annually and the last meeting was 
held from 18-20 December 2014 in New Delhi. 
4. Government regularly takes up with the Pakistan authorities the issue of the early release 
and repatriation of apprehended Indian fishermen as well as providing regular consular access to 
them. The Government also, on a continuing basis, monitors the status of all such Indian prisoners 
in Pakistani jails. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 

60 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 (Recommendation No. 32) 
 The Committee take note of reduced allocation during RE 2014 -15 under the Head 
'Eurasian Countries' as well as dismally low utilization of funds. The Committee, however, are of 
the view that the nomenclature of the Head itself is not very clear. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Head as well as Division in the Ministry be renamed  as 'Eurasia and Central 
Asia' so that it is more clearly defined. The Committee also take note of the status of the Central 
Asia Network for Tele -Education and Tele -Medicine which was announced in March 2011 and 
observe that after completion of the DPRs the feedback received from some of the countries 
indicate that the tele -education component may not be very useful from their perspective. Now, 
the Ministry proposed to set up only tele -medicine projects w hich have quick gestation. The 
Committee, therefore, treat this as a failure of planning, which could have been prevented if the 
Ministry could have engaged in a consultation process regarding the project and sought  opinion 
of concerned countries before i nitiating t he process  and seeking  DPRs. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that at the stage of identification of the projects itself the Ministry 
must conduct necessary ground work particularly in technical projects with engagement of the 
concerned beneficiary countries and finalize the design of the project before announcement.  
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that t he name Eurasia Division and the Budget Head „Aid to Eurasia‟ have 
been arrived after due consideration. Eurasia Division deals with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia as well as the five Central Asian Republics. Central Asian 
countries are widely acknowledged to be a part of the Eurasian region.  Kazakhstan and 
Kyrgyzstan are members of the „Eurasian Economic Union‟ a regional economic grouping  which 
also includes Russia, Belarus and Armenia. The term „Eurasia‟ therefore has a wider connotation 
as it refers to countries such as Russia as well as Central Asian countries and countries of 
Caucasus region. Renaming the Division could create confusio n as to India‟s policy approach 
which is sought to be holistically developed for the entire Eurasian region.  
 
2. On the Central Asia e -Network for Tele -Education and Tele -Medicine, the first link has 
been commissioned during the visit of the Prime Ministe r to Kyrgyz Republic in July 2015. 
Depending on availability of budget, other countries are also being connected through similar e -
medicine networks. The possibility of developing Tele Education Networks also continues to be 
pursued actively  and it  requires sustained engagement with local stakeholders to elaborate the 

61 
 
benefits of such linkages . It is submitted that Ministry is following a planned approach in this 
regard. 
3. Ministry will, as strongly recommended by the Committee, in future consider 
announcement of projects only after completion of necessary engagement with the beneficiary 
countries. However, finalising the design of the project may not be feasible in all cases before the 
project is announced, especially in cases where initial political accep tance through a high level 
announcement would be desirable to enable the local government to complete necessary internal 
procedures based on which the design of the project(s) would be finalised. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
  

62 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
 The Committee have taken note of the efforts being made by the Ministry to ensure reach 
of app lication collection/submission services to every nook and corner of the country and 
involvement of Common Service Centres. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry, 
along with India Post had launched a pilot project in Ahmedabad and Head Post Offi ce 
Ahmedabad has commenced online filing of Passport application. The Committee are hopeful that 
based on the outcome of this pilot project, the matter would be taken up for roll out across other 
post offices in the country.  The Committee, however, suggest to the Ministry to pursue the matter 
with India Post so as to ensure online filing of applications not only at the Head Post -Office but 
also that this facility should be made available at all the post offices across India particularly in 
the hinterland a nd rural areas. The Committee would also like to suggest that the possibility of 
reputed Travel Agents/Agencies to providing assistance in cities may be considered to applicants 
on the similar fixed charges as being done by CSCs in cities may also be consi dered sincerely 
with a view to stop exploitation of passport seekers by internet cafe operators and Travel Agents.  
These may be identified as places where citizens could get the facility on payment of nominal 
fixed charges with suitable penal provisions in case irregularities.  
        
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that despite Ministry‟s best efforts, India Post have expressed inability for 
providing facility of online filing of passport applications @Rs.100/ - per application. India Post 
also seems to have dearth of manpower and technical resources. As regards authorising travel 
agents, it is reiterated that the Passport Portal (www.passportindia.gov.in) is accessible by anyone, 
anywhere at anytime.   The travel agents are free to assist passport seekers in filing passport 
applications online just like any Common Service Centres (CSCs), internet cafe operators or any 
other person.  At no stage the Ministry has stated or held that such assistance by tr avel agents of 
any standing, is illegal. Moreover,  authorising or  giving license to  a few travel agents and 
regulating their service charges, would also go against the  tenet of ‟Minimum Government, 
Maximum Governance‟. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
The Committee note that over the years, there is vast gap in Budgetary Estimates, the amount 
released and amount utilised under the Head 'Nalanda University'. The Committee observe that 
even in BE 2015-16, the University had sought a sum of Rs. 313.21 crore, while the proposed BE 

63 
 
2015-16 is Rs. 100 crore. The Ministry has justified the BE 2015 -16 on account of 
commencement of teaching since September 2014, admissions to the new academic session, issue 
of letter of intent to successfu l bidder. The Committee note the extraordinary delay in 
commencement of construction activities and the delays in execution of construction project for 
which no responsibility has been fixed so far. The Committee, therefore, suggest to the Ministry 
to fix the responsibility for the delay and take necessary action to streamline the construction 
process in a time bound manner. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should 
ensure that budgetary projection process is streamlined in the University so that realistic 
budgetary projections are made. The Committee also desire that a blueprint regarding 
commencement and status report of the construction project along with timelines should be 
furnished to the Committee on regular basis.         
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry shares the Hon'ble Committee's concern at the extraordinary delay in the 
commencement of construction activities. Reasons for delay have already been explained in detail. 
As mentioned earlier, the stake holders faced various challen ges in establishing a new institution 
and there was constant evolution of parameters for the execution of the Nalanda Project. As such, 
it is difficult to fix responsibility.  
2. The tender for preliminary work (Phase 1A), issued on 17 February 2015 had to be 
abandoned since it attracted only a single bid at a higher than estimated cost. The Ministry had to 
advise the University to re-tender work for the entire Phase 1 and issue a composite tender which 
was floated on 6 July 2015. The University proposes to award the Letter of Intent to the 
successful bidder soon following which the work on site is expected to commence. A copy of the 
Schedule of Events provided by the University dur ing the Governing Board's meeting held on 5 
July 2015 is attached at Annexure. 
3. The University has also re -assessed its requirement of funds for the current financial year 
and made a realistic projection of Rs. 172.37 crore as against the earlier estimat e of Rs. 313.21 
crore. The Ministry will henceforth keep the Committee informed of commencement of 
construction and status of the project on regular basis. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
 The Committee note that over 60% of the budget of the Ministry is earmarked for 
developmental engagement with other countries via allocation under aid/loans. The Committee, 
however, are dismayed to note that during RE 2014 -15, a reduction of Rs. 2190 crore  was made 
in budgetary allocation under aid and loans to countries, though an allocation of Rs. 400 crore 
was sought at the supplementary stage under the Head 'Aid to Afghanistan'. The Committee note 
that matching savings made under various Sub -Heads was u sed for allocation for utilization 

64 
 
within the Ministry under the Heads Special Diplomatic Expenditure, Embassies and Missions, 
etc. The Committee express their concern over the Ministry's approach of cutting on international 
commitments towards maintaining  relations with friendly countries and towards countries' 
commitments and developmental engagement with these countries in order to fulfil the internal 
needs of the Ministry and desire that such practice should not continue because it directly affects 
the bilateral relation and prestige of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Due to reduction in overall allocation at RE stage during 2014 -15, almost all heads of 
account under „Major Head 3605 - Technical and Economic Cooperation‟ had to be reduced in 
order to comply with the ceiling mandated by the Ministry of Finance. Ministry, however, had to 
provide for the mandatory establishment expenses of the Missions/Posts abroad, and under the 
Special Diplomatic Expenditure which is discretionary in nature.  These  expenses could not be 
withheld, being mandatory in nature. However, to the extent possible, it was ensured that 
implementation of key projects would not suffer and important commitments were met by rolling 
over expenditure to next financial year.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 
 Capacity building through defence and civilian training programme under ITEC, SCAAP 
and Technical Cooperation Scheme under Colombo Plan is an integral part of India's 
developmental cooperation. The Commit tee note that the ITEC Programme has completed 50 
years in operation. In Committee's view it is the appropriate occasion to conduct a comprehensive 
review of the programme including the decision making process, types of training, identification 
of institutions, etc. and carry out an objective assessment of the programme from the perspective 
of achievement of India's foreign policy goals. It is also necessary to evaluate whether our 
programme meets the needs and expectations of the beneficiary countries. Fur thermore, the 
Committee suggest that the Ministry should critically analyse the requests received for training  
from the beneficiary countries and accordingly review the type of training provided to include 
new and emerging areas of technology as per their  requirements. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry must develop SOPs  regarding each step from the stage of  receipt of request from 
the beneficiary country up to the final conclusion and post -conclusion feedback from the 
beneficiary country. The Com mittee also note that the last review regarding inclusion of 
institutions was done in 2008. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should review 
the list of institutions and incorporate or exclude the institutions as per their performance and 
altered requirements.     
 
 
 

65 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ITEC programme consists of capacity building courses conducted for partner countries.  
The programme has completed 50 years of operation in 2014.  The capacity building courses are 
conducted at the request of partner countries. There is a system of regular  and continuous review. 
No overall structural review seems to have been carried out, as the requirement for this was not 
felt.  The reason being, under ITEC, training in diverse areas such as Accounts, Audit, Banking 
and Finance courses, IT, Telecommunicat ion and English Courses, Management Courses, 
SME/Rural Development Courses, Specialized Courses, Technical Courses and Environment and 
Renewable Energy Courses are already being covered and special courses are also conducted at 
specific request of ITEC partner countries.  
  
2. Ministry regularly evaluates the training programmes under ITEC/SCAAP /TCS Colombo 
Plan. The feedback  from participants are carefully analyzed to evaluate training courses. Inputs 
are examined to assess the course contents, duration and requirement of practical exercises/project 
works. The courses are evaluated on a yearly basis based on the popularity of the course, i.e., 
number of participants received during that training period, feedback of the participants who 
attended the course, etc. Depending on the response received, the popular courses are continued 
and unpopular courses are discontinued in the next academic year. 
  
3. A feedback mechanism is in place to assess the quality, relevance and impact of the 
programme. After completion of each course, feedback is obtained from the participants on the 
course content, teaching methodology, infrastructure, facilities, etc. Feedbac k is also given by the 
Institutes about the participants attending the courses. Besides, feedback is also received from the 
Indian Missions who stay in touch with the participants upon their return from India.  Based on 
these feedback, training programmes/ courses are assessed at the end of each training year. It has 
been the constant endeavour of the Ministry to align the programme with the requirements of 
partner developing countries.  
  
4. The popularity of ITEC Programme is also assessed during the discu ssions at mechanisms 
such as Foreign Office Consultations, Joint Commission Meetings, and HOMs Conferences and 
during the incoming and outgoing visits of VVIPs, when Government of India receives requests 
for capacity building, upgradation of skills and hum an resource development from the partner 
countries." 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
 
 

66 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that due to the lack of resources available with the Ministry of 
External Affairs, expenditure under several Heads relating to aid to various countries had been 
reduced and the payments were curtailed/deferred to the next Financial Year i.e. 2015 -16. The 
Committee are concerned to take note of the lack of additional allocation during BE 2015 -16 to 
the Ministry of External Affairs to accommodate for last year's payment as well as any provision 
for new announcements/commitments to be made a t international fora.  The Commi ttee are 
concerned at the paradox of pursuing an active foreign policy and simultaneously, cutting the 
allocations of Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should ensure that the Ministry's allocation is in t une with the Government's policy 
and under no circumstance the Ministry is forced to adhere to the economy cut at RE stage on 
lines of other Ministries/Departments in view of peculiar character of the Ministry's expenditure. 
The Committee further recommend  a substantial enhancement of the budgetary allocation at RE 
2015-16 stage in tune with the requirements and commitments for aid/assistance being made 
internationally. The Committee further recommend that if new international commitments are 
made during th e first three quarters of the financial year then the Ministry must be provided 
additional grants at the Supplementary Grants stage and the cash supplementary may be provided 
to the Ministry for fulfilment of those international commitments. The Committee reiterate that 
the Ministry of Finance must not jeopardize the nation's prestige in this manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry will continue its efforts with the Ministry of Finance to secure additional 
funds in order to give effect to the various foreign policy initiatives made at the highest levels.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that several commitments were made by the Prime Minister during Financial 
year 2014-15, but the economic implications were not factored in the allocations at RE 2014 -15 
stage. The Committee are doubtful whether the full financial implica tion of Prime Minister's 
announcement for aid/assistance have been accommodated in the budgetary allocation during BE 
2015-16. The Committee are concerned about such lack of allocation by the Ministry of Finance. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that th e Ministry should engage with the Ministry of 

67 
 
Finance for obtaining additional resources and give due priority to execution of the international 
commitments made at the highest levels.  
 
 Furthermore, in view of the several international commitments made a t the level of Head 
of State/Head of Government/External Affairs Minister, the Committee suggest that the Ministry 
must keep the concerned offices apprised about the pace of the project as well as constraints, if 
any, in implementation of the projects including  the financial constraints due to lack of allocation 
by the Ministry of Finance. In the Committee's view, involvement of the concerned high offices 
may facilitate taking up the issue of lack of allocation with the Ministry of Finance.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The advice of the Hon‟ble Committee has been taken note of. Ministry would continue to 
engage with the Ministry of Finance in order to obtain additional funds to further the 
commitments made.  Ministry would also continue to appraise the Ministry of Financ e about 
these commitments and the pace of the projects, and also involve the high offices concerned in 
taking up the issue of augmentation of resources with the Ministry of Finance.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 (Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee ta ke note of the budgetary cuts during RE 2014 -15 for aid/assistance to 
countries under various Heads. The Committee note that provision for grants/projects were made 
in allocation during BE 2014 -15, yet grant assistance to Bangladesh, Myanmar and Palestine was 
deferred to the Financial Year 2015-16 due to budgetary cuts during RE 2014 -15. The Committee 
are of the view that such delays in execution of commitments/project adversely reflects upon 
India's credibility. In the   context of the severe financial con straints faced by the Ministry over 
the years and its impact on execution of the projects abroad, the Committee in their previous 
Report had suggested to create a separate Head for announcement of aid/assistance made by Head 
of State/Head of Government/Minister of External Affairs. The Committee observe that not much 
progress has been made in this regard except for issuing of a letter and a reminder by the 
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate that Ministry should pursue the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance for creation of this Head and ensure availability of sufficient funds 
under this Head.  
 The Committee would further like to suggest to the Ministry to engage with Ministry of 
Finance to explore the possibility of bifurcation of M inistry's budget to include allocations 
earmarked for the internal usage of the Ministry in one part while a separate budget for all the 
international/bilateral commitments for aid and assistance so that the aid and assistance 
programme are not affected by  the economy cut by the Ministry of Finance, which has over the 
years become a regular feature at RE stage.  
 

68 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has taken up the matter of opening a new head of account to accommodate the 
budget relating to high level commitments once again with the Ministry of Finance by flagging 
the issue to the Joint Secretary (Budget).   
2. The possibility of bifurcatin g the Ministry‟s budget as suggested by the Hon‟ble 
Committee would also be explored in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. The Hon‟ble 
Committee would be apprised of the outcome in due course. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 The Committee observe that requests are being received by the Ministry for opening of 
new Indian Missions/Posts and are being processed and considered by territorial divisions 
concerned without any coherent policy. The Committee are of the view that Government should 
consider these proposals positively and strive to have representation of India in all the countries, 
and that limitations in terms of finances and human resources should not be a constraint while 
opening India's new Missions/Posts in those countries where India is currently unrepresented. The 
Committee also suggest that the Ministry should come up with a concrete policy regarding 
establishment of new Embassies/Missions abroad. 
 
 Furthermore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should take up the long pending issue 
of the proposed new Diplomatic Enclave with the Delhi Development Authority. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should also formulate a policy regarding allotment of land to 
Foreign Missions/Posts as per international co nventions and also suggest to dwell upon the 
practice regarding provision of reciprocity in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs is committed to expanding ties with other countries 
through opening new Embassies and Cons ulates in consultation with the Host Government. The 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard have been noted.  
2. Ministry is in constant touch with DDA and has sent letters No. 2832/COP/2015 dated 
24th June and 9th July 2015 to Chief Engineer (Dwa rka) requesting confirmation that the rates of 
offer of land conveyed by them to this Ministry are valid for the financial year 2015 -16. The 
policy to determine the terms and conditions based on which land will be offered to Foreign 
Diplomatic Missions/ International Organisations in the 2nd Diplomatic Enclave is in final stages 
of approval. As soon as the policy is firmed up, Ministry will conduct an outreach programme 
involving Missions and International Organisations based in New Delhi.  While framing t he 

69 
 
policy, Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Standing Committee regarding the 
provision of the principle of reciprocity to be invoked in each case. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
The Committee note that approximately one crore services are rendered by the CPO annually. The 
Committee also note that an allocation of Rs. 591.72 crore has been made during BE 2015 -16 for 
Passport and other services while the already pending amount for the bills to be settled as on 
March 2015 is Rs. 438.86 crore which includes the payments to be made to various agencies for 
procurement of passport booklets, police authorities, apart from payment to be made to NIC, TCS 
and Post Office, etc. The Committee are of the view that this is a public serv ice delivered by the 
Ministry which generates revenue and the Government and the Ministry has not made provision 
under this Head for allocations even to pay for expenditures on procurement of booklets, printers, 
etc. In the context of the forthcoming expenditure, the Committee express their concern as to how 
the Ministry would be able to manage with this budgetary allocation.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry to pursue the question of enhanced allocation under this Head, with 
the Ministry  of Finance in view of the inherent expenditure involved and the increased 
requirement due to procurement of hardware, improving of services and recruitment of 450 Data 
Entry Operators. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that this requirement has been consistently projected as part of Ministry‟s 
overall BE and RE demands to the Ministry of Finance. However, d ue to insufficient allocations 
received over several years, pending payments have accumulated. This requirement has also been 
a part of Ministry‟s demand under the First Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants for 2015-
16 forwarded to the Ministry of Finance . The requirement of additional funds will also be 
projected at the time of submission of Revised Estimates (RE) 2015-16. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
 The Committee take note of very slow progress in the integration process of Missions/ 
Posts abroad with the Passport Seva Portal. The Committee further note that some part of the 
application/system required fo r Missions/Posts integration would be kept in Public Cloud 
Platform. The Committee are of the view that the proposal requires in -depth analysis and 
particularly about the safety of the stored data available on cloud platform and desire that the 
Ministry sh ould engage experts from the Ministry of Information Technology as well as NIC 
before taking a final decision in the matter on the issue. 

70 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that the Missions/Posts integration was not part of the original scope of 
RFP/Master Service Agreement relating to Passport Seva Project.   In  view of high cost involved 
of approximately  Rs. 50 crore in the first year and total of Rs. 100  crore over a period of 
subsequent  3 years,  it requires detailed analysis for  its technical and commercial justification . 
The   proposal is under   internal evaluation and  approval process.  As regards the  use of  public 
cloud for Missions/Posts integra tion,   it is submitted  that only static content and html pages 
would be cached into public -cloud-platform and the source database  would continue to be 
accessed from Passport Seva data centers  located in India. Even for caching the desired 
static/html contents, all   the security requirements would be taken care of. As recommended by 
the Hon‟ble  Committee, the proposal would  be vetted by a technical committee consisting of 
members from DeitY, Ministry of Communications & IT  and NIC.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
The Committee have been following the progress of e -passport project. The Committee are aware 
that the issuance of e -passport for the diplomatic category was launched in June 2008 and the 
Ministry had drawn up  a progra mme for full roll out of e -passports in the ordinary passport 
category by September, 2009.  The Committee during Examination of Demands for Grants 2013 -
14 were informed about the issues regarding security vetting of firms which had participated in 
the inte rnational bid floated by ISP.   Now the whole process was reviewed by the Inter -
Ministerial Task Force and ISP, Nashik was authorised to float a Global Tender for procurement 
of electronic contactless inlays required for e -passports. But the work of tender ing and 
procurement is not being undertaken as per any timeline. Pre -Qualification Bid was floated by 
ISP, Nasik back in July 2014 but the Ministry is not able to give any time frame for generation 
and availability of e -passports  for general citizens. The  Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should pursue the matter with urgency through the Inter -Ministerial Task Force so that 
the long pending project may see the light of the day. The Committee may be apprised about the 
time frame fixed in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  It is submitted that   in November, 2013, with the approval of External Affairs Minister, an 
Inter-Ministerial Task Force was constituted to implement  the e -Passport Project. Subsequently 
the ISP, Nashik, floated a global Pre -Qualification Bid (PQB) in July, 2014 for procurement of 
electronic contactless inlays (15 million pieces) along with its operating system required for 
manufacturing of Indian e-passport. The Technical Committee constituted to finalize the technical 

71 
 
specifications has had held many meetings and is in the final stage in order to issue Request for 
Proposal (RFP) to the security cleared companies. 
 
2. Meanwhile,  in view of the directives of Ministry of  Communications & Information 
Technology, Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) for  giving 
preference to the Domestically Manufactured Electronic Products (DMEP) in Government 
procurement,  the ISP, Nashik is in the process of floating a development tender separately for the 
domestic manufacturers, which is also in accordance with Security Printing and  Minting 
Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL) procurement manual.  
 
3. As regards timeline, it is submitted  that  the supply of first batch of inlays was  earlier 
expected to commence by February 2016, subject to completion of all formalities/documentation 
and approval from competent authorities. However, on account of delay in receipt of security 
clearance of potential manufacturers from Ministry of Home Affairs  and the new developments 
on account of preference for domestic manufacturers, the project is now expected to be completed 
by December, 2016. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 The Committee note that apart from Budgetary allocation of Rs. 302.89 crore during the 
BE 2014-15, an additional allocation of Rs. 141.00 crore was sought during supplementary grants 
in anticipation of the South Asian University construction project. The Committee wonder as to 
why the additional resources were augmented when basic necessary clearances were awaited. The 
Committee do not support the approach being followed by SAU when a major portion of the land 
is in their possession since long, leaving small patches awaiting clearances. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the construction plan should be modified at the earliest o n the plot available 
with a view to commence the activities.  Simultaneously, they may continue their pursuit of the 
case with concerned authorities to get clearances of the remaining portion of the land. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India is committed to provide full capital costs including 100 acres of land 
for construction of the permanent campus of the South Asian University. Delhi Development 
Authority has transferred unencumbered land measuring 90.96 acres so far.  
2. The university has info rmed that they have obtained the statutory approvals for its master 
plan of the project from Delhi Urban Arts Commission, South Delhi Municipal Corporation and 
the Airports Authority. They have also obtained the necessary environmental clearance.  
Permission for felling trees is under process with the Department of Forest and Wild Life.    

72 
 
3. The ad ditional allocation of Rs. 141  crores was asked for on the premise that all 
clearances and permission would be in place soon and the project would require fresh infusion of 
funds to take off successfully. In fact, construction activity commenced on 3 rd June, 2015 with a 
ground breaking ceremony. A Legal notice has, however, been served by some individuals 
claiming the land to be under their ownership. Necessary ac tion is being taken to deal with the 
matter through inter-departmental consultations and legal counsel.  
4. The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee to prepare fresh lay out plan by making 
necessary changes with reference to land available for construction without any encumbrances has 
been noted. This may, however, require fresh approval from SDMC, CPWD etc. for the revised 
lay out plan. However, the Ministry is in consultation with the stakeholders and would exercise 
the best available option for completion of the project at the earliest. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that due to the ceiling communicated by the 
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry had to reprioritize its budgetary resources and the fourth and 
final instalment of US $25 million cash grant to Bangladesh could not be releas ed and it is 
proposed to provide it in the ensuing financial year 2015 -16.  But the Ministry has not explained 
how do they propose to do the same.  The Committee, therefore, desire that this amount should be 
released in the first quarter of 2015-16 in order to honour the commitment.  
 
 The Committee also note that there is a significant progress in the implementation of  the 
Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link Project.  But there is no mention of progress on financing of the 
Indian portion of the project. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should pursue the 
matter vigorously with the Ministry of Development of North East Region for confirmation on 
financing the cost of the project and ensure that due clearances are taken from the concerned 
authorities for commencement of construction on the Indian side simultaneously.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The fourth and final installment of US$ 25 million cash grant to Bangladesh was released 
in full in April 2015 and formally handed over to Govt. of Bangladesh on 12 May 2015.   
2. The financing of the Indian portion of the Akhaura -Agartala rail Link projec t is being 
pursued vigorously. DoNER has expressed its inability to finance this, owing to lack of 
jurisdictional mandate (land acquisition in States) and budgetary constraints on their side. 
Thereafter, M/o Railways[MoR] was requested by MEA to consider t he implementation of Indian 
portion as a Project of National Importance. MoR has conveyed its inability to add any more such 
projects of national importance to its existing list of twelve. The matter was discussed in a 
Committee of Secretaries meeting on 2 3 July 2015, chaired by Cabinet Secretary, where it was 

73 
 
decided that MEA will move a note to the Ministry of Finance which would approve the funding 
and designate the Ministry to which these will accrue.  Construction of the Indian portion will 
commence thereafter.                                                                            
 [File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
 
The Committee note under the Head 'Aid to African Countries' the BE for 2014 -15 was Rs. 350 
crore which was reduced to Rs. 145 crore while the BE for 2015 -16 has been pegged at Rs. 200 
crore. The Committee are concerned to note that in spite of pendency of several projects and zero 
allocation for several projects under this Head, the allocation has been reduced at BE 2015-16 as 
compared to BE 2014 -15. Furthermore, the Committee are concerned about this slow or no 
progress in implementation of projects announced under India Africa Forum Summit I and II. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that the Government should engage with African Union regarding 
the constraints being faced in implementation of the projects and get them expedited. The 
Ministry has stated that the announcements/identification of projects are demand driven and an 
important factor in India's politic al relations but it does not appear to be true when the failure 
percentage of projects under IAFS -I and II are analysed.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
desire that while identifying the projects under IAFS III, the Ministry must ensure that projects 
are actually demand driven. In the Committee's view this is possible through more extensive 
ground work before the IAFS III, better engagement with African Union as well as the intended 
beneficiary countries at the stage of identification of project itself. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted. A comprehensive review of 
all the projects announced so far under India -Africa Forum Summit-I & II is currently underway 
in consultation with all the concerned Ministries/de partments.  Based on this, a decision will be 
taken on the project that can be continued or dropped. Ministry had consulted the African Union 
on the projects announced during IAFS-III.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 31) 
 
The Committee observe that our bilateral engagements with countries of Latin America and 
Caribbean Region have grown in the last few years and our political engagements have also 
intensified at the highest level.  Almost all the countries of the region hav e been supporting India 
at the International fora and many of them look up to Indian development assistance.  The 
Committee are really concerned that a very small component of funds have been allocated under 
'Aid to Latin American countries' and that too i s reduced drastically at RE stage. The Committee 

74 
 
note that during the recent visit of the President of Guyana, the Prime Minister had conveyed the 
Government of India's decision to give US $ 10 million Line of Credit which had been approved 
by the Inter -Ministerial Standing Committee. However, sanction of Line of Credit of US $ 8 
million had been held in abeyance pending availability of funds. The Committee are concerned at 
the Ministry's own admission that in absence of funds under the 'Aid to Latin Americ an countries' 
budget, this politically important project cannot be implemented despite announcement at Prime 
Minister's level. The Committee disapprove such approach of the Government on the issue of 
funds and recommend that due priority should be given to  the projects announced at the highest 
level especially when it  relates to strategically important countries.   
 
 Furthermore, the Committee also take note of the status regarding implementation of 
another politically very important Project pertaining to assistance to upgrade and overhaul the 
ICT (Information, Communication and Technology) system of Caricom Secretariat, which was 
originally set up  by India, the implementation of which is also dependent upon the availability of 
funds in the financial year 2015-16. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must 
take up the project on priority basis particularly, in view of the political significance of the project 
and budgetary requirement of only Rs. 15 crore over the span of two years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee regarding budgetary requirements under 
this Head as well as the Project pertaining to assistance to upgrade and overhaul the ICT 
(Information, Communication and Technology) system of Caricom Secretariat have been noted. 
Additional funds required under the Head will be sought at the RE stage and through 
Supplementary Demand for Grants. A technical evaluation team from the Ministry of Information 
Technology and Communication has held discussions  with the officials of the CARICOM 
Secretariat when it visited Georgetown in the second half of  May 2015. Report of the Team is 
awaited. The Ministry would be undertaking  up gradation of ICT system of CARICOM 
Secretariat on priority basis in a time bound manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
 
 In view of lack of desired budgetary resources and Ministry's response regarding lack of 
avenues to make Indian Cultural Centres self sufficient, the Committee are of the view that ICCR 
should explore the possibility of generating additional resources. The Committee take note of the 
initiatives undertaken by the Ministry/ICCR for partners and public private partnership. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to ICCR to explore the possibility and  study the matter in 
depth regarding  engagement with the local associations of Indians/PIOs for organising the events 
as well as for sponsorship of events. Moreover,  the Committee suggest that the Ministry/ICCR 

75 
 
should develop basic parameters, Standard O perating Procedures (SOPs) etc. with regard to 
engagement of local Indians/Indian Diaspora organisations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Missions/ Posts/ Cultural Centres abroad typically have to arrange for local 
hospitality for ICCR -sponsored cultural groups/delegates, i.e. boarding, lodging, and transport 
within the foreign country, venue and technical support for their performance, talk or other 
activities, and publicity. In countries where we have large diaspora this is generally done through 
Indian community and/or local associations. As recommended by the Committee, ICCR is 
consulting Indian Missions/Posts/Cultural Centres regarding developing basic parameters and 
procedures for engagement with Indian Diaspora organizations. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/71/2015] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
21  December,  2015                                  Chairperson,                                                                         
30 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                                          Standing Committee on External Affairs 

76 
 
   Annexure 
Schedule of Events for Tendering Process of Package 1 Tender of Phase I Construction of Nalanda 
University's Master Plan 
Sl No Detail of Event Event Date Remarks 
1 Submission of Notice Inviting Tender to MEA 25-मई-15   
2 
Submission of Draft Tender Document along with 
complete quantity estimates, their take off sheets, technical 
specifications, market rate analysis, complete Bill of 
Quantities, complete tender drawings for Packge 1 Tender. 
10-जून-15   
3 6th Building Works & Committee Meeting for review and 
consideration of the complete Tender Documents 22-जून-15 Venue: New Delhi 
4 
Post incorporation of all the suitable comments and 
suggestions sign off  the Tender Documents by the 
University 
22-जून-15   
5 Uploading/Publication of Notice Inviting Tender with 
printed and electronic media 06-जुलाई-15   
6 Last Date of receiving queries from interested bidders 20-जुलाई-15 14 Days from day of 
uploading Tender 
7 Pre-bid Meeting at Delhi 22-जुलाई-15 Venue: IIC, New Delhi 
8 Uploading of Corrigendum based on pre-bid queries 27-जुलाई-15   
9 Last Date & Time of Submission/uploading of Tender 20-अगस्त-15 
45 Days from Publication 
of Tender 
Venue: New Delhi Office 
Time: 1530 Hours 
10 Opening of Technical Bids 20-अगस्त-15 Venue: New Delhi Office 
Time: 1600 Hours 
11 Submission of evaluation reports of Technical Bid to the  
Tender Evaluation and Selection Committee 03-सितम्बर-15 14 Days for evaluation 
process 
12 Obtaining approval from the Tender Evaluation and 
Selection Committee 04-सितम्बर-15 Venue: New Delhi Office 
13 Uploading list of technically qualified bidders 04-सितम्बर-15   
14 Opening of Financial Bids in presence of authorized 
representatives of respective Bidders 07-सितम्बर-15   
15 Submission of evaluation reports of Financial Bids to the  
Tender Evaluation and Selection Committee 21-सितम्बर-15 14 Days for evaluation 
process 
16  Obtaining approval from the Tender Evaluation and 
Selection Committee 24-सितम्बर-15 Venue: New Delhi Office 
17 Award of Letter of Intent (LoI) to the Successful Bidder 25-सितम्बर-15   
18 Commencement of works at site 25-अक्त ू बर-15 
30 days from LoI 
Start of Durga Puja 15 
October 2015 
Dussera: 22 October 2015 
 

77 
 
Appendix I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 21st  DECEMBER, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21 st December, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2. Prof (Dr) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Venkateswara Rao Magannti 
5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
6. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
7. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
8. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
9. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 Rajya Sabha 
10. Shrimati Kanimozhi  
11. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
12.  Dr. Karan Singh 
13. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2015-16.  

78 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

79 
 
Appendix II 
 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE SIXTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                                   40
              
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which  have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 19, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29,   
33, 34, 36, 37, 38 and 40 
  
 Total-23 
Percentage:  57.50% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 32 
 
Total-01 
 Percentage: 2.50% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 17, 20, 22 and 39 
Total- 04 
 Percentage: 10.00 % 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
 Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos  3, 5, 6, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 25, 30, 31 and 35 
                                                 
Total- 12 
Percentage: 30.00% 