 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
‘ISSUES RELATING TO MIGRANT WORKERS INCLUDING APPROPRIATE 
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES 
FOR PROSPECTIVE EMIGRANTS.’ 
                   
 
      TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 JANUARY, 2019/ Pausa, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) 
 
                             SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
23 
 

 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
‘ISSUES RELATING TO MIGRANT WORKERS INCLUDING APPROPRIATE 
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES 
FOR PROSPECTIVE EMIGRANTS.’ 
                   
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  2 January, 2019   
                                Presented to Rajya Sabha on 2 January, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
January, 2019/Pausa 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2019 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(__________Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter 1: EMIGRATION FROM INDIA       1 
I. Profiling of Indian Emigrants: Trends, Policy and Governance 
II. Migrant Workers: Most Vulnerable Emigrants 
Chapter 2:  PROBLEMS & CHALLENGES FACED BY MIGRANT WORKERS 9 
I. Key issues & concerns of  legal migrant workers 
A. Phase I: Pre-Departure  
B. Phase-II: Country of destination 
C. Phase III: Return & Resettlement 
II. Problems of Irregular/illegal migrant workers 
III. Gulf Region: Major recipient of Indian Emigrant workers 
CHAPTER 3:  GENDER & MIGRATION       51 
CHAPTER 4:   INSTITUTIONAL & LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK   56 
I. Institutional & Administrative Framework 
A.  Specific Initiatives/ Programmes 
B. Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
C. Media Awareness Campaigns 
II. Legislative Framework  
 
CHAPTER 5: BILATERAL & GLOBAL ARCHITECTURE     78 
 
I. Bilateral Social Security Agreements 
II. Global Compact on Safe, Secure & Orderly Migration.  
   
Appendices 
 
I. Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 11.4.2017                87 
II. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee (2017-18) held on 22.11.2017                      89 
III. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee (2017-18) held on 2.4.2018                     92 
IV. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee (2017-18) held on 18.7.2018                    95 
V. Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee (2017-18) held on 2.8.2018                      98 
VI. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee (2018-19) held on 27.12.2018                          101 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2018-19) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurj eet Singh Aujla 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Ramen Deka 
 7. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
12. Shri P.R. Senthiln athan 
 13. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 15. Shri Venakateswara Rao (Babu) Magantti  
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 18. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 19. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 20. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 21. Vacant 
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
25. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
26. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
27. Smt. Kanimozhi 
28. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
29. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
 30. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
31. Shri Jose K. Mani * 
   
Secretariat 
 
1.         Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Smita Singh   - Committee Assistant 
 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 30 October, 2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 7388 
 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Third Report of the Committee 
on External Affairs (2018-19) on the subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including 
appropriate legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective emigrants.’ 
 
 2.       The Committee selected the subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including appropriate 
legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective emigrants ’ for detailed 
examination during the year 2017-18 and 2018-19. The Committee were briefed by the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship on 11 April 2017 and 22 November, 2017. The Committee also took oral 
evidences of the representatives of Ministry of External Affairs on this subject on 22 February 2018, 
2 April 2018, 18 July 2018 and 2 August 2018. 
 
3.        The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 27 
December, 2018. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.  
 
4.        The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship for placing material information as well as 
tendering evidence and views before the Committee.  
 
5.           For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                 DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
27  December, 2018                                     Chairperson,    
 7 Pausha, 1940 (Saka)                                    Committee on External Affairs 
                                                         

1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
EMIGRATION FROM INDIA 
 Migration is an integral part of globalization that holds the potential to benefit all 
countries and people. Globalization has created a lot of mobility in the labour market and 
this mobility is conducive to the requirements of labour surplus countries like India. The 
remittances sent by migrant workers, accounting for a significant share in foreign 
exchange earnings of nations and GDP growth, contribute significantly to the economic 
betterment of migrants’ families and economic growth of many developing countries.  
1.2 The opening up of the Indian economy to the global economic flows and the 
increasing transnationalism of the Indian Diaspora will accelerate further migration in the 
future. In India, migratory flows of both skilled and unskilled labour have undergone 
changes in the process. This movement has created opportunity as well as challenges. 
India is as much a country of origin as that of destination and transit: this places us in a 
unique position in the discourse on human resource mobility. 
1.3 Emigration (refers to those Indians who leave in order to pursue employment in 
another country) takes place under two categories based on the types of Passport holders, 
namely,Emigration Check Required (ECR) and Emigration Check Not Required 
(ECNR). ECR status requires emigration clearance from the office of Protector of 
Emigrants before proceeding to the 18 ECR countries (Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Thailand, 
UAE, Syria, Sudan, Qatar, Malaysia, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Indonesia, Brunei, Bahrain , 
Afghanistan, Oman, Kuwait, and Libya). ECR passports are provided for the protection 
of Indians (who are not 10 th pass) and are going for employment in other countries. 
Emigration clearances are provided online to the workers applying through recognized 
Recruiting Agents who have a valid work visa. Passport holders travelling to other 
countries and passport with ECNR status need not get emigration clearance. The will 
have to provide a valid passport, tickets and valid visa at immigration counters of 
International Airports in India. 
 

2 
 
1.4 The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries namely Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Malaysia are home to a vast majority 
of India’s migrant workers. The resident Indian community in the Gulf region is over 8.5 
million. The temporary workers ’ community in the Gulf countries comprises of people 
from most Indian states, particularly from Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal etc.  
I. Profile of Indian Emigrants: Trends, Policy and Governance 
1.5 A very large number of Indians go abroad for employment, which includes both 
blue-collared unskilled or semi-skilled workers as well as highly qualified professionals. 
On a closer look, a discernible pattern can be seen in international migration from India 
which inter-alia includes- 
 Increase in temporary migration. 
 Growing feminization of migration. 
 Diversity of emigrants from various states.  
 Existence of illegal migration, even though in fewer numbers 
 Greater migration of unskilled/low skilled workers to the Gulf region and skilled 
workers to the Organization for Economic Cooperation countries 
1.6  The work relating to emigration of Indian citizens from India to other countries 
for employment and the return of emigrants is the responsibility of the Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA). The provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983 provides a 
regulatory framework for emigration of Indian workers for contractual overseas 
employment and seeks to safeguard their interests and ensure their welfare. The Act 
makes it mandatory for registration of Recruiting Agents with the Protector General of 
Emigrants.  
1.7 The erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) has been merged with 
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in 2016. When asked about the effect of this 
merger on the Government ’s ability to respond to the problems of overseas workers, the 
Ministry stated that the merger of the erstwhile MOIA with the M EA has brought in 
enhanced synergies and strengthened the overall institutional framework for engagement 

3 
 
with the Indian diaspora and improved the welfare and protection of Indian nationals 
abroad. It has also enabled an optimum utilization of existing manpower. 
 
1.8 Elaborating the broad policy of the Government of India towards the issue and 
concerns of emigrants, the Foreign Secretary during his testimony on 11 th April, 2017 
submitted as under:-  
“At the heart of this approach is a conviction that India is a human resources 
power whose true potential is only now being realised. We need to nurture, 
promote and protect this asset. Efforts are, therefore, geared at strengthening our 
connect, engagement and outreach with all segments of Overseas Indians ranging 
from highly skilled professionals to the low skilled workers...The Government has 
accorded topmost priority to the welfare and protection of overseas Indians under 
the stewardship of the EAM. The Institutional Framework for the support and 
welfare of Overseas Indians has been considerably strengthened. This is being 
done keeping in mind the issues and concerns of our migrant workers who are the 
most vulnerable segment of our Diaspora...” 
 
1.9 On being asked to furnish data with respect to the number of Indian workers in 
different countries, country-wise along with their migratory and employment patterns, the 
Ministry of External Affairs in a written reply answered that it maintains data of 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) passport holder Indian workers migrating to 18 
notified ECR countries under the e-Migrate system, through which emigration clearance 
is granted to the workers.  As per the data recorded in the system, a majority of the 
workers emigrated to 18 ECR countries as Carpenter, Fitter, Mason, Building Painter, 
Electrician, Plumber, Rigger, Assistant Mechanic, AC Technician, Accountant, 
Administrative Assistant, Agricultural labour, Aluminum Doormaker, Aluminum fitter, 
Cook, Archives Clerk etc.  The Missions are dependent on the inputs from the concerned 
local and Government authorities, and the Foreign Employers regarding the total number 
of Indian workers employed by them. The Ministry does not have any authentic global 
database about the number of Indian workers in different countries and their employment 
patterns.  
1.10 Lack of precise data has been a major obstruction in reaching out to the emigrant 
workers and ensuring them a safe, hassle-free and legal migration. Acknowledging this 

4 
 
major gap, the Foreign Secretary during oral evidence before the Committee pointed out 
as under: 
“It has been very rightly pointed out and we have ourselves been concerned about 
this issue of lack of data. We cannot go on saying that we collect only ECR data 
because it is in e-migrate. The hon. Minister had a meeting with the Hom e 
Secretary, the National Security Adviser and the Chief of IB in May this year 
about data sharing. The Home Ministry is capturing the data but our servers are 
not integrated because of their own Intelligence Bureau concerns over why they 
cannot share the data. But with a lot of persuasion and with us meeting the Bureau 
of Immigration officers, we have got for the first time all the data of ECNR 
passport holders flying out whether they are going on a tourist visa, an 
employment visa, a short stay visa, or any other type of visa. We have started 
getting this data. 
 It has been an eye-opener for us; for example, in the last 12 months while 
we had about 3.5 lakh to four lakh Indians who travelled on ECR passports, we 
had over 19 lakh Indians who travelled on ECNR for employment purposes. That 
actually tells us the number of Indians going abroad for employment and this is 
only for ECR countries. It is not coming down because of the ease with which 
people are getting their ECNR passports. The number of ECNR passport holders 
going overseas has actually shot up. Unfortunately, this data collection was 
started by MHA only since June, 2016. They were not able to share that data with 
us because they were on a different server.” 
 
1.11 The Committee observes that the size, spread and depth of migration 
pathways from India has been witnessing significant changes during the last three 
decades. A closer look at the profile of Indian emigrants points to a general tre nd of 
skilled and qualified Indians moving to 36 Organization for Economic Cooperation 
(OECD) countries while the unskilled or semi-skilled/low skilled workers are going 
to the Gulf region. The Committee, however, are concerned to note that the existing 
institutional arrangements for the protection, safety and welfare of Indian 
emigrants are based on inadequate data infrastructure. Moreover, in the absence of 
any articulated migration policy, the country has not been able to tap in the full 
potential offered by mobility of Indians in the international labour market and the  
efforts geared in this direction appears fragmentary and myopic.   

5 
 
Given the compelling circumstances that drive emigration and the profound 
socio-economic impact of migration, the Government ought to have had a stated 
policy on international migration that provided the over arching architecture for 
migration governance and institutional framework. The Committee, therefore, 
would strongly urge that the Government should undertake coordinated modes of 
engagement with all concerned stakeholders and enhance India ’s migration 
governance by framing a coherent migration policy. Furthermore, the Government 
should put in place a strong mechanism for inter-ministerial coordination and 
cooperation with State Governments to improve the governance on migration, 
address the challenges and effectively implement the ongoing programmes for the 
protection and welfare of Indian migrants. 
(Recommendation No.1) 
1.12 The Committee feel that without any authentic database regarding the 
number of Indian migrant workers in different countries and their employment 
patterns, the Government may not be able to reach out to the emigrant workers and 
ensure their safe, legal and regular migration. Exact official data is available only 
for workers registering for emigration clearance. The Committee are concerned  to 
note that despite the growing scale of migratory flows, vital statistics and 
information are not readily available. Recognizing the gravity of the issue, the 
Foreign Secretary informed the Committee that recently an arrangement has b een 
made between the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs to 
share data of ECNR passport holders since June, 2016. The Committee are hopefu l 
that this recent arrangement would bring forth requisite database of emigration 
from India for both ECR and ECNR passports and well-equip the Ministry in 
formulating and implementing various welfare measures for migrant workers. 
While conscious of the challenges involved, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should maintain an authentic database relating to various aspects of 
migration such as the profile of migrants, their job profile, country of destination, 
complaints registered and response thereon using the data available with PGE and 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  
(Recommendation No. 2 

6 
 
II. Migrant Workers: Most Vulnerable Emigrants 
1.13 Lower-skilled temporary migrant workers constitute the majority of labour 
migrants. In general, they are more vulnerable to rights violations than higher-skilled 
ones, as they tend to work in the informal sectors of the labour market, or in sectors 
where labour standards are not applied. Official 
Data is available only for workers 
migrating legally with Emigration Check Required (ECR) passports and to one of the 18 
ECR countries. That is, labour migration data is available mostly for workers who have to 
register for emigration clearance.
 Around 8.5 million Indians live and work in the Gulf 
region, a vast majority being semi-skilled or unskilled workers.  
1.14 The Ministry has informed that any applicant seeking employment abroad and 
possessing a passport with ‘Emigration Check Required ’, an endorsement can obtain 
emigration clearance from any of ten PoE offices on submission of documents as 
prescribed. Persons holding ECNR passport or unstamped passports are not required to 
obtain emigration clearance.  
1.15 On the Committee ’s query, the Ministry furnished details about emigration 
clearance granted to ECR passport holder Indian workers, POE-wise, during the last three 
years as follows:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of PoEs 2014 
 
2015 
 
2016 2017 (As on 
31-10-2017) 
1 Delhi 125190 185632 101000 50613 
2 Chandigarh 56862 36815 30317 36726 
3 Jaipur 56271 47573 31957 12109 
4 Rae Beily 21984 16468 18937 5688 
5 Hyderabad 77726 48760 39006 33165 
6 Cochin 26923 24079 16932 10778 
7 Trivandrum 8501 18772 8872 2002 
8 Mumbai 391368 353591 231609 142302 
9 Chennai 30463 41665 27491 21672 
10 Kolkata 9717 10797 14817 8218 
TOTAL 805005 784152 520938 323273 
 

7 
 
1.16 In the last one year, approximately 5.5 lakh ECR and 19 lakh ECNR passport-
holders have travelled to the 18 ECR countries for employment as per data available with 
this Ministry and with the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
 
1.17 Regarding the imperative of protecting and safeguarding the interests of our 
emigrant workers, the Foreign Secretary during the course of oral evidence on 2 nd April 
2018, submitted:- 
“This Government has been conscious that our emigrant workers need initial 
hand-holding and support of the Government at all stages of this migration 
cycle. Therefore, the Ministry has been making all the possible efforts to reduce 
their vulnerabilities, to curb exploitation and harassment by foreign employers 
as well as unscrupulous recruitment agents and to ensure a safe, orderly, legal 
and humane migration process.” 
1.18 Responding to the Committee ’s query over the issue of dignity of labour in our 
overall vision for migrant workers, a Representative of the Ministry of External Affairs 
made the following submission during the course of oral evidence on 18 July 2018:- 
“We do not want any Indian to suffer any indignity, particularly, the labour, 
which is the most vulnerable class of our migrant community to suffer indignity 
at anybody’s hands.  That being the case, whether it happens through the illegal 
recruiting agents; whether it happens in fraudulent way by some other elements, 
criminal elements; whether it happens to trafficking; whether it happens at the 
hands of the immigration authorities here or there including local employer in 
those countries; we really trying to see wherever there is some loophole, we try 
to plug it through some mechanism which we evolve.  Ultimately, we try to 
integrate it either in MADAD portal or e-migrate or Ministry ’s other 
mechanisms that are already available. In the end, I would say, yes, the dignity of 
labour is the most important element for us and we respect it fully and we are 
working in that direction.” 
1.19 The Committee observe that migrant workers constitute the most vulnerable 
section of Indian emigrants. A significant number of Indian workers migrate to the 
Gulf countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait and Oman but due to skill 
deficits, general lack of awareness about their rights, employment contracts, 
customs and regulations, these emigrant workers are the most explicated and 
vulnerable at the destination countries. The Kafala system and issues related to 

8 
 
Iqma further complicate the already precarious position of these workers in the Gulf 
region. The Committee strongly emphasize that all migrant workers are entitled to 
respect and protection of their human rights and dignity of labour. The Committe e, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that concerted efforts are 
being made to reduce their vulnerabilities, curb exploitation and harassment by 
placing them at the centre of our migration policy framework. There is a strong 
need to enhance the quality of interventions to maximize the positive impacts of 
migration and minimize its negative consequences. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER 2 
PROBLEMS & CHALLENGES FACED BY MIGRANT WORKERS 
  Indian migrants face multiple problems at different stages both in India and 
abroad, aggravated and complicated by corruption and the involvement of middlemen 
and fraudsters. Workers ’ complaints include violation of contractual provisions, 
exploitative work conditions, wage-related problems, and other forms of human rights 
abuses. However, due to a combination of their skill deficits and a general lack of 
awareness about their rights, employment contracts, customs and regulations, these 
workers are often exploited by their foreign employers, making them the most vulnerable 
segment of the Indian Diaspora. Their skills set are minimal- ranging from low to semi-
skilled workers. The awareness about their rights, employment contracts, local customs, 
and regulations is minimal and at times, they face considerable difficulties in the 
destination countries. The Kafala (sponsorship) system and issues related to Iqama 
(resident permit) further complicate the already precarious position of these workers. 
There is no doubt that our policy priorities should be focused on this extremely 
vulnerable section of our Diaspora.  
2.2 The migration cycle of a worker can be broadly classified in three phases, namely  
the pre-departure phase, country of destination and return/resettlement in the country of 
origin. The problems and challenges faced by migrant workers relate to all these three 
phases of the migration cycle. Briefly, they are as follows: 
 Pre-departure phase: unscrupulous recruiting agents/ illegal agents at times  acting 
in  collusion with foreign employers 
 Country of destination: violation of contractual terms, adverse working 
conditions, visa conversion, wage-related issues, employer-related problems, 
compensation/death claims, absence of legal safeguards and delay in settlement of 
disputes 
 Return and Resettlement: Inadequate support, rehabilitation relief etc.   
 
 

10 
 
I. KEY ISSUES & CONCERNS OF LEGAL MIGRANT WORKERS 
2.3 The Government has promoted migration to harness the twin benefits of 
remittances and employment through various measures like the e-migrate platform, the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana , the Indian Community Welfare Fund, the Overseas 
Workers Resources Centre, etc. and the Ministry claims to safeguard and protect the 
interests of migrant workers abroad, sill the migrant workers are facing manifold 
challenges at their own country like unscrupulous recruitment agents/illegal agents at 
times acting in collusion with foreign employers. In the country of destination they face 
problems like violation of contractual terms, advance working conditions, visa 
conversion, wage-related issues, employee-related problems and compensation/death 
claims, absence of legal claims and delay in settlement of disputes on their return to their 
home, they face many challenges like inadequate support rehabilitation/relief etc. In this 
section, the problems and challenges faced by Indian migrant workers, in general, have 
been analysed in the various phases of migration. The specific problems faced by the 
female migrant workers going to the Gulf countries will be discussed in the next chapter.  
Phase I: Pre-Departure  
(i) Recruitment violations  
2.4 The problems encountered by the emigrants may be examined at two levels-
Firstly in relation to recruitment violation and second to working and living conditions in 
the labour importing countries. Migrants are employed either directly by the employers or 
through outsourcing agencies and recruitment agents. These agents liaise with the 
overseas employers and facilitate the migration process for the workers. However, there 
are frequent reports of fraudulent activities by these agents. Additionally, India has a 
number of human resources agencies which are engaged in recruitment for developed 
countries in high skill sectors. To streamline recruitment and to safeguard the interests of 
the emigrants, the Emigration Act 1983 stipulates that only Recruiting Agents possessing 
registration certificate from the PGE can recruit for overseas employment. Those Indian 
workers who migrate through unregistered Recruitment Agents for overseas employment 
generally travel from India on tourist/visit Visas. Therefore, their estimates are not 
available.  

11 
 
2.5 The Ministry has stated that well-established procedures have been worked out to 
handle recruitment related complaints against registered Recruiting Agents (RA), 
unregistered Recruiting Agents and Foreign Employers. We have been greatly assisted by 
E-Migrate in handling complaints related to RAs. With law and order being a State 
subject, action on complaints against unregistered RAs continues to remain difficult and a 
time-consuming process. Such complaints are referred to concerned State Governments 
for investigation and action for violation of Section 10 of Emigration Act 1983, and other 
provisions of the law, as appropriate. The Police authorities in turn after investigating the 
case, seek approval from PGE for prosecuting the accused in the appropriate court of law 
under section 27 of the Emigration Act, 1983. Whenever Indian emigrant workers face 
problems with Foreign Employers, the Indian Mission takes up such matters with the 
employer/emigrant/local authorities. If needed, the employer is black-listed (Prior 
Approval Category) from further employment of Indian workers in consultation with the 
Indian Mission concerned.     
2.6 The Ministry further clarified that the procedure for redressal of complaints 
related to Registered/Unregistered Agents has been further streamlined. The key aspects 
include the following: 
 Complaints against registered Recruiting Agents (RA):  On receiving such 
complaints, a show-cause notice is served on registered Recruiting Agents against 
whom complaints are received and the Recruiting Agent is directed to 
settle/resolve the complaint, in the first instance.  If the Recruiting Agent (RA) 
fails to respond to the Show-Cause Notice or his reply is not satisfactory, his 
Registration Certificate (RC) is suspended for 30 days.  If the complaint still 
remains unresolved, the RC is suspended for an indefinite period, and action is 
initiated for cancellation of the RC and forfeiture of Bank Guarantee (BG).  
Further, a Recruiting Agent (RA) is placed under the Internal Watch List (IWL) 
after revocation of suspension if the suspension was made on multiple complaints 
or if complaints are received regularly against the RA.   
  Complaints against unregistered Recruiting Agents since such Agents are not 
registered with the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE), the complaints are 
referred to concerned State Governments for investigation and action for violation 
of Section 10 of Emigration Act 1983, and other provisions of the law, as 
appropriate. The Police authorities in turn after investigating the case, seek 

12 
 
approval from PGE for prosecuting the accused in the appropriate court of law 
under section 27 of the Emigration Act, 1983.   Request for such prosecution 
sanctions are processed and prosecution sanction is issued on priority by the 
office of PGE.  
 
2.7 In view of the fact that a majority of workers are still being sent abroad for work 
by various unregistered Recruitment Agents (RAs), the Committee were keen to know 
about the manner in which the Ministry envisages to tackle this menace. In a written 
reply, the Ministry enlisted the following measures that have been put in place:- 
 Regarding illegal migration are referred to concerned State Police 
Authorities/Protector of Emigrants for investigation and action for violation of 
Section 10 of Emigration Act 1983 and provisions of various other laws as 
applicable, including Indian Penal Code etc. 
 The Police authorities, after investigations, seek prosecution sanction of the PGE, 
who is the competent authority for prosecuting the accused in the appropriate 
Court of Law under Section 27 of the Emigration Act, 1983.  
 Requests for such Prosecution Sanction are processed and Prosecution Sanction 
issued on priority by the office of the PGE.  
 MEA had convened a High-Level Meeting of Ministers and senior officers of 10 
major workers exporting States on 9 th November 2016 and, again, with all State 
Ministers on 8 th May 2017 to sensitize them about the menace of illegal agents 
and how to take stringent action against them. 
 MEA has undertaken a media campaign on safe and legal migration in several 
Indian languages and is working in close collaboration with State Governments.  
 MEA has initiated Outreach Programme to sensitize State Governments and State 
Police authorities on catching hold of illegal agents to prevent illegal emigration 
and to take up other issues of emigrants with State Governments. Recently, such 
Outreach ‘Videsh Sampark’ programmes to sensitize the State Governments were 
held in Telangana, Maharashtra, Kerala etc. and more such programmes are 
proposed to be held in the future. 
 
 

13 
 
2.8 Any recruiting activities without a valid certificate from PGE tantamount to 
illegal migration as also human trafficking. This being a law and order issue, such cases 
fall within the jurisdiction of State Governments. Complaints regarding illegal migration 
are referred to concerned State Police Authorities for investigation and action for 
violation of Section 10 of Emigration Act 1983 and provisions of various other laws as 
applicable, including Indian Penal Code etc. MEA has convened a series of High-Level 
Meetings of Ministers and senior officers of States to sensitize them about the menace of 
illegal agents and how to take stringent action against them. Last such meeting was held 
with State NRI Affairs ’ Ministers on 10 th January 2018 in New Delhi chaired by the 
External Affairs Minister. 
2.9 On being asked about the number of complaints received against RAs and action 
taken thereon, the Ministry furnished the following details:- 
Year Show Cause 
Notice issued 
Registration 
Certificate 
(RC) 
suspended 
Registration 
Certificate 
(RC) 
cancelled 
Complaints 
dropped/ 
settled + 
SCN revoked 
2014 153 11 16 23 
2015 61 1 0 1 
2016 174 7 3 49 
2017 (upto 30 th 
September) 
144 17 - 94 
 
2.10 On the Committee's further query, the Ministry furnished details relating to 
complaints against unregistered agents received during the last 3 years and the current 
year as given below:  
Year Number of cases 
referred to State/ UT  
Government for 
action 
Number of cases in 
which request 
received for issue of 
Prosecution Sanction 
from various States 
Number of 
Prosecution 
Sanction issued 
2014  153 08 08 
2015 101 11 11 
2016 231 42 42 
2017 (upto 30 th 
September)  
349 29 29 
 

14 
 
2.11 When asked about the impediments in bringing agents to book, the Ministry 
stated that law & order being the State subject, the Complaints regarding illegal migration 
are referred to concerned State Police Authorities/Protector of Emigrants for investigation 
and action for violation of Section 10 of Emigration Act 1983 and provisions of various 
other laws as applicable, including Indian Penal Code etc. Sometimes the State Police 
refuse to register complaints and investigations are delayed due to several other more 
important engagements.  As and when complaints related to cheating/fraud by illegal 
agents are received from emigrants/intending emigrants or their relatives, the same are 
forwarded to the concerned State Government and higher Police Authorities for 
apprehending illegal agents operating in their States.  
 
2.12 Apprising the Committee further on this issue, the Foreign Secretary during 
evidence before the Committee on 22nd November, 2017 submitted as under:- 
"Illegal agents are all over the country. We know which are the districts from where 
these people are going because we get constant complaints. Whenever we get a 
complaint about an illegal agent, we note down their names, numbers, and 
addresses. We promptly transfer it to the Director General of Police of that State 
and Home Department of that State. As on date, we have sent across over 600 
complaints to the different States. I have the statistics. The highest is in UP at 79; 
next is Punjab at 46; Kerala, 26; and in Delhi itself, there are a hundred complaints. 
We are writing repeatedly to the State Governments and to the police. In some 
cases, they are taking action and following up but the investigation is taking time. 
Therefore, the number of sanctions for prosecution vis-à-vis the number of 
complaints referred to the States is very less. Both the Ministers were concerned 
about this. They addressed all the State Government NRI Ministers in November 
last year. This year, in May, when all the 29 States were on board they were give n 
an exposition on how they should take action promptly against the illegal agents. 
 The other side is that we are going to the States. We have held one-day 
workshops known as videsh sampark . We have had it in Telangana, Kerala and 
Maharashtra. There are more in the pipeline with plans for one in UP and one in 
Rajasthan in the near future and probably even one in Punjab. These are the States 
where maximum complaints are coming about the workers getting stranded." 
2.13 The Committee are aware that migrant workers are employed either directly 
by the employers or through outsourcing agencies and recruitment agents. In order 
to safeguard the interests of emigrants, the Emigration Act 1983 specifically 

15 
 
stipulates that only registered Recruiting Agents and Foreign employers certified by 
the Protector General of India can recruit for overseas employment. There are well-
established procedures for registration of recruiting agents which has been linked 
with the e-Migrate project. There are a large number of complaints against the 
Registered Recruiting Agents found indulging in malpractices in recruitment, but a 
very few of them face stringent actions like the cancellation of Registration 
Certificate; maximum number of complaints are either dropped or settled. If a 
similar complaint is received against any unregistered recruiting Agent, Police case 
is registered and prosecution is done.  The Committee, therefore, desire that PGE 
under provisions of law should take appropriate and strong action including 
prosecution of fraudulent Registered Recruiting agents, if complaints are received 
against them.  Because if they are not punished stringently, there is a greater 
likelihood that such agents would continue to commit similar frauds. The d esired 
provisions should, therefore, be made in the Emigration Act or in relevant 
procedures. Failure to regulate and monitor the malpractices of such agents creates 
fertile ground for the development of irregularities once the workers reach the 
country of destination. For controlling the frauds committed by foreign employers, 
the Committee desire that the relevant Missions/Posts abroad should integrate the e-
Migrate project with a list of recruiting agents and also authenticate the job 
contracts of the workers before giving them emigration clearance. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
2.14 The Ministry has informed that a host of measures such as media campaigns 
on safe and legal migration, extending outreach programmes to sensitize State 
Governments, prioritizing Prosecution Sanction Requests etc have been taken to 
check the fraudulent activities by these agents. The Ministry is also conducting 
workshops known as ‘Videsh Sampark ’ and High-Level Meetings with the State 
Governments to sensitize them about this issue. But the problem of unauthorized 
recruitment agents is on increase and a majority of workers are still being sen t 
abroad by them.  The malpractices of the unregistered recruiting agents have 
greatly contributed to the exploitation and vulnerabilities of the Indian migrant 

16 
 
workers. The Ministry of External Affairs responds to these complaints received 
against the agents by merely forwarding their names and details to the DG of the 
concerned State Police. The number of sanctions for prosecution vis-à-vis the 
number of complaints referred to the States is very less.  The Committee find  that 
steps have been taken to bring the state governments on board for taking prompt 
action in such matters of fraud and human trafficking, but without the desired 
results. 
The Committee are surprised to note that even after knowing the track 
locations of such illegal agents, the Central Government or the State Governments 
have not been able to stop them. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA/PGE 
should take some concrete suo moto  actions by engaging the PoE offices in such 
states/districts from where more complaints are received. By identifying such illegal  
agencies, the PoE offices should lodge complaints with the local police so that the ir 
illegal business of recruiting and human trafficking stops forever.  
 (Recommendation No.5) 
(ii) Lack of skill and training 
2.15 Skills are an important factor in determining wages and the overall migration 
experience. Low-skilled workers, usually ECR migrants, are more vulnerable to wage 
exploitation and unacceptable living and working conditions. On being asked about the 
issue of skilling the emigrant workers, a Representative of the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) during the course of oral evidence before 
the Committee on 22nd November, 2017 elaborated as under:- 
“On the skill development side, the NSDCs is working very closely with the MEA 
to see that as to how we can prepare our workforce for global mobility. As Ministry, 
we see there are five key elements to this whole exercise. The first key element is 
that we should have our qualifications and standards align to global standards which 
are acceptable across major countries. In this quest, we have tied up with UK 
wherein we have aligned our standards for 82 job rules which are in demand abroad 
and which are also acceptable in 60 plus countries abroad. We are also working 
with Australia on that front and increasingly trying to align our standards especially 
in areas where there are opportunities for overseas migration for alignment on the 
international qualifications.  

17 
 
 Secondly, once we do that, we need to create the right kind of 
infrastructure, both hard and soft infrastructure which can deliver that training. That 
also we have started and we have prepared 16 centres today, out of which, 13 are 
operational where infrastructure has been created across seven job rules to deliver 
that kind of training on transnational standards. Even the training of trainers has 
been done calling trainers from further education colleges of UK so that the trainers 
are well-equipped to deliver competency-based curriculum aligns with the 
transnational standards.  
So, these are the two key elements which we have progressed so far and we are 
on the right track. The third key element is assessment and certification. We need to 
create a credible assessment framework and have a certification which is acceptable 
world-wide. In this quest, we are trying to work with UK again for developing a 
joint certification. We have done an EOI where international awarding bodies have 
been asked to apply and we are tying up with companies like City and Guilds, 
Pearson, Prometric, etc. to see that as to how we can have joint certification with 
our Sector Skill Councils on these transnational based qualifications so that these 
certificates can carry some weight in Middle East and other GCC countries 
wherever it goes. It is because Indian assessment standard of framework is still to 
reach to that credible standard.  
The fourth key element is this. In addition to the domain skills, that is, the skill 
set competency-based skill set of the person, we also need to give him the pre-
departure orientation training on which we are working very closely with the MEA. 
They have worked out a curriculum and content which needs to be delivered to 
them and the first set of training of trainers has just been conducted two-three 
weeks back on which the trainers of all these 16 International Skill Centres have 
been trained to deliver PDOT training. The curriculum and contents are ready and 
we are digitising it and also converting it into e-content so that it can be delivered 
over a period of 160 hours to the trainees who are looking for an overseas 
destination. So, this is the fourth element which we have worked upon and we are 
hopeful that successfully we will be imparting it during the May and June period.    
 The fifth and the most important period is the job linkage.  Once the 
person is certified, then definitely he will aspire for an international job.  That is the 
very critical element.  We have been talking to foreign employers and RAs also.  
We are trying to understand this eco-system.  There are multiple training agencies 
in this country which have been working silently over the years.   They are doing 
some assessment training and certification and are linking with overseas jobs.  We 
have come across some examples.  We are trying to work with them and trying to 
see that if we can solve this riddle of direct linkage with foreign employers of these 
institutes. That is the riddle which has not yet been sorted out. This work is in 
progress.  We hope in the next one or two months, we will be having more clarity 

18 
 
on how to have a clear linkage of these international skill centres with markets 
abroad.” 
2.16 When asked about the steps taken for skill upgradation of the migrant workers, 
the Ministry underscored that the government is keen to fully utilize its demographic 
dividend and position India as a provider of skilled work-force. Pravasi Kaushal Vikas 
Yojana is among the key priorities of the Ministry towards enhancing skills-set of 
potential emigrants. The scheme is part of the government’s efforts towards strengthening 
the eco-system that supports migrant workers in all stages of the migration cycle and to 
ensure that Indian workers should migrate safely with an enhanced skill set. 
2.17 Furthermore, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for implementation of the 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana  was signed with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in July, 2016 towards implementation of the scheme. The 
scheme aims at enhancing the skills set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors 
and job roles, in line with international standards, to facilitate overseas employment.  
Initially, the scheme ’s focus is on sectors that are in demand in ECR countries. The 
PKVY includes a technical top-up training to be provided by MSDE through the National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). This is complemented by Pre-Departure 
Orientation Training aimed at enhancing soft skills of potential emigrants in terms of 
culture, language, traditions and local rules and regulations of the destination country. To 
meet this objective, Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship under the “Skill 
India” Mission is setting up India International Skill Centres (IISC) to provide skill 
training and certification benchmarked to International Standards. National Skill 
Development Agency (NSDC), the implementing agency, has established/operationalized 
15 India International Skill Centres in the pilot phase covering eight sectors Domestic 
Workers, Retail, Hospitality, Capital Goods, Health care, Construction, Automotive, and 
Security. 
2.18 When the Representatives of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship were asked about their role in skilling the migrant workers, they 
testified before the Committee on 22nd November 2018 as under:- 

19 
 
“We had signed an MoU with the Ministry of External Affairs last year in July. After 
that, we started a pilot with 16 India International Skill Centres, out of which, 13 are 
operational today. The differentiating factor in these centres and the other trainings 
that we do in 7000 odd centres across the country is that the curriculum content has 
been designed based on international standards. In some of the job rules, we have 
tried to align our standards along with the UK. By identifying the gap between the 
Indian Standards and the UK Standards, we have updated our curriculum and 
content and we have also got the trainers trained from the UK awarding bodies. 
Accordingly, we have started training here on some of the job rules which are more 
in demand in the GCC countries. If we look at the destination areas across the world, 
there are two kinds of migration from the skill point of view. There are one set of 
countries like GCC where there are no standards of skilling for the host countries. 
Host countries do not have a national qualification framework and do not have their 
own standards of skill development. So, they are dependent either on the employer-
led certification or on some other developed country ’s certification. UK and 
Australia are accepted world-wide and in most of the GCC countries, they accept the 
UK qualification. The second set of destination countries are Singapore and 
Australia where the migration can only happen after the skill has been certified by 
their assessment and awarding bodies. They have got very stringent standards and 
once those stringent standards are passed by Indian migrant skilled workers, then 
only they are able to access the migration flow.”  
2.19 Elaborating further, he added:- 
“During the pilot phase - when we did this in 16 centres - we realised that we 
were facing few challenges. Since we were funding the entire training of the 
people who wanted to go abroad, we realised that the commitment level of people 
once they have got trained, is low. Many of the people do not desire to go abroad 
once they have been trained and certified. The second thing that we found was 
that many-a-times the employer or the foreign employer looks for taking people in 
a cohort from a particular place so that it is easy for him also to manage and he is 
not ready to pick up from various centres in bits and pieces. So that was also 
putting up a lot of placement challenges before us. We also realised that every 
trainee needs a very differential level of training as far as international standards 
are concerned and the same kind of package for every training is not doable. As a 
Ministry, we felt that we need to develop a co-payment model where the 
commitment of the trainee is also very high. So that once he is trained, he is ready 
to go abroad. Keeping all these things in mind, we have devised a new policy 
based on the pilot and the outcome of the pilot. The new policy is already unde r 
the Inter-Ministerial consultations. Within the Ministry, we have consulted all the 
stakeholders. This time while devising the policy, we have brought in some 

20 
 
foreign employers on-board, especially the Indian companies who are employing 
Indians abroad. We have also brought in the recruitment agents. We have also 
discussed this policy with the MEA and now we are at a final stage and we hope 
that in the next month, probably will be able to come out with a new policy. In the 
new policy, the broad way is that as a Government we will be looking more at the 
outcomes and will be regulating the whole training process. We will look at the 
outcomes and incentivise based on the outcome in terms of placement. Instead of 
individually paying for the training cost of each trainee, we will incentivise in a 
way so that the training cost for the trainee is minimal and he is able to access the 
training. On that line, we are already working and once this new policy is there, 
we will roll out another set of IISCs beyond the 13 that are functional right now. 
We will carry on this method also until we are able to prove the success in the 
new policy. The old method of having a completely funded Government 
programme will also be carried on in some centres. But, once the new policy 
stabilises and we get good results, probably we will do away with the earlier 
effort of completely funding the entire training programme through the 
Government funds.” 
2.20 On the Committee ’s further query about the manner in which the Skill Centres 
will be set up, a Representative of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship stated as under:- 
“On this, we are discussing with MEA and trying to identify the migratory pockets 
where these training centres would be set up and also the job rolls on which there is 
a demand abroad so that we set up the centres in the right kind of job rolls. Secondly, 
once the job roll and area are identified, we are carrying out an EOA asking the 
private training providers to evince interest in setting up training centres and putting 
that kind of investment. We do have schemes for a soft loan for those training 
providers if they want some soft loan support for putting in that investment.  We do 
have an OPEX funding scheme also under PMKVY.   If there is a training support 
which is required to a training provider for training on these trans-national centres , 
we do have a scheme for that also.” 
 
2.21 While giving testimony before the Committee on 2 April 2018 regarding the steps 
taken to upgrade skill sets of migrants, the Foreign Secretary elaborated as under:- 
 “Skills are, of course, an important driver of mobility and since the signing of the 
MoU with the Ministry of Skills Development and Entrepreneurship in July 2016, 
we have made progress as fifteen India International Skill Centres have now 
become operational. As part of MEA ’s responsibility, a comprehensive pre-
departure orientation manual has been prepared aimed at enhancing the soft skills 

21 
 
of migrant workers. This manual has been translated into Hindi and Telugu. Apart 
from the manual, handbooks on pre-departure orientation have also been 
developed both for the general category of migrant workers and also specifically 
for women migrant workers.” 
 
2.22 Skills are important drivers of mobility. As per the Ministry of External Affairs, 
since the signing of MoU with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
in July last year, there has been significant progress. Fourteen India International Skill 
Centres have been operational as part of the MEA ’s responsibility. A comprehensive pre-
departure manual has been prepared aimed at enhancing the soft-skills of migrant 
workers. The manual has also been translated into Hindi and Telugu languages.  
2.23 The list of the 14 operational IISCs are as follows: 
Sl No Name of Training Centres IISC Job role Location 
1 Society Action for Welfare and Cultural 
Advancement Society (SWACA) General Duty Assistant Varanasi 
2 Quivan – DTC – Anandnagar Mason General Maharajganj 
3 Orion Edutech  General Duty Assistant Varanasi 
4 SynchroServe Skill Development Centre Food And Beverage Service 
steward Hyderabad 
5 Force 10 Protection Services Private Ltd Unarmed Security guard Kochi 
6 Empower Pragati India International Skill 
Training Centre 
Sales Associate 
F and B Steward Allahabad 
7 Mahendra Skills  Retail Sales Associate Lucknow 
8 Labournet-IIMC Center General Mason Gorakhpur 
9 Prayas JAC  General Housekeeper Ranchi 
10 IL&FS Skills   Commercial Vehicle Driver Ajmer 
11 Quivan HTTC  General Mason Kolkata 
12 Society Action for Welfare and Cultural 
Advancement Society (SWACA)  
Food And Beverage Service 
steward Lucknow 
13 Moti Babu Institute of Technology  General Mason and MIG 
Welder  Araria 
14. Quivan Technical Institute MIG Welder North 24, 
Parganas, WB 
2.24 The key priorities under the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana  include enhancing 
skills-set of potential emigrants and strengthen the eco-system that supports migrant 
workers in all stages of the migration cycle and to ensure that Indian workers should 

22 
 
migrate safely with an enhanced skill set. Ministry in coordination with the NSDC has 
been organizing Pre-Departure Orientation programmes. During the examination of 
Demands for Grants (2017-18), the Committee had observed that no real progress has 
been made in the implementation of the schem e ‘Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana ’ as no 
demand has been raised till December, 2016 by the implementing agency i.e. the Ministry 
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). When asked about the causes for 
non-implementation of this Yojana, the Ministry responded that with regards to the 
implementation of Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana  (PKVY), a proposal for request of 
funds was shared with Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) by 
NSDC in January 2017. The India International Skill Centres (IISC) program is currently 
in the pilot phase with 14 operational centres. Approximately 500 trainees have been 
enrolled in these centres in the pilot phase. In order to create a flexible, market-oriented 
model the IISC guidelines are being revised. Upon finalization of IISC guidelines, Phase 
1 and 2 of the program would be launched and more centres would be added. The 
locations of centres would be done through a location analysis based on migration data.  
NSDC intends to identify additional centres in Phase I and Phase II and reach the target 
of 100 on completion of these phases. The Ministry of External Affairs had allocated Rs. 
10.00 crore for PKVY during 2016-17 and a similar provision has been made for the 
current year. 
2.25 In addition, the Ministry intends to commence a one-day PDOT for migrant 
workers going abroad in collaboration with NSDC in Delhi and Mumbai and expand this 
later in the subsequent phases. Whereas the setting up of India International Skill Centres 
(IISC) has been slow in the beginning, this has picked up the momentum and more such 
centres are likely to be identified/set up in the near future.  
 
2.26 On being asked, the Ministry illustrated the challenges faced in implementation 
which includes:- 
a) benchmarking for the creation of trans-national occupational standards,  
b) overseas placement and aggregation of demand from overseas employers  
c) setting up of assessment and certification system acceptable by employers in 
different countries/regions across different sectors.  

23 
 
2.27 Under the provisions of MoU signed with MSDE, MEA's main responsibility is to 
provide Pre- Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) to the intending emigrants going for 
overseas employment. To attain this objective, One Day PDOT has been launched on a 
pilot phase in 4 Centres- 2 in Mumbai and 2 in Delhi in collaboration with NSDC. One 
Day PDOT in 2 Centres in Mumbai was implemented from 10 January, 2018, while in 
New Delhi it was rolled out on 29 January, 2018 in 2 Centres. The position is 
summarized as under: 
 
Month Videsh Bhavan 
Mumbai from 
10 Jan 
Asmacs 
Mumbai from 
10 Jan 
Don. Bos 
Delhi (from 29 
Jan) 
Orion 
Delhi (from 29 
Jan 2018) 
Total 
10-31 Jan  414 744 7 0 1165 
Feb, 2018 900 1238 327 6 2471 
March 
1-26 March 
696 996 462 113 2267 
Total 2010 2978 796 119 5903 
2.28  The Ministry stated that they have achieved the target of 5000 before March, 2018 
and are vigorously pursuing with NSDC to have PDOT in more and more States and 
Centres. They have received requests from State Government of Rajasthan, Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, and U.P. to start Pre-Departure Training in their Centres. They are in 
contact with the concerned States and may finalize dates soon for start of the PDOT in 
these States.  They also look forward to starting one-day PDOT programme in other 
places namely, Chennai, Kochi, Lucknow and Hyderabad that are major departure points 
for migration to Malaysia and the GCC region. We also intend to provide training to 
Indian nationals who are going for overseas employment to other than ECR countries. 
2.29 A pre-departure orientation programme for migrants is recognized as one of the 
most effective means to address the problems encountered by migrant workers in the 
destination countries. On being asked about the effectiveness of the pre-departure 
orientation programmes towards educating and empowering the potential migrants, the 
Ministry submitted that up-skilling of migrant workers by imparting Pre-departure 
orientation offers them a distinct advantage and assists them in moving high-up in the 

24 
 
wage chain. Besides, a well-informed worker is in a better position to safeguard his/her 
rights. 
2.30 The Ministry plays a vital role in enhancing the skill sets of the potential migrant 
workers through PDOT which is an important component of PKVY. These programmes 
are aimed at promoting welfare and protection of labour migrants and are particularly 
targeted at migrant workers travelling to ECR countries. Presently, the PDO Programs are 
disseminated through PDO workshops based on a comprehensive Training of Trainers 
(ToT) manual developed by India Centre for Migration (ICM). An exclusive Handbook 
on PDO was also developed to supplement the ToT Manual with illustrative work on 
themes covered in the ToT Manual. The Manual is being made available to all Trainers 
who participate in the ToTs. So far, three ToT workshops have been conducted in Delhi, 
Hyderabad (Telangana) and Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh) since March 2017. The 
Manual is available in English, Telugu, and Hindi. More such workshops will be 
organized in near future. Apart from the Manual exclusive Handbooks on Pre-departure 
orientation have also been developed, both for the general category of migrant workers 
and women migrant workers. The Handbook for general category is available in English, 
Hindi, Malayalam, Urdu, and Telugu, whereas the Handbook for women migrant workers 
is available in English & Telugu. 
 
2.31  Providing details about the various job roles for which training is being imparted 
to the potential migrants. The Ministry stated that  Currently, training is being imparted at 
IISCs various job roles including Sales Associate, Food & Beverage – Steward, General 
Duty Assistant, Unarmed Security Guard, MIG Welder, General Housekeeper, 
Commercial Vehicle Driver, and General Mason. The job roles were identified on the 
basis of the inputs available with the Ministry/Missions and the research study on 
overseas migration conducted by Grant Thornton. The curriculum and content used for 
training is prepared by the various sector skill councils. In the future, more job roles 
would be added based on the overseas demand for skilled manpower. It is also expected 
that multiple international awarding bodies would be on board for assessment and 
certification to cater to the specific requirements of different countries and occupations. 

25 
 
2.32 On Committee ’s query regarding procedure of establishing relationship between 
job roles and their demand in various labour importing countries, the Ministry states 
Currently, training for various job roles is based on overseas demand for skilled 
manpower provided by the Missions, recruitment agents, overseas employers   as well as 
the study conducted by Grant Thornton on overseas migration patterns. In order to arrive 
at a more updated mapping of overseas demand for various job roles, NSDC is also 
conducting a Global Skill Gap study. 
2.33 When asked about the coordination mechanism between the Ministry of External 
Affairs and MSDE in preparation, setting of targets and implementation of training 
programmes for potential migrants. The Ministry answered that the MEA and MSDE 
share knowledge and relevant data for the implementation of training programs. Data 
related to overseas demand for manpower in specific occupations, location analysis for 
identifying the location of training centres and for recommending credible recruitment 
agencies is shared with MSDE/NSDC. 
2.34 In order to reap the benefits of global migratory flows, the Committee are of 
the considered view that upgrading the skill sets of our migrant workers is essential 
for a labour exporting country like India. The limited skill sets of our migrant 
workers are a major hindrance in their quest to find gainful overseas employment
. 
The Ministry of External Affairs has highlighted five core elements that are 
essential for preparing the workforce for global mobility. These include alignment 
of qualifications, curriculum, and content with global standards; development of 
infrastructure, both soft as well hard for training purpose; credible assessment and 
certification framework; pre-departure orientation training and job linkage. As per 
the Ministry, we have progresse d satisfactorily on the first two elements. The 
Committee have also been informed that an MoU has been signed with the Ministry 
of Skills Development and Entrepreneurship and since then fifteen Indian  
International Skill Centres have become operational. The Ministry of External 
Affairs has also prepared a comprehensive pre-departure manual in order to 
enhance the soft skills of migrant workers. This manual has been translated into 
Hindi and Telugu language. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 

26 
 
translate the same into other major regional languages and hand over to the State 
governments for their wider dispension.  
While appreciative of the slew of measures taken by the Ministry to upgrade 
the skill sets of migrant workers, the Committee are of the opinion that much more 
needs to be done in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should establish a strong and multi-level engagement with all the 
concerned stakeholders and incorporate all the five elements while framing 
curriculum and standards for skill development. The Government should also 
establish Migrant Help Desks at all major airports and handover a comprehensive 
pre-departure manual to migrants before departure to destination countries.   
(Recommendation No.  6) 
2.35  The Committee find that the upgradation of skill sets and pre-departure 
orientation training of the migrant workers constitute the most effective way to 
lessen their vulnerabilities. MEA has collaborated with the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) to implement the skill development 
programme ‘Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana ’, which aims to enhance the skill sets of 
prospective Indian emigrant workers in select job roles. The Committee observe 
that National Skill Development Agency, the implementing agency for the scheme 
has operationalized 15 India International Skill Centres so far. It is noticed that the 
while up-skilling of workers has largely been the task of MSDE, MEA ’s main 
responsibility is to provide pre-departure orientation training (PDOT) to the 
intending emigrants. The Ministry has also informed that the NSDC is conducting a 
Global Skill Gap Study to arrive at an updated mapping of overseas demand for 
various job roles. 
The Ministry has informed the Committee that these orientation 
programmes are disseminated through workshops based on a comprehensive 
Training of Trainers (ToT) manual developed by the India Centre for Migration. 
The Committee noted that only three workshops have been conducted in Delhi, 
Hyderabad, and Vijaywada since March 2017. 

27 
 
The Committee suggest that the Government should increase the number of 
India International Skill Centres particularly in Southern States (which are major 
labour exporting States) and also expand the sectors for training after a rigorous 
job-mapping study. MEA is also urged to organize more pre-departure training 
programmes in view of the massive outward migration for overseas employment 
from India. The skilling of workers should also be carried out in the destination 
country and therefore the Government is strongly advised to forge cooperation with 
destination countries for further skilling. The Committee also desire to be apprised  
about the outcomes of the Global Skill Gap Study. 
(Recommendation No.7) 
PHASE II: COUNTRY OF DESTINATION 
2.36 Once at the destination, the key issues and concerns of foreign workers, therefore, 
centre upon workplace grievances and can be broadly classified under three headings: 1) 
employment-related 2) welfare, occupational health and safety issues and psychological. 
Employment-related issues are mainly about non-payment or under-payment of wages 
and unauthorized deductions. Issues in the second category (welfare, occupational health, 
and safety) pertain to accommodation, long working hours and workplace hazards. The 
latter includes work-related injuries and accidents as well as physical and sexual abuse. 
The psychological impact relates to adjusting with culture, tradition, and system in a new 
country.  
(i)  Human Trafficking, Exploitation & Discrimination against Indian workers  
2.37 It has been reported by Indian Missions/ Posts abroad that complaints received 
from Indian emigrant workers are mostly regarding non-payment/delayed payment of 
salaries, long working hours, inadequate living and working conditions, non-payment of 
over time allowance for extra working hours, non-grant of weekly holidays, refusal to 
grant exit/entry permits for visit to India, incidences of confinement, refusal to allow the 
worker on final exit visa after completion of their contracts and non-provision of medical 
and insurance facilities etc. 

28 
 
2.38 When Indian emigrants face a problem with foreign employers, the Indian 
Mission takes up such matters with the employer/emigrant/local authorities. If the 
employer is at fault, that employer is black-listed (Prior Approval Category) from further 
employment of Indian workers in consultation with the Indian Mission concerned.  As of 
now, 475 foreign employers stand blacklisted.   
2.39 Discrimination against Indian workers, particularly differentiation in salary, 
contractual positions remains another major challenge faced by Indians working abroad. 
Acknowledging this challenge, the Foreign Secretary during oral evidence before the 
Committee on 2 April, 2018 submitted as under:- 
“On the matter of differentiation in salaries, this is indeed one of the many issues 
that the Ministry of External Affairs is grappling with when it comes to migrant 
workers abroad whether they are in the skilled, semi-skilled or un-skilled 
categories.  This is an issue, however, that involves not just India but the recipient 
country of these jobs.  You will agree Mr. Chairman that the matter of racism, and 
an allegation that there is a racist element to any policy of that Government, is a 
matter with which the Government of India has to deal with extreme care and 
sensitivity.  Therefore, while it is our responsibility and we do press on 
Governments to ensure that Indian workers are given a fair treatment, perhaps we 
need to introspect on whether we should take the next step of alleging that the 
host Government is acting in any manner which suggests racism and whether that 
will have an impact on further immigration from India to those countries.” 
2.40 Responding to the Committee ’s query about restrictions in conducting cultural 
activities by emigrant workers, the Foreign Secretary during oral evidence before the 
Committee on 2 April, 2018 stated as under:-  
“As regards the cultural activities, it is important to note that the cultural and 
religious milieu of these countries where our workers are going is very different 
from what we have in India.  Religious freedom too has a very different meaning in 
those countries in comparison with India. We do not really intend in any way in 
interfering in those countries religious milieu and this has to be handled in a very 
sensitive manner.  However, the Government does care for the religious needs of our 
own people in those countries and are trying to engage wherever possible in a very 
subtle manner with those Governments.  The current situation as we know of in 
these countries like Oman, Bahrain, UAE, and Qatar is that the whole religious 
milieu is a little more relaxed than in other places in terms of prayers, conducting 
religious ceremonies and rituals.  In Saudi Arabia, we cannot form a religious 

29 
 
association and this is as per the country ’s rules and regulations and legal 
framework.  Again, Kuwait is also a relatively restricted place.  As I said, however, 
we are at times able to make some in-roads and as you would have noted from a 
recent visit of a higher dignitary, bhoomi pujan was made for a new prayer place in 
one of the countries.  We cannot beyond a point really go in a big way in this 
particular matter.” 
2.41 Migrant workers, particularly women and children are often vulnerable to human 
trafficking, forced labour, violence, and exploitation. Enumerating the steps taken by the 
Ministry to deal with various issues related to human trafficking in the Gulf countries, the 
Ministry stated that it is working in close coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs, 
which is the nodal Ministry for human trafficking.   
 
2.42 The Ministry has also taken the following steps to deal with issues related to 
human trafficking:- 
a) E-Migrate system has been introduced to make the emigration process more 
simple and transparent. 
b) Process for registration of recruiting agents has also been made transparent and 
time-bound. 
c) Any recruiting activities without a valid certificate from PGE tantamount to 
illegal migration as also human trafficking. This being a law and order issue, such 
cases fall within the jurisdiction of State Governments. As and when a complaint 
relating to human trafficking reported to the Ministry, the same is referred to the 
Central Bureau of Investigation under Chapter 3.5 (f) of CBI Crime Manual for 
taking action in the matter. The State Law enforcing authorities from where illegal 
recruitment/human trafficking has taken place are also sensitized and details of 
such agents sent to all State Governments. Till date, in the last three years and the 
current year, a total of 834 such cases of illegal recruitment/human trafficking 
have been referred to the States. 
d) The mechanism is in place to take action against registered recruiting agents 
found indulging in malpractices in the recruitment of Indians for overseas 
employment and any laxity on their part to extend all possible help to an emigrant 
in distress in the foreign land. Immediately on receipt of a complaint against a 

30 
 
registered Recruiting Agent, a Show Cause Notice is issued to the RA. Based on 
his response and the action taken to resolve the grievance, further course of action 
viz. closure of grievance, suspension of RC or cancellation of RC is decided. The 
number of complaints received against RAs and action taken thereon is indicated 
in the table below: 
Year Show Cause 
Notice issued 
Registration 
Certificate (RC) 
suspended 
Registration 
Certificate 
(RC) cancelled 
Complaints 
dropped/ settled + 
SCN revoked 
2014 153 11 16 23 
2015 61 1 0 1 
2016 174 7 3 49 
2017 (upto 30th 
September) 
144 17 - 94 
e)  Complaints regarding illegal migration are referred to concerned State Police 
Authorities/Protector of Emigrants for investigation and action for violation of 
Section 10 of Emigration Act 1983 and provisions of various other laws as 
applicable, including Indian Penal Code etc. 
f)  The Police authorities, after investigations, seek prosecution sanction of th e 
Protector General of Emigrants (PGE), who is the competent authority for 
prosecuting the accused in the appropriate Court of Law under Section 27 of the 
Emigration Act, 1983.  
g)  Requests for such Prosecution Sanction are processed and Prosecution Sanction 
issued on priority by the office of the PGE. Position relating to complaints against 
unregistered agents received during the last three years and the current year is 
given below:  
Year Number of cases 
referred to State/ 
UT  Government 
for action 
Number of cases in 
which request received 
for issue of Prosecution 
Sanction from various 
States 
Number of 
Prosecution 
Sanction 
issued 
2014 153 08 08 
2015 101 11 11 
2016 231 42 42 
2017 (upto 30 th 
September)  
349 29 29 

31 
 
h)  MEA had convened a High-Level Meeting of Ministers and senior officers of 10 
major workers exporting States on 9 th November 2016 and on 8 th May 2017 to 
sensitize them about the menace of illegal agents and to take stringent action 
against them. 
i)  MEA has initiated Outreach Programme to sensitize State Governments and State 
Police authorities on catching hold of illegal agents to prevent illegal emigration 
and to take up other issues of emigrants with State Governments. Recently, such 
Outreach ‘Videsh Sampark’ programmes to sensitize the State Governments were 
held in Telangana, Maharashtra, Kerala etc. and more such programmes are 
proposed to be held in the future. 
j)  MEA has undertaken a media campaign on safe and legal migration and is 
working in close collaboration with State Governments. 
 
2.43 It is noticed that discrimination, exploitation, and trafficking of migrant 
workers at the country of destination is a recurrent challenge and constitute a 
serious violation of their basic human rights. Non-payment/delayed payment of 
salaries, long working hours, inadequate living and working conditions, non-
payment of overtime allowance, non-grant of weekly holidays, incidences of 
confinement, are serious issues that not only tantamount to discrimination and 
exploitation of migrant workers but also pose a serious assault to their basic human 
rights. The Ministry has informed that when complaints about foreign employers 
are found to be true, they are blacklisted. The Committee note that in order to  
tackle the grave issue of trafficking in the Gulf countries, the Ministry of External 
Affairs is working in close coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs, the 
nodal Ministry for human trafficking.   
 The Committee strongly condemn the discriminatory and exploitative 
treatment meted out to our migrant workers. It is understandable that 
Governmental interventions in such incidences are constrained by the fact that they  
occur in the territory of another country. However, violations of basic rights are 
universal and ought to be respected by all. The Committee, therefore, would 
strongly recommend that the Government should seriously raise the issue of basic 

32 
 
rights of our migrant workers during all bilateral and regional interactions with the 
GCC countries. The migrant workers should be provided with a manual of their 
rights and the point of contact with Missions/Posts for redressal in case of their 
violation. The Ministry should also make it a mandatory requirement that all work 
contracts need to be attested by Indian Mission/Post in the respective destination 
country. 
 (Recommendation No. 8) 
2.44 Passport is a document issued by the Government of India to an individual. 
It is an exercise of his/her constitutional right and nobody else can hold his/her 
passport. Notwithstanding this fact, seizing of passports by the employers is a 
common practice throughout the GCC countries.   The workers also give their 
passports willingly because the iqama is what is sought after in those countries when 
caught by the police.  If they are found without an iqama, they are put behind the 
bars. Another common discourse behind is that it serves as a protection against 
workers who want to run away from the company and look for another work.  
Taking of passports and keeping workers pay in arrears are two widespread  
methods used by employers to control workers. The Foreign Secretary has 
submitted that the Ministry has blacklisted a lot of foreign employers for taking 
away the passport where they are not having the iqama system. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to issue an advisory to GCC countries for not 
withholding the passports of our Indian workers by the employers and using it as a 
method of exploitation of our migrant workers. The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard.   
(Recommendation No. 9) 
2.45 The Committee noted that the low paid Indian workers working in GCC 
countries normally visit their home once or twice particularly to attend marriages 
or some seasonal festivals. It is disheartening to note that not only the foreign 
airlines but also our own airlines charge very exorbitant air fares adding to the 
financial burden on the already low paid workers. In this regard, the Committee are 
happy to note that the MEA has understood the issue and taken up this matter with 

33 
 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation. As a welfare measu re, the Committee desire that the 
MEA should engage with the Ministry of Civil Aviation more vigorously to find a 
positive solution. The efforts undertaken in this regard and the outcomes thereof 
may be intimated to the Committee.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
(ii) Safety and security for Indian Workers in distress situation including Conflict 
Zones 
2.46 During this year, the tragic confirmation of the death of 39 Indians in Iraq, were 
reported missing since June, 2014 brought to the fore the challenges faced by Indian 
workers in conflict areas. Elaborating over this issue, MEA in a written note stated that as 
soon as the terrorist organization ISIS captured large territories in Iraq with its attacks 
beginning from June, 2014, rendering many areas in Iraq as conflict zones, Ministry of 
External Affairs made timely efforts to ensure the safety and security of the Indian 
nationals in Iraq by evacuating them from the conflict zones.   
2.47 Furthermore, in view of the then precarious situation prevailing in Iraq a Travel 
Advisory was issued on 15 June, 2014 through which Indian nationals were advised to 
avoid all travel to Iraq, until further notification. Indian nationals in Iraq were also asked 
to leave the country by commercial means if it was safe to do so. Our nationals living in 
the areas affected by the then ongoing armed conflict were advised to stay indoors as far 
as possible and were advised to remain in contact with our Embassy in Baghdad for 
necessary advice and for getting updated information on the evolving security situation. 
Those Indian nationals who did not have travel documents or needed other consular 
services were advised to seek assistance from the Indian Embassy in Baghdad. The 
Indian Embassy in Baghdad set up a 24-hour helpline and opened camp offices in Najaf, 
Karbala and Basra contact details of which were given through subsequent Advisories.  
2.48 When asked about the existence of a standard operating procedure for migrant 
workers in distress situation, the Foreign Secretary during oral evidence on 2 April, 2018 
submitted as under:- 

34 
 
“Following the evacuations from Libya and Yamen we are trying to understand 
what are the circumstances and the manner in which we can evacuate our citizens.  
We have SOPs for evacuation. 
 We also issue travel advisories if we sense that the crisis is imminent or a 
political and law and order situation is deteriorating sufficiently enough to 
become a matter of concern to the Indian Nationals. But, in the end of it all, hon. 
Chairperson, these are circumstances that happen very quickly at times. In those 
circumstances, most of our SOPs are designed to see how we can get our 
Nationals out as safely and as quickly as possible. We do advise all our nationals 
to register on our website. This question was asked by Prof. Bhattacharya. We do 
send out information to them from time to time on whether there is such situation 
developing in those countries. The registration is a voluntary affair. Not all Indian 
citizens register with the Indian Embassies. One of the advantages of the e-
Migrate programme would be that, at least, in the lower skilled or semi-skilled 
workers, the registration process would begin in India and, therefore, it would be 
more comprehensive.” 
 
2.49 The Gulf region has been facing a frequent crisis in recent past. The  tragic 
death of 39 Indian workers in Iraq in early 2018 is a sad testimony to the security 
and safety challenges faced by them. The Committee note that during emergen cy 
situations, the Ministry made serious efforts to evacuate them by issuing travel 
advisories and setting up an emergency helpline. Non-payment of salaries, seizure of 
passports, lack of finances, inadequate communication etc further augment the 
security challenges of the se migrant workers. The Committee recommend that the 
Government should chalk out an emergency plan that clearly delineates the 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and also forge an institutionalized mechanism 
with host countries to evacuate workers. Furthermore, the migrant workers should 
also be provided with the manner in which emergency situations can be dealt with 
during their pre-departure training phase.  
(Recommendation No. 11) 
(iii)  Repatriation of mortal remains of deceased 
2.50 The family members of the deceased emigrant face difficulties and 
inconveniences in the repatriation of mortal remains. On being asked, the Ministry 
enumerated the present policy in place for bringing back the mortal remains of the Indian 

35 
 
workers who die abroad by stating that registration of death at the concerned Indian 
Mission/Post is necessary, for which normally the following documents are required: 
• Medical report/death certificate issued from a hospital 
• Copy of detailed police report (with English translation, if the report is in some 
other language), in case of accidental or unnatural death 
• Consent letter from next of kin of the deceased for local cremation/burial/ 
transportation of mortal remains, duly attested by a notary 
• Copy of passport and visa pages 
• In addition to the above, other documents such as clearance and arrangements for 
the embalming of mortal remains, clearance from local immigration/customs 
department, etc. are required. These procedures may differ from country to 
country. 
• Our Missions/Posts remain in constant touch with the next of kin of the deceased 
Indian national to facilitate the transportation or local burial of the mortal remains 
in accordance with the wishes of the family of the deceased. They also liaise with 
the concerned foreign officials to expedite procedures for the repatriation of 
mortal remains to India. 
• In case no friend or relative is available to take care of the transportation of mortal 
remains, Indian Embassy/Consulate may be authorized to make arrangements for 
the same. 
 
2.51 Local procedures for transportation of mortal remains of foreign nationals vary 
from country to country. It normally takes from 2 to 4 weeks for completion of local 
formalities before repatriation of mortal remains to India from Gulf countries. While 
there is no undue delay in cases of natural deaths, the time taken in transporting the 
mortal remains to India is longer in the case of unnatural deaths as local authorities 
conduct a detailed investigation in such cases to determine the exact cause of death 
before allowing repatriation of mortal remains. During this period, the Indian 
Embassy/Consulate stays in constant touch with the concerned local authorities to 
expedite the process. 
2.52 The Committee observe that repatriation of human remains is a painstaking 
and expensive process. As per the Ministry, local procedures for transportation of 
mortal remains vary from country to country. The time taken for completion o f 
local formalities is usually two to four weeks and the wait is even longer for 
unnatural deaths due to the procedure of investigation. Moreover, registration of 

36 
 
death at the concerned Indian Mission/Post is essential for which too much 
documentation is needed.  
 The Committee are of the view that the extant procedures often add to the 
agony of those who lose their family member and are left at the mercy of officials o f 
host countries and the Indian Consulates and Embassies. As a humanitarian issue, 
the Committee recommend that the Government should take up this issue with 
utmost seriousness and devise an effective mechanism with the host governments to 
ensure speedy repatriation of the mortal remains of the Indian migrants. A single 
window system can be set up in the Indian Missions/Posts abroad to ease the 
formalities and reduce the time taken for repatriation.  
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
(iv) Minimum Referral Wages 
2.53 The Indian Government has fixed minimum referral wages for various 
professions. It appears that the minimum referral wage is at an unrealistically high level 
above the prevailing market wages in many West Asian countries and de facto this results 
in worst exploitation because the Indian gets a contract showing the minimum referral 
wage to satisfy the MEA and then gets a separate contract with the real wage which may 
be lower than a realistic market wage that the Ministry had imposed. When asked about 
the need for re-examining the minimum referral wages in order to make it more realistic,  
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs during evidence before the 
Committee on 2 April, 2018 submitted as under:- 
“MRWs were fixed way back in 2014 in consultation with our Missions on the 
prevailing wage rate there for a variety of job descriptions or job IDs, as we call them. 
We have over 400 job descriptions for which Indian workers are emigrating to the 
Gulf countries. After 2014, in the last four years, due to the oil crisis and the fall in 
prices, the overall wage structure in these countries have come down. We are aware 
of this through the fact that we do get contracts of employment which are registered 
on our e-Migrate. There is a need to re-position these MRWs, which will also the 
address the fact and address the view that Indians are being paid less. So, it is not 
exactly like that. In fact, both these are contradictory - high MRWs on the one hand 
and our Indians being paid less. So, to address this thought, that Indians are being 
paid less, the Government of India intervened to fix the Minimum Referral Wage. 

37 
 
Now, we are in a situation where we feel that the MRWs are high and therefore, the 
jobs are going away to other countries. In between, there is a dual contract happening 
which is detrimental to the worker because he signs another contract on reaching 
there, which is not enforceable in India, but it is enforceable in that country. So, the 
MRWs are currently under review. We have got the data out of the system, as to what 
is the real wage prevailing over a period of time.” 
2.54 Informing the Committee further on this issue, the representatives of the Ministry 
of External Affairs in another Sitting held on 18 July, 2018 submitted as under:- 
“We have had in-depth consultations with our Missions and also a Committee has 
been set up which has finalised its report.  It was decided that we will look at the 
minimum referral wage to bring it downwards because they appear to be unrealistic.  
These comments and suggestions also came from this Committee itself.  It is in the 
final stages and we hope to roll it out in the next fortnight.  It will address most of 
the concerns which the recruitment agents have been saying.  Simultaneously, when 
we lower this, it will also address the problem of dual contract – one contract for the 
e-migrate and another contract for the Government ’s there which are justiciable in 
their countries.  With MRW being rationalised, we are going to take care of both 
these problems.” 
2.55 The Government of India has been fixing minimum referral wages to 
regulate the wages of Indian migrant workers employed in different countries 
falling under the Emigration Check Regulation (ECR) category. The Ministry has 
informed the Committee that on the basis of consultation with our Missions, the 
minimum wage rates were fixed in 2014 on the then prevailing wage rate. The wage  
structure in the Gulf countries has plummeted since 2014 due to the oil crisis and 
fall in prices. However, the minimum referral wages fixed by the Government has 
not kept pace with such changes, leading to widening of the wage differential 
between the one imposed by the Indian Government and the prevailing wage rate in 
the destination countries. Though the fixing of higher minimum referral wages may 
be justified for the protection of migrant workers; this may result not only in 
reduced preference for Indian workers but also  greater exploitation through  dual 
contracts - one for the e-Migrate and the other for the Government in the 
destination country. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken due 
cognizance of this issue and established a Committee to review it.  

38 
 
The Committee agree with the Ministry that there is an urgent need to revisit 
the minimum referral wages and making it more realistic and up to date. The  
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should co-ordinate with the 
Ministry of Labour and set up a Committee for reviewing the minimum referral 
wages at least on annual basis with the primary purpose of striking a balance 
between protection of workers and promotion of employment.  
(Recommendation No.13) 
Phase III: Return and Re-settlement 
2.56 The Committee were keen to know about the problems being faced by the migrant 
workers upon their return to India. In a written reply, the Ministry answered that the 
Government has launched a State Outreach Programme ( “Videsh Sampark” series) from 
May, 2017 to generate awareness in the States and during such Conferences with the 
States, the resettlement and rehabilitation is taken up at the higher level.  The 
Government has from time to time sensitized the State governments to inform returning 
workers about their resettlement programmes and financial support schemes available 
with the State governments. The Government also stands ready to work closely with the 
State governments. 
2.57 Furthermore, the Ministry also enumerated certain key challenges faced in the 
resettlement of the returnees as under:-  
a) The inability of the States to absorb the returnees and offer employment due to 
already high unemployment. 
b) The home state's economic situation and employment situation not strong enough to 
introduce social programs socio-cultural reintegration of the returnees. 
c) The non-existence of appropriate state government establishments, institutions etc to 
take advantage of their savings and experience, to guide them properly to invest in 
appropriate schemes introduced by the State for their welfare and use their savings. 
d) The absence of soft loans or other financial incentives by the State Govt. for self-
employment ventures. 
e) No comprehensive rehabilitation package by the State Government. 
f) Difficulties in re-adjusting to the socio-economic environment in their home state. 

39 
 
Since the resettlement of the returnees is a state subject, the Ministry has been 
sensititizing the state governments from time to time.  Some of the State Governments 
like Andhra Pradesh and Kerala have taken measures to set up welfare programmes for 
the returnee migrants.  
2.58 Migration of workers to the Gulf region is mostly temporary and they do 
return back to the country of origin. The returning of migrants after crisis 
situations in the Gulf countries puts them in a precarious position. The Committee 
note that there exist numerous challenges in the resettlement of the returnees which 
inter alia  includes difficulty in socio-cultural reintegration, lack of employment 
opportunities, the absence of soft loans or other financial incentives and lack of 
comprehensive rehabilitation package etc. Given the fact that resettlement of 
returnees is a state subject, the Ministry has expressed its constraints in playing an 
active role. The Ministry has stated that it has tried to sensitize the State 
Governments through Conferences and Workshops.  
 The returnee migrant comes back with skills, work experience and 
savings. Their active participation can give momentum to our developmental 
activities. In the opinion of the Committee, re-integration of the returnee migrants is 
necessary to accrue the fruits of successful migration. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the logic that the issue of returnee migrants be sidelined due to the 
larger responsibility of s tate governments. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Government should frame a rehabilitation policy in 
consultation with the states receiving returnees to help the returnee emigrants to use 
their enhanced skill sets for contributing to the development of self and countr y. 
While framing such a policy, the state governments should be actively involved and 
factors such as the socio-economic profile, skill sets, country of employment and 
nature of the job of the returnee migrant be taken into account.  
 (Recommendation No. 14) 
2.59 Broadly, complaints received in the Ministry and by our Missions and Posts 
abroad could be classified into two categories: 

40 
 
(i) Violation of contractual provisions and work place related issues – This 
category of complaints primarily  relate to  violation of contractual provisions, 
contract substitution, non-issue of Iqamas (residence permit),  not granting of 
exit visas on completion of contract, poor working conditions-ill treatment 
and harassment, long working hours,  wage and employer-related issues, and 
difficulties faced by female  workers.   
(ii) Recruitment Agent related issues – Complaints mainly relate to unauthorized 
recruitment agents, registered recruitment agents, and foreign employers. 
2.60 Against this backdrop, several administrative and operative measures have 
already been put in place to enhance the protection of emigrant workers and avoid their 
exploitation by unscrupulous agents. These are specifically aimed at making a difference 
at the ground level. These measures will be discussed in details in the next chapter. 
 
2.61 The expatriate migrant workers face various issues during the three phases 
of the migration cycle (pre-departure, country of destination and return) both in 
India and abroad. During the pre-departure phase, the key issues relates to 
illegal/fake recruiting agents, non-availability of the adequate database, lack of skill 
& training and unrealistic minimum referral wages. In the country of destination, 
the migrant workers largely face three key issues related to employment, welfare 
and psychological. Finally, in the last phase, the returnee migrant has to face the 
difficulties of rehabilitation and resettlement.  The Committee are of the view that 
the problems faced by migrant workers in the first and the last phase can be 
effectively tackled by the Government as these are within the geographical and 
sovereign limits of our country. The Committee realize that the second phase is the 
one where the onus rests mostly on the host country and the Government have to 
grapple with serious challenges in protecting and safeguarding of our workers. 
These problems are further aggravated by the Kafala system in most of the Gulf 
countries, which leaves emigrant workers more vulnerable to exploitation and 
trafficking.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in order to mitigate the 
vulnerabilities faced by the migrant workers at different stages of migration cycle , 

41 
 
the Government should set up a pro-active infrastructural and institutional 
mechanism in all the Embassies/Missions that will comprehensively look into the 
concerns of the workers, improve the quality of services, enhance levels of welfare 
and respond efficiently to situations of distress. A cooperative approach is needed 
between all the concerned stakeholders to optimize the benefits of migration while 
addressing its risks and challenges. The Government should, thereby, endeavour to  
empower the emigrant workers through specific systemic interventions on domestic, 
bilateral and multilateral fronts. The Officers/officials posted in all the 
embassies/Missions should be accessible and render a human touch while 
addressing the problems of migrant workers, particularly the blue collar workers. 
(Recommendation No.15) 
II. PROBLEMS OF IRREGULAR/ILLEGAL MIGRANT WORKERS 
2.62 There is no universally accepted definition of irregular migration. A migrant 
become an illegal or irregular worker in the following circumstances: 
 He or she may not have been granted authorization by the state on whose territory 
he/she is present as per the requirements of the law in respect of entry, exit or 
employment. 
 He or she has failed to comply with the conditions to which his/her entry stay or 
employment is subject to. 
2.63 A large number of such Indian workers reside in GCC countries. The 
illegal/irregular workers run the risk of unfair exploitation and human right violations.  
Since their employment is illegal neither they nor their employers notify the authorities 
that they are working.  Most of the Indian irregular migrates in West Asia are those 
emigrant who have overstayed their visa for different reasons.  The ir reasons which may 
make them illegal can be as follows:- 
(i) They overstayed their original visa taken and have been unable to extend it 
or renew it. 
(ii) Emigrants entered the country on a visitor or tourist visa and started 
working without proper documents or getting a work permit. 

42 
 
(iii) They changed employer without proper authorities or resigned from their 
job. 
(iv) They were unable to regulate their status or simply leave the country since 
their employers did not return their passports. 
(v) They finished their contacts but were unable to leave the country as their 
employers did not provide them with return tickets which they were 
unable to buy themselves. 
(vi) They left their sponsors when they were not paid their salaries or delays in 
getting salaries or when they were forced to work for longer hours that the 
labour laws allowed. 
(vii) They changed their place of work as a result of actions of their sponsors, 
who facing economic difficulties instead of repatriating their employers, 
forced them to look for another job. 
(viii) Some more ambitious emigrants leave their companies because they can 
earn more outside than they can earn in the company. 
2.64 When asked about the vulnerabilities faced by these illegal migrant workers and 
the type of assistance being provided by the Missions/Posts to these workers during times 
of distress, the Ministry stated that those Indian workers who migrate through 
unregistered Recruitment Agents for overseas employment generally travel from India on 
tourist/visit Visas. Therefore, their estimates are not available. It has been reported by our 
Missions/ Posts abroad that complaints received from Indian emigrant workers are mostly 
regarding non-payment/delayed payment of salaries, long working hours, inadequate 
living and working conditions, non-payment of over time allowance for extra working 
hours, non-grant of weekly holidays, refusal to grant exit/entry permits for visit to India, 
incidences of confinement, refusal to allow the worker on final exit visa after completion 
of their contracts and non-provision of medical and insurance facilities etc. 
2.65 On receipt of reports of Indian emigrants in distress, our Mission/Post in that 
country intervenes with the concerned government authorities and the foreign 
employer/sponsor to resolve the disputes and extend all possible assistance, including 
repatriation of Indian workers, wherever necessary. Several Missions/Posts abroad are 

43 
 
conducting Open House on working days, to provide direct access to workers to convey 
their grievances. Some Missions/Posts abroad have established 24x7 Helplines and Toll-
Free Helplines. They have also launched Mobile Applications to enable Indian workers in 
Gulf countries to contact respective Indian Missions/Posts abroad when in distress or in 
an emergency situation
. 
2.66 The Government of India has set up Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) in 
all the Indian Missions/consulates abroad to meet contingency expenditure incurred by 
them for carrying out various welfare activities for overseas Indian citizens who are in 
distress. The ICWF, inter-alia, covers: 
a) Boarding and lodging for distressed Overseas Indians in need; 
b) Extending emergency medical care to the Overseas Indians in need; 
c) Providing air passage to stranded Overseas Indians in need; 
d) Providing legal assistance to the Overseas Indians in deserving cases; 
e)  Expenditure on incidentals and for airlifting the mortal remains to India or 
local cremation/burial of the deceased Overseas Indians in such cases where 
the sponsor is unable or unwilling to do so as per the contract and the family is 
unable to meet the cost; 
f) Providing the payment of fines and minor penalties in respect of Indian 
nationals for illegal stay in the host country where prima facie the worker is 
not at fault; 
g) Providing the payment of small fines/penalties for the release of Indian 
nationals in jails/detention centres. 
2.67 Possibility of a worker getting stranded in a foreign country increases manifold 
when they emigrate through unlawful processes. Replacement of original contract with 
another one - unfavorable to the workers, is common in these cases and these workers 
have very limited chance to get help from the local legal authorities because of their 
illegal emigrant status. Reports of exploitation of ECNR category passport holders and 
those ECR passports holders who travel on a ‘Tourist’ Visa and later illegally convert 
them to ‘Employment’ Visas in that country are also reported by the Missions from time 
to time. Such emigrants are increasingly becoming vulnerable to exploitation. However, 

44 
 
our Missions/Posts extend a helping hand to every Indian in distress overseas irrespective 
of legal or illegal migration, and ECR or ECNR passport holders.  
2.68 The Committee are aware that a majority of migrants lives and works 
abroad legally. However, a large number of illegal/irregular workers also reside in 
Gulf countries. Illegal migrant workers includes those who are overstayers; used 
their tourist visas and are engaged in work; student engaged in employment, 
trainees overstaying their visas; regular migrants continuing beyond the contract 
period especially regular migrants running away from their designated employer 
before the expiry of the contract
.  These illegal/irregular migrants run the risk of 
unfair exploitation and human rights violations due to their illegal status. Since 
their employment is illegal, neither they nor their employers notify the authorities 
that they are working.  Therefore, it is virtually impossible to keep a track of them 
or afford them any protection.  
There exists a lot of difference between the rights and benefits enjoyed  by 
nationals, regular emigrants and irregular emigrants in different Gulf countries.  
Irregular workers in almost all GCC countries do not have civil and human righ ts 
leading to their living and working in appalling conditions
. During deliberations on 
this subject, the Ministry of External Affairs has tacitly acknowledged this 
complicated issue and the consequent dilemma in front of the host government in 
responding to their problems. The Committee, however, note that the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund offers assistance to both legal and illegal Indian 
migrants. Even during the negotiation phase of the Global Compact of Migration, 
the Government has contended for agreed commitments on easy and safe m igration 
of economic migrants and has vouched for a distinction between legal and illegal 
migrants. 
The Committee understand that the Government cannot have a stated 
position on the rights of illegal migrants as this might lead to its promotion. In the 
considered view of the Committee, the existence of illegal migrants, though 
undesirable, is a reality which cannot be denied.  Destination countries are using 
their services and they are also contributing significantly through remittances in 

45 
 
India. The best way to deal with this precarious situation is to create legal pathways 
for migration and remove incentives for individuals to resort to irregular methods 
of migration. The Committee, therefore, urge that the Government should take a 
humanitarian perspective on this issue and strengthen the mechanism underpinnin g 
migration so that illegal migration and the risks associated with it is curtailed. In 
this regard, media awareness can play a significant role. Moreover, in providing 
assistance during distress situations from ICWF, there should not be any 
discrimination between regular and irregular migrants. Indian Missions/Posts 
should also facilitate them in getting the advantage of Amnesty Schemes or availing 
any opportunity for regularization in the destination country. 
 (Recommendation No.16) 
III. Gulf Region: Major recipient of Indian Emigrant workers 
2.69 As of today, the majority of workers from India migrate to the Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) countries namely Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the 
United Arab Emirates, where the working conditions are not always very conducive to 
their well-being. In addition to this, a number of our workers also migrate to South East 
Asian countries, particularly to Malaysia.  Regular workers are of two types- First, the 
workers migrated under Kafala (Sponsorship) system under the sponsorship of local 
company etc and the Second the category of workers emigrated under the ‘free Visa 
system’ under the loss of GCC states in this regard.  
2.70 Providing details about the ‘Kafala’ or the sponsorship system of hiring migrant 
workers which is prevalent in the Gulf, the Ministry informed that a sponsorship system 
is prevalent in Gulf countries, popularly known as ‘Kafala’, for the issuance of 
employment visa to workers coming from other countries. Any foreign national who 
comes to these countries on tourist/employment/visit/family visa requires a sponsor. The 
worker is supposed to work only under his sponsor, failing which he is declared an illegal 
worker.  Therefore, while restricting workers' mobility, the Kafala system puts the 
worker at the mercy of a foreign employer with not much scope to safeguard his rights. 
 

46 
 
2.71 However, in recent years, governments in some GCC countries have taken 
measures to reform the Kafala System to make it more institutionalized to protect the 
interest of workers. UAE has amended certain features of the sponsorship system thereby 
permitting employees to change their sponsor after a certain period and especially in the 
case of professionals and degree holders. However, in practical terms, changing one ’s 
employer is still very difficult especially for blue collar workers.  
  
2.72 Government of Qatar passed a new legislation in 2016, named as “Regulation of 
the Expatriates ’ Entry, Departure, Residence and Sponsorship ”, replacing the 
Sponsorship System (Nizam-e-Kafala). Bahrain abolished the Kafala system in 2009 and 
replaced it with the issuance of a work permit by the Sponsors. A Flexi work permit 
system scheme was launched in August 2017 for expatriate workers allowing Bahraini 
employers to employ expatriates to carry out temporary and casual work legally. The 
Flexi Permit system is expected to enable the skilled workers to work with multiple 
employers depending upon availability of work.  
 
2.73 The ongoing economic downturn in the Gulf region has affected Indian expatriate 
workers. There are some reports of Indian workers being asked to leave before 
completion of their existing contracts. Instances of unpaid salaries for the last few months 
have also been reported. When asked about the impact of the ongoing economic 
downturn in the Gulf on the Indian migrant workers working there, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated that the ongoing economic slowdown in Gulf countries resulting from 
lower oil prices since 2014 has had an adverse impact on the various sections of economy 
including construction industry, real estate, Oil and Natural gas-based companies, 
banking/financial sectors and on other sectors. These have adversely impacted expatriate 
migrant workers.  
2.74  The Ministry also informed that there are some reports of retrenchment of Indian 
workers and loss of jobs resulting from the closure of companies as well as premature 
termination of existing contracts. Instances of unpaid dues/salaries have been reported 
from Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Oman in recent months. Kuwaiti authorities have 

47 
 
imposed a hike in availing medical treatment, charges for obtaining residency etc in 
respect of expatriate workers. The recent GCC crisis involving Qatar has created 
financial pressures on companies undertaking infrastructure projects and may have 
potentially adverse consequences for Indian workers.  
 
2.75 Informing the Committee about the remedial measures undertaken in light of the 
recent situation in the region, the Ministry stated that the Government has been 
monitoring the situation and working in close coordination with the governments in the 
Gulf States towards extending all possible assistance to Indian nationals abroad. 
Whenever difficulties have been reported, matters have been taken up with the host 
government and concerned companies. In addition, support has also been extended 
through ICWF in deserving cases. Creating necessary awareness particularly in the 
migratory labour pockets of the country is an integral part of the Ministry’s efforts.  
 
2.76 There has been a separate issue raised by a number of people regarding a new 
stipulation that has affected Indian engineers in Kuwait. The Kuwaiti Government has 
required that all engineers working in Kuwait upon the renewal of their work permits 
have to show that their degree is from a university that is recognised by the National 
Accreditation in India. Only 16% of our engineering Board of Institutes are accredited 
with NBA. Unfortunately, the Kuwaiti Government has failed to realise that this 
particular body has only come into existence in recent years and that there are many 
engineers from India who have come out of institutions recognised by AICTE & UGC, 
which there was an Accreditation Division that played the same role. Therefore, there is 
no separate accreditation available from an independent body. But as a result, apparently 
several hundred of Indian engineers in the mid 40s and 50s are essentially not going to 
get their work permits renewed. 
2.77 When asked about the steps taken by the Government of India to resolve the issue 
the Committee was informed on 18 July, 2018 submitted as under: 
“we asked the Kuwaiti Government to send a delegation to India and visit all our 
technical bodies and institutes, to give them an idea how our system is working.  
Now, we have agreed.  We will give them an entire comprehensive list of all the 
technical/engineering institutes that are working in India for their consideration.” 

48 
 
  
2.78  The Ministry further added that the Kuwait Ambassador is deeply involved to 
resolve this. He has held two rounds of discussions with the labour Minister and she has 
assumed to review this because the permanent Authority for manpower (PAM) is directly 
under her charge. So we are waiting that something will come out just like we have have 
had considerable success in the removal of the issue regarding the issue of good conduct 
certificate in UAE which was again thrust upon us on 4 February, 2018. This certificate 
for NAB accreditation will also hopefully be resolved. We are on it.” 
 
2.79 Another important development has been the Amnesty-2017 drive announced by 
the Government of Saudi Arabia beginning March 29, 2017. Since then, the Amnesty has 
been extended thrice by the Saudi government.  The ‘Amnesty-2017’ is covering three 
categories:  
 Those who entered the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on Haj or Umrah or transit visa 
or performing Haj without a permit;  
 Persons who arrived in the country on a work visa and now Iqama is expired; and  
 Undocumented persons, Huroob (run away), and violators of Haj directives. 
 
2.80  Again on 4 February, 2018 the UAE Government tried to impose a new restriction 
on all migrant workers asking them for a good conduct certificate. This is something that 
came as a shock because the Indian Government does not send anybody abroad who has 
no passport and before issuing the Passport the Indian Government verify in a very 
thorough some the anomaly aspect of the passport applicant and whether there is an 
Indian citizen and if there is anything adverse that has been noticed against the person. It  
was going to affect several hundred thousand of our people living there. The Ministry 
immediately took up this issue both through the local embassy of UAE as well as our 
embassy in UAE. As a result, the matter has been deferred and there is no such instance 
right now on good conduct certificate for those who want to go for work to UAE.  
 
2.81  Majority of the workers from India migrate to the Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC) countries where the working conditions are not always very conducive to 
their overall well being. Due to the existence of multiple problems such as skill 

49 
 
deficits, general lack of awareness about their rights, employment contracts, 
customs and regulations, these workers are often exploited by their foreign 
employers making them the most vulnerable segment of the Indian Diaspora. The 
Kafala (sponsorship) system and issues related to Iqma (resident permit) further 
complicate the already precarious position of these workers. The Ministry of 
External Affairs has also admitted the fact that its policy priorities should be 
focused on this extremely vulnerable section of Diaspora.  
Despite the existence of a well-established mechanism and a settled pattern of 
migration to these countries, the Committee fail to understand the logic behind the 
absence of an exigency window to cater to such problems. The Committee note that 
while restricting workers mobility, the Kafala system puts the workers at the mercy 
of Foreign employers with little scope to safeguard their rights. It was relieving to 
learn that in recent years, governments in some GCC countries have taken 
measures to reform the Kafala system to make it more institutionalized in order to 
protect the interest of workers. UAE has amended certain features of the 
sponsorship system whereby the professional employers and degree holders are 
permitted to change their sponsors after a certa in period. However, in practical 
terms, changing one ’s employer is still very difficult especially for the blue collar 
workers.  
Given the fact that the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) region comprises 
the bulk of India's expatriate migrant workers and contribute to more than half of 
our remittances, it is beyond comprehension that a trend of migration which is more 
or less well established since the past few decades has not drawn adequate policy 
attention of the Government and is being dealt with in an ad-hoc manner. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should forge an 
institutionalized arrangement with GCC countries delving upon the full spectrum of 
issues concerning our expatriate workers, their rights and safety.  
 (Recommendation No. 17) 

50 
 
2.82 The Committee note that the ongoing economic downturn in Gulf countries 
has adversely impacted the expatriate migrant workers leading to loss of jobs, 
premature termination of contracts, unpaid dues/salaries etc. Furthermore, there  
are instances where on 4 February, 2018 the UAE Government tried to impose a 
new restriction on all migrant workers asking them for producing a good conduct 
certificate. The Committee are happy to note that as a result of persistent efforts of 
MEA the matter has been deferred.  The Committee are also concerned to learn 
about a new stipulation imposed by the Kuwaiti Government which required that 
for renewal of their work permit, all engineers working in Kuwait have to sh ow that 
their degrees are recognized by the National Board of Accreditation. As a result, 
apparently, several hundred Indian engineers in their mid-40s and 50s are not goin g 
to get their work permit renewed.  
Recognizing the specificity of all these issues, the Committee understand the 
immense challenge before the Government of India in catering to the country-
specific problems being faced by the Indian workers. In order to deal with the 
recent situation in the Gulf region, the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
continue taking a two-pronged remedial measure of working in close coordin ation 
with the Gulf States and extending possible assistance to Indian nationals abroad 
with sincerity. As regards the issue of degree of Indian engineers working in 
Kuwait,  the Committee desire that instead of waiting for the Government to change 
their law, MEA in coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
should immediately issue a clarification and convey the same to the Government of 
Kuwait through the Kuwaiti Ambassador. The Committee may also be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER 3 
GENDER & MIGRATION 
During the migration process, women migrant workers often are at a disadvantage 
due to gender-specific factors and have different experiences by virtue of gender 
stereotypes of the role of women and the division of labour between the two sexes. The 
gender-based hierarchies that affect all women in general also handicap migrant women 
in particular, influencing job opportunities, work environment, and wages compared to 
their male counterparts. While migration can be a source of economic empowerment and 
progress for women migrants and their families, the existing system of migration poses 
many challenges for women who want to benefit from migration and the potential 
employment opportunities. Some of the possible consequences under this system are 
cases of physical violence, sexual abuse, withholding of passports, restrictions on 
mobility and communications and even death while trying to escape. 
3.2 On being asked, about the data regarding emigration of female workers to Gulf 
countries during the last five years the Ministry furnished the following details as under: 
Year Number of emigration of female 
workers to Gulf countries 
2013 21521 
2014 14962 
2015 1783 
2016 6076 
2017 (Up to 30th October, 2017) 3883 
 
3.3 In order to check the exploitation of female workers, the Ministry has made 
immigration clearance of all ECR female workers for overseas employment in ECR 
countries mandatory through six State-run agencies. In this regard, when the Ministry 
was asked to enumerate the effect of this move on putting a check on female workers 
exploitation, it submitted that since the order to make recruitment of female DSWs 
mandatorily through State Government RAs was issued only in August 2016, no study 
has been made to gauge the impact of this mechanism on exploitation of female workers.  

52 
 
3.4 Emphasizing the special attention given to female related migration problems, a 
Representative of MEA during the course of briefing on 11 April, 2017 submitted:-  
“We have special attention to women ’s issues. Particularly under the directions of 
hon. EAM we have taken a number of steps. Within the Susikshit Jao, Prasikshit 
Jao, we have a special campaign for the women who are going. As a result, there 
are special provisions for women who go abroad. These are very strictly being 
followed by the Ministry. For the first time, we have made it a condition that the 
female employees would only go through the State Governments and the six 
agencies that are already registered with us.”  
 
3.5 Regarding the steps taken by the Government of India to curb trafficking of 
women from India to Gulf countries, the Ministry in a written reply stated that the 
Government has put in place the following measures to regulate emigration of Indian 
women workers including Domestic Service Workers, holding ECR passports, for 
overseas employment in Gulf countries: 
a) Age restriction of 30 years has been made mandatory in respect of all women 
emigrants (Except Nurses) emigrating on ECR passports to ECR countries 
irrespective of nature/category of employment; 
b) In the case of direct recruitment, the Foreign Employer is required to deposit a 
Bank Guarantee equivalent to the US $2500 for recruiting each woman worker, in 
the respective Indian Mission.  
c) Embassy attestation has been made mandatory in respect of direct recruitment of 
all ECR passport holder women workers in respect of all ECR countries; 
d) With effect from June 2015, registration of foreign employers in the e-migrate 
system has been made mandatory; 
e) Since August, 2016, emigration clearance of all female workers having ECR 
passports, for overseas employment in 18 ECR countries has been made 
mandatory through six State-run recruiting agencies only. These are NORKA 
Roots and Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultants 
(ODEPC) of Kerala, Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd. (OMCL) of Tamil 
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC) of Uttar Pradesh, Overseas 
Manpower Company Andhra Pradesh Limited (OMCAP) of Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM) of Telangana.  
 
3.6 When asked about the specific problems of the female migrant workers, 
specifically the female domestic sector workers, the Ministry stated that the major 
problems of migrant workers, including female DSWs, as reported by the Missions are 

53 
 
ill-treatment and harassment; long working hours; false allegations or charges by local 
Sponsors to the Police authorities; non-provision of free food, improper arrangements for 
boarding and lodging and physical or mental harassment /assault, etc. 
3.7 Elaborating further on this point, the Representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs during the course of oral evidence on 18.7. 2018 stated:- 
“The subject of trafficking involves the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
and the Home Ministry and us.  But their role is far greater to prevent trafficking. 
We are in the picture once the people are trafficked and we have to get them back. 
So, that is the problem, but definitely, we are engaged with them in addressing this 
issue.  I think, on a monthly basis, three or four complaints I forward myself to the 
Director, CBI, because trafficking as a subject, is under the CBI manual. They have 
to take action against the agents. In many complaints of trafficking, they only give 
me a mobile number. I cannot track such an agent.  I have half-a-dozen mobile 
numbers within Delhi alone operating from different parts of Delhi who are doing 
trafficking but I am not able to catch them.” 
3.8 Domestic Service Workers (DSW) are the employees whose job is wholly or 
mainly to do domestic work in a dwelling that a house hold uses mainly to live in, and 
will include but not limited to, gardeners, drivers of motor-vehicles and people who take 
care of children, the aged, the sick and the disabled. 
3.9 The situation of domestic workers, in particular, the female domestic workers is 
the most vulnerable as the domestic workers are not covered by the extant labour laws in 
the GCC countries. The problem is acute w.r.t. women travelling on tourist visas and 
subsequently, getting these visas converted to housemaid/employment visas on arrival at 
the destination country. Taking this into account, the Ministry has made emigration 
clearance of all ECR female workers for overseas employment in 18 ECR countries 
mandatory through six State-run recruiting agencies, viz. NORKA Roots & ODEPC of 
Kerala, OMCL of Tamil Nadu, UPFC of Uttar Pradesh, OMCAP of Andhra Pradesh and 
TOMCOM of Telangana. Provision of Bank Guarantee of US $ 2500 is also compulsory.  
3.10 The nurses constitute another category of women migrant workers who face 
considerable problems in the Gulf Region. While giving testimony before the Committee 

54 
 
on 18th July 2018, the Foreign Secretary talked about the issue of complaints of rampan t 
corrupt practices in the recruitment of nurses. He submitted:- 
“The Government immediately stepped in and made emigration clearance 
mandatory for nurses as a category and restricted recruitment of Indian nurses 
only through the State Government recruiting agencies… this has brought in some 
restrictions on the travel of nurses, but it is the view of our Minister that rather 
than allowing exploitation and harassment of our women abroad, it is better that 
the system works in such a manner that every nurse, who travels, is safe there and 
we are able to look after her interest when she is overseas. Later on, recruitment 
of nurses was also permitted through private registered recruiting agencies, but 
with additional safeguards. Since June, 2015 till now, we have facilitated safe 
emigration of about 9,700 nurses to ECR countries. We are trying to see how best 
these numbers could increase, but with a caveat that we fully take care of their 
welfare and protection when they are overseas.  We do have some residual 
problems with Kuwait and we are trying to resolve them and we are in very active 
consultation with the Government of Kuwait in this matter.” 
3.11 Citing the example of the reluctance of Indian nurses working in Yemen to 
evacuate the country due to non-payment of salaries, the Committee during the Sitting on 
2 April, 2018 specifically prodded the Foreign Secretary about the measures taken. The 
Foreign Secretary submitted as under:- 
“On the issue of Kuwait, as we speak today, there are two batches of nurses – 600 
and another 58 nurses who went two years back illegally through the Dubai route.  
They still have not got their salaries.  They have been working with the Ministry of 
Health of Kuwait. So of the RAs who facilitated and who we came to know actually 
had some hand in sending them, we suspended their licences. These RAs had so 
much of influence that they went and spoke to the Ministry of Finance, Government 
of Kuwait and got the salaries released for six months.  This was last year.  Now, 
after those six months again they do not have a budget to pay these nurses.  So, in 
this kind of a situation, I cannot allow more nurses to go and they will be the first to 
tell us that they have not got their salaries for the next six months.  That is why we 
have put this temporary embargo.  Even as we speak, the Indian Mission is engaged 
to find out ways and means.  We do not want our nurses to lose jobs but, I would 
rather not send nurses there and get them into a position where they are calling for 
money from Kerala to survive.  So, even if 900 jobs go to the Philippines or 
Vietnam, I am not really agitated about it because it is a job loss for us but we want 
them safe.  That is my first and foremost obligation.” 

55 
 
3.12 The Committee observe that gender-based hierarchies that affect all women 
in general and migrant female workers in particular, expos es them to greater risks 
and exploitations which inter-alia includes physical violence, sexual abuse, 
restrictions on mobility and long working hours. In this regard, the plight of 
domestic service workers and nurses within the category of female emigrant 
workers are appalling and worrisome. Taking into account the acute problems of 
domestic service workers, the Ministry has made emigration clearance of all ECR 
female workers for overseas employment in 18 ECR countries mandatory through 
six State-run recruiting agencies, namely NORKA Roots & ODEPC of Kerala, 
OMCL of Tamil Nadu, UPFC of Uttar Pradesh, OMCAP of Andhra Pradesh and 
TOMCOM of Telangana. On the issue of non-payment of salaries of Indian nurses 
working in Yemen, the Ministry suspended the licenses of the Recruiting agency 
that facilitated their illegal migration. As per the data furnished by the Ministry, the 
number of female workers migrating to Gulf countries has diminished from 21, 521 
in 2013 to 6076 in 2016.  
The Committee note that the overall approach of the Government towards 
the problems confronting the female migrant workers has been largely dominated 
by ensuring their protection and safety. Such an approach, the Committee feel, 
might be a short-term solution which also tends to impact the opportunities for 
women migrants vis-à-vis their male counterparts. Due to the protectionist nature of 
the policy measures mentioned above, it is possible that women migrants may be 
resorting to illicit channels to migrate with increased costs and risks. In the 
Committee’s view, there is an urgent need for a gender-sensitive migration policy 
which takes into consideration the gender-specific concerns and risks. The lack of 
availability of sex-disaggregated data is another challenge that weakens the 
migration praxis framework. The Committee, therefore, would recommend that the 
Government should spell out a gender-sensitive migration policy based on sex-
disaggregated data with the larger objective of not only protecting but also 
empowering women with equal opportunities. Establishing a 24 x 7 women helpline 
in the Missions/Posts abroad can be a good starting point towards that direction. 
(Recommendation No.19) 

56 
 
CHAPTER 4 
INSTITUTIONAL & LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK  
The Indian expatriate is the largest expatriate community working in the Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) region. Although the migrant workers come from all 
community of labour- from white collar to blue collar workers to businessmen and 
professionals- most are unskilled and semi-skilled. With the prime objective of ensuring 
safe migration of Indians abroad, reduce complaints in Missions/Posts and to prevent 
exploitation of Indian emigrant workers, the Government of India has established a 
robust institutional and administrative structure.  
4.2 While briefing the Committee on the efforts made for safeguarding the interests of 
migrant workers, the Foreign Secretary during evidence on 18 July, 2018 submitted as 
under:-  
“The Ministry of External Affairs is engaged in a very holistic manner in addressing 
the issues of welfare, protection, safety, and security of not only our workers but all 
the entire overseas Indian community, which comes to about 31.2 million all over 
the world. Out of this, approximately, 13 million are our citizens.” 
I. INSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK 
4.3 A series of initiatives have been taken by the Government of India to provide 
safe, regular and legal migration to migrant workers. As per the Ministry, the government 
is working in close coordination with foreign governments to address concerns related to 
the employment and welfare of Indian workers.  Immediately on receipt of such 
complaints, the same are addressed by Indian Missions by taking them up with the 
concerned foreign authorities. The government has also sensitized the State governments 
to inform the returnee workers about their resettlement programmes and financial support 
schemes and stands ready to work closely with the State governments in this regard. 
4.4 The Ministry also stated that various initiatives taken by the Ministry for welfare 
and protection of Indian migrant ’s workers abroad have been largely successful in 
ensuring their welfare. The Ministry/Missions are constantly in contact with the foreign 
governments to further strengthen mechanism to safeguard the interest of our workers.  

57 
 
4.5 Consular offices and diplomats posted abroad play a key role in protecting the 
rights of the migrant workers. On being asked about the existence of a system in 
Missions/Posts abroad to take feedback from the workers, the Ministry answered that 
Missions organize ‘Open Houses’ to address any labour/consular issue and other welfare 
matter of the Indian community. Interaction with the Indian community by Mission 
officers also provides valuable feedback on various relevant issues. 
4.6 The Committee further enquired that the mechanism for coordination between 
Missions/Posts and various Indian community organizations in the Gulf. The Ministry in 
a written reply stated that there are various Indian community organizations in the Gulf 
working in close association with our Missions. There are several registered and non-
registered Indian associations/Community organizations in Gulf countries particularly in 
UAE representing various states and various communities across India. These 
organizations conduct various social, cultural, religious and economic activities 
throughout the year for the Indian community. The Mission/Post Officials attend these 
events and provide support for their activities. Indian Business/Professional Group 
(IBPG) and The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) represent the 
professional Indian community in UAE and organize various seminars, workshops, and 
events providing a platform to discuss various issues related to the Indian community and 
its workers. These organizations also provide volunteers for completing the procedural 
formalities for the Transportation of Mortal Remains of deceased Indian workers. They 
also bring to the notice of the Mission/Post various cases of Indian workers who need the 
help of the Mission/Post for resolving their issues. They also approach various companies 
and Corporations to provide necessary assistance (mainly financial) to deserving cases of 
Indians through their CSR activities.  They also participate in the Awareness Camps 
conducted by IWRC in the labour camps for Indian workers.  In Qatar, the Indian 
Community Benevolent Forum (ICBF) a charitable organization of Indian expatriates 
supplements the Embassy ’s efforts.  The organization is supported by various Indian 
cultural organizations, schools, companies and professional bodies. In Oman, the Mission 
and Indian Social Club (which is the only recognized Indian Community Association) 
work together to help Indian citizens in distress.  Indian Associations are also active in 
other GCC countries namely Bahrain, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. 

58 
 
A.  Specific Initiatives/Programmes 
 (i) E-Migrate Project 
4.7 The Ministry stated that in order to effectively deal with the different types of 
complaints received from Indian emigrants from time to time, the Government had taken 
an initiative to make the emigration process totally transparent. Based on this thinking, 
the e-Migrate project was rolled out FOR ALL 10 Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices. 
E-Migrate provides MEA, a comprehensive and online database of emigrants, Recruiting 
Agents, Foreign Employers to make the whole emigration cycle faster and authentication 
of credentials of above-mentioned stakeholders quicker. The comprehensive database 
also detects any foreign employers with complaint cases pending against them and alerts 
POE officials at the time of clearances of new recruitment for such foreign employers. 
4.8 Emigration clearance (EC) was started through e-Migrate system w.e.f. 
25th September 2014. Till date, 19, 82, 467 ECs have been granted through the portal. 
Foreign Employer (FE) registration has also been mandatory under an eMigrate system in 
a phased manner with effect from 1 st June 2015 and since 1 st Oct 2015 all new demands 
for recruitment being submitted through FEs online only. As on 31.10.2017, a total of 
121852 FEs are registered on e-Migrate. 
4.9 Providing a detailed note on the manner in which e Migrate has streamlined 
emigration, the Ministry in written reply stated that 100% paperless emigration clearance 
for ECR passport holder Indian workers for overseas employment at PoE offices has been 
started under the e-Migrate system. About 20.00 lakh emigrants have been granted 
emigration clearance for overseas employment during the last three years through e-
Migrate. This has brought about e-governance, transparency and faster processing of 
Emigration Clearance. No emigrant is now required to visit the PoE offices as EC 
application/processing and approval is given on-line.EC process has become transparent 
and every RA can track the progress of his case on-line, without having to visit POE 
/PGE offices. 
4.10 The Ministry further stated that eMigrate is being managed by one of the best IT 
service providers in India namely TCS.  On an average, daily around 1800 applications 

59 
 
are submitted online by recruiting agents and individuals for ECs and around 1700 
emigration clearance are given by the 10 PoEs daily, across the 10 offices all over India. 
E-migrate being integrated with Passport Sewa Project and the BOI Servers, immigration 
at the airports is now smoother for those travelling with proper EC.  
4.11  The Ministry stated that initially there were reports of slowness in the system, 
which has also been overcome through improvements in the software application system. 
The cumbersome processes experienced by RAs/FEs in 2015 have also been addressed, 
based on a “Simplification Committee’s” recommendations in Jan-Feb 2016. Through a 
helpdesk, TCS addresses technical problems faced by the users for on-line redressal. 
4.12 Illustrating further on the way in which e-migrate has ensured accountability of 
the Recruiting Agents and Foreign employers, the Ministry stated that FE registration has 
also been mandatory under e-Migrate system in a phased manner with effect from 
1st June 2015 and since 1 st Oct 2015, all new demands for recruitment are being 
submitted by FEs online only. As on 31 st October 2017, a total of 1, 20, 101 Foreign 
Employers (FEs) have registered on e-Migrate for recruiting Indian workers.  There has 
been a significant increase in the number of FEs registered, which bears a testimony of 
FEs’ preference for recruiting Indian workers online through the e-Migrate portal as well 
as the ease of raising demand online, selection of Recruiting Agent and transparency 
provided in the recruitment process by e-Migrate.   
4.13 A country-wise statement showing registration of Foreign Employers in the six 
Gulf Countries as on 31.10.2017 on e-Migrate is given below: 
Name of countries Number of Foreign Employers registered  Total 
2015 2016 2017 
United Arab Emirates 12390 16550 8629 37569 
Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia 
3131 14954 8636 26721 
Oman 545 1075 437 2057 
Qatar 1801 3835 2650 8286 
Kuwait 5631 24535 11627 41793 
Bahrain 542 1891 1242 3675 
Total 24040 62840 33221 120101 
 

60 
 
4.14 Emphasizing the efficacy of the e-migrate system, a representative of the Ministry 
of External Affairs during evidence on 18 July, 2018 submitted:- 
“In our e-migrate system, which I have just now mentioned, PG has an online 
facility to monitor the activities of foreign employers and recruitment agents and 
take immediate remedial measures. We are also, on the e-migrate site itself, giving 
the list of those unscrupulous agents that have come to our notice, either here or 
abroad. Our overseas embassies are also in the loop so that they also get to know as 
to how many people are travelling from India to these respective countries. As and 
when the problem arises overseas, then they are able to immediately contact these 
workers at their work premises through their employers who are also registered 
with us through this system. We are continuously trying to improve both, the 
system as well as the process that govern the entire migration cycle.” 
4.15 He further added:-  
 “As regards apprehensions being expressed by some of the Gulf countries about 
the acceptance of e-migrate as a portal and whether they want to do business 
through e-migrate, the very fact that today we have almost 1,50,000 foreign 
employers registered on the e-migrate willingly and verified by our Missions.  This 
number is growing every day.  So, it is indeed heartening to see that the number is 
growing. …whenever we have had the Joint Working Gro up meetings in these 
countries, we have given them a presentation, addressed their apprehensions and 
now, in fact, the position is reversed.  Now Saudi Government has expressed its 
desire to integrate their electronic system with ours which is almost 95 percent 
complete and it is going to be rolled out very soon.  We already have a request from 
UAE and Bahrain that they would like to integrate their electronic systems for the 
visa verification process and safe migration.  So that is a testimony of the success of 
e-migrate.  Their apprehensions have been fully addressed in all the GCC 
countries.”   
(ii) Indian Worker Resource Centres (IWRCs):   
4.16 Indian Worker Resource Centres (IWRCs) have been setup that provides guidance 
and counseling on all matters pertaining to overseas Indian workers. IWRCs in Dubai and 
Sharjah (UAE), Riyadh and Jeddah (Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) are 
already functional. 
4.17 The IWRCs offer free legal, psychological and financial counseling to distressed 
Indians and also organize awareness campaigns at prominent camp sites to educate the 
workers.  A 24x7 multilingual toll-free helpline at IWRCs is operational to provide 

61 
 
assistance to Indians in need.  They also document the feedback received from the callers 
who had availed their services. Missions/Posts receive acknowledgement emails/letters 
from the workers who were helped and safely repatriated to India by the Mission/Post. 
 
(iii) MADAD portal  
4.18 The ‘MADAD’ portal, an important initiative of the Ministry, is an effort to 
extend a helping hand to Indians abroad requiring consular assistance. It enables online 
logging and tracking of grievances including by emigrant workers and their family 
members. As of now, 26,918 grievances have been registered on the portal and 21,245 
grievances have been resolved so far.   
4.19 When asked about the Pravasi Bhartiya Sahayata Kendra (the new name given to 
OWRC and IWRCs) Grievances, the representatives of the Ministry of Eternal Affairs 
during the evidence on 18 July, 2018 stated:-  
“Pravasi Bhartiya Sahayata Kendra  Grievances, actually it is a route, through 
which MADAD portal gives complaints to e-migrate.  The PBSK is a call centre 
working 24*7 … Each complaint gets translated into a grievance number, which is 
monitored.  The emigrants who file the complaint or calls up in any of the 7 or 8 
languages in which we operate, is monitored and is updated online, so the person 
who has filed the complaint gets an update immediately on his e-mail or on his 
mobile number which he has shared to enable him to know what is the status of his 
complaint today. All he has to do is, enter the grievance number and he gets the 
information.…Sometimes there are mortal remains cases, there are sometimes 
insurance cases to be settled, whatever be the nature of the complaint, if it is 
employment-related, we are into it, including even illegal agents, where the 
complaint is passed on to the State Government police. These 900 odd complaints is 
the only tip of the iceberg because there are many cases where the police receive the 
complaint directly and they are acting on it.  We have collected all this data, put it 
on our website so much so that people are seeing our website and saying that their 
name is on the website as illegal agent and they request that their names be removed 
from the website because they are not illegal agents.  So, I call them to prove their 
credentials or meet the police men and tell us as to why his name should be 
removed from the website. Similarly, on the issue of foreign employers who are 
misbehaving, we are updating that list every day. We are taking action on the 
complaints who says that a particular foreign employer is misbehaving, or he did 
not pay his salaries, or he beat him up or lock him up.  We are blacklisting such 
employers and many of the foreign employers come back and say that they made 

62 
 
these mistakes and they have taken care of those people. They request us for their 
restoration in e-migrate. It gives us a very hand on a tool to take action against the 
employer as well as the recruiting agents.” 
(iv) Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF)  
4.20 The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), set up in 2009, is aimed at 
assisting Indian nationals abroad in times of distress and emergency in the most 
deserving cases on a means-tested basis. ICWF stands extended to all Indian Missions 
and Posts abroad and is primarily funded by levying service charge on various consular 
services rendered by Indian Missions and Posts abroad.  
4.21 Recently, the ICWF guidelines have been made broad-based and the scope of 
welfare measures that can be extended through the Fund has been further expanded with 
the approval of the Union Cabinet. The revised guidelines have become effective w.e.f. 
September 1, 2017. The guidelines cover three key areas namely Assisting Overseas 
Indian nationals in distress situations, Community Welfare activities, and Improvement in 
Consular services. They are expected to provide Indian Missions and Posts abroad greater 
flexibility in swiftly addressing to requests for assistance by Overseas Indian nationals. 
4.22 Elaborating upon the revamping of ICWF, a representative of the Ministry of 
External Affairs during evidence on 22.11.2 017 submitted:- 
“The logic of revising ICWF was that we saw there were limitations on the figures 
that are the amounts of assistance to the needy. So, we have enhanced that. 
Secondly, we did not have any provisions to help the community organisations that 
have been proactively helping to resolve the issues of distressed labour and 
workers. Thirdly, the visa, passport and consular wings of our Missions at many 
locations were not really appropriately geared to serve the people. So, we have 
covered them so that they can assist our people better. We also brought the student 
community which is also an important part of the overseas Indian community under 
the ambit of the ICWF. We have streamlined the assistance to be provided, and 
finally, the most important aspect is that we have delegated considerable powers to 
our Missions and the Consul General and Ambassadors so that they don ’t have to 
refer the smallest of the matters to the Ministry.” 
 
4.23 The Indian Community Welfare Fund  ( ICWF) stands extended to all Indian 
Missions and Posts abroad and is primarily funded by levying service charge on various 

63 
 
consular services rendered by Indian Missions and Posts abroad.  The revised guidelines 
of ICWF have become operational with the approval of Cabinet w.e.f. September 1, 2017, 
with the objective of further strengthening welfare and protection of Overseas Indians 
and enhancing its engagement with the increasing Overseas Indian community. ICWF is 
largely funded by levying service charge on Consular & Visa service rendered by the 
Mission. 
4.24 Providing details about the activities for which ICWF funds were used, the 
Ministry stated that a major part of ICWF utilization is in the Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) countries in West Asia, North Africa and South East Asia that are home to a large 
number of temporary Indian migrant workers. Around three-quarters of the ICWF 
expenditure is towards air passage to stranded Indians, boarding & lodging and 
transportation of mortal remains/ burials. Over 80% of the utilization of the Fund is in 
Africa and Asia.  
4.25 The Ministry further added that apart from assisting Indian nationals in distress 
abroad, ICWF has been a critical support in the emergency evacuation of Indian nationals 
in conflict zones i.e. in Libya Iraq Yemen and recently in South Sudan. It has also been 
extensively used in other challenging situations like assistance extended to undocumented 
Indian workers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia during the Amnesty drive ( Nitaqat) in 
2013 and Amnesty drive in 2017.  The scale and speed of these evacuations and 
assistance rendered through the Fund have been universally appreciated. It has also 
created a sense of confidence among the migrant workers going overseas about the 
support they can expect from India during critical times. 
4.26 When asked about the fund's disbursal mechanisms of ICWF, the Ministry 
submitted that ICWF is primarily funded by levying service charge on various consular 
services rendered by Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The Fund has become self-
sustaining and no separate budgetary support of the Government of India is needed at 
present. It has become a viable option for extending assistance to distressed Indian 
nationals abroad in the most deserving cases on a means-tested basis. 
 
 

64 
 
 (v) Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC)  
4.27 The multi-lingual 24X7 Helpline of Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) 
provides information and guidance on all matters and problems pertaining to overseas 
employment of Indian nationals. Migrant Resource Centres are also functional in Kochi, 
Hyderabad Gurugram, Chennai, and Lucknow. 
(vi) Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY)  
4.28 The Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is a mandatory insurance scheme for 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR countries for 
overseas employment. The Scheme, launched in 2003 with successive revisions in 2006, 
2008 and more recently in 2017, is aimed at strengthening the welfare and protection of 
Indian workers.   
4.29 The strengthened PBBY, effective from August 1, 2017, is a major milestone in 
broadening the scope and ensuring the effective implementation of the scheme. When 
asked about the status of revamping of the Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY)  the 
Ministry stated that it has been revamped and strengthened further to make it more 
beneficial to ECR category workers going to 18 ECR countries. The revised Scheme has 
become effective from August 1, 2017. The Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY)  is a 
mandatory scheme and provides an insurance cover of Rs. 10 lakhs in case of death or 
permanent disability and a few other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of Rs. 275 
and Rs. 375 for a period of two and three years respectively. 
4.30 As per the information furnished by the Ministry the salient provisions of the 
strengthened scheme are as follows: 
a) The maximum sum for which insured under the Scheme is Rs.10 lakhs in the 
event of accidental death or permanent disability leading to loss of employment 
while in employment abroad, irrespective of change of employer/location of the 
insured person. 
b) Certification of accidental death or permanent disability by Indian Missions and 
Posts abroad shall be accepted by the insurance companies.  
c) Medical insurance cover including injuries/ sickness/ ailment/ diseases has been 
enhanced to Rs.1, 00,000/- (up to Rs.50,000 per hospitalization) 

65 
 
d)  Repatriation cover for medically unfit/premature termination of employment: 
Actual one-way economy class air fare to the nearest International airport in 
India.  
e) Family Hospitalization in India up to Rs.50,000/- 
f) Maternity benefit to women emigrants up to Rs.35,000/- 
g) Return economy class air fare to the nearest international airport attendant in case 
of emigrant’s accidental death or permanent disability. 
h) Legal expenses on litigation related to emigrant ’s overseas employment up to 
Rs.45,000/- 
i) Provision for Online renewal of PBBY policy. 
 
4.31 Adding further, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs during oral 
evidence submitted as under:-  
“Scheme provides global coverage for a sum of Rs. 10 lakh in cases of 
accidental death and permanent disability and has provisions for renewal of the 
Scheme online, acceptance of certification of accidents by Indian Missions and 
Posts abroad and enhancements in limits related to hospitalisation and legal 
cover.” 
4.32 As per the Ministry the various issues faced in implementation viz scope of 
coverage, no information to nominees, no facility for on-line renewal and difficulty in the 
certification of accidental death/permanent disability while in employment aboard have 
been comprehensively addressed in consultation with all stake holders.  
4.33 Presently, PBBY provides an insurance cover of 10 lakhs in case of accidental 
death or permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of 
Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of two/three years. The scheme also provides for global 
coverage irrespective of employer and location and has a facility for online renewal. With 
enabling provisions for certification of accidental death/permanent disability by Indian 
Missions and Posts abroad in the new scheme, the realization of compensation claims has 
become a swift and hassle-free process. The revised scheme is simpler and more 
beneficial for emigrant workers and is aimed at ensuring an expeditious settlement of 
claims.  
 

66 
 
4.34 The Committee observe that extensive measures have been taken by the 
Government to safeguard and protect the welfare of our workers migrating to the 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) region. These range from initiating specific 
schemes & projects like e-Migrate, MADAD portal, Indian Community Welfare 
Fund (ICWF), Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRCs) etc to extending 
outreach to State Governments and addressing issue-specific challenges during the 
three phases of migration cycle. Although these efforts are praiseworthy, they have 
not been able to alleviate the plight of our migrant workers. Of course, MADAD is a 
unique experiment of providing a single-window grievance redressal system for 
migrants but it still needs to be strengthened in view of the complaints that are 
getting registered.  
The Committee note that as the first point of contact between the aggrieved 
worker and the Government of India, the Missions/Posts abroad play a central role 
in protecting emigrants. The Ministry has informed that there are several registered 
and non-registered Indian associations in Gulf countries that act as effective 
mechanisms for coordination between Missions/Posts and various Indian 
community organizations in the Gulf.  
The Committee are of the view that as a vulnerable section of our expatriate 
community, the migrant workers should be made the focal point of our policy 
response. The efforts and policies of the Government not only appear fragmentar y 
and piecemeal but also lack adequate coordinating mechanism between various 
stakeholders such as the Missions/Posts, Recruiting Agents, Foreign Employers, 
country of destination and the migrant workers. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Government should develop a comprehensive and multi-
pronged approach to advocacy targeting the Gulf governments, employers, 
recruitment agencies and the Diaspora. Adopting a more pro-active approach to 
migrant workers would not only safeguard India ’s economic interests but also 
cement a mutual partnership with the Gulf States and cultivate India’s soft power in 
the region.  
(Recommendation No. 20) 

67 
 
4.35 The Government has rolled out the e-Migrate Project for all 10 Protector of 
Emigrants (PoE) offices since September, 2014. The Committee note that by 
providing a comprehensive and online database of emigrants, Recruiting Agents 
Foreign Employers, the e-Migrate Project has made the emigration cycle faster and 
authentication of above-mentioned stakeholders quicker. Furthermore, the 
Committee observe that the integration of e-Migrate with Passport Sewa Project of 
the Ministry of External Affairs and Bureau of Immigration servers of MHA has led 
to great validation of passport details of ECR category workers and curbing 
malpractices and data entry errors. The Committee were pleased to learn that 
apprehensions of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries are being addressed 
and the latter has shown willingness to integrate their system with e-Migrate.  
The Committee feel that e-Migrate Project has streamlined the entire 
emigration process and has brought about transparency, e-governance and faster 
processing of Emigration Clearance. For the e-Migrate system to be holistic its 
integration with GCC countries is requisite and therefore, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should win the confidence of GCC countries and persuade them to 
integrate their system with e-Migrate so that the database is not only comprehensive 
but also well integrated.  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
4.36 The Committee note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), 
created in 2009 with the aim of assisting overseas Indian nationals in times of 
emergency and distress, has been recently revised. The revised ICWF guidelines 
have expanded the scope of welfare measures by covering three key areas n amely 
Assisting Overseas Indian nationals in distress situations, Community Welfare 
activities, and improvement in consular services. Provisions have also been made to 
support distressed Non-Resident Indian women in need under the revised ICWF 
guidelines. The Ministry has stated that ICWF is largely funded by levying service 
charge on Consular & Visa services rendered by the Mission.  
While appreciating the intent of the Government behind setting up this fund 
to financially support the Overseas Indian community during emergency and 

68 
 
distress situation on a means-tested basis, the Committee are of the strong opinion 
that mere creation of a fund without the availability of adequate finances can prove 
ineffective in dealing with the challenges faced by Indians abroad. The revised 
ICWF guidelines have expanded the outreach and scope of financial assistance, 
however, funds allocation does not commensurate with the expanding areas. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should assess the 
financial modalities of the expansive coverage of areas under the ICWF and 
accordingly seek budgetary support so that larger number of Overseas Indians can 
be provided with financial aids during times of need.  
(Recommendation No.22) 
4.37 Launched in 2003 with successive revisions in 2006, 2008 and 2017, the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana  is a mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category workers going to 18 ECR countries for overseas 
employment. After the revamping of PBBY in 2017 there is a provision of an 
insurance cover of Rs. 10 lakh in cases of accidental death and permanent disabili ty 
and some other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of Rs. 275/ Rs.375 for a 
period of two/three years. The Committee also observe that the various issues in the 
implementation of this scheme such as the scope of coverage, no information to 
nominees, no facility for online renewal and difficulty in the certification of 
accidental death/permanent disability have been comprehensively addressed by the 
Ministry in consultation with all stakeholders. Given the fact that migration to GCC 
countries is temporary in nature, social security of the workers requires adequate 
attention. In this regard, the Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY)  with it recent 
revamping is a step in the right direction. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should explore the possibility of a wider social security net for migrant workers in 
consultation and collaboration with foreign employers.  
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
 

69 
 
B. Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
4.38 The number of persons going abroad for employment has increased rapidly over 
the last few years. However, complaints received from emigrants about malpractices by 
employers and intermediaries. Most of the complaints are addressed by the Indian 
Missions by taking them up with the concerned local authorities.  Complaints pertaining 
to employment are taken up by the Indian Missions with the concerned foreign 
employer/Labour officials in that country.  
4.39  The Ministry enumerated that the following general practices prevalent in the 
Mission/Posts abroad for reducing complaints:- 
a) Attestation by the Missions/Posts abroad: As a precautionary measure, MEA has 
advised all Indian Missions/Posts abroad not to attest any Work Agreement of 
Indian women workers holding Emigration Check Required (ECR) category of 
Passports below the age of 30 years who seeks any kind of employment in Gulf 
countries to prevent them from emigrating.   
b) Bank Guarantee: In case of direct recruitment, the Foreign Employer is required to 
deposit a Bank Guarantee equivalent to the US $2500 for recruiting each woman 
worker holding ECR category Passport, in the respective Indian Mission.  This is to 
safeguard female emigrant’s welfare and to protect their interests. 
 c) Verification of Foreign Employers: The FEs are registered in the e-Migrate system 
thus enabling them to generate demands for recruitment only after the Mission/Post 
abroad is satisfied with their antecedents.  
 d) Minimum Referral Wages (MRWs): Based on the recommendations of all Indian 
Missions/Posts in the ECR countries, the Government had fixed the MRWs for 
different job categories for different countries so as to avoid any complaints of 
lower wages being offered by the FEs. The Government is in the process of 
reviewing the MRWs based on the prevailing salary structures in those countries. 
e) Job Contract: The e-Migrate system has ensured that a well laid down job Contract 
between the employer and the employee is signed.  
 

70 
 
4.40 Elaborating upon the grievance redressal system available at the level of 
Missions/Posts for the problems of the Indian workers in the Gulf countries, the Ministry 
said that the grievances/complaints received by the Missions/Posts from Indian workers 
are appropriately taken up on a case-by-case basis with the employers/local authorities 
for early redressal/resolution. Most of the cases get settled amicably by negotiating with 
the employers and if there is no settlement even after that, the matter is taken up with the 
local foreign office, labour courts etc.            
4.41 The Ministry also informed that various facilities are arranged by the 
Missions/Posts for providing all the required assistance to the workers. Round the clock 
facilities are available for immediate contact of officials. The Missions/Posts has an 
arrangement of ‘Open House’ for all Indian nationals to meet the concerned officials to 
address their grievances. The direct contact details of officials of the Missions/Posts are 
given on their website.  
 
4.42 In addition, a series of information, educative and preventive measures have been 
adopted in India and the Missions/Posts which are implemented by the Missions/Posts to 
create awareness and to provide assistance in the time of distress to Indians. These 
measures include prior vetting & attestation of employment documents through eMigrate, 
enforcement of Emigration Clearance at the point of entry and ensuring minimum referral  
wage for employment of different categories of unskilled and semi-skilled workers. The 
online grievance redressal system, MADAD has been dynamically handled by the 
Missions/Posts by checking each and every cases registered and effectivel y providing 
necessary feedbacks.  
4.43 Grievances related to Overseas Employment in notified Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) countries including Gulf countries, can also be logged in directly by 
emigrants/relatives or through the Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) on the 
eMigrate portal. These grievances are settled by respective jurisdictional Protectors of 
Emigrants (PoEs) as per laid down procedures. Missions in Gulf countries also conduct 
Open Houses on a regular basis where workers can seek redressal of their grievances. 

71 
 
Missions in Gulf countries have also established 24x7 helplines and Toll-Free help lines 
for the benefit of Indian workers to seek help. 
4.44 Indian Workers Resource Centres (IWRCs) have been set up at Dubai and 
Sharjah (UAE), Riyadh and Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia), to provide guidance and counselling on all matters pertaining to overseas 
Indian workers. Migrant Resource Centres have also been setup in Delhi, Kochi, 
Hyderabad, Chennai and Lucknow to assist emigrants or their relatives to redress their 
problems/complaints regarding overseas employment.   
4.45 The Ministry has informed that the grievances received by the Missions/Post 
abroad from Indian workers are appropriately taken up on case to case basis with 
the employees/local authorities for redressal. The Committee observe that well-
established procedures have been established to handle recruitment related 
complaints against registered Recruitment Agents, unregistered Recruitment 
Agents, and Foreign Employers. In order to provide redressal of the grievances, 
series of measures, viz, MADAD portal, attestation by the Missions/Posts abroad, 
verification of foreign employers, fixation of Minimum Referral Wages, job 
contract, Overseas Workers Resource Centre and others have been initiated by the 
Government.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the existence of numerous grievance 
redressal mechanisms makes it a cumbersome and painstaking process for the 
already aggrieved migrant worker and their families. The MADAD portal and its 
Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra  represent a qualitative improvement over the 
existing procedure for handling of consular grievances through online forwarding 
tracking and escalation. However, the Government should establish a concrete 
channel for remedies and redressal, including fixing of a timeline and in form the 
migrant workers about the same through media campaigns and pre-departure 
training. 
 (Recommendation No. 24) 
 

72 
 
C. Media Awareness Campaigns 
4.46  The Ministry has also undertaken a media campaign on “Safe & Legal Migration 
of Workers for Overseas Employment to Gulf Countries” on television and radio in Hindi 
and 8 regional languages, throughout the country particularly in states from which a large 
number of migrant workers are proceeding for overseas employment. The campaign has 
also been undertaken through media platforms of the Ministry and our Indian Missions 
and Consulates, particularly those in the Gulf countries. The State Governments have also 
been requested to broadcast these advertisements. 
4.47 The Ministry launched a media campaign on safe and legal migration of workers 
for overseas employment to Gulf countries called Surakshit Jaao, Prashikshit Jaao on 
television as well as radio, in Hindi as well as in regional languages throughout the 
country. The campaign focuses on the States from which a large number of migrant 
workers are proceeding for overseas employment.  
4.48 The Government has launched a campaign for ‘Prashikshit Jao, Surakshit Jao ’. 
Illustrating the impact of this campaign on the ground, the Ministry stated that with the 
campaign message of Prashikshit Jao, Surakshit Jao ’, MEA is making endeavours for 
safe and orderly migration of workers with an enhanced skills set.  This has been 
extremely useful in creating awareness among the Indian emigrant workers.  
4.49 Explaining the relevance of awareness, the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs during oral evidence on 18 July, 2018 submitted as under:-  
“Creating necessary awareness has been a very important aspect of our work, and 
we have launched a campaign for a safe and legal migration. Our slogan is 
‘Surakshit Jao, Parishikshit Jao, Vishwas Ke Saath Jao ’. It is because if our people 
feel confident that India can take care of them, then they will work better; more 
efficiency will be there, and they will also voluntarily contact the Embassies and 
Consulates whenever they are in distress. The campaign has been run on TV and 
radio not only in Hindi, but also in regional languages. We do plan to further 
strengthen this campaign so that more people are aware that they have to take 
certain precautions before they go overseas for work.” 
4.50 When asked about the feasibility of setting up an information desk at immigration 
counters in the airports, a representative of MEA during on 18 July, 2018 submitted as 
under:-  

73 
 
“The Ministry has accorded important priority to outreach with State governments, 
the wider public, and Indians abroad.  The Ministry is working in close coordination 
with State governments. As part of Videsh Samapark  Series, the Ministry has 
organized State Outreach Programmes in Hyderabad (13 May 2017), Mumbai (28 
Aug 2017) and Thiruvananthapuram (13 September 2017) in collaboration with 
respective State Governments for generating awareness among the states on issues 
relating to overseas Indians, consular and passport services, grievance redressal, 
skilling and welfare and protection of overseas Indians. The India Centre for 
Migration that serves as a research think-tank of the Ministry on all matters related 
to international migration has conducted follow up workshops on pre-departure 
orientation and safe and legal migration in partnership with State governments in 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.”   
4.51 The Committee note that in order to create awareness about safe and legal  
migration, the Government has launched a campaign ‘Prashikshit Jao, Surakshit 
Jao’ on television and radio in Hindi and eight regional languages throughout the 
country and particularly in the major labour exporting Indian states. Further, 
during the Ministerial level meetings with the NRI Ministers of State Governments, 
the Ministry provides booklets and CDs in regional languages for wider circulation 
and dispension. The awareness campaigns are being rolled out on Doordarshan, FM 
Gold as well as Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha channels. However, the Committee are 
dismayed to note the real effect of the awareness campaign in print and electron ic 
media. The Committee are surprised that blue collar migrant workers are expected 
to watch Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Television. The Committee are apprised that 
the Ministry has been provided with a budget for a media campaign through OEPG 
and OIA Division. The Ministry requires more budget to vigorously roll out this 
campaign.  Further, the Committee are astonished to note that till now the Ministry 
has not initiated any help desk at the Airports.  
In light of the fact the ECR category migrant workers are ones with low 
levels of education and skill, creating necessary awareness among them through 
simpler and accessible channel becomes a pre-requisite to protect their righ ts and 
interests, both in the country of origin and destination. The Committee are 
dissatisfied with the efforts made by Government in this regard. The Government of 
India is strongly recommended to carry out multi-media awareness campaigns to 
educate intending emigrants about emigration procedures, pitfalls of illegal 

74 
 
migration, various welfare schemes, and grievance redressal mechanisms. While 
doing so, the Committee urge the Government to specifically focus on those states 
where problems of Migrant Workers are dominant. The Government should also 
establish Migrant Help Desks at all immigration counters at airports and provide 
the migrant workers with a comprehensive manual on everything related to safe and 
legal migration. The Committee further desire that adequate budgetary support 
should be provided for these activities. The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard.       
 (Recommendation No. 25) 
II. LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK 
4.52 The process of emigration by ECR category emigrants is regulated under the 
Emigration Act 1983 which is administered by the Ministry of External Affairs. The 
Protector General of Emigrants enforces the Act with the help of 10 offices of the 
Protector of Emigrants (POE).  In order to safeguard the interests of Indian nationals 
working abroad, the Emigration Act, 1983 requires all workers seeking contractual 
employment abroad to obtain emigration clearance from any of the ten Offices of the 
Protectors of Emigrants (POE ’s) located at Chandigarh, Cochin, Chennai, Delhi, Jaipur, 
Hyderabad, Mumbai, Kolkata, Raebareli and Trivandrum. The Act also mandates that no 
agency/establishment can undertake recruitment of Indians for employment abroad 
without obtaining registration from the Protector General of Emigrants, Ministry of 
External Affairs, Government of India. 
4.53 Over the past few years, the Committee have expressed serious concerns about 
the prolonged delay in the introduction of the draft Emigration Management Bill. 
Successive Foreign Secretaries and former Secretaries of the erstwhile MOIA have 
repeatedly assured the Committee about the earliest introduction of such Bill.  
4.54 This Ministry has informed that it is working towards drafting an Emigration 
Management Bill taking into account the considerable changes in migration landscape 
and in the migration pattern of workers proceeding for overseas employment so that it 
helps in evolving a comprehensive emigration management framework. The overarching 

75 
 
objective is to streamline management of migration from India. The Ministry has already 
set up a Committee comprising representatives of concerned Ministries towards this end. 
One year extension has been taken from the Committee on Government Assurances in 
this regard. The new Bill is expected to strengthen the regulatory framework already in 
place under the Emigration Act, 1983. Alongside, a number of initiatives have already 
been taken such as e-migrate, Online MADAD platform, Indian Community Welfare 
Fund (ICWF), Indian Worker Resource Centres (IWRC), help-lines, and launch of 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) to provide skills training to migrant workers.  
4.55 Regarding the challenges faced in finalizing the draft Emigration Bill, the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs during a briefing on 11 April, 2018 
stated:-  
“Sir, you have repeatedly expressed your concern, and I would like to assure the 
Committee that MEA is extremely keen to present this Bill as early as possible. We 
have held four meetings of this Committee. We are also hoping that a Consultant -- 
who will actually draft the Bill -- will soon join us because while the Bill is awaited, 
we have not stopped revamping the systems, and we have not stopped plugging the 
loopholes in this entire scheme of things where we want to provide protection. In 
fact, many new and innovative initiatives have been introduced during this period, 
and we will see to it that these are all eventually incorporated in the new Emigration 
Management Act.” 
4.56  Apprising the Committee about the latest status of the Bill, a representative of the 
Ministry during the concluding evidence on 2 August 2018 made the following 
submission:- 
“With regard to the Emigration Management Bill of which the Standing Committee 
has been seized, as we have informed the Standing Committee, a Committee had 
been constituted. It has already had four meetings to undertake a comprehensive 
examination of the environment management framework. Consultation with 
stakeholders is taking place. A consultant has now been recruited to assist the 
drafting of this Bill. The terms of reference include inter alia a review of the 
existing Emigration Act of 1983, the stocktaking of existing administrative 
frameworks in emigration, consultation with stakeholders and preparation of an 
implementation plan. We are hoping that the initial draft will be prepared in the 
coming weeks.” 

76 
 
4.57 The Committee observe that the process of emigration by Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) category workers is presently regulated under the Emigration Act, 
1983 and enforced by the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) with the help of 10 
offices of the Protector of Emigrants. Successive Secretaries from the Ministry of 
External Affairs and erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have repeatedly 
assured the Committee about the earliest introduction of the Bill in the Parliament. 
Recently, the Foreign Secretary while giving oral evidence before the Committee on 
18 July, 2018 had given the deadline of November, 2018 for submission of the Bill. 
Throughout the period of one and a half year of deliberations on this subject, the 
Ministry has offered numerous justifications for the delay in the introduction of the 
Bill which inter-alia included the need for harmonization of an international 
instrument, change in migration landscape, the constitution of a Committee and 
appointment of a consultant. 
 The Committee are of the strong view that in light of the momentous changes 
in migration patterns, the legal provisions contained in the present Act are 
inadequate to effectively deal with the diverse issues confronting the migrant 
workers. The prolonged delay in the introduction of draft Emigration Bill has been 
an issue of grave concern for the Committee. The justifications and assurances 
offered by the Ministry for putting the bill in abeyance are untenable and 
unconvincing. If the country of origin is negligent about its duties towards its 
migrant workers, how can we have expectations from the destination countries? The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should take 
serious cognizance of this matter and accord it the highest level priority. The 
Committee desire that the bill may be finalized urgently and presented to the 
Parliament without any further delay. The Committee desire that the following 
salient features must form an essential part of the proposed comprehensive law on 
emigrants: 
a. The proposed law must regulate visa brokers, especially by providing clear 
terms through which visa brokers may contract with recruiting agents. The law 
must clearly specify the legal duties and obligations of brokers and the rights of 

77 
 
migrant workers. It must also provide for the issuance of short term and 
individual licenses to visa brokers in order to enable them to recruit workers in 
collaboration with recruitment companies. The law must also emphasize on the 
onus on the recruiting agents to conduct due diligence on prospective working 
conditions, employment benefits and other related factors, to ensure a safe and 
equitable working environment for migrant workers. 
b. The law must address the asymmetry of information between migrant workers 
and their prospective employers. It is essential that migrant workers are 
provided information about the nature and conditions of the prospective work 
to the fullest extent possible, in order to enable them to make an informed 
decision. A mechanism should be setup to enable interaction between 
prospective and experienced migrant workers. The flow of information will be 
valuable in improving efficiency and productivity in different fields. A new law 
must also provide for Migrant Worker Welfare Centres at international 
airports to deliver key information. These include emergency assistance, acce ss 
to labour welfare departments and agencies etc.  
c. The law must take into account technological advancements. Digitized 
databases should be created with records of all migrant workers, their 
recruitment companies, their skills, educational qualifications etc. The law must 
ensure that all migrant workers are registered in these databases. 
d. The law should establish a separate department with powers of enforcement 
under the Protector of Emigrants to investigate complaints of exploitation and 
other abuses by recruiters. This department must provide legal aid, translation 
services, and other forms of assistance to workers, while initiating legal 
proceedings against recruitments engaging in illegal activities.  
e. The law should also provide for “safe migration cells ” in key migrant districts 
across the country, to inform and engage migrant workers about the emigration 
process, employment contracts, their legal rights and other essential 
information to protect them from exploitation and abuse.  
(Recommendation No. 26) 

78 
 
CHAPTER 5 
BILATERAL & GLOBAL FRAMEWORK REGULATING LABOUR 
MIGRATION 
 The Ministry has informed the Committee that the Government is working in 
close coordination with foreign governments to address concerns related to employment 
and welfare of Indian workers. Furthermore, Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MoUs/Agreements are already in place with the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries, Jordan and Malaysia that provide the institutional framework to 
comprehensively discuss and review these matters.  
I. Bilateral Social Security Agreements 
5.2 The most common mechanisms for regulating interstate labour migration are 
various types of bilateral agreements. A formal bilateral agreement sets out each side ’s 
commitments and may provide for quotas. The Government of India has signed various 
Bilateral Social Security Agreements with various countries. Regarding the efficacy of 
SSAs in facilitating the stay and working conditions of Indian workers in Gulf countries, 
the Ministry in a written reply stated that India has been entering into bilateral social 
security agreements (SSA) with other countries in order to protect the interests of Indian 
professionals / skilled workers working abroad for short durations. SSAs provide the 
following three benefits: 
a) Avoiding making double social security contributions: Once an SSA is signed 
between India and a foreign country, it exempts the Indian worker (working on 
short-term contracts abroad) from making a social security contribution in that 
foreign country. This exemption is provided only if the Indian worker is covered 
under the social security system of India and continues to pay his/her contribution 
during the period of overseas contract. 
b) Easy remittance of benefits (Exportability): An SSA between India and a foreign 
country enables the Indian worker, in case of relocation to India or a third 
country, to export/remit his/her accumulated social security contributions made in 
the foreign country to India or to the third country where subsequently posted.  
c) Aggregating the contribution periods (in two countries) to prevent loss of benefits 
(Totalization): An SSA allows aggregating residency periods of social security 

79 
 
contribution made by the Indian worker / professional in India and the foreign 
country to qualify for retirement benefits.  
5.3 On being asked, the Ministry furnished a detailed note on the status of SSAs. As 
on date, India has signed and operationalized Social Security Agreements (SSAs) with 18 
countries - Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Hungary, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, 
Sweden, Switzerland, and South Korea. We have also signed comprehensive Social 
Security Agreements with the Quebec Province of Canada which will be operationalized 
soon. 
5.4 The second round of negotiations on SSA between India and Sri Lanka was held 
in Colombo on 17-18 November, 2017. During the meeting, the text of SSA has been 
finalized between both sides. The first round of negotiations of the India-Brazil Social 
Security Agreement was held from the 13-16 March 2017 in Brasilia.  The draft Cabinet 
note for signing the Social Security Agreement between India and Brazil is under 
circulation to various ministries for comments. The 2 nd round of negotiations on 
administrative arrangement was held from 13-16 November 2017 in Delhi. Apart from 
this, Ministry is in the process of initiating negotiations on SSA with the Philippines . 
Draft SSA texts from Uruguay, Peru, and Argentina have been received and are under  
process. 
5.5 The Committee are aware that the most common mechanism for regulating 
inter-state migration are the various types of bilateral agreements that spell out 
each side’s commitments. As per the Ministry, India has signed and operationalized 
Social Security Agreements (SSAs) with 18 countries – Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Japan, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and South 
Korea. The SSAs are binding reciprocal instruments that help in avoiding doub le 
security contributions, easy remittances of benefits and aggregating contributions to 
prevent loss of benefits. It is disconcerting to note that despite the benefits, India has 
not signed any SSAs with the Gulf countries, where the bulk of Indian migrants 

80 
 
work. Labour and Manpower cooperation/MoUs/Agreements have been affected 
with six countries of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).  
The Committee are of the view that ensuring social security of migrant 
workers working in the Gulf countries is increasingly important due to the 
temporary nature of their migration. In view of the sizeable and steady migration 
outflows to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, the Government is 
urged to work out bilateral agreements with major countries of destination with the 
overreaching objective of balancing the welfare of migrant workers and economic 
imperatives. The positive outcomes of migration can also be used as a soft power to 
further accelerate our ties with Gulf region countries.  
(Recommendation No. 27) 
II Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and legal Migration  
5.6 The September 2016 New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants had 
mandated the finalization of two ‘Global Compacts’ – one on the movement of Refugees 
(GCR) and another on Migration (GCM). The GCM process was largely conducted in 
New York. The Permanent Representatives of Mexico and Switzerland were appointed as 
the co-facilitators of the intergovernmental consultations and negotiations on GCM. The 
discussions had commenced against the backdrop of the large movement of refugees 
fleeing armed conflicts in west Asia (and some longstanding large movement of refugee 
and asylum seekers from North Africa) and crossing into Western Europe.  
 
5.7 The Ministry informed that the zero drafts for GCM was released in February, 
2018 and inter-governmental negotiations were carried out in a compressed schedule and 
concluded on July 13, 2018. Recently, the Global Compact on Migration was adopted on 
10 December, 2018. It creates a non-legally binding agreement and co-operative 
framework that builds upon the commitments made by the member states in New York 
Declaration for refugees and migrants of December, 2016. 
 

81 
 
5.8 While delving into the role of Indian Government during the negotiating phase of 
the Global Compact on Migration, the Foreign Secretary on during the course of oral 
evidence on 2 August, 2018 submitted as under: 
“Throughout this very short but intensive negotiation, we were a very active 
participant and a contributor. The Global Compact on Migration draft has about 23 
objectives with a series of action points. What we take satisfaction from is the fact 
that we have agreed that the best practices that suit each country or suit the 
countries concerned should be adopted. It is, therefore, not a one-size-fits-all and 
we are free to select the best practices that work in our environment and are in 
consonance with our national policies and laws. This is in contrast to the earlier 
prescriptive approach that some member States wanted where other member States 
would not have a choice in what was internationally legislated. So, from our 
perspective this was important and the one from which we can draw some 
satisfaction.”  
5.9 Illustrating specifically about India ’s position and strategy during the negotiation 
of this Compact, the Ministry of External Affairs in a written background note postulated 
that:-  
“India, in its interventions, highlighted its longstanding experience in dealing with 
all aspects of migration issues. While India is more known for its diaspora, India 
is equally a country of destination and transit for international migrants. The 
Indian delegation was among the very few delegations who took a very broad 
view of the phenomenon of international migration, explaining the complex inter-
linkages among various economic, social and legal aspects. The Indian delegation 
also stressed on the role of migration in achieving sustainable development as 
envisaged under target 10.7 of Agenda 2030 “to facilitate orderly, safe and regular 
migration and mobility of people, including through implementation of planned 
and well-managed migration policies for achieving sustainable development. ” 
During negotiations, India also formally supported a statement delivered by a 
group of 22 like-minded countries on the issue of decent work and labour 
migration. The statement argued for the inclusion of references to the promotion 
of decent work and ILO Conventions and fundamental principles and rights at 
work in relevant objectives.”  
 
5.10 Given the rise of protectionist trends around the world and sensitivities involved 
with migration, there were several fault lines between developing and developed 
countries and amongst themselves. These issues encompass the distinction between 

82 
 
emigrants and refugees, regular versus irregular migration, the importance of national 
sovereignty in determining migration policy and so on.  
5.11 The Foreign Secretary summed up India ’s contention on these issues during 
testimony before the Committee as under:- 
“In a nutshell what we were able to be was we were able to maintain a distinction 
between a refugee and a migrant and ask them to deal with it separately. We were 
able to underscore that there is a legitimate purpose to legal migration as the means 
of global economic development as opposed to illegal migration and that legal 
migration should be treated as an engine of economic growth. We were able to 
safeguard some of our core considerations which was the right to migrate by legal 
means for economic opportunity, decent work for decent pay, preservation of labour 
and human rights and new pathways for migration. We wanted to and we were able 
to ensure that the principle of national sovereignty in the determination of migration 
policy was included in the Global Compact on Migrations.” 
5.12 When the Committee asked the Ministry about conducting consultations with 
stakeholders group during the negotiation phase, a representative of the Ministry of 
External Affairs made a submission on 18.7.2018:-  
“Through ICM we have and with States also we have been doing the workshop 
there; we have taken all the issues that have been reported to us in addition to the 
suggestions that have come to us from various stakeholders, which are also related 
to the Mission also. We were the only ones who were pushing some of these 
skilling, mutual recognition, and PDO related matters. These have been fully 
factored in.” 
5.13 Clarifying India ’s position on the issue of illegal migrants, a representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs during the course of concluding evidence on 2 August, 2018 
stated as under:- 
“The dilemma we are facing in Europe addresses this question. Our greatest 
concern, Sir, is that the number of legal migrants who are going for economic 
opportunity for outnumbers the number of illegal migrants. It must be 
Government’s priority to give legal migrants as much as protection and as much 
support as we can, not only they are emigrating legally but because they are in one 
manner or another assisting India, India ’s economy and development in various 
ways. To the extent that we encourage support or even tacitly acknowledge illegal 
migration, it allows other countries outside to conflate legal and illegal migration. 
Then, to treat both at par which we should not permit because legal migrants are 

83 
 
people who have taken all the necessary permissions and approvals to go and work 
abroad, and who need to have protection from the Government, in case, their rights 
are violated in any manner or the terms and conditions of employment, whereas 
illegal migrants have left the country without disclosing the real objective.”  
5.14 Explaining the position of our neighbouring countries on GCM, the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that:- 
“A very basic thing is that most of the countries in South Asia are not signatories 
and have not signed on to the 1951 Convention on refugees. So, most of us actually 
had very similar positions on most of the issues of migration because most of us 
also tend to send people out for opportunities and we had primarily very similar 
positions on most of the issues, including China. I think largely oppositions 
matched on various issues under the Global Compact on Migration.” 
 
5.15 Elaborating the role of India in the negotiation of the draft, the Ministry stated 
that India was a major player during the negotiations and India ’s positions on several 
critical issues were carried in the agreed draft Global Compact on Migration document. 
These include:  
 Clear distinction between migrants and refugees 
 Clear distinction between regular and irregular migrants 
 GCM being a non-legally binding document 
 No mention of the principle of ‘Non-Refoulement’ 
 No inclusion of references to ‘Internally Displaced Persons’ 
 The primacy of national sovereignty in determining migration policies and laws 
 Appropriate language in the context of sudden-onset natural disasters and slow-
onset climate change 
 Highlighting the importance to facilitate decent work conditions; remittances 
(faster, safer and cheaper); portability of benefits (social security entitlements and 
earned benefits); establishing mutual recognition of educational qualifications, 
skills; ensuring non-discrimination against migrant workers; consular protection 
and assistance to migrant workers; enhancing pathways for regular migration 
 The overall balance between development and human rights aspects 
5.16 The Ministry further informed that Issues critical from India ’s perspective relating 
to remittances; portability of benefits; mutual recognition of qualifications and skills; 
eliminating discrimination; providing consular assistance; the contribution of migrants 
towards sustainable development in all countries; and enhancing pathways for regular 
migration appear in the GCM document as independent standalone objectives. India ’s 

84 
 
view point to project an overall positive narrative against the backdrop of the negativity 
associated with the phenomenon of migration was well-received and its positions on all 
key issues are reflected in the agreed draft Global Compact.”  
5.17 Elucidating the commitments made by India in the GCM, representatives of the 
Ministry during concluding evidence on 2 August, 2018 stated as under:-  
“The commitments mentioned in it are broad-based. There is no such thing in it that 
you have to do. As FS also mentioned, under each commitment which is broad-
based, there are actionable points and best practices. It is up to us again as a 
Member State how we wish to take it forward, which are the practices we wish to 
take as part of our process of implementation. There is no such thing that you have 
committed yourself to. It is up to us. This is where the sovereignty and the 
voluntariness of it lie. It is an important point to remember.” 
5.18 The Committee note that the recently adopted Global Compact for 
Migration is a UN-backed non-binding global agreement on a common approach to 
international migration in all its dimensions. The Compact comprises of 23 
objectives for better managing migration at local, national, regional and global 
levels. The Ministry of External Affairs has also consulted other concerned 
Ministries and the issues taken by India are largely based on the issues already 
taken up in ILO or Geneva. The Committee are happy to learn that India has 
played a pro-active role in negotiating the Compact and India ’s position on several 
critical issues like the distinction between migrants and refugees, the primacy of 
national sovereignty in determining migration policies etc, have been mentioned in 
the agreed document. The Ministry informed the Committee that active 
consultations were held with the concerned stakeholders during the negotiation 
phase. The distinction between migrants and refugees raises a new the need for 
fresh legislation in India governing both emigrants from the country and refugees 
seeking asylum in the country. The Committee note with disappointment that the 
former is still governed by the outdated Emigration Act of 1983 and that on the 
latter, India remains one of the few democracies without an asylum/refugee law at 
all. 

85 
 
The Committee recommend the enactment of a new law to govern emigrants, 
which must incorporate India ’s commitments to various international covenants 
and instruments, such as the International Convention on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(ICCPR), the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crimes 
and various standards and guidelines set out by the International Labour 
Organization (ILO).  
(Recommendation No. 28) 
5.19 The Committee take note of the fact that India took the position that the 
Principle of Non Refoulement should not be included in the Global Compact on 
Safe, Orderly, and Regular Migration. The Principle of Non Refoulement states that 
no person shall be rejected or expelled in any manner which would compe l him or 
her to remain in or to return to a territory where there is a likelihood of such person 
being subjected to torture, persecution or other serious human rights violations. The 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in its 
Advisory Opinion on the Extraterritorial Application of Non Refoulement 
Obligations under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 
1967 Protocol, had reasoned that the Principle of Non Refoulement is part of 
Customary International Law. The UNHCR has also taken the position that Article 
6 (Right to Life) and Article 7 (Right to be free from Torture) of the ICCPR , 
embodies the Principle of Non Refoulement. The Human Rights Committee in 
General Comment No. 31 has clarified that all Covenant rights are applicable to all 
individuals, including migrant workers. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
Government of India revises its stand on the non-application of the Principle of Non 
Refoulement in relation to migrant workers.  
(Recommendation No. 29) 
5.20 The Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration is indeed a 
historic and commendable move to frame a positive narrative and agenda on 
migration. The Committee desire that this progressive Compact on migration 

86 
 
should be kept in mind and used as a guiding factor in strengthening the framework 
as well as in drafting of the domestic legislation on migration. The Government can 
further utilize it as a basis for working out cooperative bilateral agreements with 
labour importing countries, particularly the GCC countries to protect the rights of 
our migrant workers and addressing the challenges and vulnerabilities faced by 
them.                                                
     (Recommendation No. 30) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                        DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
27  December, 2018                                       Chairperson,    
 7 Pausha, 1940 (Saka)         Committee on External Affairs 
  

87 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 11 APRIL, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 April, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 1650hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3.  Dr. Sugata Bose 
4. Prof. Richard Hay  
5. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
8. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
9. Shri Mohammad Salim 
10. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
11. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
12. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Dr. Swapan Dasgupta 
14. Shri Amar Singh 
15. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai         -       Director 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha       -        Additional Director 
3. Shri Janmesh Singh        -       Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1.  Dr. S. Jaishankar   -  Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri D.M. Mulay   -  Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
3. Shri Jaideep Mazumdar  -  JS (South & Nalanda) 
4. Shri Arun K. Chatterjee  -  JS (PSP) & CPO  
5. Shri M.C. Luther   -  JS (OE) & PGE 
6. Ms. Vani S. Rao   -  JS (OIA- A) 
7. Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar  -  JS (Parl. & Coord.) 
8. Shri Manish Gupta   -  JS (OIA- I) 
9. Shri Upender Singh Rawat  -  JS (CPV) 
10.  Shri. R.V. Prasad   -  Director (Gulf) 
11. Shri Rajesh Agrawal   -  Director (OE&PGE) 
12. Shri Pramil Gupta   -  Director (OE- I) 

88 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 Shri Rajesh Agrawal   -  JS & CVO 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Skill Development 
& Entrepreneurship to the Sitting of the Committee, convened to have a briefing on the 
subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers and skill development initiatives for 
prospective emigrants’. The Chairperson also drew the attention of all the representatives 
to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the 
confidentiality of the proceedings.    
 
3.  Thereafter on the direction of Chairperson, the Foreign Secretary gave a detailed 
briefing on the subject which inter-alia highlighted the problems faced by Indian workers 
in the Gulf Cooperation Council (G.C.C.) countries; problems faced by workers during 
three phases of migration cycle viz. pre-departure phase, country of destination and return 
and resettlement phase; emigration of ECR category female workers; problems being 
faced by Indian workers due to economic downturn in the Gulf Region; and procedure for 
handling recruitment related complaints. 
 
4. The members of the Committee raised various queries which inter-alia related to 
Skill Centres/Skill development initiatives, the status of Emigration Management Bill, 
welfare measures for Indian workers, high air fare for returnees during the peak season, 
facilitating return of the asylees and derivative asylees, etc. The witnesses responded 
comprehensively to the queries of the members.  
 
5. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship highlighted some key initiatives taken for skill development of potential 
emigrants. The Chairperson directed the principal witness to furnish written replies on the 
points raised by the members to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest. 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

89 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2017-18) HELD ON 22 NOVEMBER, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 November, 2017 from 1600 hrs to 1755 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2.  Prof. Richard Hay  
3. Shri Jose K. Mani 
4. Shri Mohammad Salim 
5. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
6. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
7. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
8. Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
9. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
12. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
13. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
14. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P C Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Dnyaneshwar M. Muley  - Secretary (CPV & OIA)  
2. Shri  Manish Gupta   - JS (OIA- I) 
3. Shri  Amrit Lugun   - JS (OIA-II) 
4. Shri  M.C. Luther   - JS (OE & PGE) 
5. Shri  Arun K. Chatterjee  - JS (PSP), CPO & CPV 
6. Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar  - JS (Parl. & Coord) 

90 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP  
 
1. Shri Rajesh Agarwal   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Asheesh Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson informed the Committee that the subject under 
discussion had been bulletenised as ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including 
Emigration Bill and skill development initiatives for prospective emigrants ’.  He 
proposed that in order to avoid any reference to the Emigration Bill the nomenclature of 
the subject may be modified to read as ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including 
appropriate legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective 
emigrants’.  The Committee approved the modifications in the nomenclature of the 
subject under discussion. 
3.  Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship were ushered in.  The Chairperson welcomed 
the witnesses and the Members to the Sitting of the Committee to take evidence on the 
subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including appropriate legislative framework 
and skill development initiatives for prospective emigrants ’.  The principal witness 
briefed the Committee on various institutional measures put in place to safeguard the 
interests of migrant workers including steps for their skill upgradation.   
4. The Members of the Committee raised queries related to the opening of skill 
centres, resettlement of workers upon their return to India, tackling the menace of illegal 
recruitment agents, reasons for delay in the proposed Emigration Bill, non-availability of 
comprehensive data base on Indian workers, insurance scheme for migrant workers, 

91 
 
problems faced by Indian female domestic workers in the Gulf, difficulties in bringing 
back mortal remains of deceased workers, labour and manpower cooperation agreements, 
placement record of skill centres, etc.  
5. In the end, the representative from the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship briefed the Committee about the broad initiatives being taken in the 
field of skill training. 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

92 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2017-18) HELD ON 2 APRIL, 2018 
The Committee sat on Monday, 2 April, 2018 from 1610 hrs to 1740 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
3. Shri Mohammad Salim 
4. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
5. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
6. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
7. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
10. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
11. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.C. Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri Vijay Gokhale   - Foreign Secretary  
2. Shri Dnyaneshwar M. Muley  - Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
3. Shri M.C. Luther   - Joint Secretary (OE&OIA) 
4. Shri Amrit Lugun   - Joint Secretary (CPV) 
5. Shri Arun K. Chatterjee  - Joint Secretary (PSP & CPO) 
6. Dr. T.V Nagendra Prasad  - Joint Secretary (Gulf) 
7. Dr. B. Bala Bhaskar    - Joint Secretary (WANA) 
8. Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar  - Joint Secretary Parl & Coord) 
9. Shri Manish Gupta   - Joint Secretary (OIA- I) 
10. Shri M.S Kanyal   - Director (OIA-II) 
11. Col. Rahul Dutt   - Director (OE) 

93 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to have a briefing on the subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including 
appropriate legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective 
emigrants’ with particular emphasis on ‘Safety and Security of Indian Workers in 
Conflict Zones’.  He specifically placed on record the Committee ’s deep appreciation for 
Smt. Jaya Bachchan, Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi, Shri C.R. Ramesh and Shri D.P Tripathi 
who were to retire from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2018.  The Chairperson also drew the 
attention of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings.    
 
3. In his opening remarks, the Foreign Secretary provided an overview of the 
statutory and institutional mechanism for the welfare of emigrant workers.  He 
specifically dwelt on issues related to emigration of Indian nurses, requirement of 
adequate handholding for emigrant workers, Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, Indian 
Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), Pre-Departure Orientation Training, travel advisories 
and other efforts made to ensure safety of Indian workers in conflict zones.  Regarding 
the killing of 39 Indian workers in Iraq, the Foreign Secretary submitted that the External 
Affairs Minister has already made a detailed statement before the Parliament and media 
and expressed his inability to add anything to it. 
4. Thereafter, members of the Committee raised various queries related to the 
subject under discussion viz. widespread salary discrimination against Indian workers in 
Gulf countries, curtailment of freedom to Indian emigrants in conducting cultural 

94 
 
activities, need to put curb on unregistered Recruitment Agents, imperative for taking up 
multilateral Labour Agreements, Standard Operating Procedures (SoPs) for evacuating 
Indians in distress situation, need for better training to potential emigrants, status of the 
draft Emigration Bill, emigration of nurses to Kuwait, Minimum Referral Wages, 
impounding of Passports by Foreign employers and their agents and  lessons learnt from 
the death of 39 Indian workers in Iraq. 
5. The Foreign Secretary and other witnesses responded to the queries of Members 
comprehensively. 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

95 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2018-19) HELD ON 18 JULY, 2018 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 18 July, 2018 from 1530hrs to 1710hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
     Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
4. Prof. Richard Hay 
5. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita  
8. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
9. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
10. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
12. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
13. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
14. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
15. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
16. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
17. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Smt. Jyochnyamayi Sinha  - Additional Director  
3. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

96 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to the Sitting of the 
Committee, convened to take evidence from the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs on the subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including appropriate 
legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective emigrants. ’ The 
Chairperson also drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the 
proceedings.    
3. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) elaborated upon 
the specific institutional framework as well as policy interventions initiated by the 
Ministry for providing support, protection and welfare of the emigrant workers which 
inter-alia included e-migrate Project, MADAD Portal, Indian Community Welfare Fund, 
pre-departutre orientation training programme, Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana, 
awareness campaign for safe and legal migration etc.  
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised questions impinging on issues 
such as implications of evolving the labour dynamics in the Gulf region; Bilateral Social 
Security Agreements with foreign countries; India ’s position and strategy during the 
ongoing negotiations on Global Impact on Migration; status of Draft Emigration 
Management Bill; issues of overstay of emigrant workers in UK & USA; plight of female 
S.No. Name                   Designation 
1. Shri Dnyaneshwar M. Muley -                Secretary (CPV &OIA) 
2. Shri M.C. Luther -                Joint Secretary (OE & PGE) 
3. Shri Amrit Lugun -                Joint Secretary (CPV) 
4. Shri Arun K. Chatterjee -                Joint Secretary (CPO) 
5.           Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar   -                Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord) 
6. Shri Manish Gupta -                 Joint Secretary (OIA-1) 
7. Col. Rahul Dutt -                  Director (OE-II) 

97 
 
workers, particularly domestic workers and nurses; minimum referral wages; media 
campaign and certifications of Indian Engineers etc.  
5. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded 
comprehensively to the queries of the members. Before the Committee adjourned, the 
Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
members of the Committee at the earliest. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

98 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON  
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2017-18) HELD ON 2 AUGUST, 2018 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 2 August, 2018 from 1600hrs to 1730hrs in 
Committee Room 2, Block ‘A’ Extension to Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
     Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
5. Prof. Richard Hay 
6. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
7. Shri P.R. Senthil Nathan 
8. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Md. Salim 
11. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
12. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
13. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
15. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
16. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
17. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
18. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
19. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.C.Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director  
 

99 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to the Sitting of the 
Committee, convened to take further oral evidence from the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs on the subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including 
appropriate legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective 
emigrants.’ The Chairperson also drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 
55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of 
the proceedings.    
3. Within the broader framework of the subject under consideration, in this 
concluding Sitting the Committee delved upon two specific recent developments at the 
international as well as domestic levels, namely Global Compact on Migration and the 
status of proposed Emigration Management Bill respectively. The Foreign Secretary and 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs clarified on various facets such as 
objectives and negotiating strategy of India; fault lines between developed and 
developing countries; principle of national sovereignty in determination of migration 
 
 
S.No. 
 
 
Name 
                  
 
                      Designation 
1. Shri Vijay Gokhale -                Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Dnyaneshwar M. Muley -                Secretary (CPV &OIA) 
3. Shri M.C. Luther -                Joint Secretary (OE & PGE) 
4. Shri Amrit Lugun -                Joint Secretary (CPV) 
5. Shri Arun K. Chatterjee -                Joint Secretary (CPO) 
6. Shri Manish Chauhan -                Joint Secretary (UNES) 
7.             Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar   -                Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord) 
8. Shri Manish Gupta -                 Joint Secretary (OIA-1) 
9. Shri Vinod K Jacob -                  Joint Secretary (ED&States) 
10. Shri Manoj Mohapatra -                  Joint Secretary (OIA-II) 
   

100 
 
policy; setting up of consultative mechanism for drafting the Emigration Bill; imperative 
for drawing a line between refugees and migrants.  
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee sought clarifications on issues related 
to commitments made by India in the Global Compact on Migration; existence of a 
formal policy on migration; measures to curb the menace of human trafficking; 
parameters guiding the consultation process on the proposed Bill; illegal vs migrant 
workers; media awareness and grievance redressal system.  
5. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded 
comprehensively to the queries of the members. Before the Committee adjourned, the 
Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
members of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

101 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2018-19) HELD ON 27 DECEMBER, 2018 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 27 December, 2018 from 1600hrs. to 
1655hrs. in Room No. ‘2’, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Gurj eet Singh Aujla 
 3. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 5. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 7. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 8. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 9. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  Rajya Sabha 
10. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
11. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
12. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
13. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
  
      Secretariat 
 
1.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -   Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider the draft Report on the subject ‘Issues relating to 
migrant workers including appropriate legislative framework and skill development 
initiatives for prospective emigrants.’  
 
3. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. 

102 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report with minor 
modifications. 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the members.  
5. The Chairperson also conveyed his heartfelt thanks and gratitude to all the 
Members for their cooperation and valuable contribution during the current term of the 
Committee. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 