 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
‘INDIA’S SOFT POWER DIPLOMACY INCLUDING ROLE OF INDIAN 
COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) AND INDIAN DIASPORA.’ 
 
 
 
             THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2016/Kartika, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2016-17) 
 
                             SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
13 
 

 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
‘INDIA’S SOFT POWER DIPLOMACY INCLUDING ROLE OF INDIAN 
COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) AND INDIAN DIASPORA.’ 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd November, 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23rd  November, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November, 2016/Kartika, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2016 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(__________Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) (i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)  (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (iii) 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Introduction 1 
 
CHAPTER -II Soft Power and its determinants 
 
4 
 
CHAPTER -III Role and Functioning of Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
A.  ICCR’s Expenditure and Budget situation   
B.  Manpower Status 
C. Academic and Intellectual Activities 
D.  Cultural Exchanges 
      a. Indian Cultural Centres 
      b. Indian Cultural Troupes 
E.  Other Activities 
17 
18 
25 
26 
30 
31 
35 
38 
 
APPENDICES 
I.  Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Committee (2015-16) held on 23.02.2016                  60 
II. Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2015-16) held on 27.07.2016                     62 
III. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 16.11.2016                           65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
CHAPTER-IV Issues Related to Coordination and Role of Indian Diaspora 47 
A. Coordination with other Ministries/Departments 47 
B.    Merger of Public Diplomacy and External Publicity Divisions 52 
C.    Role of Indian Diaspora 54 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) 
 
Sl. No.   Name of Members 
  
 1.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6.  Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.   Prof. Richard Hay * 
 9.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 10.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11.  Shri Venkateswara Rao Magannti 
 12.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14.  Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17.  Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18.  Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20.  Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21.  Shri Sharad Tripathi  
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri Raj Babbar $ 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta^ 
 25.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 26.  Smt. Kanimozhi 
 27.  Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 28.  Shri Amar Singh @ 
29.  Shri C.M. Ramesh  
 30.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 31.  Shri D. P. Tripathi    
    
*Prof. Richard Hay has been nominated w.e.f.13.04.2016 vice Smt. Raksha Khadse who has been nominated to the 
Committee on Agriculture 
$ Shri H.K. Dua retired on 17.11.2015 and Shri Raj Babbar has been nominated w.e.f.20.05.2016. 
^Shri Swapan Dasgupta has been nominated w.e.f.20.05.2016. 
@ Shri Pavan Kumar Varma retired on 07.07.2016 and Shri Amar Singh has been nominated w.e.f. 25.7.2016. 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 

   
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2016-17) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 9. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Venkateswara Rao Magannti 
 12. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13. Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Raj Babbar 
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 25. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 26. Smt. Kanimozhi 
 27. Shri C.M. Ramesh  
28. Shri Amar Singh   
29. Dr. Karan Singh 
 30. Shri R.K. Sinha 
 31. Shri D. P. Tripathi    
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Cryil John     –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3.       Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha   –   Additional Director  
4. Shri Janmesh Singh    –   Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs (2016-17) on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power Diplomacy including 
role of Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora.’ 
 
2.             The Committee selected the subject ‘India’s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of 
Indian Council for Cultural Rela tions (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora’ for detailed examination during 
the year 2015-16. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) on 23 rd February, 2016. The Committee 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR), Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Human Resource Development on 
27th July, 2016. 
 
3.        The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 16 th 
November, 2016. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.  
 
4.        The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs, Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development for placing before them the material and information as well as tendering evidence and 
placing their considered views before the Committee.  
 
5.         For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI               DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
21st November, 2016                   Chairperson,                                         
30 Kartika, 1938 (Saka)                                 Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Our world has witnessed vast changes in the manner and conduct of international 
relations and diplomacy since the end of the Cold War. Overreliance on military 
supremacy and ‘hard’ power is no longer adequate, and countries must exercise their 
influence through soft power. After all, it is not always the country with the bigger army 
that always wins, but that which tells the better story. Seen from this perspective, soft 
power is something of an instrument of persuasion, to bring the world around to our 
perspective, not by force but by ‘selling’ them a compelling story.  
1.2 The term “soft power” was coined in the late 1980s by Joseph Nye. It is the 
ability of a country to persuade other nations of a line of thought in consonance with its 
goals.  Soft power is derived from three resources i.e. a country’s culture, its political 
values and its foreign policy. India enjoys a wealth of soft power resources, from its rich 
culture of spiritualism, yoga, its cuisine, art and entertainment; classical and popular 
dance and music; its discourse of non-violence, its strong democratic institutions, and its 
pluralism, all of which have attracted people from across the world for centuries.  
1.3 India’s global influence has had a long and complex history, from the 
dissemination of Hindu and Buddhist ideas across Asia, to the welcoming of Arab and 
Islamic thought on mathematics, astronomy and other physical and metaphysical 
sciences, to the more recent export of human and intellectual capital to Western 
universities, transnational corporations and multilateral organizations. However, it has 
only been in the last two decades that India has begun to actively promote and enhance its 
soft power effectively. Besides setting up a Public Diplomacy Division within the 
Ministry of External Affairs in 2006 and expanding the role of the Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR) worldwide, the Ministry of Tourism has been roped into 
develop the ‘Incredible India!’ campaign.  However, there remains a widespread feeling 
that we are yet to fully harness our soft power potential, to achieve which efforts and 
greater focus are necessary. 
1.4 Cultural diplomacy is the lynchpin of public diplomacy because cultural activities 
demonstrate the best of what our country has to offer the world.  Cultural diplomacy is 

2 
 
also a long-term strategy and, unlike traditional diplomacy, does not expect immediate 
returns—it aims to “tell a story” over time, and establish what a nation stands for in the 
world. India has a rich culture and the Government must facilitate its expression abroad 
to foreign audiences in order to build long term international influence. Cultural 
diplomacy has the potential to enhance national prestige and garner support for policies 
abroad on a sustained basis. 
1.5 The Committee is aware of the role of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) in this direction.  Since its establishment in 1950, the ICCR has made concerted 
efforts to promote Indian culture, India’s democratic ideals, its values, traditions 
literature, languages, philosophy, and art forms, through a variety of mediums, including 
electronic and print publications, live performances etc.  The activities of ICCR are 
serviced and supported through its headquarters in New Delhi along with 20 Regional 
Offices located in various parts of the country and 37 Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) 
abroad. 
1.6 In furtherance of its objectives, ICCR carries out a range of art and culture related 
activities which include exchanging culture troupes of dance and music with other 
nations, conducting exhibitions, theatre and puppetry shows as well as organizing 
academic and intellectual activities, endowing scholarships and fellowships, setting up 
India Studies chairs, arranging conferences and seminars, etc. Other activities for the 
project of our soft power include visiting programmes by distinguished scholars, 
supplying statues/busts of our leaders, organizing and celebrating Indian festivals and 
days abroad, and so on.  
1.7   In addition to the Ministry of External Affairs/ICCR, other line Ministries and 
Departments of the Government are also involved in the mandate of dissemination of 
India’s culture abroad and the projection of our soft power. Therefore, it is imperative 
that there is proper coordination between the Ministry of External Affairs/ICCR and the 
Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of AYUSH, 
Ministry of Tourism, and other line Ministries within various State Governments. 

3 
 
1.8 The diaspora is critical in promoting a country's soft power.  India is fortunate in 
its influential diaspora spread across the globe.  Over the years, this has played an 
important role in popularizing Indian culture abroad. Diaspora reflects the multiplicity 
and variety of the rich social, ethnic, religious, and cultural tapestry that constitutes India 
and the Indian experience. The deep-rooted affection the diaspora feels for its motherland 
is an intangible asset that forms one of the foundations of our soft power. In recent times 
the Government has engaged constructively with the diaspora, but it is necessary to make 
them important stakeholders in projecting our soft power abroad in the long run.  
 

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
SOFT POWER AND ITS DETERMINANTS 
The concept of soft power has largely been understood as Joseph Nye’s definition 
of ‘the ability to achieve goals through attraction [rather] than coercion’. Nye employe d 
the term largely to discuss the decline of the United States in the world and strategic 
options available to the country in light of its decline. 
 
2.2 Though the expressi on did not exist before Nye, India has been projecting its ‘soft 
power’ for decades. ICCR, founded in 1950, has been the nodal point for India’s cultural 
engagement with the world and it is the preeminent organization of the Government to 
project our soft power. It is a registered society funded by the MEA and is autonomous in 
its functioning. 
 
2.3 The Foreign Secretary elaborated upon India’s soft power resources and their use 
in diplomacy during a sitting of this Committee:- 
“….The Committee’s questionnaire recalls Joseph Nye’s definition of Soft 
Power as the ability to achieve goals through attraction rather than 
coercion. Attraction itself is a mix of affinity and persuasion and it is the 
pursuit and projection of these two concepts that is the core of diplomacy. 
Obviously, in doing so, every nation draws on its particular national 
personality and practices. While culture and history are at the centre of 
this reservoir, there are today many other factors – political, economic and 
technological – that form part of the mix. There are parts of the world 
where India is deeply respected for its enduring culture, but equally, there 
is a growing admiration for the achievement of building a credible 
democracy under very challenging conditions. In the last two decades, the 
widespread perception of India as an IT power is perhaps the most 
effective achievement of our soft power. While Indian diplomacy reflects 
this broad spectrum, some salient aspects of this include the following 
things. One, projection of our cultural vibrancy through arts, crafts and 
other intangible heritage, noting that many other nations have seen them 
erode very substantially in the process of modernization. Two, promotion 
of traditions such as yoga, meditation and holistic medicine that lead to a 
stronger appreciation of our history and heritage.  Three, underlining our 
pluralistic and diverse lifestyle that is expressed through the peaceful co-
existence of multiple faiths, languages and identities. Conferences, 
exhibitions and exchanges in these fields help us bond with other nations 
that share different aspects of this pluralism. Four, utilize the power of 
Indian cinema that has been a particularly effective tool over many 

5 
 
decades in shaping a positive view of India abroad. Five, develop and 
enhance a more contemporary picture of India that is digitally driven, 
whether in terms of our skills and capabilities or in our projection efforts. 
National flagship programmes, that further reinforce this message of 
modernization underway, also help in this regard.  Six, leverage the 
influence of the world’s largest Diaspora to advance our interests and 
improve our global standing. In recent times, this has been a conscious 
element in our interactions abroad. As a larger strategy, it may be noted 
that India’s future lies in its emergence as a human resources power. It is, 
therefore, important we display an ability to support the Diaspora whether 
under stress or in distress, individually or collectively....” 
 
 
2.4  According to the Ministry, over the past decade, India has increasingly come to 
be recognized as something of a “soft power superpower”, with some of the constituents 
commonly identified spanning a very broad spectrum, including recognition of our 
country as the world’s largest democracy. The visible impact and influence of Bollywood 
and Indian popular culture across the globe, the attractions across the world of holistic 
health alternatives such as yoga and the ideas of leading personalities from the Buddha to 
Mahatma Gandhi, some of whom have, in fact, gone beyond being seen as exclusively 
Indian, are all measures of India’s soft power.  
 
2.5 When asked about the conceptualization of soft power and its relevance in 
diplomacy, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“Ability to shape the preferences of others through appeal and attraction, 
using non-coercive means i.e. by using ‘ Soft Power ’ continues to be 
relevant in Indian diplomacy, wherein the three dimensions of Soft Power 
namely – Culture, Political values and Foreign Policy are important tools. 
India has been exercising ‘ Soft Power’, well before the term was coined. 
For instance, ICCR was established way back in 1950 precisely for this 
purpose. In Ministry’s view, there is both need and scope to go beyond 
Nye’s original formulation of Soft Power, by shifting focus from ‘ tools’ in 
hand to ‘ approaches and methods ’ of u sing the power in hand. Judicious 
blend of Soft power with other dimensions of hard power –military might 
shall make India a Smart power.”  
 
 
2.6 The Ministry, furthermore, states that democratic and secular values, peaceful co-
existence, friendly relations with neighbours and the strengthening of regional 

6 
 
cooperation have been the tenets of Indian culture, and our political values and foreign 
policy. These have been the principles by which India has traditionally constructed its 
strategy of using soft power. Our parliamentary, democracy, multi-party political system 
and stable political system have all enhanced India’s standing and image.  
 
2.7 When asked about its conceptualization of culture of India, the Ministry submitted 
the following through a written reply:- 
“ ‘Culture’ is a dynamic concept characterizing the Indian society and 
manifested in our collectively held attributes, which include teaching and 
learning ( socialization, language, literature), ideas ( identity, Philosophy 
and way of thinking ), value system ( democratic and secular ), norms 
(economic systems , traditions, varied art forms and sports ) and India’s 
institutional structures (family, Constitution and political systems). ICCR’s 
tool-kit to project diversity of Indian Culture to the external world broadly 
has two sets of tools – (i) its structures and (ii) activities conducted. The 
structures include ICCR’s (i) Culture Centres, (ii) Indian studies Chairs 
and, (iii) teachers of languages, music, dance and Yoga etc. deployed 
abroad and (iv) scholarship programme for foreign students to study in 
India. The activities include dynamic exchange of intellectuals, 
academicians, experts, authors, scholars and artists at bilateral and 
multilateral level throughout the year, organizing seminars and 
conferences and bringing out publications and periodicals in prominent 
international languages. India’s performing arts including music and 
dance, visual and fine arts, architecture, culinary art and Bollywood have 
been traditional tools to showcase India’s l ong, rich and diverse cultural 
heritage.”   
 
2.8 According to the Ministry, the ICCR (and MEA) recognise “ Indian Culture” as a 
dynamic concept and have therefore diligently align our soft power strategies with an 
evolving foreign policy, which in turn is a constituent of the broader idea of “ Indian 
Culture”. ICCR has, over time, emerged as an important organization at the national level 
for extensive cultural engagement with the world and for promoting India’s culture in all 
its forms and flavours abroad. It has evolved and adapted its requirements as well as 
adjusted its emphasis on the activities it undertakes, keeping in view India’s soft power 
needs and our evolving diplomatic relationships. These efforts have contributed to an 
improved understanding of India in foreign countries and in the enhancing of our prestige 
internationally.    

7 
 
 
2.9 On the ways of assessing the effectiveness of soft power capabilities and their 
tangible foreign policy outcomes, the Ministry submitted the following through a written 
reply:- 
“India’s soft power capabilities are plentiful and multifaceted. When seen 
in perspective, one can see there have been significant achievements since 
India’s independence, in terms of how India is perceived by the outside 
world. This can be witnessed in (i) clichéd ideas about India being 
replaced by image of country producing brain power, (ii) India becoming a 
nation of (computer) mouse charmers from being a nation of snake 
charmers; (iii) India emerging as one of the leading economies – BRICS 
and G-20; (iv) greater acceptability for Indian popular culture including 
Bollywood and Bhelpuri abroad and (v) mass-media revolution, within 
India connecting people abroad. How India overcame Japan’s bitterness 
after Pokhran-II through a sustained Cultural campaign and charms it once 
again to become a valued friend and partner is one such example to site. 
However, it is worthwhile to explore devising an objective method of 
assessing effectiveness of soft power capabilities and their tangible foreign 
policy outcomes, such as developing a “ Soft Power Matrix ”. ICCR is 
currently conducting a performance review of its own functioning to 
understand how its efforts over the years have translated into tangible 
Foreign Policy returns and how a framework of an integrated strategy, 
resource base could and tool kit could be formulated to be more effective.”   
  
 
2.10 On being asked about its views on ‘Smart Power’ , the Ministry submitted the 
following through a written reply:- 
“In Ministry’s opinion, ‘Smart Power’ is the most representative of India’s 
current interaction with the world, where the emphasis is on building 
capacities to be able to choose right forms of power to employ in relation 
to a particular context. MEA’s policy of ‘Neighbourhood first’, ‘Act East 
Asia’, ‘Link West Asia’, ‘Indian ocean outreach’, ‘Cooperation with 
Pacific Islands’, ‘Fast track diplomacy’, ‘Engagement with Overseas 
Indians’ etc. enhanced engagement with North and South America, 
European nations, Eurasia and Africa are manifestations of how Indian 
Foreign-Policy making is being conceptualized and formulated, where 
‘Power’ as Nye says is being treated as a resource, and focus is on using 
context specific approach and method.”  
         
2.11 On being asked about tangible gains from soft power, the representative of the 
Ministry during the sitting submitted as under:-  

8 
 
“I think the effective deployment of soft power is probably the fact that we 
represent India is an advantage that we get. I will tell you just why. It is 
anecdotal. It has happened to me more than once that when you are 
outside and you are asked which country you represent when you say you 
are representing India, people say, ‘Oh that is my favourite country!’ I say 
thank you very much and ask when you were there last? They s ay, ‘I have 
never visited India’.  I think that is the most dramatic reflection of soft 
power that one can encounter that it is the image of India which is our 
greatest asset and resource.  This is something that I say to all my young 
colleagues.  When we go abroad as representatives of India for the first 
time, this is something we recognize that one has an automatic advantage 
over other diplomatic colleagues and peers.  When one says one represents 
India, one starts off with a positive.  So, it is only the fact that there are 
people who may have visited India, and then we may have encountered 
some ugly Indians, who may have had some negative experiences, who 
have to actually counter a negative bias.  Most of us start off with a 
positive sentiment.  So, I think that in itself is the most effective example 
of soft power that I could cite.”      
2.12 When asked whether soft power can be employed in India’s dealings with China, 
the Foreign Secretary during the sitting of the Committee submitted as under:- 
 “On NSG, China and whether soft power engagement can have a role at 
this time, the soft power has a value. But I do not think it is a substitute for 
some serious hard power arguments. I do not think we should be in denial 
of what is the problem that we are having with China right now.” 
 
2.13 He further added:   
“So, at this time what is required with China is a sensible pragmatic 
conversation about how not accommodating each other’s aspirations is not 
beneficial to the relationship. We need to have that conversation and we 
will have that conversation. But we cannot find a fix for a terrorism 
problem or a PoK problem or a NSG problem in soft power engagement, 
which is not to detract from soft power engagement per se. I do believe, 
particularly in China, we need to do more to improve our image there. I 
did two postings there back to back. I think an average American has an 
image of India which is much superior to what an average Chinese has of 
India. Therefore, clearly there is work to be done, there is soft power 
deficiency there which needs to be remedied.’’ 
 
2.14 On being asked about impediments in projecting India’s soft power, the Foreign 
Secretary during the sitting of the Committee submitted as under:- 
 “……about the impediments of projecting soft power, the answer I would 
give in a way is that soft power is probably most effectively projected 
when you do not do it in a conscious and visible manner.  I would draw to 

9 
 
your attention and observation which Lequan once made. He contrasted 
the rise of China which is obviously at a much higher level with rise of 
India and asked a question why is it that the rise of China was threatening 
to its neighbours where the rise of India was not.  He answered the 
question himself, which he said that it is part of it.  It is in the Indian 
personality. The very lack of assertiveness, the diffusion of the 
personality, somehow the pluralism of India which sometimes looks much 
more fuzzy because it does not have the sharp edges, it actually makes 
people more comfortable, at least, less threatened.  A part of it was also 
because a democratic country with a culture of tolerance, a culture of 
acceptance seems to be intellectually less domineering than China.  So, 
my sense is that when it comes to soft power, in a sense it is good to keep.  
I am not suggesting, I mean this is not a Narasimharaoean answer that the 
strategy is a non-strategy.  But, there is some element of that that it has to 
be kept very loose, very, sort of, effective but disaggregated for it to 
work.’’     
2.15 According to the Ministry, on average only about 60 Missions send Annual 
Action Plans to the ICCR. Soft power projections need to be mainstreamed and each 
Mission should be obligated to submit plans. Besides, at annual HoMs Conference as also 
Regional HoMs conferences, soft power projections ought to be included as an agenda 
item to enable better planning and implementation, to craft regional initiatives, learn from 
best practices, share creative funding ideas and learn from efforts of other countries. The 
XP Division has now absorbed the erstwhile Public Diplomacy Division, which projects 
soft power, ICCR should work with all concerned divisions and departments, including 
XP, the Akademies and State Governments in order to deliver better, with the allocation 
of adequate resources – both financial and in terms of personnel. This would itself prove 
be a worthwhile investment.      
2.16 On being asked about parameters determining ways and means for developing our 
soft power in different countries and regions of the world,  the Ministry submitted the 
following through a written reply:- 
“Parameters/ consideration for determining the ways and means for 
projecting soft power in various countries/ regions of the world largely 
depend on the Foreign Policy of the day. These are diligently calibrated, in 
tune with the evolving policy priorities in close coordination with the 
GOI.” 
2.17  On the short-term, mid-term and long term goals of the ICCR in regard to these 
parameters, the Ministry submitted the following through a written reply:- 

10 
 
“ICCR’s vision is to foster cultural relations  with all the countries of the 
world and emerge as a brand organization in India providing “ Smart 
Power” solutions and strategies for enhancing these relations further. As 
far as short term goals are considered, ICCR prepares Plan of Action 
(POA) every financial year. Mid-term and Long term-goals based on the 
Foreign Policy initiatives focus on institution building – that is 
institutionalizing processes involved in Smart Power projection. ICCR’s 
statutory bodies (General Assembly, Governing Body and Finance 
Committee), with the completion of tenure in October 2015 were recently 
reconstituted on March 28, 2016. Reconstituted General Assembly would 
be soon be convened and ICCR’s Short term, Mid -term and Long term 
goals would be worked out accordingly.”     
 
2.18 The Ministry has stated that the celebration of the International Day of Yoga on 
the 21 st of June last year globally was assessed as a very effective manifestation of our 
soft power outreach. The XP Division and the ICCR worked very closely with each other 
and also with AYUSH in this effort, and this was marked in 144 countries through ICCR 
centres and Indian Missions. As a follow up to this effort, the ICCR has established the 
India-Turkmen Centre for Yoga and Traditional Medicine in Ashgabad in July last year 
and the India-China Yoga College at Yunnam Minzu University in November last year.  
 
2.19 The Ministry has also stated that the growing profile and influence of Bollywood 
is a very important factor in our soft power, and an on-going effort is underway to 
acquire non-commercial rights of quality Indian feature films and TV series, with the 
proposal to make these available to our Missions to reach out to young people, potential 
viewers and film lovers globally. Another aspect related to soft power is the projection of 
our culture through Embassy buildings. We have made a conscious decision to increase 
Indian motifs and architectural features and this is visible in many of our new projects, 
notably in Bahrain, Shanghai, Beijing and Kuwait. 
2.20 The Foreign Secretary during the sitting of the Committee made the following 
point in describing development partnerships as a means of soft power projection:- 
“The Committee may also wish to note that our development partnerships 
have been a very effective way of projecting soft power. Fifty-four per 
cent of the Ministry’s budget is actually allocated to developmental 
assistance. Whether it is the Parliament in Kabul, a Hospital in 
Kathmandu, Housing in Sri Lanka, or a Sports Stadium in the Caribbean, 
we have earned enormous goodwill through these efforts. While this could 

11 
 
be a subject for a separate discussion, the Lines of Credit abroad, 
especially to Africa, projects in neighbouring countries, particularly of a 
connectivity relevance, and the training and capacity building that we 
offer in India and abroad are all key elements of our soft power 
enhancement. These are areas that occupy increasing attention within the 
Ministry and much of our energies are devoted to effective monitoring and 
speedier implementation.’’ 
 
2.21 While elaborating upon the appeal of Gandhian values as a soft power resource, 
the Foreign Secretary during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“….so, we are actually looking at the Pravasi Bharatiya  Kendra which we 
have taken over with the merger of the Overseas Indian Ministry.  We 
want to see if actually, when we get it going, we can have a major Gandhi 
exhibition there because probably the best way of raising consciousness is 
to begin at home.  For our own people and for the Pravasis who come to 
India and who would be coming to the Centre, whether we can enhance 
their understanding of Gandhi.  It is certainly a theme which can be 
focused upon.  During the Prime Minister’s visit to South Africa, you  
would notice that he actually took one day off actually to visit 
Pietermaritzburg and to go to the Phoenix Settlement.  The fact that he did 
it and it got a lot of play, itself was raising that consciousness.  But, in the 
process of doing this for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra, we have actually 
today found or are tracking a lot of resources relating to Gandhiji which 
we hope over a period of time to more effectively present.  Certainly the 
point is well taken.  I think we could look and maybe October 2 is a good 
occasion to ask Embassies all over the world also to promote that.”   
 
2.22 When asked whether any comparative study has been made to determine the ways 
in which different countries leverage their soft power, the Foreign Secretary during the 
sitting submitted as under:- 
 “...yes, actually this is an issue we have just asked PP Division to do some 
sort of first cut of what are other people doing, give us a comparative 
model but again I would submit in many ways this is very unique. Large 
countries have unique soft power.  We will have a mix which would be 
very different though we are Asian countries, say from China, though we 
are democracy say from Europe or the United States. I think we are in a 
curious way a mix of western liberal tradition with an Asian culture but an 
Asian culture which is different from other Asian cultures.  So, there can 
be some comparisons.  At the end of the day, I think the uniqueness really 
wins out...”   
 
 

12 
 
2.23 Soft Power is the ability of a country to achieve foreign policy objectives 
through cultural attraction rather than through force, coercion or indeed large 
deployments of money. While culture and history are at the centre of this approach,  
various political, economic and technological factors are equally significant. India is 
endowed with enormous soft power resources in the form of a vibrant culture, our  
art, artifacts, tangible and intangible heritage, practices like Yoga, meditation,  
Indian TV and cinema, information and technology exports, our democracy, our 
pluralism and a thriving diaspora. In spite of having vast soft power resources at its 
disposal, it comes as a matter of regret for the Committee that we have not be en 
able to put them to adequate use in matters of foreign policy. The Committee a re 
aware that the Government and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) has 
made concerted efforts to promote India’s soft power, its values, traditions, 
literature, languages, philosophy, art forms through a variety of mediums including 
electronic and print publications, live performances etc. Through these efforts, the 
image of India overseas has seen a major overhaul from that of a land of snake 
charmers to one of an emerging knowledge hub and IT superpower. Still, there ar e 
missing links regarding India abroad, and in certain cases there is the prejudice of 
prevailing stereotypes. The Committee find that in all these decades we have been  
lagging behind in cultural diplomacy and this lacuna should be removed at the 
earliest. It is widely believed that India’s soft power until now has functioned 
independently of Government policies and the world’s reckoning of our soft pow er 
is by default rather than design. The Committee are of the view that the 
Government has been able to leverage our country’s soft power only in a 

13 
 
fragmented way without the backing of a cohesive policy or commensurate financial 
resources. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
formulate a comprehensive and well-str uctured policy delineating India’s soft 
power resources and their articulation abroad. The Ministry of External Affairs and 
the ICCR should extensively and in a sustained manner employ the resources at 
their disposal to propagate an image of India that augments our natural historical 
appeal, empowering our diplomacy and foreign policy. 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 
2.24 Today the concept of soft power has acquired currency not only in the f ield 
of academics but also in the field of international relations and diplomacy. Though 
soft power is an intangible component of a State’s power and it is difficult to 
measure its definite impact, a study could establish the linkages between our soft 
power and tangible outcomes in the field of diplomacy. Such a study could point 
towards the ways in which India could leverage its soft power Without such a 
linkage, soft power will remain a mere non- operational concept in India’s 
diplomatic doctrine. The Ministry has also conceded that it is worthwhile to explore 
devising an objective method of assessing effectiveness of soft power capabilities and 
their tangible foreign policy outcomes, such as developing a ‘soft power matrix’. The 
Committee are of the opinion that soft power, while very useful in itself, is only one 
possible instrument for enhancing our global role, along with appropriate use of 
hard power, and it should where possible be used in conjunction with the latter. The  
Committee would deem it desirable for the Ministry to study the tangible foreign 

14 
 
policy outcomes of soft power and to devise, thereafter, a blue print for deployin g it 
looking ahead. In itself, soft power carries no currency unless it is contextually 
driven and guided by certain objectives. The Committee would also recommend that 
the Government should come out with a ‘soft power matrix’ at the earliest, in order 
to measure the effectiveness of India’s soft power.  
The Ministry states that there is substantial scope for the improvement of 
India’s image in neighbouring States. Even while fully endorsing the idea that we 
cannot fix all our problems with neighbours through soft power engagemen t alone, 
the Committee feel that some amount of soft power may be beneficial in improving  
our relations with our neighbours . Going by India’s ‘Neighbourhood First’ policy, 
the Committee would also recommend that India should selectively exercise its soft 
power in neighbouring states for better diplomatic traction.          
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
2.25 The Committee observe that apart from using conventional means of soft 
power in the form of culture and heritage, India has started importing new elements 
into its repertoire of soft power. It is an articulation of the Ministry’s 
conceptualization of Indian culture as a dynamic concept. The Committee are 
pleased to note that the Min istry has been trying to go beyond Nye’s formulation of 
soft power by shifting focus from the ‘tools’ in hand to ‘approaches and methods’ of 
using soft power. The Government’s initiative to showcase India’s soft power to the 
world by successfully organizing the International Yoga Day on 21 st June across the 
globe was an expression of this approach. Such an approach will definite ly go a long 

15 
 
way in stamping India’s enduring image in the minds of people across continents. 
With the changing nature of global engagements, the manner in which we present 
our image overseas should also be flexible.  
But in order to achieve this, a great deal of ground work will need to be don e 
and a mere change in phraseology will not be adequate. It is informed that at 
present, on an average, only 60 Missions are sending Annual Action Plans to the 
ICCR. In the Committee’s opinion, this is a major handicap in adequate  planning 
and in the leveraging of our soft power resources. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend that in order to mainstream soft power projections, each Mission 
should necessarily submit its Annual Plan to the ICCR and soft power projections 
should be a definitive agenda item at annual HoMs/Regional HoMs Conferences.  
The Committee note that the Ministry has considered Development 
Partnerships as an effective means to project soft power. But in a number of c ases, 
while announcements are made at the highest levels, funds are not available in tim e. 
The Committee in earlier Reports had expressed anguish over such delays in 
disbursals, in project execution and in the lack of effective monitoring, and her e 
again the Committee would strongly reason that Development Partnerships should 
be handled carefully because they have the potential to create a favourable image of 
India overseas.  
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that these partnerships should 
be handled with utmost diligence along with the expeditious release of funds for the 
equally expeditious execution of projects.  

16 
 
The Committee also recommend that India being the birthplace of Mahatma 
Gandhi, we should propagate his values and philosophy through embassies in all 
parts of the world in a sustainable manner in the long term. In a world divided by 
strife and conflict, the path of non-violence and peace lit by Mahatma Gan dhi 
decades ago could awaken nations around the globe to India’s message once again. 
In addition, Gandhian values of environmental consciousness, “small is beautiful” 
and moral living have once again become relevant to global public discourse. Ther e 
could be no better time to revive interest in the Father of our Nation.   
       (Recommendation No.3)   

17 
 
CHAPTER III 
ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL 
RELATIONS 
According to the Ministry, since its establishment in 1950, the Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR) has made concerted efforts to promote India’s soft power 
abroad, celebrating, inter alia, Indian culture, our democracy, its values, traditions, 
literature, languages, philosophy and art forms through a variety of mediums, including 
electronic, publications, live performances, India Studies Chairs, seminars and 
conferences, exchange programmes, scholarships and through Indian Cultural Centres 
(ICC) abroad. The ICCR has emerged as an important organisation for cultural 
engagement with the world and for promoting India’s culture abroad in all its 
magnificence. It has evolved and adapted its requirements as also adjusted its emphasis in 
the activities it undertakes keeping in view Indi a’s soft power requirements and evolving 
diplomatic relationships. These efforts have contributed to helping develop a better 
understanding of India in foreign countries and in the enhancing of our prestige.  
   
3.2 The aims and objectives of the ICCR’s as  enunciated in its Memorandum of 
Association, are as follows:-  
 To participate in the formulation and implementation of policies and programmes 
relating to India’s cultural relations with other countries;  
 To foster and strengthen cultural relations and mutual understanding between 
India and other countries;  
 To establish and develop relations with national and international organizations in 
the field of culture. 
 To take such measures as may be required to further these objectives. 
 
3.3 The ICCR’s activities are serviced and supported through its Headquarters in New 
Delhi, 20 Regional Offices located in various parts of India, and 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres abroad.  

18 
 
3.4 The ICCR is headed by a President. Its activities are overseen by its statutory 
bodies – the General Assembly, Governing Body and Finance Committee. These bodies 
provide overall guidance and direction and approve the ICCR’s budget and Annual Plan 
of Action. The last three year tenure of the General Assembly, Governing body and 
Finance Committee expired on October 16, 2015, and all three bodies have now been 
reconstituted. The Council draws up a Plan of Action (POA) before the start of the 
financial year listing out the activities it proposes to undertake and projected expenditure 
involved, which are approved by its statutory bodies.     
3.5  While delivering a brief account of the activities undertaken by the ICCR, the 
representative of the Ministry during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“The promotion of Indian performing arts and fine arts is an important part 
of the ICCR’s work.  In the current financial year, the Council has 
presented 120 performances in about 100 countries. It has taken 18 
exhibitions overseas, received and arranged three exhibitions in India, and 
organised an art residency programme for women artists in Shanghai.  The 
ICCR has also organised major cultural festivals in Russia, in the CIS 
countries, in Singapore and in Egypt.  The participation in these activities 
is with the help of empanelled experts artists and scholars in the relevant 
fields; and in the Ministry’s view, the Council has played a major role in 
helping create a sophisticated and nuanced understanding of India and of 
our fabled scholastic and intellectual strengths through specifically 19 
conferences and seminars which, as an example, have been organised in 
the current year. I would like to mention, about the two international 
conferences, in particular, which were held.  One was the World Indology 
Conference that was organised at the Rashtrapati Bhavan in November last 
year and the second was the recently held International Conference on the 
Roma Community.”  
 
 A. ICCR’S EXPENDITURE AND BUDGET SITUATION   
3.6 As per the Detailed Demands for Grants, a budget of Rs. 192 crores has been 
allocated in BE 2015-16 and it was retained at the same level in RE 2015-16. During BE 
2016-17, the budgetary allocation was enhanced to Rs. 215.80 crores which is higher by 
12.40%.  

19 
 
3.6 As per the Ministry, at RE stage of 2015-16 it has sought Rs.202.80 crores. Under 
BE 2015-16, it asked for Rs.250.48 crores.  The details of BE, RE and expenditure of 
ICCR are as follows:-  
 
As can be seen from the budgets for the last six years, not only were there cuts at 
the BE stage but the ICCR was also asked to plan more realistically at the RE stage, 
perforce requiring ICCR to cut down on programme outreach. With an adequate budget 
and funds, the ICCR will be better equipped to project and leverage India’s Soft Power. 
 
3.7  The details of the budgetary allocations and activities carried out by the ICCR are 
as under:  
 
S.No. Year BE RE projected 
By ICCR 
RE allotted Actual 
expenditure 
1 2010-11 150.00 176.41 150.00 148.36 
2 2011-12 121.00 197.02 140.00 175.75 
3 2012-13 150.00 253.50 157.30 181.08 
4 2013-14 160.00 194.82 160.00 165.45 
5 2014-15 176.00 193.19 167.20 160.29 
6 2015-16 192.00 202.80 192.00 -- 
S.No.  2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2013-14 
1. Budget (in Crores) 86.75 139.00 150.00 140.00 157.20 160.00 167.20 
 Expenditure (in crores) 88.28 130.00 148.36 175.75 81.08 165.45 160.29 
Activities         
1. International Scholars 3432 3987 4375 4268 4721 5178 6095 
2. Indian Cultural 
Centres abroad 
21 26 34 37 37 39 35 
3. Outgoing Cultural 
Delegations 
94 101 125 146 157 61 86 
4. Outgoing Visitors 
Programme 
85 54 72 35 51 15 18 
5. Festivals abroad 5 2 4 7 2 1 3 

20 
 
 
Note: Out of RE of Rs. 167.20 Cr, a sum of Rs. 9.58 Cr was deducted by the O/O 
PrCCA/MEA towards previous liabilities.  
3.8  On being asked about the reasons for a decline in the number of activities 
undertaken by the ICCR, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“Resource/Financial crunch is the sole reason responsible for decline in 
the number of ICCR’s activities over the last few years. Budget situation 
described above may please be referred to once again. Another important 
factor responsible for decline in ICCR’s activities is the growing Agency 
work (for administering various scholarship schemes) and untimely 
release of funds for implementing the same. Of the 24 Scholarship 
schemes that ICCR is currently administering, 16 schemes are being 
administered as Agency. All these schemes are primarily goodwill 
generating projects. If the funds are not released in time to the foreign 
students studying in India, purpose of these schemes is defeated. Due to 
non-release of Agency funds in time, ICCR has been bona fide spending 
S.No.  2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2013-14 
6. ICCR Chairs abroad & 
Hindi Teachers 
32 42 84 91 95 76 77 
7. Outgoing Exhibitions 22 24 46 42 52 35 36 
8. Distinguished/Imp 
visitors programme 
19 19 19 11 18 3 4 
9. Fellowship to Foreign 
Scholars 
-- 9 14 3 4 3 4 
10. Academic Visitors 
Programme 
-- -- 5 10 6 NIL  10 
11. Busts/Statues 1 11 3 26 13 6 12 
12. Incoming Cultural 
Delegations 
48 35 29 36 17 11 61 
13. International Festivals 
in India 
4 3 9 8 11 4 11 
14. Indian Cultural 
programmes in India 
(Horizon) 
NIL 18 403 435 521 332 336 
15. Conferences & 
Seminar 
1 4 8 12 11 2 13 
16. Incoming Exhibitions 13 5 3 4 4 2 2 

21 
 
its own allocation for smooth implementation of Scholarship schemes. For 
example, ICCR spent Rs. 28 Crores in FY 2014-15 and Rs. 57 Crores in 
FY 2015-16 from its allocation. In the past few years, fund spent by ICCR 
on Agency work was given back as reimbursement in next FY. However, 
this was made part of ICCR’s budget allocation of next FY and not 
reimbursed as an additional amount that was spent. As a result, the net BE 
would further come down. In some years, part of Agency funds would be 
released to ICCR towards the end of the financial year, which could not 
practically be spent by ICCR and had to be surrendered. In a situation 
when ICCR has to spend its allocation for Agency schemes, in the absence 
of liquidity, it is left with no choice but to cut down its own activities and 
outreach.”  
3.9 It is clear that there is a massive gap between the ICCR’s wide an d ever-
expanding mandate and the budgetary support granted it to fulfill this mandate. As per 
the Ministry, in order to maximize outcomes within limited resources, the ICCR has 
already taken a number of initiatives, which include: 
a) Synergizing its efforts with related line Ministries to converge funds, 
b) Initiating partnerships with State Governments and sharings costs incurred, 
c) Initiating negotiations with its foreign counterparts for establishing institutional 
partnerships. It is currently negotiating a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the China Federation of Literary and Art Circles (CFLAC), 
d) Initiating the running of Indian Culture Centres abroad under a PPP model, 
e) Exploring possibilities for establishing Regional Culture Centres abroad to cover 
more than one country in the region, 
f) Negotiating a cost-sharing model for establishing chairs in Universities abroad,  
maximizing the use of Indian Chairs and teachers, and 
g) Establishing a panel of multi-talented teachers to minimize costs incurred on 
sending many teachers to a centre/Mission. 
3.10 The Ministry has submitted that adequate, if not generous, budgetary support to 
the ICCR’s expanding mandate would go a long way in assisting it in producing quality 
outcomes. 
3.11  On the financial delays created on account of agency work, the Foreign Secretary 
during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“On the agency work which ICCR does, again what you have said is very 
valid. It is a problem, it has been a problem and there have been 
complaints from ICCR about not receiving payment in time for agency 

22 
 
work. When I spoke about the irregular flow of finances, frankly that was 
what I was partly referring to and at least from the MEA side for the work 
that they do for us, we are very conscious of it and we are trying to ensure 
that does not continue to be a problem.” 
 
3.12 On the same matter, the DG, ICCR during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“…..mentioning about our problems regarding collecting money on 
account of work done as an agency. That, in fact, has been crippling on 
top of the lack of adequate financial reserves. The present Foreign 
Secretary has taken a view that wherever ICCR is given agency work, 75 
per cent of that money should be paid in advance so that it does not 
impinge upon our limited money available for programming activities. I 
am glad that it has been released so far in the first quarter and I hope, this 
will continue. Other Ministries should also follow this. This is the practice 
within the Ministry….”   
  
3.13 On the issue of State support to cultural activities, the representative of the 
Ministry during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“You also made a point about the kind of cultural exchanges that used to 
be very popular up to the 70s and into the 80s but are not longer as visible.  
This is part of an overall tendency that funding for culture on all side, 
institutional funding by Government for culture on all sides, has dwindled.  
This is a pattern that used to happen at the time when there was State 
financing of culture.  We find that now even when we suggest to foreign 
partners that we should have a Government- to-Government cultural 
exchange programme there is very little receptivity to the idea because 
Western industrialised countries in particular feel that culture is something 
that should be self- supported.  Notwithstanding the fact that at least in 
Europe very large public funding is provided for local cultural activities. 
But providing subvention to foreign cultural groups is not something that 
they think of automatically. So, it takes a fair amount of diplomacy with 
local and regional Governments, with other bodies or with private 
foundations to try to get them to support our groups.  That is the reason 
why, there is also not so much funding available for cultural groups to 
visit India.  Notwithstanding that, ICCR nonetheless does sponsor and 
support a fair number of foreign cultural performances in our country but 
not as much as we would like.” 
3.14 While spelling out budgetary requirements, the DG, ICCR during the sitting 
submitted as under:- 

23 
 
 “You asked about the quantum of funding..... Actually I have taken over 
after the last RE projection was made. But I think notionally at least Rs. 
500 crore would be required which, in fact, the hon. Minister of External 
Affairs has also been mentioning so that that gives us a reasonable 
flexibility because when we take the regional offices, one-third of them 
are manned at Under Secretary level officers. So, based on that projection, 
in fact, the hon. Minister of External Affairs mentioned this a couple of 
times. This time, we missed the bus at the RE stage. This can only happen 
at the BE stage next year. I had a conversation with the Finance Secretary 
and Foreign Secretary. Last time when the Foreign Secretary attend the 
Governing body meeting, he had advised ‘realistic planning”.  
 
3.15 On the matter of realistic planning for the ICCR, the Financial Advisor to the 
Ministry of External Affairs during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“What we call realistic planning, if you have to do the time series analysis 
of the fiscal year 2014-15 and 2015- 16 which have just gone by, ICCR’s 
demands at the BE level in 2014-15 was Rs. 217.68 crore and which was 
reduced to Rs. 193 crore at the RE level. That was a realistic planning 
given the institutional capacity.  In 2015-16, the demand was Rs. 250.48 
crore which at the RE stage was brought down to Rs. 202.80 crore.  We as 
the finance people tried our best to satisfy their demands.  In 2014-15, the 
BE allocated was Rs. 176 crore  vis-à-vis the RE wish-list of Rs. 193 crore 
and in 2015-16 Rs. 192 crore was allocated vis-à-vis the demand for Rs. 
202.80 crore.  Between the RE demand and allocation in 2015-16 the gap 
was only Rs. 10 crore. For the coming fiscal year, though our Budget 
Estimates have been squeezed by 2 per cent, we have actually proposed an 
enhanced Budget Estimate for ICCR.  So, we are going to budget for 
2016-17 an amount of Rs. 215.80 crore, which is an increase of 12.4 per 
cent despite our overall Budget Estimates being reduced by 2 per cent.” 
3.16 He further submitted that:- 
“Similarly, when I look at ICCR dispassionately and we are here to 
deliberate on the road map ahead, there are basically two gaps, the human 
resource gap and the foreign exchange gap.  In my humble opinion, the 
finance gap is not as critical as the human resource gap.  The above 
analysis clearly shows that they were forced to do realistic planning 
because of the lack of institutional capacity to spend.  I do know whether 
this is a chicken egg story. I think, first we have to put the right people in 
the right slot, built up institutional capacities – I do not know whether they 
will agree with me or not but we will try out best that money will flow.”         

24 
 
3.17 According to the information made available by the Ministry, the British Council 
enjoys a budget of 800 million (about Rs. 8000 crores) of which it receives about 160 
million (Rs. 1600 crores) from the UK Government while the rest is raised through its 
activities like English language courses etc. China commenced establishing Confucius 
Institutes in 2004 and has already established 300 such Institutes in various universities . 
In comparison, the ICCR has a budget of Rs. 192 crores and 35 Indian Cultural Centres 
abroad, which is manifestly inadequate in attaining its goals and objectives as stated 
above.    
3.18     The Foreign Secretary during the sitting of the Committee submitted as under:- 
“New institutional partnerships have been initiated both abroad, for 
example, in Iran and China recently, and with State Governments at home, 
equally important. ICCR is synergising with other Ministries including 
Culture, HRD, AYUSH, Tourism and Textiles.”   
3.19  Elaborating on the issue, the representatives during a sitting submitted as under:- 
“Another thought is establishing institutional counterpart mechanisms. For 
example, the Chinese Federation of Artists and Writers are interested to 
collaborate. We pay airfare and provide hospitability on reciprocal basis. 
So we are pursuing this kind of line, so that we can make the resources 
stretch.” 
3.20 On being asked to provide a comparison between the ICCR and the Confucius 
Institute of China, the representatives during a sitting submitted as under:- 
“Shri Sharad Tripathi ji made a point that we had made a comparison 
between Confucius Institute and ICCR. Sir, we know that those people are 
very active. They have opened their centres in great number. Point is that 
there is no such restriction on their budget as we have. They are self-
generating. It is also one of the points as I have told that we are 
experimenting that thing. If it is successful we will anticipate moving 
ahead regarding that model. To the best of my mind there are more than 
hundred Confuscious Centres in America. It means that they have two 
hundred or two hundred and fifty Centres in the world. Sir, they have a 
budget of 20 billion dollars for cultural diplomacy.”  
 
 
 
 

25 
 
 B. MANPOWER STATUS 
3.21 As per the Ministry, the  ICCR is headed by a President. The Director General 
(DG) is an officer drawn from the Foreign Service (MEA) and heads the executive of  the 
ICCR. The DG is supported by a team of three Deputy Director Generals (DDGs) at the 
executive level; three Directors, Special Programme Directors (SPDs), and Programme 
Directors (PDs) at the management level and Programme Officers (POs), Assistant 
Programme Officers (APOs) and other staff at the support level. Posts of DDGs are filled 
by Foreign Service officers drawn from the MEA. Posts of Directors are filled by ICCR 
Cadre officers. In terms of sanctioned strength and posts actually filled – the Post of 
Director General is filled. Against the three posts of DDGs, only one post is currently 
occupied. All the three posts of Directors are vacant in the absence of eligible officers. 
Against 251 sanctioned posts of the ICCR cadre at various levels, only 178 posts are 
filled. This covers the Head Quarter (HQ) in Delhi, Regional Offices (ROs) and Indian 
Culture Centres (ICC) abroad.     
3.22 When asked about the steps taken to tide over manpower shortage, the Ministry 
through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“To cope with the growing mandate and volume of work at all levels of 
ICCR’s structure and serious manpower crunch, IC CR has engaged 96 
personnel at various level as outsourced support and 8 consultants. This 
covers HQ, ROs and ICCs abroad. However, these means are not proved 
of great help. In 2009, Finance Ministry had sanctioned 44 posts for ICCR 
cadre, which was to be filled by direct recruitment. These posts could not 
be filled within a period of one year since the date of their sanctioning as 
ICCR did not have its recruitment rules in place and was in the process of 
formulating them. In the meantime ICCR had requested SSC and UPSC to 
recruit officers/officials on behalf of ICCR, which could not materialize. 
Now ICCR has its recruitment rules in place. Proposal to permit ICCR to 
recruit personnel against 44 posts mentioned above has been submitted 
through MEA to Finance Ministry for its approval. Filling up of the 
sanctioned posts; greater leverage to engage experts in the form of 
Consultants; engaging specialized agencies to assist in functioning of 
ICCR would enhance ICCR’s output (in quantity) and outcome (in 
quality) substantially.”                  

26 
 
3.23 The Ministry has submitted that the ICCR intends to seriously invest in training 
and generating the right attitude in the minds of its personnel, especially on ‘Culture 
Management’. In order to implement India’s Soft Power Diplomacy it is important that 
our personnel are trained and well equipped with necessary tools and strategies. For this 
purpose, the ICCR has taken initiatives which include (i) orienting every Director ICCs, 
teachers and professors being deployed a broad on their role as missionaries for India’s 
soft power abroad, (ii) activating ICCR’s alumni, (iii) and initiating talks with leading 
management institutes to design courses for ‘Cultural Management’ for ICCR officers at 
all levels.           
3.24 Broa dly, the ICCR’s activities could be divided into (A) Academic and 
Intellectual; (B) Cultural; and (C) Other Activities. 
C. ACADEMIC AND INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITIES 
3.25 As per the Ministry, the ICCR provides 946 scholarships of its own to foreign 
students from various parts of the world for graduate, postgraduate, doctoral and post-
doctoral courses in various fields annually which are funded by its budget. Besides 
ICCR’s own scholarships, ICCR also manages scholarship schemes funded by the MEA 
and the Department of AYUSH.  For the academic year 2015-16, of the 3339 scholarship 
slots available, ICCR received 3880 applications and helped secure admissions for almost 
90% of the slots. For the Afghan scholarship scheme, under which 1000 slots are offered 
annually, all slots have been utilized. Total number of ICCR scholars currently in India 
has increased from 6,252 in 2014-15 to 6,518 in 2015-16. The reasons for non-admission 
of some of the applicants are mainly linked to applicants not being able to meet the 
qualification requirements for the universities/institutions to which they applied or due to 
a lack of seats in government universities / university affiliated colleges. At present, the 
ICCR has scholars from over 120 countries studying subjects covering dance and music, 
the humanities, commerce, science and engineering, and management as also research in 
various fields. ICCR scholars are studying in 18 States in India in over 120 institutions, 
including in IITs and NITs.  
 
 

27 
 
3.26 The details of the scholarship schemes being administered by ICCR are as under:- 
Sl. Name of the Scholarship Scheme 
A ICCR Scholarship Schemes 
1 General Cultural Scholarship Scheme 
2 Scholarships under bilateral Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEP Scholarship/EEP/MOU) 
only where valid CEPs are operational 
3 Scholarships for students from Commonwealth Countries (ICCR’s commonwealth Scholarship 
Plan) 
4 Special Scholarship Scheme for Mauritian nationals (TC Division) 
5 Scholarship Scheme for Training in Indian Music and Dance (ICCR Scholarship Scheme) 
6 Global Studies Programme 
7 Scholarship Scheme for Bangladeshi Nationals – Bangladesh Scholarship Scheme 
8 Scholarship Scheme for Sri Lankan Nationals – Nehru Memorial Scholarship Scheme 
B Scholarships Schemes being administered by ICCR on behalf of Agencies 
9 Scholarship for students from SAARC Countries – SAARC Scholarship Scheme 
10 Scholarships for students from African Countries – Africa Scholarship Scheme 
11 Scholarships for students from Mekong Ganga Co-operation (MGC) Countries – (Mekong 
Ganga Co-operation Scholarship Scheme) 
12 Scholarships for Afghan nationals – Afghan Scholarship Scheme 
13 Scholarship for Nepalese nationals (also known as Silver Jubilee Scholarship Scheme) 
14 Scholarships for Mongolian nationals – Aid to Mongolia Scholarship Scheme 
15 Scholarships for Bhutanese nationals – Aid to Bhutan Scholarship Scheme 
16 Scholarships for Maldivian nationals – Aid to Maldives Scholarship Scheme 
17 Scholarships to Bangladeshi nationals – India Scholarship (Bangladesh) Scheme  
18 Nehru Memorial Scholarship Scheme  
19 Maulana Azad Scholarship Scheme  
20 Rajiv Gandhi Scholarship Scheme  
21 Scholarship for students from IOR - ARC Countries (IOR-ARC Scholarship Scheme) not valid 
2014 onwards 
22 
Ayush Scholarships to study Indian Traditional Medicine Systems such as Ayurveda, Unani, 
Siddha & Homeopathy (available for students from all Countries, though priority is given to 
those from BIMSTEC Countries) 
23 Ayush Scholarship Scheme for Non Bimstec countries on behalf of Ayush Department to study 
in Indian Traditional Medicine System such as Ayurveda, Yoga Unani, Siddha & Homeopathy 
24 AYUSH Scholarships to study Indian Traditional Medicine Systems such as Ayurveda, Unani, 
Siddha & Homeopathy (for Malaysian nationals) 
 

28 
 
3.27 The Ministry has furnished the following information with regard to its 
scholarship scheme:- 
Given the large financial outlay of its scholarship programme and its long-term impact, 
the ICCR is giving special attention to the welfare and wellbeing of its scholars while 
they are in India, including, inter alia, arranging talks and meetings with eminent experts 
and prominent personalities, arranging discourses/participation at cultural events to 
expose them to Indian culture, taking them on summer and winter camps and to places of 
historical and cultural importance, and so on. In order to provide them a superior 
understanding of our political system, the ICCR is also planning on organizing meetings 
for groups of students with members of State Legislatures and of Parliament. It has plans 
to extend welfare programmes from such tours to exposing foreign students to all aspects 
of Indian society, from its culture and science to its political system and economics. The 
ICCR’s endeavour is to provide foreign students a comprehensive experience of India so 
that they return to their respective countries as lifelong friends of our country. 
3.28 It was further stated that over the decades, the ICCR has created a pool of scholars 
around the world many of whom have distinguished themselves in various walks of life. 
It is working with Indian Missions to ensure that India’s engagement with these scholars 
continues after their return to their countries. Towards this, at the ICCR’s initiative, 
Indian Missions are in the process establishing ICCR Alumni Groups, and so far 34 
Missions have established such groups. The ICCR is also in the process of creating a 
database of its alumni.   
3.29   According to the Ministry, in order to promote studies pertaining to various 
aspects of India in universities and institutions abroad, the ICCR has established India 
Studies Chairs. At present, it has 64 operational Chairs and 8 new Chairs are likely to be 
operationalized soon, for which MOUs have been signed. These Chairs are in about 50 
countries covering a variety of subjects, including Indian culture, languages, polity, 
history, contemporary India, Buddhist Studies, philosophy and intellectual history, 
humanities and social sciences, international relations, Tagore studies, cinema and film 
studies, corporate governance, and strategic management and they also engage with 
young audiences and local intelligentsia host countries in various ways such as through 
research guidance/collaboration, conferences, public lectures, publications etc. To 

29 
 
increase its portfolio of Chairs, the ICCR has recently begun seeking partners under the 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) model. EXIM Bank of India funds one Chair and 
sponsorships have been raised by Universities abroad for a few more for meeting about 
half of ICCR’s cost for Chairs. Amongst its Chairs, ICCR currently has 20 for Hindi, 3 
for Sanskrit, 2 for Tamil and 1 for Bengali. In addition, it has deployed 9 Hindi teachers 
abroad, some of whom serve in Indian Cultural Centres.      
3.30 On the ways of financing these India Studies Chairs, the representative during the 
sitting stated as under:- 
“The academic Chairs you had asked for, one is we are trying to look for 
more cost sharing models. More prestigious universities like Harvard and 
others, they would like to go the endowment way. They want us to put in 
millions of dollars which we do not have. Instead, what model we are 
looking at is – we are looking to the host university to offer residential, 
office accommodation, health insurance and a part of the salary so that we 
can supplement the rest. We have been able to do a few arrangements like 
that.” 
3.31 The Ministry has stated that the ICCR regularly organizes international seminars 
and conferences, by itself or in partnership with other like-minded institutions, on themes 
relevant to its mandate. During 2015-16, 19 conferences and seminars were organised, 
including the first International Conference of Indologists which was inaugurated by the 
Hon’ble President of India, Shr i Pranab Mukherjee at Rashtrapati Bhavan and the 
International Roma Conference 2016, which was inaugurated by the Hon’ble External 
Affairs Minister, Smt. Sushma Swaraj, at Azad Bhavan, ICCR.  An International seminar 
on Vietnam was also arranged.  The Council also organizes international conferences in 
India, preferably in collaboration with academic institutions. The Kalinga-Lanka 
Conference was organized in collaboration with Utkal University, Bhuvaneshwar, while 
the Conference on Kashmir’s Rishi -Sufi traditions was organized in collaboration with 
Kashmir University in Srinagar. A seminar on 
the forms of soft power was organized 
with the Indian Institute of Advanced studies,  Simla. In addition to these, the ICCR also 
extends support to various Universities and organizations for international conferences/ 
seminars.   
3.32  The Ministry has furnished details on other academic and intellectual 
engagements that the ICCR undertakes:- 

30 
 
(a) Under the Academic Visitors Programme (AVP), the Council invites international 
academicians holding positions of eminence in their respective countries with proven 
credentials, including PIO/NRIs, on the recommendation of the HOM for a period of 7-
10 days. The scheme has helped widen strategic cooperation between India and variou s 
other countries. During the year 2015-16, as of December 2015, the Council invited five 
(05) eminent Academicians/Scholars from Argentina, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Poland and 
Tanzania to India. 
(b) As a part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural relations and mutual 
understanding between India and other countries, the Council facilitates visits of Indian 
scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artists to foreign countries under the Outgoing 
Visitors Programme (OVP) to attend and present papers on culture, literature, Indology, 
Buddhism, Sufism etc. in major conferences and to deliver lectures at reputed universities 
abroad. The Outgoing Visitors help the ICCR maintain and develop collaborations with 
various organizations/institutions abroad.  During the period from April to December 
2015, the Council sponsored visits of 21 eminent scholars to various parts of the world 
i.e. Bhutan, Canada, France, Japan, Mauritius, Srilanka, Thailand, USA & UK.     
(c)  The ICCR awards Junior and Senior Research Fellowships to international 
scholars specialising in Indian studies in the fields of culture and social sciences. Under 
this programme, the selected Fellow is affiliated, on the basis of mutual consent, to an 
academic institution in India. Six (06) Fellows visited India between April and December 
2015.
 On behalf of the Ministry of External Affairs, the ICCR also administers the 
SAARC Fellowship.      
D.  CULTURAL EXCHANGES 
3.33 The Ministry states that exchanges with other countries, particularly for the 
promotion of Indian culture abroad -- including various performing arts such as dance, 
music and theatre; visual arts such as paintings, artifacts, handicrafts, textiles, pottery and 
promotion of Yoga and traditional practices -- is an important aspect of ICCR’s work. 
This is accomplished through three key mediums – Indian Cultural Centres abroad; the 
sending of Indian cultural troupes, teachers, scholars and experts abroad; and by 
organizing Indian cultural festivals. 
 

31 
 
a. Indian Cultural Centres 
3.34 In order to promote awareness and appreciation of India’s rich cultural heritage, 
the ICCR currently operates 37 Indian Cultural Centres across the globe. These Centres 
are instruments of India’s cultural outreach abroad and project our soft power through a 
wide range of cultural, academic and intellectual activities, promoting knowledge, 
information and greater understanding of various aspects of Indian culture including, 
Indian dance, music, yoga, languages, food, festivals, history, ethos and traditions and 
contemporary issues.         
  
3.35 It has been informed that these Centres are located in countries where we have 
significant strategic, economic, political and cultural interests as also countries with a 
large community of Indian origin. This includes countries in India’s immediate 
neighbourhood, in Southeast Asia, P5 countries as well as countries in Central Asia, West 
Asia, Africa and Latin America. Following announcements at the highest level to open 
Cultural Centres in Sydney and Hanoi, new Culture Centres were operationalized in these 
cities by initiating teaching activities. Existing Centres have made a significant 
contribution in strengthening cultural relations and fostering mutual understanding 
between India and other countries. Their activities are not restricted to the capital cities 
where they are located but cover other regions of the country as well.          
3.36 On being asked about constraints faced by the ICCs and efforts taken to make 
them financially self sustainable, the Ministry through a written reply stated as under:- 
“Most important constraints being faced by the ICCs abroad pertain to 
manpower and financial resource crunch. As far as manpower is 
concerned constraints faced are also in terms of numbers and quality of 
manpower available. ICCR is entering into PPP model to address both 
resource and manpower crunch wherein both are pooled by the partnering 
agencies for example, in case of Casa-de-la India, ICCR provides grant to 
the Centre for promotion of Indian Culture in Spain.” 
  
3.37 As per the Ministry, in order to maximize returns on the ICCR’s limited financial 
resources, the ICCR has entered into Public Private Partnerships (PPP) to operate ICCs 
abroad, with the cost of cultural promotion shared with local institutions committed to 
Indian culture. Casa de la India  in Spain and the Culture Centre in Cardiff, for instance, 

32 
 
are examples of this arrangement. Another initiative taken by the ICCR includes deputing 
teachers (dance, music, Hindi and Yoga) to Missions that can provide venues for 
operating classes either in a property occupied by it or at a local institution. To further 
utilize limited resources without compromising on expansion plans, the ICCR is currently 
exploring possibilities of establishing Regional Culture Centres abroad in select cities, 
which could cover a group of countries rather than the single host country alone.  
 
3.38 The Ministry has maintained that while existing Centres have been functioning 
satisfactorily, in order to improve their capacity and to empower them with appropriate 
means to ensure greater, more effective promotion of Indian culture abroad, the ICCR has 
constituted a Performance Audit team. The team is currently studying the functioning of 
ICCs and was expected to submit its recommendations by the end of March 2016.  
             
3.39 On its plans to open new cultural centres abroad, through a written reply it was 
noted:- 
“Yes, the Ministry is contemplating opening up of more centres. At 
present, work is on to establish new centres in Washington, Paris, Sydney 
and Hanoi. However, in the absence of sufficient resources the Ministry 
and ICCR may not be able to open new Culture Centres commensurate 
with the vision of the Government.”  
 
3.40 On being asked whether ICCs are adequately staffed, the Ministry through a 
written reply submitted as under:- 
“None of the Centres is adequately staffed. ICCR and MEA are currently 
seeking revival of ICCR’s 44 posts which could not be filled in 2009 as 
ICCR did not have recruitment rules then. These are now in place. Along 
with these 44 posts, ICCR is planning to engage domain experts in the 
field of Culture as Consultants/ Outsourced Managers to be sent as 
Directors at ICCs abroad as well as Directors of its Regional Offices 
within the country.”
    
     
3.41 On being asked about lessons learnt from inordinate delays in acquiring property 
for the Cultural Centre in Washington, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as 
under:- 

33 
 
“Acquiring property abroad, whether it is for establishing a Culture Centre 
or other GOI offices is a complicated exercise as it involves legal and 
extralegal factors when it comes to dealing with foreign governments. 
Under the present system while our Missions abroad are involved in 
identifying suitable properties, MEA’s Projects Division is entrusted with 
the responsibility of developing these in a “Fast Track” mode and make 
them suitable for use as soon as possible. In case of new Chancery 
projects, Project Division is factoring in the demand for establishing a 
Culture Centre in advance. ICCR comes at a later stage of making use of 
these facilities, after providing the initial input as to the space requirement 
specifications.” 
 
3.42 On being asked about the status of construction of new cultural centres of the 
ICCR abroad, the Ministry furnished the following information:- 
1) Washington – After going through multiple hurdles in identifying properties to 
establish the Indian Culture Centre in Washington, a property at 1438 U Street, NW, 
Washington DC was identified and was finally purchased by the Government of India in 
August, 2015.  Our Mission proposed that this property could accommodate offices of the 
Chancery including the Cultural Wing, following which a team comprising the DG, 
ICCR, AS (FA), JS (Projects) and Sr. Architect (Project) visited Washington in April 
2015 to examine the Mission’s proposal. The team rec ommended that the Mission may 
go ahead with minimal and appropriate renovations to the property located at 1438, U 
Street, NW, Washington DC and relocate Chancery annex offices to this property after 
conclusion of the renovations. The targeted deadline, to complete this and to make the 
building functional, is the end of 2016. Designs for the proposed renovation have been 
finalized. So far the project is well within the target of completion by the end of 2016.  
2)  
3) Paris – ICC Paris is a case study in the number of factors involved in acquiring 
property in a foreign country, where issues such as reciprocal commitments, perception 
of proportionate reciprocity, market concerns vis G- to-G cooperation, Federal vs Capital 
city administrations, legal and extralegal constraints, local heritage laws etc. play their 
role. The Indian Culture Centre (ICC) Paris was a long pending project ever since India 
offered a piece of land on concessional rates to the French Government for establishing 
its first branch of Alliance Française in New Delhi. This property was offered on the 
basis of a reciprocal commitment from the French government to provide a property on 
similar terms – that is on concessional rates (not at market rate) – for establishing an ICC 
in Paris. The French had difficulty in recognizing this reciprocal commitment until 2007 
when renewed efforts were put in by the Mission to persuade them to honor their 
commitment. Following this, between 2007 and 2009 over two dozen properties were 
identified and surveyed in prominent districts of Paris for establishing the ICC, including 

34 
 
properties proposed by France Domaine (French Government’s Federal body dealing 
with consolidation of Government properties) on concessional rates and not at market 
price. Considering the directives from GOI to negotiate for a property costing upto Euro 
5 million and not beyond, of the properties proposed by France Domaine, the Mission 
recommended one at 3 Avenue du Lowendal in District 7, which met both the space 
specifications as indicated by the ICCR as well as permissible limits of cost as indicated 
by the Ministry.  DG, ICCR and the finance team paid a visit in 2009 to examine the 
property and finalized the transaction. This property required redevelopment to make it 
suitable to carry out functions of the ICC. There was also an issue concerning a Fire Exit 
Gate which had to be resolved with the adjoining building of the Ministry of Agriculture. 
The Sale & Purchase agreement and cooperation papers were signed in 2011 between the 
two sides. In January 2015, our Mission signed an order of service with M/s Cle Millet 
appointing them as consultant architects assisting in implementing the agreement, also 
signed in January, 2015. After negotiations with the French side, the French Ministry of 
Agriculture has finally agreed to allow a Fire Exit from its premises. The Indian side will 
have to bear the expenditure on installation of automatic gates exists and the associated 
control and alarm systems. The French side will soon be sharing a draft legal document 
with our Mission containing the agreement between Embassy of India, Paris and the 
MAAF regarding the operationalization of the fire exist.  Once the document is signed, it 
will be publically notified and actual work will commence thereafter.  The above-
mentioned works were originally intended be completed by September 2016 to coincide 
with the formal opening of the “Namaste France” Festival in September, 2016.  
4) Hanoi – Our Mission has identified a suitable property for establishing the ICC 
and sought sanction from the MEA/ICCR to lease it.   As far as the ICCR is concerned, 
the Mission has been authorized to hire the proposed property for which ICCR would pay 
rent. The Mission will execute a formal lease with the local government once the latter 
completes mandatory renovation work. The Mission will, thereafter, carry out additional 
renovations to make the property useable for the Cultural Centre. The ICCR is pursuing 
its proposal for the sanction of additional funds with the MEA/MoF.  Meanwhile, it has 
deputed an India-based Yoga Teacher to the Mission as a Resource Person to conduct 
Yoga classes there and at other venues in Hanoi. Five Posts for ICC, Sydney have been 
sanctioned recently.   
5) Sydney – ICC, Sydney started functioning on a floor within the Chancery 
building. Two local teachers for Yoga and Hindi were deployed in March 2015.  Five 
Posts for ICC, Sydney have been sanctioned recently.   
6)  
3.43 Elaborating upon the new model for ICCs, the representative of the Ministry 
during the sitting submitted as under:- 

35 
 
“I should like to speak about the fact that we are experimenting with 
different models of cultural centres. There are 37 centres as you 
mentioned. I think, the number should perhaps be more. I should like to 
speak about one which is run by an extremely imaginative partnership that 
was developed in Spain, which is North of Madrid where the local 
government has provided the building and facilities. We have contributed 
in cash to some of the establishment costs and we also provide a certain 
sum of money annually but the activities are being undertaken through 
other resources that are raised locally through the provincial government, 
the local government and the central government. An extra-ordinary range 
of activities are generated from this centre which is also physically a 
delight to visit since it is an old Castilian house into which features from 
India have been transposed including jaali from Ahmedabad and furniture 
from India.” 
3.44 She further submitted that:- 
“Over time, the ICCR has continued to expand its outreach by establishing 
new Culture Centres abroad and building new forms of partnerships.  Two 
new Culture Centres have been operationalized in the current financial 
year in Sydney and Hanoi, and work on establishing eight other new 
centres is ongoing; a Centre in Paris is proposed to be inaugurated with the 
inauguration of the Namaste France Festival in the second half of this 
calendar year. New institutional partnerships have been initiated with the 
ICCR’s counterparts and other organizations.  While the ICCR is 
expanding its network of Culture Centres outside India, a need to review 
their functioning, of how they have been performing has been felt.  
Accordingly, a review process has been initiated to undertake a 
comprehensive performance review of the Culture Centres so that these 
may be further strengthened, empowered and recalibrated  in order to 
secure more effective outcomes. The performance audit underway is 
expected to be completed during the current financial year as things stand.  
This audit is also expected to evaluate the different aspects of the India 
Studies Chairs that have been established outside India.”   
 
b. Indian Cultural Troupes  
3.45 As per the Ministry, the ICCR regularly sends cultural troupes —dance, music, 
and theatre -- abroad to various countries to perform. In the last financial year, up to 
December 2015 it has sponsored 86 groups to about 91 countries to present varied forms 

36 
 
of Indian performing arts. Emphasis was also accorded to participation in major 
international festivals so as to generate interest in India’s cultural accomplishments. By 
the end of the financial year the ICCR would have sent a total of 120 groups abroad. The 
dance and music troupes include a wide range of Indian forms from various parts of the 
country to depict our range and repertoire in the performing arts. In addition to 
organizing performances, the ICCR from time to time deputes experts for lecture-
demonstrations and workshops abroad. As part of its scholarships programme, it also has 
over 50 foreign scholars learning Indian dance and music in India under Guru-shishya 
parampara.       
3.46  On the issue of Indian artists travelling abroad to perform, the representative of 
the Ministry during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“...the diversity of Indian artists abroad now is very great.  Not all Indian 
artists travel on behalf of or through the sponsorship of ICCR or any other 
Government institution.  There are again a very large number of artists 
who are travelling through the efforts of impresarios both in India and 
abroad.  I think that is a very valuable asset and resource which is 
available to Indian embassies abroad to be able to partner in collaboration 
with private impresarios and entrepreneurs....”   
3.47  She further submitted that:- 
“...For the ones who are sponsored by ICCR, I believe the selection 
process is through a mechanism which is established.  There is an 
empanelment advisory committee which is formed from amongst the 
members of the statutory bodies of the council and one of the three vice 
presidents of the ICCR chairs that committee. The empanelment advisory 
committee has tenure of three years and sub-committees are constituted to 
evaluate the applicants who represent different streams or different art 
forms.  In most cases, when a group or an artist or a performer is sent 
abroad, the local mission sends advice about what sort of performance, 
what genre, what demographic in a sense are we trying to appeal to or 
reach out to.” 
3.48 On being asked about steps taken to address the backlog in applications for the 
empanelment of artists, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:-  

37 
 
“Fresh round of empanelment process for upgrading the status of existing 
empanelled artists and empanelling new artists was initiated last year. 
Empanelment of performing artists is concluded. Process of empanelling 
vocal artists has been initiated.”  
 
3.49 On various financial constraints faced in sending troupes abroad, the 
representative of the Ministry during a sitting of the Committee submitted as under:- 
“I have to say that though the exercise may be on a shoestring budget, it is 
such an expensive one that we do try and arrange that the said artist or 
group can travel to neighbouring countries and regions as well.  So, rather 
than sending someone or requesting someone to travel to a single country 
for a single performance, we try and request them to use their time for 
other performances elsewhere.  These performance outside India tend to 
be either gratis for invited audiences or they tend to be for very low cost, 
just to cover the expenses locally of the performance itself, not even of 
stay and hospitality.  Even that is either covered through reaching out to 
corporate sponsors or through a variety of means ideally starting with 
local governments providing the local hospitality.  So, the entire operation 
is as low cost and budgeted for as frugally as possible.  It may be that the 
entire exercise tends to be very economical and therefore may not be of 
the highest quality but these are the genuine constraints within which we 
work.” 
3.50 As per the Ministry, the ICCR regularly sends abroad exhibitions on various 
themes connected to India which include paintings, photographs, textiles and garments 
from its existing collection as well as in collaboration with other organizations. It also 
curates new exhibitions to add to its collection. From time- to-time it also supports the 
presentation of art by Indian painters, sculptors and photographers abroad. In 2015-16 it 
sent 18 exhibitions out, of which 16 were from its own collection for display in various 
countries. The ICCR also supports exhibitions by foreign artists in India. It received three 
exhibitions from abroad -- one each from Russia, Montenegro and Vietnam. At the same 
time, it also organizes Artists’ Residencies with individual or groups of countries where 
Indian and foreign painters and sculptors are brought together for about a week or so to 
create a  work of art each which is then exhibited in various parts of India and abroad. An 
India-China Artists’ Residency called ‘Maitri with women painters from Shanghai in was 
organised in Jaipur last year and a reciprocal India- China Women Artists’ Residency 

38 
 
called ‘Maitri-II’ was arranged in Shanghai, China this year. The ICCR also plans to host 
Artists’ Residences with ASEAN, IORA and SAARC Member States and in Africa. 
 
E.   OTHER ACTIVITIES 
3.51 According to the Ministry,  the ICCR regularly supplies busts and statues of 
eminent personalities from India for installation abroad at prominent locations which 
helps disseminate our national message as well as the individual contributions of these 
figures abroad. In the financial year 2015-16, as of December 2015, the ICCR sent four 
busts including that of Mahatma Gandhi’s to Almaty, Turkmenistan, Malaysia, Haiti, the 
Hague, Malta and Mexico city; of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose’s to Singapore and 
Malaysia; and Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore’s to Tajikistan and Argentina. A total of 
nine (09) busts/statues including Aryabhata to France, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam to Sri 
Lanka, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar to Australia and Hungary, Lal Bahadur Shastri to Uzbekistan, 
Swami Vivekananda to Brazil were also set out. 
3.52 Under the Distinguished Visitors Programme, distinguished dignitaries of other 
countries are invited to India for about 10 days for an interaction with Indian dignitaries, 
media persons and academics and to familiarize them with the economic, political, social 
and other developments here. Under this programme, the ICCR hosted 23 visits during 
the financial year 2014-15 and financial year 2015-16 (till February), including a visit by 
Sheikh Rashid Ghannouchi, President of Ennahada Party, Tunisia; Shri Khil Raj Regmi, 
Former Chief Justice of Nepal; H.E. Dr. Sam Najuma, founding President of Namibia 
and a 14 member delegation of distinguished visitors from the Pacific Island Countries 
(PICs). Apart from DVP, ICCR has introduced a ne w visitors’ programme called the 
‘Important Visitors’ Programme’ (IVP) administering visits of guests who cannot be 
covered under DVP or AVP but who are nevertheless important to us. ICCR has so far 
hosted one visit under IVP.          
Regional Offices of ICCR in India 
3.53 As per the Ministry, the ICCR’s responsibilities are not limited to promoting 
Indian culture abroad, but also include the provision of all assistance to incoming foreign 
students, scholars and artists within the country. This calls for decentralized functioning 
and close cooperation with State Governments. The Council has 20 Regional Offices 

39 
 
(ROs). In order to realize close cooperation with State Governments, the ICCR initiated 
cooperation agreements with State Governments in 2014-15, which was continued in FY 
2015-16 as well. It has so far signed Memoranda of Understanding with nine (09) State 
Governments. Activities of ROs include coordination with State authorities, local bodies, 
cultural organizations, universities and colleges as also with artists, scholars and students. 
The primary functions of ROs include providing assistance to foreign students studying 
under the Council’s sc holarship schemes in universities located in various States. ROs 
also extend logistical facilities to incoming and outgoing cultural delegations and to any 
visitors hosted by the Council under its Distinguished Visitors Programme 
(DVP)/Academic Visitors Programme (AVP)/ Important Visitors Programme (IVP). 
Besides, they regularly organize cultural programmes under the ICCR’s Horizon series.  
 
3.54 The ICCR is the nodal organization for the projection of India’s soft power 
abroad, and ever since its establishment in 1950, it has emerged as the principal 
governmental organization for our cultural engagement with the world and for 
promoting our culture in all its magnificence through various activities. The 
Committee are, however, disappointed to note that budgetary support granted to 
the ICCR has not been adequate. A budget of Rs. 192 crores has been allocated to 
ICCR in BE 2015-16, a sum that was retained at the same level in RE 2015-16. 
During BE 2016-17, the budgetary allocation has been enhanced to Rs. 215.8 0 
crores. Despite an increase of 12.40%, the amount is still insufficient if the allocation 
is compared to the other Government supported organizations world over which are 
engaged in the dissemination of culture for their respective countries. By the 
Ministry’s own admission, ICCR is being forced to resort to juggle its limited 
resources to make do with the meagre budget and it will notionally require at least 
Rs. 500 crore to help it meet its expanding mandate. The Committee, therefore, 

40 
 
recommend that the budget of the ICCR should be sufficiently increased as such a 
move will go a long way in assisting us in leveraging our country’s soft power and 
all its vast potential.  
The Committee have also noted that during the budget exercise, the gap 
between RE demand and allocation is not much. It points to the fact that at present 
there is no institutional capacity within the ICCR for ingesting huge funds. Such a 
situation does not sit well with the continuous (and necessary) demands for 
enhanced budgetary allocations. The Committee would therefore, recommend that 
in the interests of more realistic planning, the ICCR should also ramp up its 
institutional capacity to utilise in the best possible manner any enhanced allocation.  
            (Recommendation No.4) 
 
3.55 The ICCR faces massive shortages in manpower at present and clubbed with  
inadequate budgetary support, the organization’s role and work is hugely limited. 
The Committee are surprised to note that seats are lying vacant both at the level of 
the headquarters and field offices -- against three posts of Deputy Directors General 
(DDGs), at present only one post is occupied. All the three posts of Directors are 
vacant. Similarly, against 251 sanctioned posts of ICCR cadre at various levels, only 
178 posts covering the Headquarters (HQ) in Delhi, Regional Offices (ROs) and 
Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad are filled. Even when the ICCR has engaged 
96 personnel at various levels as outsourced support and 8 consultants, this has 
proved to be inadequate. It sounds ironic that at a time when the ICCR has 

41 
 
embarked upon an expanded mandate, it remains handicapped in terms of 
manpower. It is the Committee’s contention that without adequate human 
resources, the demands of the ICCR for enhanced budget will not be adequate ly 
justified. It is not reassuring that when the Finance Ministry sanctioned 44 posts for 
the ICCR, these posts could not be filled as the Council did not have its recruitment 
rules in place. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the ICCR should 
expedite steps to fill already vacant posts and only thereafter seek sanction for more 
post from the Finance Ministry.  
The Committee urge the ICCR to take exceptional care in ensuring that the 
most appropriate persons are appointed to head the cultural centres overseas. Their 
ability to connect with the countries in which they are located is imperative.  
 
The Committee are aware that work in the ICCR requires a person’s ability 
to handle culture and asks for attendant skills and aptitude along with knowledge. It 
should, therefore, be ensured that not only are the most eligible candidates selected 
to various posts, but also that they are given the right orientation and training to 
handle their work responsibly and productively. The Committee also recommend 
that the ICCR should set up a search panel to suggest names of eminent persons 
from various fields of culture who are eligible to fill the vacant seats of Directors at 
ICCs.           (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
3.56 The ICCR provides 24 scholarships annually in various fields to students 
from various parts of the world for graduate, postgraduate, doctoral and post-

42 
 
doctoral courses. Out of these, 8 scholarships are funded through its own budget 
and 16 scholarship schemes are being managed by the ICCR under funding from 
the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of AYUSH. The Committee have 
noted that this growing agency work (for administering scholarship schemes) and 
untimely release of funds for implementing the same is an important factor in 
crippling the ICCR. The Committee are distressed to note that in the past few years, 
funds spent by the ICCR on agency work were reimbursed in the following  
Financial Year. However, this was made part of ICCR’s budget allocation for the 
next FY and not reimbursed as an additional amount that was spent. The 
Committee do not approve of such an approach on the part of the Ministries 
concerned as they add to the financial woes of an already fund starved ICCR. The 
Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs abide by 
the view taken by the Foreign Secretary regarding advance payment of 75 percent 
of the money to the ICCR on account of Agency work. The Committee would also 
desire that other Ministries should accept the same arrangement as a pre-condition 
to any agency work.  
Given the large financial outlay under its scholarship programme and its 
long term impact for India’s soft power, the Committee are of the opinion that 
special attention should be paid to the welfare and well-being of foreign scholars 
while they are in India. Incidents like the one which took place involving attacks on 
African students should not be allowed to be repeated through better coordinat ion 
with the concerned State Governments. It is also imperative that the culprits behind 
these attacks should be brought to book.  

43 
 
By virtue of awarding scholarships to a wide array of foreign students, the 
ICCR has managed to create a pool of scholars around the world, many of whom 
have distinguished themselves in various walks of life. In the Committee’s opinion, 
these individuals can prove to be long term assets in promoting our image abroad as  
India’s de facto cultural brand ambassadors in their own countries. The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that the work related to establishment of ICCR 
Alumni Groups should be expedited and a status report in this regard be furn ished 
to the Committee.           (Recommendation No.6) 
 
3.57 The Committee are aware of budgetary constraints faced by the ICCR and 
its crippling effect on desired outcomes. It is, therefore, imperative that some fr esh 
thinking outside the box should be invested in making the programmes of the ICCR 
financially sustainable. Across the world, the trend has been for Governments to 
withdraw from direct spending on culture. The Committee are pleased to note that 
ICCR has started entering into Public Private Partnerships (PPP) in some of our 
Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) to address resource and manpower crunches. The 
Committee desire that the ICCR should enter into institutional partnerships with 
reputed and select cultural organizations from across the world in order to avail of 
reciprocal arrangements related to hosting of troupes and programmes. Such 
partnerships would go a long way in easing the logistics of the ICCR in the face of 
growing budgetary cuts.  
(Recommendation No.7) 
 

44 
 
3.58 In order to promote the awareness and appreciation of India’s rich cultural 
heritage abroad, the ICCR currently operates 37 Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) 
across the globe. The ICCs are a principal instrument of India’s institutional 
cultural outreach abroad and project our soft power in a wide number of  ways.   
These Centres are located in countries where we have significant strategic, 
economic, political and cultural interests as also countries with large communities of 
Indian origin. The Committee are surprised to note that despite these parameters in 
place we still do not have a Cultural Centre in the entire Gulf Region. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a Cultural Centre should be opened in the 
Gulf in view of India’s strong and sustained strategic and cultural ties with the 
region. The Committee also recommend that stalled projects in Washington, Paris 
and Hanoi should be executed without further delay. While the Committee fully 
understand that acquiring Government property abroad is a complicated exercis e 
involving legal and extra-legal factors, the type of inordinate delay as in Washington 
cannot be countenanced. It should, therefore, be ensured that a mechanism be 
established so that such delays do not hamper future projects.  
It has been stated that the ICCR is currently exploring the possibility of 
establishing Regional Cultural Centres abroad in select cities which could cover a 
group of countries in the region instead of any single country alone. The Committee 
ask the ICCR to tread with caution in this regard, given the serious limitations of 
manpower in the organization. So far, human resources have proved to be an issue 
when it comes to the ICCs, both in terms of quality and quantity. Catering to a  
wider geographic region involving several countries and cultures would not be an 

45 
 
easy proposition in these circumstances. The Committee would, therefore, desire 
that such a decision should not be implemented in haste and proper consider ation 
should be given to all relevant factors. The Committee would also desire that the 
findings of the Performance Audit of the ICCs should be communicated to the 
Committee at the action taken stage.          (Recommendation No.8) 
 
3.59 Sending Indian Cultural troupes outside the country is an important part of 
the activities of the ICCR. These troupes perform in countries across the world and 
such performances play a significant role in projecting our soft power. It is, 
therefore, important that artistes of quality and distinction in any art form should 
be given opportunities to showcase their talent overseas. The Committee have 
observed during visits to Regional Offices of the ICCR that empanelment of artists 
was often not guided by pronounced policy, particularly in terms of the inclusion  of 
unique art and dance forms on the verge of extinction. It was also noted that a large 
number of empanelment applications were pending both at the level of the Regional 
Offices (ROs) and the Headquarters. Such a trend is not reassuring for long term 
soft power ambitions and therefore, the Committee desire that all matters related to 
the empanelment of artists should be resolved expeditiously and the entire system 
made more transparent. The Committee also recommend that a performance aud it 
of the functioning of ICC R’s Regional Offices (ROs) should be undertaken by the 
Ministry urgently in order to ensure that the quality of the artists who get 
empanelled and seek to perform outside India is of the highest order. 
(Recommendation No.9) 

46 
 
3.60  Cultural diplomacy should also embrace the culture of ideas, showcase 
India’s democracy and diversity and avoid being seen as propaganda. For this 
reason it is imperative that speakers and experts from a wide range of backgrou nds 
and disciplines be identified to be sent abroad to address foreign audiences, thereby 
showcasing India’s pluralism and freedom of expression, including freedom of the   
press. In addition to music and dance, India’s soft power should also embrace the 
attraction of words and ideas, including contemporary and classical literature, 
thereby projecting India to those wishing to know more in depth about the country 
and its culture.  
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ISSUES RELATED TO COORDINATION AND ROLE OF INDIAN DIASPORA 
 
A. COORDINATION WITH OTHER MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
As per the Ministry, the ICCR has been working closely with the 
Ministries of Culture, Tourism, Human Resource Development and AYUSH. 
Along with the MEA’s External Publicity Division, the ICCR was a key partner 
of the AYUSH Ministry in implementing the first Yoga Day celebrations across 
the world last year. Similarly, most of the food festivals abroad are organized with 
the assistance of the Ministry of Tourism. The ICCR closely works with the 
Ministry of Culture for the Festivals of India (FOIs) abroad. It is in talks with 
Ministry of HRD for similar such cooperation. 
 
4.2 When asked about the correlation between the role and functioning of the 
ICCR and the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as 
under:- 
 
“ICCR has traditionally been the designated nodal organization to 
leverage India’s Soft Power, besides PD (now part of XP) division. 
Ministry of Culture (MOC) has also been implementing programmes some 
of which overlap with ICCR’s mandate. MOC’s primary mandate in terms 
of bilateral cultural relations is in the context of formulating Cultural 
Exchange Programmes (CEPs) that it enters into with countries abroad and 
ensuring its implementation with the help of various implementing 
agencies (ICCR being one of the implementing agencies) and framework 
mechanisms such as holding regular Joint Working Group (JWG) 
meetings for CEPs. MEA has faithfully been assisting in implementing 
CEPs with the help of ICCR in India, its Culture Centres and Ministry’s 
network of Missions abroad. Duplication can be avoided through better 
defining of roles and coordination. This is visible for instance in the 
context of implementing Festivals of India (FOIs) abroad. To bridge this, 
the two are at present in the process of working out an arrangement 
wherein both the agencies would pool its strengths for better implementing 
FOIs abroad.” 

48 
 
 
4.3 While elaborating upon the coordination between various line Ministries in the 
field of culture,  the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs during the sitting 
submitted as under:- 
 “In addition, the ICCR is engaged actively with several related line 
Ministries including the Ministries of Culture and Education and Human 
Resource Development with which the ties are, in a sense, almost 
symbiotic.  But there is a larger group of Ministries including AYUSH, 
Tourism, Textiles, Information and Broadcasting, whose resources, the 
ICCR supplements.  I would like to mention the cooperation received by 
us from the Ministry of Culture in implementing cultural festivals abroad 
and in arranging the International Yoga Day celebrations with the support 
of the AYUSH Ministry.”  
4.4 According to the Ministry, Cultural Festivals, Year of India, India Week, Days of 
India etc. are mechanisms by which, typically, a range of Indian cultural offerings a re 
presented to world audiences. Since these mechanisms call for large-scale budgetary 
provisions these have been kept under Ministry of Culture’s domain. The ICCR actively 
participates in planning and executing these events. In organizing these, some events 
mark special occasions in bilateral relations. The ICCR plans and designs cultural 
festivals to cover academic and intellectual dialogues, performing arts, visual arts, 
theatre, handicraft, yoga, cuisine etc. For executing Cultural Festivals/ Week/ Days it 
works closely with other relevant organisations and Ministries including the Ministries of 
Culture, Tourism, Ayush, Human Resource Development, Textiles, National Museums, 
Sangeet Natak Academy, Lalit Kala Academy, Sahitya Akademi. It is wor thwhile to 
mention here that the related line Ministries, especially the Ministry of Culture, play a 
substantial role in rge promotion of India’s soft power abroad by collaborating with the 
ICCR.   
4.5 While underlining the work being done by the Ministry in the field of culture 
propagation, Secretary, Ministry of Culture during the sitting submitted as under:- 
 “......we have the cultural agreements with various countries, and under 
those agreements we have the cultural exchange programmes with a large 
number of countries. With this umbrella type cultural exchange 
programme, our institutions keep collaborating with their institutions on 

49 
 
equal sharing basis. That is one element of bonding between our country 
and other countries.  We have the Festivals of India abroad where the 
troupes from India, from various facets of culture, be it music, dance, 
drama or even literature go there and perform. That is organised with the 
help of our Missions abroad. We have a memorandum of understanding 
with the ICCR where certain activities are also given to the ICCR. There is 
a Standing Committee to plan and coordinate these Festivals of India 
abroad. That Standing Committee is chaired by Secretary (Culture) where 
DG, ICCR is also a Member and representatives of various Ministries are 
also members. In Standing Committee meeting on a view is taken on 
finalization of the events / performances for festivals of India abroad in 
consultation with Indian Missions abroad to project India and our constant 
endeavour has been to get in touch with our Ambassadors abroad to 
ascertain, what do they require to project India we try to meet their 
requirements from whatever resources we have with us....”  
 
4.6 He further submitted that:- 
“.....We also have another scheme of Indo-Friendship Societies where we 
give the money to the Indian Missions abroad authorization through MEA, 
and they provide the grants to the societies. Presently, it is up to the tune 
of Rs.5 lakhs per society. Though it is small, yet our budgets have been 
increasing. We have been trying to cover as many Indo-Friendship 
Societies as possible so that culture of India gets into the minds of the 
people who are in that country. Another intervention that we have been 
doing is in the field of archaeological conservation activities of old 
temples and other structures in Vietnam, Cambodia etc. They have been 
more than willing to invite our experts to go there and do the conservation 
activities because many of these structures are dilapidated and they want 
them to be conserved for longer duration. We also have been planning 
certain things like Project Mausam which basically relies on the monsoon 
routes of trade between countries in the Arabian Sea and the country in the 
South East India. We have been trying to move a trans-national 
nomination to UNESCO for its inclusion and inscription as one of the 
heritage sites. This is somehow being countered by China by saying that 
they have a maritime silk route. So, we have to do some kind of things. 
We have been getting into this, trying to move a trans-national 
nomination. We have also finalized a proposal to send our Director 
General, ASI from Kashi to Kashgar in China, tracing the routes of spread 
of Buddhism from India to China and Myanmar and other countries.  So , 
that will help establish how Buddhism spread and how various things in 

50 
 
the trade travelled from India to China or other countries.  What was the 
route?  That will also throw some light on how we all were bonded 
together in early days. We have also been trying to take at least the due 
position that India should in the field of Buddhism.  The Buddhist 
institutions are part of the Ministry of Culture and we do want to say that 
Buddhism has been nurtured here and the Buddhists across the globe 
should also come together and use Buddhism as an instrument of peace.  
So, there is International Buddhist Confederation which has organised 
global conference in which our Prime Minister also participated.  But we 
do know that even doing this has counter-pressures and other countries are 
trying to get the entire credit of Buddhism, saying that Buddha was born in 
so and so country or the entire teachings of Buddha were absorbed by such 
and such country and are now being exported. So, there is some kind of 
competition wherever we are trying to see but we do want to ensure that 
the proper credit of whatever has happened in Buddhism in India is 
coming to us.  Similarly, we have been trying that our institutions also 
participate in the festivals of other countries in their country so that we 
actually get that kind of footfall and that kind of presence is registered that 
yes, India came and participated.  So, we have been trying to get into these 
areas and the ICCR is a strong partner with us and we have been working 
in that direction.”     
 
4.7  On the issue of coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs, the Secretary, 
Department of  Higher Education during the sitting of the Committee submitted as 
under:- 
“...we work very closely with the Ministry of External Affairs in very key 
areas.  We are guided by them, especially in the agreements that we have.  
We have 54 bilateral agreements in varying forms, from framework 
agreements to more specific agreements that go country to country.  We 
are also guided by them in our multilateral activities which include 
UNESCO but there are others as well.  We work very closely, partly with 
the Diaspora and its concerns, partly in the provision of seats and in 
facilitating the movement and mobility of students, either from India to 
countries abroad or from students from other countries to come to study in 
India.”    
              
4.8 On the issue of coordination with other line Ministries, the Foreign Secretary 
during the sitting submitted as under:- 

51 
 
 “... some things have improved and this  is one of them. But the serious 
point underlying it is well taken which is that we have to find ways of 
working together, we are not making the best use of the limited resources 
we have and that is something we will all be conscious of....” 
 
4.9 On the issue of coordination with the ICCR, Secretary, and Ministry of Culture 
during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“….One is regarding the coordination with the ICCR. I think the ice has 
either melted or started melting because what used to happen about two 
years ago, is happening now that in the last two six months, at least once 
in every week we are on telephone and exchanging note about what has 
happened. We also have a Memorandum of Understanding how they will 
collaborate with us in the Festival of India, etc…” 
 
4.10 While elaborating upon the synergy achieved with the Ministry of Culture, the 
Director General of the ICCR during the sitting submitted as under:- 
 ‘‘…we have been consciously meeting regularly and in fact, we have 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding for closer collaboration in the 
month of May. As a result, we are going to do the Festival of India in 
Australia, perhaps for the first time, with closer collaboration, which will 
be inaugurated by the Hon. Minister of Culture. Also, I am regularl y 
attending the Steering Committee meetings so that the inputs are closely 
coordinated for organizing the Festivals of India abroad. They have a very 
ambitious plan of about 18 festivals coming up for rest of the remaining 
year.’’ 
 
4.11   He further elaborated that:- 
“…Certainly, there can be closer collaboration and periodic consultation 
because, as you rightly observed, the projection of soft power overlaps 
various Ministries. Today, we are joined by HRD and Culture Ministries, 
but this subject also covers MHA for propagation of Hindi language, 
AYUSH for projection of yoga and Indian medicine and Ministry of 
Textiles for khadi and handicrafts and handlooms. So, a closer 
coordination will certainly help optimize the limited resource that we 
deploy to get better results.” 
4.12 When asked about ICCR’s collaboration with various State Governments, the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs during the sitting submitted as under:- 
“Within the country, the ICCR has signed MoUs with nine State 
Governments to establish Regional Centres and to implement wider 
cooperation and promoting the culture of these States as also in partnering 

52 
 
these States in offering a platform to groups and artists from other 
countries when they visit India.” 
 
B. MERGER OF PUBLIC DIPLOMACY AND EXTERNAL PUBLICITY 
DIVISIONS 
4.13 As per the Ministry, the External Publicity Division and the Public Diplomacy 
Division have been merged w.e.f. 24 January, 2014 recognizing the need to craft a 
uniform communication strategy, keeping in view both the requirement to reach out to 
the Indian public and media, as well as audiences abroad through our Missions. It may be 
kept in mind that prior to 2006, these separate divisions did not exist. Looking back, over 
the past, this has proved to be an important decision, as this seamless integration has 
helped the new entity, the XPD Division, enhance efficiency of our Soft Power projection 
globally. The merger has resulted in three significant advantages:  
 
i. A Holistic Communication Strategy: Coalescing the two Divisions into one has 
helped shape a more holistic perspective of India’s soft power projection and foreign 
policy narrative that is directed towards either media or our missions/posts. The move 
has ensured that an officer in charge of Public Diplomacy is also aware of the media 
angle and therefore, this enhances his capability to address any situation. It has helped 
fine-tune our communication strategy, in all outreach areas (Soft power projection, 
Public diplomacy initiatives, media communication, etc.). This integration helps the 
officer concerned, i.e., JS (XPD), to leverage the power of digital diplomacy at 
appropriate times for setting the right narrative and putting things in the right 
perspective for all concerned. For example, during the visit of the Prime Minister to a 
foreign country, JS (XPD) is aware of what narrative is to be set and is in a better  
position to present information to the media and public by utilizing the ministry’s 
social media handles. Information is packaged through attractive infographics, videos, 
etc. and the appropriate information is highlighted. A case in point is the Ministry’s 
response to the commercial film, “Airlift”  where the Government was projected in 
not so positive light. Both mainstream media and social media handles were 
employed to disseminate our official position even as a Google Hangout was 
conducted which provided a far better perspective of the actual situation as opposed 
to the very narrow outlook portrayed in the film. 
ii. A Single Point of Contact for Missions: The merging of the two divisions has also 
streamlined communication between the Division and missions/posts on any 
media/public diplomacy/soft power projection. It has ensured that the Division has 

53 
 
become the single point of contact for our missions/posts with respect to any outside 
communication. The media implications of any communication/soft power projection 
are relayed to the Mission through the Division, ensuring that there is no room for 
confusion as far as communication strategies for the missions are concerned. 
iii. Efficiency in Human Resource Deployment: The merger has also helped in 
optimizing human resource deployment. Following the merger, a total of 14 posts 
were surrendered by both Divisions. This included the post of a Joint Secretary and a 
Director level officer, thus indicating that what was done with much larger staff 
strength is now being done with greater efficiency, and providing much greater 
impact.    
 
4.14   Explaining the rationale for the merger, the representative of the Ministry of 
External Affairs during the sitting submitted as under:- 
 “…we are just very, very under resourced and we felt that it would be 
more synergistic to pursue different activities under the same head rather 
than trying to maintain two establishments which could, in fact, be 
combined and which could work in a complementary manner.” 
4.15         On the same issue, the Foreign Secretary during the sitting submitted as under:- 
 “As you know, before 2006, there was only one division. It was the 
External Publicity Division, and Public Diplomacy was very much part 
and parcel of External Publicity Division. In 2006, a decision was taken in 
line with, I suppose, international practices that public diplomacy was 
acquiring a higher profile that we created the new Division of Public 
Diplomacy, and separated it from the XP Division. XP Division really 
became the nerve centre for the Spokesperson’s office as also some of the 
associated activities in terms of inviting foreign journalists to India, etc. 
But then over the course of the years, in the last eight years the Public 
Diplomacy Division had its independent profile. The feeling was that, 
perhaps, there were more synergies to be tapped by having them combined 
rather than having them separated. In a sense, both XP Division and Public 
Diplomacy Division are in the business of promoting brand India, and we 
felt that having two separate sets of officers doing the same kind of a job, 
well, not entirely same but in a sense they were cross-cutting issues. 
 The second problem was that many of the Missions were a bit 
flummoxed with this dual change. There was the PD Division and there 
was the XP Division, and they did not know whom to approach for what. 
So, now with the merger, what has happened is, first of all, we have found 
that a seamless communication strategy has been able to be developed? 

54 
 
The XP Division now knows exactly what the brand India projection is, 
and is able to utilize the resources of the PD Division for that. Secondly, 
for our Missions now there is a single point of contact, whether they want 
funding for a Gandhi exhibition or whether they want funding for a 
journalist’s visit, they approach only one division.  Thirdly, because o f 
these overlapping functions which were reduced, we were able to save 13 
posts. So, actually 13 posts were surrendered when the two divisions were 
merged in 2014. So, on the whole, yes, I agree my workload has definitely 
increased because now apart from d oing my spokesman’s job, I have to 
also handle the files relating to public diplomacy. But on the whole, I 
think the merger has worked well that I am able to now tap the right 
sources and there is no artificial distinction that you are XP and you are 
PD. Everybody is basically there as part of one pool and we are able to get 
the maximum output done from a lesser number of people now.’’ 
4.16 He further added that:- 
“…. there is now an overall perspective planning in the sense that the 
overall task of XP Division is to project Brand- India and India’s Soft 
Power. Now, we have a holistic sense of which are the kinds of films we 
need to produce, which are the kinds of books we need to buy. The most 
obvious example would be the International Day of Yoga which was 
handled entirely by XP Division with funding part coming from ICCR and 
the fact that we were able to do it in 192 countries out of 193 member-
countries of the United Nations seamlessly, without any difficulty. I think, 
this testifies to the improved synergies that have come as a result of the 
merger of the two.” 
 
C.  ROLE OF INDIAN DIASPORA 
4.17 The Diaspora is critical in promoting a country's soft power.  India is fortunate to 
have a large and influential diaspora spread across the globe.  Over the years, Indian 
diaspora has played an important role in popularizing our culture abroad. It reflects the 
full multiplicity and variety of the rich social, ethnic, religious, and cultural tapestry that 
is India. A deep-rooted affection among the diaspora for the motherland is an intangible 
asset and is something that we have to build upon.  
4.18 As per the Ministry, the ICCR has encouraged its ICCs and Indian Missions 
abroad to actively partner with Indians living abroad. Some of the engagements include 

55 
 
(i) the partnership with Maison de l’Inde  in Paris, and (ii) the running of the Indian 
Culture Centre in partnership with Dr. Keshav Singhal in Cardiff. New partnerships are 
being explored with cultural and academic organizations and associations established by 
Indians abroad. The ICCR has engaged about 30 local teachers from the diaspora in 16 
countries for teaching dance, music, the Hindi language and yoga in its Culture Centres 
or Missions. In the Gulf countries, an 8-million strong diaspora has played a significant 
role in the promotion of Indian culture and in academic exchange.     
   
4.19 During the recent foreign visits of our Prime Minister, engagement with the 
diaspora has emerged as a focal point. When asked about concrete initiatives taken by the 
Ministry to reach out to Indians abroad and to make them stakeholders in our soft power 
projections, the Ministry through written reply submitted as under:- 
 “Indian Diaspora  has been an important vehicle of India’s “Soft power 
projection overseas and has played an important role in facilitating Indian 
culture and values abroad, reason why it is a focal point in Prime 
Minister’s foreign visits. The Ministry has been organizing several events, 
programmes and schemes to strengthen its outreach to the overseas Indian 
community spread across the world. Special focus and attention are given 
to ensuring welfare and protection of vulnerable sections of the overseas 
Indian community, especially distressed Indian nationals and migrant 
workers. Diaspora engagements include programmes such as (i) National 
Pension Programme for NRIs, (ii) Overseas Citizenship of India scheme, 
(iii) Scholarship Programmes for Diaspora Children, (iv) Corporat e 
Internships for Young Overseas Indians, (v) Online Services for Voters, 
(vi) Tracing the Roots, (vii) Indian Community Welfare Fund, (viii) 
Overseas Indian Youth Club, (ix) Know India programme (x) Study India 
Programme and (xi) Pravasi Bhartiya Kendras.”            
 
4.20 On the issue of collaboration with the diaspora, the representative of the Ministry 
of External Affairs during the sitting submitted as under:- 
 “...The ICCR has been an active collaborator with the Indian Diaspora in 
multifaceted ways. This has encompassed partnering with established 
cultural and academic institutions of the Diaspora Indian communities 
with scholars, eminent Indians, professionals and experts.  As we all 
know, in several instances, Diaspora Indians have preserved Indian 
customs as living traditions.  In some ways, perhaps beyond what is 

56 
 
actually the case in the mother country and ICCR has helped them in 
performing an important role in promoting and propagating their culture 
and values.  This has made the Indian Diaspora community a valued 
partner in the overall effort to promote our culture and heritage.’’ 
 
4.21 When asked about plans to utilize migrant workers as instruments of soft power in 
the Gulf Region, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“Gulf, which has large number of Indian Diaspora especially the migrant 
workers, is indeed an important region for India both from the economic 
as well as security point of view. Under its “Link West” policy Ministry is 
committed to further increase India’s engagement with the countries in its 
west and the Gulf region. In this context establishment of (i) Migrant 
Resource Centres (MRCs) in Kochi, Hyderabad, Gurgaon, Chennai and 
Lucknow to provide assistance to the Indian nationals intending to work in 
the Gulf countries, (ii) 24/7 help-lines in Gulf countries to provide ready 
assistance to the distressed Indian nationals and migrant workers are 
important initiatives to mention, (iii) Grievances Management System 
(MADAD) setup for users to register grievances pertaining to the Consular 
Services offered by the Indian Missions/Posts abroad, and (iv) Scholarship 
scheme for NRI and PIOs with special focus on Indian Diaspora in Gulf 
countries are some initiatives to mention.” 
 
4.22 The Committee understand that culture is a wide field that encompasses a 
number of Ministries/Departments. In such a scenario it is inevitable that the 
mandate of one organization will overlap with that of another. At least in the field of 
culture it is almost impossible to conceive a water tight compartmentalization of 
responsibilities between the ICCR/MEA and other line Ministries. On various 
aspects related to culture the MEA/ICCR must work with the Ministries of Culture, 
Tourism, Human Resource Development, AYUSH etc. For example, the Ministry of 
Culture’s primary mandate in terms of bilateral cultural relations is in the context 
of formulating Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEPs) with countries abroad and 

57 
 
ensuring its implementation with the help of various implementing agencies (ICCR 
being one of them). While the Committee agree with the Ministry’s contention that 
duplication should be avoided through a clearer definition of roles, at times it 
becomes difficult to define them in isolation with one other. During oral deposition 
the Foreign Secretary admitted that despite coordinated efforts among Ministries 
where the DG, ICCR and Secretary, Culture meet and discuss issues, there remain 
gaps in coordination. It is imperative that all concerned Ministries find ways to 
work together, particularly in light of limited resources. The Committee would, 
therefore, strongly recommend that much more emphasis be given to the issue of 
coordination among various line Ministries in order to achieve the highest order of 
functional efficiency, and that a Co-ordinating Committee of Ministries dealing with 
cultural diplomacy be established to meet not less than once in two months. A field 
like Cultural Diplomacy requires that various Ministries/Departments do not 
operate in silos. In order to achieve this, the Committee’s proposal aims to create a 
fixed mechanism for effective coordination between MEA/ICCR and other line 
Ministries involved in the task of dissemination of culture and goodwill to people 
outside India. All should work together to strengthen the soft power diplomacy of 
the country. 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
4.23 The Public Diplomacy Division had been merged with the External Publicity 
Division in January, 2014 to form a new entity called External Publicity and Pub lic 
Diplomacy Division. Before the merger, the erstwhile Public Diplomacy Division 

58 
 
complemented the ICCR in showcasing our soft power resources and in buildin g an 
understanding and appreciation of India’s foreign policy. Following the merger, the 
functions of the two Divisions have been coalesced to a significant level and the 
Committee are afraid that the long term requirements of public diplomacy may 
stand subordinated to the expediency of providing a platform for external publicity 
and responding to the urgent and immediate requirements of the news of the day . 
While being in favour of working towards achieving synergy, the Committee would 
specifically recommend that it should be ensured that the matters related to publi c 
diplomacy are not given short shrift under the new entity. In particular, since the 
Joint Secretary (XP) is bound to be preoccupied principally with urgent matter s, a 
senior official should be appointed under him tasked solely with stewardship of 
India’s public diplomacy activities. 
 (Recommendation No.12) 
 
4.24 The Diaspora is an indispensable partner in promoting our country’s soft 
power. We are fortunate to have a large diaspora across the globe that has 
preserved Indian customs as living traditions. As per the Ministry, the ICCR has 
encouraged its Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) and our Missions abroad to actively 
engage with the diaspora, which  has emerged as a focal point during recent high 
level foreign visits. It is, therefore, imperative that our soft power of India is 
projected through these communities. The reach of the diaspora is not only wide in  
terms of its geographic coverage, but also in terms of its influence in the economy 
and society of host countries. The Ministry has been partnering with established 

59 
 
cultural and academic institutions of the diaspora with scholars, eminent Indians, 
professionals and experts. It appears to the Committee that such programmes are 
largely driven by the initiative of the local Mission or the particular Indian Cultural 
Centre. Therefore, the Committee would recommend that instead of this short-term 
approach, the Ministry of External Affairs should make a blueprint for engaging 
meaningfully with the Diaspora in leveraging our soft power abroad through a 
broader and more systematic policy. 
The Gulf Region is not only important to India from economic and strategic 
perspectives, but also as home to a large number of Indians, especially migrant 
workers. Unlike other regions of the world where Diaspora has considerable clout, 
the position of migrant workers in the West and the Gulf is not strong. This requires 
better collaboration and coordination in all possible ways as they may be the best 
messengers of India’s soft power in that part of the world. The Committee 
therefore, consider it essential that special focus should be laid on disseminating soft  
power under the ‘Link West’ policy through the diaspora in that region.  
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
21st November, 2016                                                                                    Chairperson, 
30 Kartika, 1938 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
                                                                                                                  
 

60 
 
APPENDIX- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 23RD FEBRUARY, 2016 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23 rd February, 2016 from 1600 hrs. to 1800 
hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
            Lok Sabha 
2.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
4. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
5. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
6. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
           Rajya Sabha 
7. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
8. Dr. Karan Singh 
9. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
10. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cyril John   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  -  Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh   -  Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
 
1.      Ms. Sujata Mehta - Secretary (West) 
2.      Dr. Sumeet Jerath - Additional Secretary & FA 
3.      Shri Vikas Swarup - Joint Secretary (XP) & Spokesperson 
4.      Shri Sibi Goerge - Joint Secretary (Administration) 
5.      Ms. Vani S. Rao - Joint Secretary (OIA-II) Additional Charge of OIS-I 
6. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 

61 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) 
S.No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri C. Rajasekhar -     Director General (ICCR)  
2. Ms. Namrata S. Kumar - Deputy Director General (ICCR) 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations to the sitting of the Committee to have a briefin g on the subject 
‘India’s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) and Indian Diaspora’. He also drew the attention of the representatives of the 
Ministry to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
3. The Secretary (West) briefed the Committee on the various issues pertaining to 
the subject which inter-alia included various activities being carried out by the ICCR 
towards promoting India’s soft power through the cultural centres and also through 
collaboration with other Ministries as well as  the State Governments, overall functioning 
of the External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division of the Ministry, use of social 
media for digital diplomacy and celebration of the International Yoga Day etc.  
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised various queries related to 
rationale for the merger of External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division; budgetary 
allocation of ICCR and its utilization, lack of clarity about the remit of ICCR and the 
Ministry of Culture, Project Mausam, appointment of Cultural ambassadors; audit of 
Regional Centres of ICCR etc. The representatives of the Ministry responded at length to 
the queries of the Members.   
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

62 
 
APPENDIX- II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 27TH JULY, 2016 
   
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27 th July, 2016 from 1600 hrs. to 1815 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
      Lok Sabha  
2.  Prof. (Dr. ) Sugata Bose 
3.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
4.  Prof. Richard Hay 
5.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6.  Shri Venakateshwara Rao Magannti 
7.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Mohammad Salim 
11. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
12. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
13. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
14. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
Rajya Sabha 
15.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
16.  Dr. Karan Singh 
17.  Shri Amar Singh 
       Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar -          Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri D.M. Mulay -          Additional Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
3. Shri Vikas Swarup -          Joint Secretary (XP) & Spokesperson 
4. Shri Sibi Goerge -          Joint Secretary (Administration) 
5. Ms. Vani S. Rao -          Joint Secretary (OIA-II) Additional Charge of OIS-
6. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar -          Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
7. Shri Dinkar Asthana -          Joint Secretary (DPA II) 
8. Shri Manish Gupta -          Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
9. Shri M.C. Luther -          Joint Secretary (OE) & PGE 

63 
 
10. Shri Sanjay Kumar Verma -          Joint Secretary (GEM) 
11. Ms. Neena Malhotra -          Joint Secretary (E&SA) 
12. Shri Anurag Srivastava -          Director (Finance) 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) 
 
1. Shri C. Rajasekhar -            Director General  
2. Ms. Namrata S. Kumar -            Deputy Director General  
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1.  Shri Narinder Kumar Sinha -        Secretary  
2.  Shri K.K. Mittal -        Additional Secretary  
3.  Ms. Shefali Shah -         Joint Secretary  
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER 
EDUCATION)  
 Shri Vinay Sheel Oberoi -        Secretary 
 
NALANDA UNIVERSITY 
     Dr. Gopa Sabharwal                      -          Vice Chancellor, Nalanda University 
 
 2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. XXXXXXXXXXXX  
4. XXXXXXXXXXXX 
5.  XXXXXXXXXXXX 
6. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations (ICCR), Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development were ushered in. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives to the 
sitting of the Committee for furnishing evidence on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power 
Diplomacy including role of Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian 
Diaspora’.  

64 
 
7. The Foreign Secretary gave a brief outline of the work being done by the Ministry 
of External Affairs and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) in projecting our 
soft power and he also outlined certain impediments being faced in this regard. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Culture and the Secretary, Department of Higher Education 
(Ministry of Human Resource Development) also briefed the Committee about the areas 
in which they are working closely with the Ministry of External Affairs on issues related 
to culture and soft power. 
8.  The Members of the Committee raised various queries which inter-alia included 
lack of coordination between ICCR and the Ministry of Culture, financial burden on 
ICCR due to Agency work, status of the Cultural Centres at Paris and Washington, 
imperative of projecting a grand vision of Asia, need for an institutional arrangement 
between ICCR and Ministry of Culture in order to avoid overlap, tangible gains and 
outcomes derived from India’s soft power, popularizing Gandhian values as soft power, 
the concept of ‘smart power’ etc. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary, the Secretaries and 
other representatives of the three Ministries responded to the queries of the Members on 
all these issues.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
APPENDIX - III 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 16TH  NOVEMBER, 2016 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16 th November, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 1545 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
  
 2. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 3.  Prof. Richard Hay 
  4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 5. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 6. Prof. (Dr.)  Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 7. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 8. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 9. Dr. Karan Singh 
 10. Shri D. P. Tripathi    
 
 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  

66 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
subject ‘India’s Soft Pow er Diplomacy including role of Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora.’  
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. 
The Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating 
the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 