 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2018-19] 
 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 February, 2019 / Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
24 
 

 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report 
of the Committee on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs 
for the year 2018-19] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 February, 2019 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 13 February, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2019 / Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2019 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………  (iii)     
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………    1  
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted                             
  by the Government………………………………...........................................  23   
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………. 52 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..……………………… 55 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………      60    
  
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 11.2.2019…………      72 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs.  ……………………………………………...        74                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2018-19) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Ramen Deka 
 7. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
12. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 13. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 15. Shri Venakateswara Rao (Babu) Magantti  
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 18. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 19. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 20. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 21. Vacant 
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Jose K.Mani 
24. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
25. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
26. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
27. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
28. Smt. Kanimozhi 
29. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
30. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
 31. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 
Secretariat  
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3.       Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha   –   Additional Director  
4. Ms. Smita Singh     –   Committee Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (201 8-19) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Fourth Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First  Report of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2018-19. 
 
2. The Twenty-First Report was presented to the Parliament on 9 March, 201 8. The Action Taken 
Replies of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received 
on 7 December, 2018 (English version) and 3 January, 2019 (Hindi version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report on action taken at their Sitting held on  11 
February, 2019. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-First Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                  DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                                
11 February, 2018                                                                                                Chairperson,                                  
22 Magha, (Saka)                                                                            Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty First  Report on the 
Demands for Grants for the year 2018-19 which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the table 
of the Rajya Sabha on 9 March, 2018. 
 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 46 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
30, 32, 34, 36, 38, 39, 40 and 43                 Total- 28 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's replies:- 
Recommendation No. 14                                               Total- 1  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration:- 
       Recommendation Nos. 6, 18, 33 and 46                                               Total- 4 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government are 
still awaited:- 
     Recommendation Nos.  2, 5, 8, 11, 13, 17, 31, 35, 37, 41, 42, 44and 45               Total- 13 
3.    The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I and 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
 

2 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Strict Compliance of Statements under Direction 73A 
5. Despite persistent written/ oral reminders and repeated Recommendations in previous Reports 
of the Committee, Statements under Direction 73A of Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha in context of 
the Reports of the Committee were piling up, which was not a happy augury. Direction 73 -A has 
been issued with the specific intent of keeping the Parliament aware of the implementation status of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Reports of the Parliamentary Committees. For t his 
purpose a six months period has been prescribed for the Government to make the Statement, which is 
a reasonable time period. The Committee were distressed to note that in the instant pendency of 
Ministry of External Affairs, Statements were to be made for Reports presented as long as six years 
ago. In the considered opinion of the Committee, such inordinately long delays amount ed to 
hindering the oversight function of the Committee as well as the Parliament, which was a serious 
matter. The Committee had hoped that the Ministry would appreciate the gravity of the situation and 
get all the pending Statements under Direction 73A made in both the Houses as desired by the 
Committee in their Twentieth Report. Furthermore, in future, the Ministry would scrupulously adhere 
to the prescribed timelines in this regard. 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:-  
“The Hon‟ble Committee‟s directions are noted for compliance. The Minister made 
Statements on 4 th April 2018 in the Lok Sabha and on 5 th April 2018 in the Rajya Sabha 
during the Budget Session 2018 on the status of implementation of Recommendations and 
Observations contained in the following Reports of the Hon‟ble Committee: 
a. 13th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for 2012-13 
 
b. 19th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for 2013-14 
 
c. 15th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Problem s related to Overseas Indian marriages: 
Scheme for providing legal/financial assistance/rehabilitation to Indian women deserted by 
their overseas Indian Spouses.  
 
d. 25th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Passport Seva Project – Targets and Achievements 
e. 3rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for 2014-15  
 
f. 5th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for 2015-16 
 
g. 13th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on In dia‟s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations and Indian Diaspora 
 

3 
 Minister‟s Statements in respect of other pending Reports is proposed to be made 
during the forthcoming Session of Parliament.” 
7. Emphasizing the significance of legislative oversight over the Executive, the Committee 
had urged the Ministry to strictly adhere to timelines for making Statements by the Minister 
under Direction 73A of the Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Committee are happy to 
learn that the Minist er of External Affairs has taken a serious view of this matter and made 
Statements on the status of implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in 
seven pending Reports. Minister’s Statement in respect of othe r pending Reports is also 
proposed to be made during the ongoing session of Parliament. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to strictly comply with Statements under Direction 73A of Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha, in context of all the Reports that are p resented to the Parliament. The Committee 
are also hopeful that the Ministry would ensure that the Statements with regard to the pending 
Reports are made during the ongoing budget session positively.  
 
 (Recommendation No. 3) 
Need for Zero-Based Budgeting 
8. The Committee had noted that the Ministry was in agreement with their observations 
regarding the scope for improvement in the process by which budgetary demands were being 
prepared at the Unit level but it has also submitted that the mismatch between fu nds demanded and 
actual utilization was largely on account of its technical assistance and development cooperation 
schemes, projects and programmes being implemented abroad where certain extraneous factors come 
into play which were beyond its control. The Ministry, inexplicably, ha d not intimated about steps 
taken towards formulating a zero-based budgeting process, which incorporated continuous evaluation 
and assessment of budgetary allocation against fund utilization.  The Zero Based Budgeting seem ed 
all the more imperative where the Committee had observed significant and unrealistic gaps between 
the allocations sought, BE and RE and the expenditure actually incurred. While acknowledging the 
factors put forth by the Ministry, the Committee had desired that the Ministry take fool proof steps to 
secure all clearances and pre-emptive steps before going ahead with the international aid projects  
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:-  
 “The Ministry will continue to improve its budgetary assessment and management in line 
with the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendations of better unit -based budgeting. Ministry has 
instituted a mechanism of holding Quarterly Budget Management Meetings with majo r 
Divisions and Spending Units, chaired by Foreign Secretary or Financial Advisor, where 
spending as well as demands are assessed in detail based on project -wise status of 
implementation. This has assisted in the Ministry projecting more realistic demands for a given 

4 
financial year for the Revised Estimates and for the subsequent financial year for the Budget 
Estimates.  
 The overarching principle of zero -based budgeting guides the continuous evaluation and 
assessment of budgetary allocation and optimal fun ds utilization in Ministry‟s budget 
management. The Ministry will continue to make more efforts in this direction to realize 
credible budgetary demands justified by past efficient utilization of funds and objective 
assessment of anticipated expenditure bas ed on implementation progress, in line with the 
Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation to further improve budgetary assessment, management 
and utilization.” 
10. Highlighting the imperative of Zero -Based Budgeting in improving budgetary 
assessment and managemen t, the Committee in the  instant recommendation had specifically 
urged the Ministry to consider a zero -based budgeting process. Though the Ministry has 
accepted the overarching principle of zero -based budgeting, it has failed to enumerate the 
specific steps  taken in that direction. In order to narrow down the gap between allocations 
sought and actual utilization during both the BE and RE stage, the Ministry was suggested to 
take fool proof steps before initiating international aid projects. As a follow -up to  the 
Committee’s recommendation, the Ministry has stated that the mechanism of holding 
Quarterly Budget Management Meetings with major Divisions and Spending Units has assisted 
in projecting more realistic demands for a given financial year. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to furnish clear, pointed and updated action taken replies so that accurate assessment 
of financial performance of the Ministry is  made. The Committee strongly desire that Zero 
based budgeting process should be incorporated to bolster budgetary assessment, management 
and utilization. Furthermore, pre -emptive measures ought to be taken to seek all requisite 
clearances before seeking funds for international aid projects. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
Optimum utilization of budgetary allocation 
11. On examining utilization of budgetary allocation during 2017-18, the Committee had fou nd 
that the Ministry had an amount of Rs. 4223.85 crore to spend in the last quarter. Thus, 30.85 percent 
of the RE allocation was remaining for spending in last quarter,  which was slightly less than the 
Ministry of Finance guidelines of expenditure within 33% of allocation. The Committee ha d made a 
note of the specific steps taken by the Ministry to improve financial management and spending 
pattern. It was perplexing to n ote that while on one hand, there ha d been a discrepancy in budgetary 
demands made by MEA and actual allocations provided, on the other hand, even the lower Revised 
allocated outlays were not spent by the Ministry. The budgetary cuts inflicted upon the Min istry of 
External Affairs seemed to be a fall out of its own expenditure pattern. The Committee were satisfied 

5 
to note that the Ministry has now felt that the gap between budgetary demands and allocation c ould 
be narrowed down by demonstrating robust and p rudent expenditure in first two quarters of the 
financial year and presenting a positive case before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee  had, 
therefore, strongly recommend ed that the Ministry should first demonstrate efficient utilization of 
funds in first two quarters of the year by observing the progress at Unit level and also maintain it at 
optimal level so that the Ministry of Finance at least not reduce the funds at the RE stage. 
Simultaneously, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Ext ernal Affairs convince the 
Ministry of Finance to well -equip them financially so that the foreign policy objectives do not get 
restricted due to lack of financial resources. 
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:-  
 “As per the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee, the Ministry has made concerted 
efforts to improve expenditure in the first two quarters of a financial year to be in a realistic 
position to seek additional funds from Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. In FY 2017 -18, 
Ministry‟s expenditure in the first two quarters of the FY was 44.81% of the BE 2017 -18 
allocation. In FY 2018 -19, Ministry has achieved expenditure of 5 5.6% of the BE 2018 -19 
allocation in the first two quarters. Ministry assures the Hon‟ble Committee of its commitment 
towards continuing to make further efforts to improve the utilisation pattern of its allocated 
budget while addressing the inherent politi cal, security, geological and other challenges faced 
in implementing projects abroad. Ministry has also been engaging with Ministry of Finance to 
keep them informed them of funds required to meet our international commitments and to 
emphasize the importance of providing adequate budgetary allocations for the same.”  
 
13. In their recommendation, the Committee had urged the Ministry to demonstrate 
optimum utilization of budgetary funds so that a strong case for enhanced budgetary allocation 
can be made before the Ministry of Finance . It was desirable for the Ministry to furnish the 
details of budgetary demands and allocation at the RE stage at the time of submission of action 
taken replies. The Committee are satisfied with the Ministry’s efficient utilization of funds 
during the first two quarters of the current fiscal year and would desire th at the latter should 
continue to be an effective spender in the remaining two quarters as well. The Committee are of 
the considered view that good utilization pattern can prove to be a potent tool for impressing 
upon the Ministry of Finance for future fund s requirements. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should continue taking concerted efforts to pursue the issuance of increased 
budgetary allocation with the Ministry of Finance at all levels. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Scheme Section to be kept immune from budgetary cuts 
14. The Plan and Non -Plan distinction in expenditure budgeting ha d been discontinued and the 

6 
then budget classifications were in terms of Revenue and Capital Heads and Scheme and Non -
scheme sections. The Committee were happy to learn that the bifurcation of Scheme and Non -
Scheme section ha d resulted in better appreciation of budgetary requirements and allocation for 
projects related to international commitments as aid related spending has come under a single 
classification. In view of the declining share of the scheme section in the last fiscal, the Ministry ha d 
carried out an intensive monitoring and review of the technical and aid development assistance 
project, including at the levels of External Affairs Minister an d Foreign Secretary. The Ministry was 
hopeful that the aid and non -aid outlays would be evenly distributed in  the next two financial years. 
The Committee had, therefore, desire d that the Ministry of External Affairs should take appropriate 
measures in th at direction and keep them informed.  Notwithstanding the fact that the expenditure 
covered under the Scheme section exclusively pertains to two Major Heads namely „Technical and 
Economic Cooperation with other countries‟ and „Advances to Foreign Governments ‟, which 
constituted the central plank of a country‟s international credentials, this section ha d not been kept 
immune from budgetary cuts. The Committee were dismayed to note that despite repeated 
recommendations that budgetary cuts should not be effected  in such a critical aspect of our global 
engagement and diplomacy, it has neither found much reverberation in MEA‟s fiscal prudence nor in 
Ministry of Finance‟s budgetary allocation to the former. The Committee  had, therefore, strongly 
recommended that the Government refrain from making financial cuts under the scheme section of 
MEA's budget pertaining to International aid and commitments as it directly impinges on our foreign 
relations and international image abroad.  
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:-  
“The Ministry assures the Hon‟ble Committee that it will make firm and focused efforts to 
utilize its allocated funds in an efficient and timely manner for its overall budget and 
particularly for the „Scheme‟ Section, while addressing the inherent political , security, 
geological and other challenges faced by the Ministry in implementing projects abroad, and 
while remaining prudent in the spending of public funds. The Ministry is focused in achieving 
anticipated implementation progress in all key result areas  and demonstrating robust 
expenditure in the first half of the financial year, which would assist in making a positive case 
with Ministry of Finance to narrow the gap between the Ministry‟s funds demands and 
allocations.  
 In FY 2018-19, Ministry achieved expenditure of 32.38% of its BE 2018-19 allocation 
in the first quarter (1 April to 30 June 2018), which is much higher than the minimum 25% 
benchmark; and by the end of the second quarter (till 30 September 2018), Ministry achieved 
expenditure of 55.65% o f its BE 2018 -19 allocation, which is higher than the minimum 50% 
benchmark.  

7 
 As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, the Ministry will make strenuous efforts 
to secure adequate budgetary support from Ministry of Finance, especially for its international 
technical aid and assistance commitments, based on this robust spending demonstrated by the 
Ministry.”  
16. With the bifurcation of the Budget Heads into Revenue and Capital Heads and Scheme 
and Non- Scheme sections, the Committee were optimistic about enhanced budgetary allocation 
to MEA, especially for its international technical aid and assistance programmes. 
Unfortunately, that has not been the case. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that 
the Ministry should take up this matter of financial cut s under the Scheme Section with the 
Ministry of Finance and ensure that it is kept immune from budgetary cuts. In its reply, the 
Ministry has merely provided verbal assurance that firm and focused efforts will be made  in 
making a positive case before the M inistry of Finance. Generally, the Ministry of Finance in its 
Budget circular asks the Ministries to convey their proposal for Revised Estimate and Budget 
Extimate by the month of August/September.  The Ministry has furnished the action taken 
replies in De cember 2018 i.e. after the submission of proposal for Revised Estimates to the 
Ministry of Finance.  However, they have not bothered to furnish the proposed amount at the 
RE stage.  Non-availability of RE figures and generic response  to most of the important 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report is unacceptable. Without complete and 
specific replies, the Committee cannot have a clear perspective about the overall functioning of 
the Ministry. Expressing disapproval of the tendency on part of the Ministry of not furnishing 
all available details on date of submission of replies, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the Ministry  should submit updated , specific, pointed and accurate action taken replies  
urgently. The Ministry is further urged to make a strong case for the necessity of having 
adequate funds before the Ministry of Finance about  timely implementation of international 
aid projects and apprise the Committee about their response.  
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
Bridging the gap between Sanctioned Strength & Actual Strength of CPO 
17. The Committee had noted that against sanctioned strength of 2697, the actual strength in CPO 
was 2051. The Ministry ha d stated that steps have been taken to improve service condit ions of the 
CPO personnel, including indenting of 224 posts of different non -gazetted level from SSC.  
However, the Committee did no find these steps as sufficient, particularly when most of the 92 PSKs 
operating as arms of 37 Passport Offices are working with inadequate staff. Furthermore, to bring 
passport services closer to the citizens, the Ministry in association with the Department of Posts had 
initiated opening up of 251 POPSKs in two phases. Of these, 60 POPSKs are functional. These 
POPSKs also requ ired granting officers. The Committee insist ed that the sovereign functions of 
passport services like processing and issuance of passports should always be carried out by the staff 
of MEA while the non- sovereign functions are vested with the staff of Department of Posts. 

8 
Expressing disapproval of the persistent manpower crunch in CPO, the Committee had 
strongly recommended that the Ministry should augment manpower in the CPO and its network of 
Passport Offices, PSKs and POPSKs either through direct recruitment or on deputation. Furthermore, 
training programmes should be conducted for the staff of Department of Posts to familiarize them 
about Passport services so as to avoid technical glitches and human errors in delivery of passport 
services.  
18. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:-  
 “The Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation that the sovereign function of passport services 
should be carried out by MEA staff is being followed. As on 31 October 2018, 229 out  of 251 
POPSKs have been inaugurated. In the Passport Seva Project model, the tasks of „A‟ Counter 
pertain to application acceptance after biometric data collection and initial scrutiny of 
documents and are carried out by the service provider M/s TCS in th e existing Passport Seva 
Kendras (PSKs); while the tasks at the „B‟ and „C‟ counters pertain to sovereign functions of 
verification and grant of passports. In POPSKs, only the „A‟ counter tasks would be carried 
out by officials of the Department of Posts, while those of „B‟ and „C‟ counters would be 
performed by officials of the Central Passport Organization (CPO). 
 Augmentation of the manpower strength of the CPO and its offices is a priority of the 
Ministry. The total sanctioned strength of the CPO cadre is 2697 against which the working 
strength is 1996 as on 10 May 2018. In addition, 15 Technical and 6 supporting staff man the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Passport Seva Project. Ministry has engaged 446 Data 
Entry Operators through an outsourced s ervice provider to bridge the gap between the 
sanctioned strength and the working strength for the non-gazetted posts.  
 The difficulty in filling the vacant posts in the CPO cadre stems from the extant Recruitment 
Rules. Direct recruitment is possible onl y in the grades of Office Assistant, Junior Passport 
Assistant and Assistant Superintendent. Ministry has been regularly placing its indents with 
the Staff Selection Commission for recruitment in these grades as per the vacancies.  
 The Granting Officers a re in the grades of Superintendent and Senior Superintendent where 
100% recruitment is by promotion of Assistant Superintendents. There is no scope for direct 
entry or taking officials on deputation, or promotion of Assistant Superintendents through 
Limited Departmental Competitive Examination. Further, there is a shortage of Assistant 
Superintendents with the requisite qualifying service to be promoted as Superintendent.  
 Ministry has taken several steps to improve the service conditions of CPO personnel by re-
structuring and expanding the CPO cadre to ensure that vacant posts available to them are 
filled by promotion. In the years 2016 -17, 2017-18 and till date in 2018 -19, regular meetings 
of the Department Promotion Committee have been held for promotion  of eligible officials to 
the next grade. The cadre position as on 11 May 2018 is enclosed at Annexure -A (Gazetted) 
and Annexure-B (non-Gazetted).  
 Ministry has also decided to undertake a Cadre Review to address the issue of manpower 
shortage in the CPO.” 

9 
19. Concerned about the constant understaffing of Central Passport Organization, the 
Committee in their earlier recommendation had recommended that human resource should be 
augmented in CP and its network of Passport Offices, PSKs and PoPSKs either throu gh direct 
recruitment on through deputation. Even though the Ministry has taken steps to bridge the gap 
between sanctioned strength and working strength of the non -gazetted posts, it appears grossly 
inadequate. As per the extant Recruitment rules, direct recruitment is possible only in the 
grades of Office Assistant, Junior Passport Assistant and Assistant Superintendent. The 
Ministry has also informed that it has decided to undertake a Cadre Review t o address the 
issue of shortage of staff in the CPO.  
 The Committee are happy to learn that in pursuance of their recommendation, the 
sovereign functions of passport services are being carried out by MEA staff while the non -
sovereign tasks are being carried out by officials of Department of Posts. The y observe that the 
gap between the sanctioned strength and working strength can be narrowed down by direct 
recruitment, promotion and deputation. While the Ministry ha s taken steps to fill the vacant 
posts through the direct recruitment and promotion, much remains to be explored at the level 
of deputation. The Committee are of the considered opinion that Central Passport Office need 
to be provided with better infrastructure , including human resource and the Min istry should 
take adequate steps to ensure it. The Committee also desire that the Cadre Review  should be 
done expeditiously and the Committee may also be apprised of the same. 
 (Recommendation No. 15) 
Expedite construction of permanent campus of SAU 
20. The Committee had noted that there has been an increase in allocation for South Asian 
University from Rs. 260 crore in BE 2017-18 to Rs. 378.30 crore in RE 2017-18 and to Rs. 375 crore 
in BE 2018-19. The Ministry ha d informed that work related to the const ruction of the SAU campus 
has gained momentum in the last year and therefore, adequate funds ha d been provisioned for 
contribution towards creation of capital assets. In view of the slow and tardy progress of the 
construction of permanent camp us in the pre vious years, that wa s a welcome development.  The 
Committee were aware that construction work for the SAU campus ha d been devised under four 
packages. The Ministry has informed that work under Package I for boundary wall and site office has 
been completed, work under Package II for five building was in full progress and scheduled to be 
completed by December 2018; and work under Package III was slated to be complete by January 
2020. However, the Ministry ha d not provided a specific schedule for completion of  work under 
Package IV. The Committee were happy to know that after much prodding, Pakistan ha d made a part 

10 
of the payment of US$ 2.259 million against an overdue payment. The efforts for getting the 
remaining contribution should be continued till it is de posited. Given the record of sluggish progress 
in the construction of SAU, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should ensure that 
work related to Package II and III are completed as per schedule and issues related to works of 
Package IV were so rted out expeditiously. The Committee  had also desire d to be apprised of the 
progress made in that regard at regular intervals.  
21. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:-  
“The current progress of construction work for the SAU campus is as follows: 
Package-II (five buildings): Work under this package is being undertaken in an expeditious 
manner. As of September 2018, the structure works for the building housing the Faculties of 
Life Sciences and Earth Sciences has been completed. Miscellaneous structure works have also 
been completed. Internal works are nearing completion from basement up to third floor, and 
work is in progress for works till the last floor. The superstructure work in two Faculty 
Housing Blocks ha s been completed and internal and external works are in progress. The 
foundation for the fourth faculty and housing block has been completed. The superstructure 
work for the main building of faculty club, guest house and civil work for swimming pool has 
been completed. Miscellaneous, internal and external works are in progress. Overall progress 
in this package as of September 2018 was 56%. 
Package-III (seven buildings): As of September 2018, the RCC structure work for the faculty 
of Physics, Chemistry, Maths, IT and Law and Humanity has been completed. The structure 
work for Administration Block, Library, Institute of South Asian Studies, Faculty of Art 
Design and Convention Centres, and Utility Building are at various stages of construction. 
Overall progress in this package as of September 2018 is 35%. 
Package IV : The works on remaining buildings could not be planned due to various land 
issues. However, based on the recent directions of Hon‟ble Supreme Court, permission has 
been accorded for construction  in the geo -morphological ridge area. In respect of litigations 
pertaining to acquisition of land, the final verdict of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in one leading 
case is awaited which will determine the outcome in similar cases in the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court and the Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi. Ministry has already deposited an amount Rs. 
10.39 crore with the Hon‟ble Supreme Court as compensation to the land owner. Once these 
issues are resolved, construction for the buildings under Package IV will also be abl e to 
commence. 
In 2009, Cabinet approval was accorded for USD 239.93 million (approx. Rs. 1200 crore at 
the then exchange rate)  for GoI‟s assistance to South Asian University, of which USD 198 
million (approx. Rs. 990 crore at the then exchange rate)  was towards capital cost for campus 
construction with the project to be completed by 2014. However, due to delays in construction 
attributable to factors like non -receipt of approvals from various statutory authorities and 
encumbrances on the allotted land, the  project could not commence before 2016. This has also 
resulted in cost escalation over the amount approved by the Cabinet. The University has now 
sent a revised Detailed Project Report (DPR) to the Ministry in which the preliminary cost 

11 
estimate has been revised to Rs. 3115.73 crore (approx. USD 430 million at prevalent 
exchange rate). The revised DPR is being processed for vetting by CPWD and fresh approval 
of the Cabinet will be sought for the revised cost of the project. 
 Pakistan has paid a sum of USD 7,339,563 but balance contribution of USD 521,631 
is remaining. SAU through the SAARC Secretariat has taken up the case for early release of 
the balance payment. 
22. The construction work of permanent campus of the South Asian University devised 
under four  packages has been underway since 2010. Owing to the enhanced allocation for 
South Asian University during both RE 2017 -18 and BE 2018 -19, the Committee observe that 
there has been satisfactory progress in the construction work. The Ministry has informed t hat 
work under Package I had been completed last year; work under Package II for five buildings 
is being undertaken in an expeditious manner; work under Package III (seven buildings) are at 
various stages of construction and work under Package IV have not commenced due to legal 
and environmental issues. The delay in construction work has led to cost escalation over the  
amount approved by the Cabinet. The Ministry has also stated that revised Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) is being processed for vetting by CP WD and subsequent approval has to be 
obtained from the Cabinet for the revised cost of the project. It is a matter of greater 
disappointment that a construction work for permanent campus of an international university 
has been delayed for  such a considerab le time period and its completion , even in the near 
future appears grim. The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should invest due 
diligence and priority to ensure that all outstanding issues – legal, environmental and 
procedural – are resolved at the earliest and the construction of SAU campus is completed 
within a given time frame under intimation to this Committee.  
 (Recommendation No. 16) 
Timely completion of construction of Nalanda University 
23. The Committee had noted that an allocation of Rs. 200 crore was provided for Nalanda 
University in BE 2017 -18, but it was reduced at RE Stage and an outlay of Rs. 200 crore ha d been 
kept in BE 2018 -19. It was expected that the splitting up of tender into several packages and 
establishment of Nalanda Mentor Group (NMG), the construction of Nalanda University would be 
facilitated and expedited. However, the downward allocation in RE 2017 -18 and an allocation of Rs. 
200 crore at BE 2018 -19 told a different story. The Committee had observed that the University ha d 
started three courses since 2014 but they were unable to start new courses or enhance the intake of 
students due to non-availability of accommodation. The delay in completion of Nalanda University – 
an international institution of excellence for pursuit of intellectual philosophical and historical studies 
– was highly unfortunate. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the Government 

12 
should streamline the process in all the packages and draw a clear roadmap for the completion of this 
project with fixed timelines. Necessary funds should also be provided for timely completion of the 
progress. The Ministry should explore opportunities to channel ize contribution for this project from 
other participating countries to buttress domestic funds.   
24. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:-  
“Ministry, in coordination with Nalanda University, has taken measure s to expeditiously 
complete the campus construction project. The University has constituted a Project Monitoring 
Committee (PMC) consisting of two experts from civil engineering and electrical engineering 
fields respectively, one expert from the Government  of Bihar and one from the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The PMC has been mandated with the task of overseeing the construction 
project in addition to the monitoring done by the Architect Consultant and the Project 
Management Consultant. The status of work is as follows: 
Package I-A (Internal Roads and Earthwork for Water Bodies): Work in this package has 
been completed.  
Package I-B (Non-Residential Building): Work commenced in end of April 2017 and till end 
of April 2018, 31% of the work in this package has been completed. The scheduled period of 
completion is February 2020. The contractor has been instructed to compress the micro -
schedule and increase manpower, materials and machinery to accelerate work and minimize the 
delay.  
Package 1-C (Residential Buildings): The tender is under process.  
 Article 3 of the MoU on establishment of Nalanda University states that “funding for the 
establishment and operations  of the University will be on a voluntary basis” . Therefore, 
contributions from countries such as Australia, China, Thailand, and Lao PDR were purely 
voluntary and for specific purposes. However, in view of the Hon‟ble Committee‟s 
recommendations, Ministry  will explore opportunities of channelizing contributions for the 
project from other countries which have signed the MoU.” 
25. Regarding construction work of Nalanda University, the Committee had recommended 
that the Ministry should chalk out a roadmap for completion of this project with fixed timelines 
and also explore opportunities of channelizing contributions for the project from participating 
countries. Providing a status note of the project, the Ministry replied  that work related to 
Package I-A has be en completed; work in Package I -B have commenced in April, 2017 and is 
expected to be completed by February, 2020; and the tender for Package I -C is under progress. 
Delay in construction work of such international projects not only leads  to cost escalation  but 
also result in loss  of face of the Indian Government. The Committee , therefore,  urge the 
Ministry to coordinate with Nalanda University Administration and make concerted efforts to 

13 
complete work in Package I -B and I-C in expeditious and time -bound manner. The Committee 
may be apprised about the outcome thereof. 
(Recommendation  No. 18) 
Making Developmental Partnership immune from budgetary cuts 
26. The Committee had observed that as  a key instrument of our foreign policy, the scope and 
magnitude of developmental partnership has widened tremendously over the past few years. An 
allocation of Rs. 5093.77 crore was made in BE 2017 -18, which was reduced to Rs. 4273.82 crore in 
RE 2018 -19. An outlay of Rs. 5148.55 crore, which is 34% of total MEA‟s budget has been 
earmarked in BE 2018 -19. The reduction to the tune of 9% at RE 2017 -18 stage was based on 
physical and financial progress of projects under various Heads.  While recognizing the p ractical 
challenges faced by the Ministry in execution of various projects under this Head and its subsequent 
impact on making budgetary demands, the Committee feel that the allocation under this Major Head 
is indicative of our international commitments an d of our bilateral relations with various countries. 
With the inclusion of the major Head under the scheme section, the Committee in their previous 
Report on Demands for Grants were hopeful that it will remain immune from budgetary cuts of the 
Ministry of Finance. However, that has not been the case and significant reduction has been made at 
the RE stage. 
 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs should undertake a 
thorough review of all Aid projects and prepare a roadmap for their completion. Based on this review 
exercise, the Ministry can prevent any reduction at RE stage and if required liaise with the Ministry 
of Finance for additional financial resources at that stage. The Committee  had also reiterated their 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of setting up an autonomous 
aid disbursal body along the lines of USAID to avoid the arbitrary cut‟s imposed by the Ministry of 
Finance and prioritization being done within the available allocations. Th is would make the DPA 
more predictable and play a vital role for ushering developmental diplomacy.   
27. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:- 
 “The Ministry is constantly monitoring the progress of GoI -assisted development cooperation 
projects to ensure that projects are completed within the scheduled timeframes, have continuity 
of resources, and achieve the desired impact. In line with the recommendations of the 
Committee, projects are being reviewed at regular  intervals and at multiple levels in the 
Ministry as well as with all concerned stakeholders. A roadmap of milestones specific to each 
project is part of the monitoring process that is updated and reviewed in consultation with the 
respective project management consultants. 
 The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) was created in 2012 within MEA to 
channel Indian development and technical assistance through various schemes and projects 

14 
that are aligned with India‟s overall foreign policy priorities a nd aims, and that respond to the 
needs and requests of the recipient partner countries. DPA consists of three Divisions, 
handling different streams of development cooperation, and are overseen by Secretary 
(Economic Relations) in the Ministry. DPA‟s work i nvolves close coordination and 
consultation with concerned Territorial Divisions of the Ministry where the projects are 
located, as they are the principal interlocutors with partner countries. Projects and schemes are 
initiated in Territorial Divisions as per overall foreign policy priorities and objectives, and then 
handed over to DPA for implementation. There is continuous coordination by DPA with other 
Divisions of the Ministry, as required, during the implementation stage. Funds requirements 
are assessed and calibrated carefully to ensure continuity of resource flow for smooth project 
implementation. Ministry has not faced any serious constraints vis-à-vis budget till now. The 
existing institutional set -up with a healthy mix of cross -Ministry expertise a nd consultants 
from outside Government has served well in the Ministry‟s ability to execute and deliver its 
development cooperation and technical assistance programmes.” 
28. Developmental partnership constitutes a central aspect of our foreign policy and have 
widened in scope and outreach. Notwithstanding this fact, it has been susceptible to budgetary 
cuts. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should undertake a 
thorough review of all ongo ing aid projects and prepare a roadmap of their timely completion. 
In order to impart fiscal predictability, the Committee had also urged the Ministry to explore 
the feasibility of creating an autonomous aid disbursal body along the lines of USAID. The 
Ministry has informed that there exists a regular review process at multiple levels with all 
concerned stakeholders. The Committee find the silence of the Ministry over the issue of a 
more institutionalized autonomous mechanism like USAID as totally unacceptable. Yet again, 
the Ministry  has failed to furnish updated RE figures. With such half -stated facts and 
incomplete replies, the Committee are not in a position to comment appropriately. The y, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should submit all  available data  so that 
accurate picture can be seen and apt observation be made.  
(Recommendation No. 24) 
Aid to Maldives 
29. The Committee have noticed that the budgetary allocation under the sub -head „Aid to 
Maldives‟ had been increased from Rs. 75 cror e in BE 2017 -18  to Rs. 125 crore in RE 2017 -18 as 
well as in BE 2018 -19.  The Ministry had stated that the 66.67 per cent increase in allocation during 
RE 2017 -18 was on account of implementation of Coastal Surveillance System project, regular 
payment towards training course and scholarships for civilians and physical progress of the Institute 
of Security and Law Enforcement Studies (ISLES). The assertion that in view of the prevailing 
political situation in Maldives, project related expenditure was likely  to be lower than what was 
envisaged has been duly noted by the Committee.  The Committee observe that only 19 per cent 

15 
physical progress had been accomplished in construction work of ISLES. The Committee had 
therefore, recommended that allocation should b e made on a realistic basis. The Committee had 
further recommended that the Government reach out to the Government of Maldives to ensure the 
smooth implementation of our projects.  The Committee had also desireed that the construction of the 
long-delayed ISLES should be expedited and completed by May, 2019.   
30. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:- 
“The implementation of the ISLES project has been affected due to undue delay in the issuance 
of work permits by the Government of Maldives in recent months. So far, the physical progress 
of the project stands at 26%. The issue of delay in work permits has been raised bilaterally with 
the Government of Maldives, and the Ministry continues to pursue the matter.  While all efforts 
are being made to achieve the completion of the project on schedule, funds allocation would be 
reviewed at RE 2018 -19 stage to align the same with the actual progress of the project bearing 
in mind the prevailing political situation in Maldives”. 
31. The Committee observed that there was an increase in budgetary allocation  under the 
sub-head ‘Aid to Maldives’ during RE 2017-18 and BE 2018-19 in comparison to BE 2017-18.   
The major reason behind the augmented allocation was implementation of Coa stal 
Surveillance System, payment towards training course and scholarships for civilians and 
physical progress of the Institute of Security and Law Enforcement Studies (ISLES). In the 
earlier recommendation, the Committee had asked the Government to coordi nate with the 
Government of Maldives for Quick and smooth implementation of ongoing projects.  The y 
had also specifically desired that the construction of ISLES project be fast tracked so that it is 
completed by May, 2019.  In their reply, the Ministry  have stated that efforts are being taken 
to complete the desired project on schedule, fund allocation would be reviewed at RE 2018 -19 
stage.   It is inexplicable that when the replies were submitted to the Committee in December, 
2018, the RE figures were read ily available with the Ministry, however, the casual reply to 
Committee’s recommendation is a serious concern . If the physical progress of the project 
stands at 26 % only, then how does the Ministry envision completing it as per the schedule i.e. 
May, 2019.   Criticizing the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry, the Committee strongly 
reiterate that complete and updated replies should be furnished by the former. The 
Committee desire to know the deadline for completion of the long-delayed ISLES. 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
Augment human capital in MEA 
32. The Committee had noted that the sanctioned strength of the Ministry was 8208, while the 
working strength was 7012. The Committee were unhappy to learn about the huge gap between the 
sanctioned and actual strength in the Ministry of External Affairs, leading to vacant posts in vital 

16 
departments. Over the years, the Ministry ha d provided the same justification that the gap was due to 
delay in recruitment which is beyond its control. The Committee had also observed that to tide over 
this manpower crunch, various steps such as induction of officers from other Ministries, engagement 
of Consultants etc ha d been taken. The Committee had taken serious cognizance of the persistent 
vacant posts in the Ministry and find the steps taken by the Ministry as inadequate and half -hearted. 
The Committee had strongly recommend ed that the Ministry impress upon the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) and Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) to enhance the direct recruitment 
process to fill up the vacant positions in the Ministry so that it is appropriately staffed. The 
Committee had also recommend ed that the Ministry continue inducting expertise from other 
Ministries, academia, think tanks and the private sector, as needed to ensure the quality of manpower 
is also augmented simultaneously.   
 
33. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:- 
“Ministry has taken concerted action to ensure adequate human resources as follows: 
 
 Requisite indents were placed with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for ASOs, 
Steno /PAs, Junior Secretarial Assistants and MTSs. Regular follow -up was done with SSC. 
Accordingly, 125 ASOs and 35 Stenos/PAs joined the Ministry in May 2018. In addition, 28 
more JSAs are expected to join the Ministry. Recruitment of nearly 80 MTSs is in its final 
stages. 
   
 Regarding resources at the officer level, 38 IFS officers of the 2017 batch have joined 
the Ministry. After regular follow -up, UPSC has recommended one candidate to the post of 
Junior Interpreter in 2018. Further, Ministry has placed an indent with UPSC for five vacancies 
in the grade of Legal Officer Grade II. 
 
 To augment its human resources, Ministry has continued to take officers on deputation 
from various line Ministries and Departments of Government of India as well as State 
Governments. More than 70 such officers on deputation are currently working in the Ministry. 
 
 Ministry engages consultants, including retired Government officials as well as from 
the open market, with expertise in varied fields including project management, international 
law, consular services and di sarmament. More than 50 such consultants are currently engaged 
by the Ministry”. 
 
34. While noting the steps taken by the Ministry to tackle the shortage of staff, the gap 
between the sanctioned strength and working strength has been an issue of persistent  concern 
to the Committee.  In order to deal effectively with this problem, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to increase the direct recruitment pro cess and also continue 
induction of expertise from other Ministries, think tanks, academia and Priv ate Sector.  The y 
did notice that the Ministry has taken concerted action s to augment its human resources which 
inter-alia included placing requisite indents with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and 

17 
(UPSC), engaging consultants and taking officers on deputations.  The Committee desire that 
the Ministry should ensure that adequate and well -required human resources are available for 
smooth functioning of the Ministry by adopting all these methods. 
(Recommendation No. 32) 
Due priority should be accorded to PoE offices 
35. The Committee had observed that out of the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 440.64 crore in 
BE 2018-19, for the major head Secretariat General Service, Rs.17.09 crore ha d been earmarked for 
expenditure on Protectorate General of Emigran ts (PGoE). The allocation of Rs. 14.82 crore at BE 
2017-18 was raised to Rs. 21.89 crore at the RE stage.  The Ministry had stated the reason for 
increase in allocation to PGoE during the RE 2017 -18 was due to payments to the Implementing 
Agency for runnin g the e -Migrate project. The Committee had observed that the bulk of the 
expenditure under PGoE is for the sub -head 'Information Technology.' It was observed that against 
the sanctioned strength of Protector of Emigrants (POE) offices of 87 posts, 62 posts  are occupied. 
The Ministry ha d informed that there was no proposal of shifting of present POE offices. However, 
in principle approval ha d been obtained for opening one POE office in Bengaluru, Karnataka and a 
PoE Cell has also been staged in Lucknow under PoE Rai Bareli.   
 The Committee had taken a serious note of the negligence accorded to PGoE post merger, as 
can be discerned from the budgetary allocation. It was a matter of deep concern that another vital 
department of MEA, namely POE offices, has been  enduring manpower constraint. The Committee 
had strongly recommended that the Government should pay special attention to strengthen the POE 
offices through adequate provisioning of finances and human capital. The Ministry was further urged 
to improve the working conditions of POE offices by either shifting them to new buildings or by 
investing on infrastructural development of the offices in the process of establishment or to be 
established and apprise the Committee about the progress in this regard.  
36. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry has been giving high importance to augmenting manpower in POE offices. 
Officers of the Ministry as well as from other Ministries/Departments have been posted t o 
POE offices on deputation basis. Contractual staff have also been hired against sanctioned 
vacant positions as per administrative requirements to ensure that the important functions 
performed by these offices are not hampered. Ministry is also taking active steps to fill the 
14 vacancies in POE offices expeditiously”.  
 
37. The Committee observed that after the merger of erstwhile Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs (MOIA) with Ministry of External Affairs in 2016, the Protector of 
Emigrants (PoE) Offices and the Protectorate General of Emigrants (PGoE) have not been 

18 
given adequate institutional as well as fiscal space.  Expressing concern over this worrisome 
development, the Committee had recommended that the Government should strengthen 
PoE offices throu gh adequate provisioning of human as well as financial capital.  The 
Ministry was also urged to improve the working conditions of PoE offices through requisite 
infrastructural development.  In their reply, the Ministry has enumerated measures taken 
to augment human resources in PoE Offices; however, it does not mention anything about 
infrastructural development of PoE Offices.  The Committee urge the Ministry to attach 
significant attention to PoE Offices by giving them adequate finances and staff so that t he 
intended objectives behind the merger is not jeopardized.  Furthermore, the Ministry may 
also apprise the Committee about the role of PoE Offices in the proposed Draft Emigration 
Management Bill that has been recently released for public feedback. 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
Making Public Diplomacy more visible 
38. The Committee had noted that the budgetary allocation to the sub -head 'Expenditure on 
Public Diplomacy' was Rs. 21.66 crore in BE 2017 -18, Rs. 20.55 crore in RE 2017 -18 and is Rs. 
21.87 crore in BE 2018 -19.  The marginal decrease in RE 2017 -18 as cited by the Ministry was on 
account of the transfer of certain routine activities to the Secretariat Establishment budget. The 
Committee had observed that out of the allocated budget in BE 2018 -19, more than 90% has been 
earmarked for 'Advertising and Publicity'. The Ministry ha d cited two objectives of this Division - 
introducing and acquainting people within the country about India's foreign policy objectives and 
promoting India in foreign countries. For attainment of these twin objectives, the Ministry ha d been 
emphasizing on traditional as well as digital platforms. The Committee ha d been informed that while 
constantly endeavouring to follow global trends in Public Diplomacy, it has been adapting to best 
international practices as per Indian requirements.  
 In the considered view of t he Committee, the budgetary allocation made to the XPD Division 
was not in proportion to the critical role played by it in creating awareness about India's Foreign 
policy priorities and effective global engagement. There was further room for incorporating the best 
global practices to make this Division truly dynamic and consequently, the Committee had desired 
that the Ministry should undertake an assessment study of successful global practices. The 
Committee had also urged that the Ministry should expand its public outreach through an innovative 
and grassroots presence. 
39. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs replied as under:- 
“The Ministry has taken steps for conducting the exercise recommended by the 
Hon‟ble Committee to learn from the best global practices being followed by the 
publicity and information wings of other Foreign Ministries and how the same may be 

19 
adapted by the Ministry . The Ministry has also undertaken severa l innovative public 
outreach initiatives in recent times. The Ministry will further focus on extending the 
reach of these initiatives and take them to the desired beneficiaries”. 
 
40. In their recommendation, the Committee found that the budgetary allocations 
made to the External Publicity Division (XPD) were not in sync with the crucial role 
assigned to it.  The Ministry was, therefore, recommended to carry out an assessment 
study of g lobal best practices and incorporate it in order to make the Division more 
dynamic.  The Committee are of the firm view that in a globalized and inter -connected 
world, the role of public diplomacy as a powerful tool cannot be downplayed.  The 
Committee exp ress the view that the Ministry’s external communication efforts are, at 
best, unsatisfactory and a major overhaul is needed. The Government ought to exploit 
the full potential of our public diplomacy by making it more pro -active, target-oriented, 
innovative and foresighted.  To achieve this objective, the Ministry should complete the 
assessment study at the earliest and inform the Committee about its findings and 
outcomes. 
(Recommendation. No. 40) 
Gender-sensitive approach towards distressed women 
41. The Committee have noted that scheme on „Legal Assistance to Women Facing problems in 
NRI marriages‟ was the only gender specific scheme being implemented by MEA for Overseas 
Indians. The Committee were dismayed to note that there had been a drastic reduction in allocation 
under this scheme, from Rs. 0.25 crore in BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 0.01 crore in BE 2018-19. The Ministry 
had informed the Committee that after bringing this scheme under the ambit of Indian Community 
Welfare Fund (ICWF), budgetary allocation had be en reduced to a token amount in BE 2018 -19 and 
the existence of the budget head will be assured in light of feedback received. The Committee have 
noted that various steps have been taken by the Ministry to create awareness among Indian nationals 
about NRI marital issues. The Committee had urged that the Ministry should actively monitor the 
efficacy of the new modality under ICWF in providing legal and other assistance to distressed Indian 
women. Further, adequate budgetary funds and awareness drive should b e launched to ensure that 
such a gender specific scheme does not get lost under the ICWF which caters to multiple issues. 
42. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry has continuously endeavoured to a ddress problems pertaining to distressed Indian 
women who have been abused, cheated or abandoned by their NRI/PIO spouses. As 
recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee earlier and with an aim to provide financial and legal 
assistance to distressed Indian women married to NRI spouses by Indian Missions and Posts, the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) guidelines were revised in September 2017. Under the 

20 
revised ICWF guidelines the assistance amount for distressed Indian women was increased to 
US$ 4000 per case on a means -tested basis; scope of assistance was enhanced to include 
boarding and lodging; and, funds disbursement to lawyers/NGOs providing assistance would be 
made through Indian Missions/Posts. 
Indian Missions and Posts have been asked to widen the empa nelment of lawyers, NGOs and 
Community Organizations to provide guidance, counseling services and assistance. Many Indian 
Missions have designated „Open House‟ meetings in which any distressed Indian national can 
approach Mission for assistance and guidanc e. Ministry is empowering aggrieved Indian 
nationals by providing information and guidance about procedures, mechanisms for serving 
judicial summons on the offending overseas Indian spouse; filing a case in an Indian court or 
police station; issuing Look -Out Circulars; impounding and cancelling of Indian passport of the 
offending spouse etc.  
Ministry has prepared a comprehensive bilingual FAQs providing information on legal provisions 
prevailing in foreign countries and database of organizations, NGOs and lawyers who are 
registered or empaneled with Indian Missions and Posts. This information has also been made 
available on Ministry‟s website at http://www.mea.gov.in/faq -hi.htm. State authorities and 
Regional Passport Offices have been asked to translate th e above -mentioned FAQs, legal 
provisions and revised guidelines for legal and financial assistance under ICWF and other 
relevant information into local languages to be posted on their respective websites. 
An Integrated Nodal Agency (INA), as recommended by  the Expert Committee on NRI Marital 
Disputes set up by the Ministry, has been constituted. The INA, aimed to be an effective 
mechanism to provide a single -window timely solution to the problems of affected women, is 
headed by Ministry of Women and Child D evelopment with senior officials from Ministries of 
External Affairs, Home Affairs, and Law and Justice as members. The INA has held five 
meetings so far.  
NRI marital issues are also taken up during bilateral meetings and Consular Dialogues held with 
foreign countries. The State Commissions for Women are being involved for providing 
appropriate guidance and counseling to distressed Indian women abandoned in India by their NRI 
spouses and assisting women to get in touch with district legal authorities who h ave empaneled 
lawyers who also work on pro-bono basis with them.  
Under the Videsh Sampark series initiated by Ministry, outreach events are held in partnership 
with State Governments with an aim to brief State Governments and relevant stakeholders about 
the programmes, schemes and welfare measures of the Ministry and cooperation is sought to 
disseminate information. Such outreach events have been held in Telangana, Maharashtra, 
Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. Ministry is in the process of producing a f ilm/ad on NRI 
marital disputes as part of its awareness campaign in Hindi and regional languages”. 
43. The Committee had noted that the only gender -specific scheme of the Ministry of 
External Affairs i.e. Legal Assistance to women facing problems in NRI marriage’s has been 
subsumed under Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF).  Recognizing the gravity of the  
problems pertaining to distressed women, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry 

21 
should ensure that budgetary funds and awareness campaigns are  lunched to provide them 
with requisite legal and financial assistance.  In its reply, the Ministry has provided a detailed 
note on the concerted efforts made to address the problems related to distressed Indian women 
who have been abused, cheated or aband oned by their NRI/PIO spouses.  Widening 
empanelment of lawyers, NGOs and Community Organizations in Indian Missions and Posts, 
preparation of a comprehensive bilingual FAQs, establishment of Integrated Nodal Agency 
(INA), holding outreach events with stat e Governments are commendable st eps taken by the 
Ministry in this  direction.  The Committee are satisfied with the follow -up action taken by the 
Ministry over such a critical aspect.  The Committee would like to be informed about the 
impact/outcome of this  endeavour towards having a gender -sensitive approach towards India 
Diaspora. 
(Recommendation No. 46) 
Time to frame a Grand Strategy for Indian foreign Policy 
44. The Committee noted that there were ten key principles and objectives guiding our foreign 
policy. The Ministry has informed that the Government followed a pragmatic and outcome -oriented 
foreign policy. The Committee were surprised by the Ministry's submiss ion that there is no 
overarching and formalized policy document covering all aspects of our foreign policy.  However, 
policy initiatives and strategies such as „Neighbourhood First‟ Policy, „Act East‟, SAGAR maritime 
doctrine, revitalizing ties with West A sia, simultaneous engagement with all powers, focus on 
regional connectivity and Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), reform of 
multilateral institutions, including of the UN Security Council, reconnecting with Diaspora, 
constituted the elem ents of that multi -faceted approach to India‟s international relations and our 
diplomatic strategy. The Committee had also noted that the existence of mechanisms of consultation 
and coordination between MEA and other arms of Government to ensure that facto rs shaping India‟s 
foreign policy were in tune with the country‟s national priorities.  
The Committee were cognizant of India's deepening engagement at the bilateral, regional as 
well as multilateral level. The Committee were of the considered view that the formulation of a grand 
strategy encompassing the broad aspects of our foreign policy with short term, medium term and long 
term objectives is the need of the hour. By imparting coherence and clarity on our hitherto long 
established and enduring principle s of foreign policy, the grand foreign policy strategy would also 
bolster the case for enhanced allocation by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs should take all requisite institutional a s well 
intellectual steps to spell out a coherent and balanced grand strategy for India in the world.  

22 
45. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its action taken reply stated as under:- 
 
“The process of formulating a road map for India‟s international engagement is an ongoing 
one. The Ministry undertakes continuous stock -taking of changes in the global landscape 
with a view to identify challenges and opportunities over a short, medium and long -term 
horizon. It is this process that has led to enunciation of t he „Neighbourhood First‟ policy, 
the „Act East‟ policy and the SAGAR maritime doctrine.  
 
Our policy of simultaneous engagement with all major powers, our new and more intensive 
orientation towards the Indian Ocean region, recent strengthening in our relat ions with 
West Asia and the Gulf, and upgradation in the scale of our vision for relations with 
African countries, are all reflective of a more energetic, coherent and focused approach.  
 
The immediate and most fundamental factor shaping our foreign policy  thinking is the flux 
and transition that characterizes the current world order. There is a clear trend of new 
voices and issues arising in the overall global discourse. In such a scenario, while locking 
in to a particular strategy may not prove to be an ideal approach in the long run; it is indeed 
very important for us to have our own world view – and we do. India‟s world view is 
essentially centered on the concept of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam  – the world is one 
family. This is increasingly being enunciated at  global platforms through references by our 
leaders to various ideas under this concept.  
 
Keeping this unique Indian world view at its core, the Ministry will continue to take 
institutional as well as intellectual steps to implement a pragmatic and outcome-oriented 
foreign policy, which is agile and responsive in the face of short term developments and 
forward looking in dealing with emerging global trends in the longer term”.  
 
46. In view of India’s expanding and deepening global engagements, the C ommittee were 
surprised to note the absence of an overreaching and formal policy underlying the visions and 
objectives of India’s foreign policy. The Committee, therefore, had recommended  that the 
Ministry should spell out a comprehensive, coherent and bal anced ‘grand strategy ’ for 
directing and guiding India’s foreign policy. The Ministry’s circuitous response in this regard 
is unacceptable. While the Committee do realize that formulating a roadmap is an ongoing 
process, the presence of an overreaching policy framework can be a potent force in giving 
shape and direction to our foreign policy. The C ommittee, thereby, reiterate their  
recommendation that the Ministry of External Affairs should undertake a thorough study and  
frame a comprehensive and cogent ‘grand strategy’ document to guide, shape and direct our 
foreign policy on a priority basis.  
  

23 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Despite persistent written and oral reminders and repeated Recommendations in previous 
Reports of the Committee, Statements under Direction 73A of Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha in 
context of the Reports of the Committee are piling up, which is not a happy augur y. Direction 73-A 
has been issued with the specific intent of keeping the Parliament aware of the implementation status 
of Observations/Recommendations contained in the Reports of the Parliamentary Committees. For 
this purpose a six months period has been prescribed for the Government to make the Statement, 
which is a reasonable time period. The Committee are distressed to note that in the instant pendency 
of Ministry of External Affairs, Statements are to be made for Reports presented as long as six years 
ago. In the considered opinion of the Committee, such inordinately long delays amount to hindering 
the oversight function of the Committee as well as the Parliament, which is a serious matter. The 
Committee hope that the Ministry would appreciate the gravi ty of the situation and get all the 
pending Statements under Direction 73A made in both the Houses as desired by the Committee in 
their Twentieth Report. Furthermore, in future, the Ministry will scrupulously adhere to the 
prescribed timelines in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Hon‟ble Committee‟s directions are noted for compliance. The Minister made Statements 
on 4 th April 2018 in the Lok Sabha and on 5 th April 2018 in the Rajya Sabha during the Budget 
Session 2018 on the status of implementatio n of Recommendations and Observations contained in 
the following Reports of the Hon‟ble Committee: 
h. 13th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for 2012-13 
 
i. 19th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for 2013-14 
 
j. 15th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Problems related to Overseas Indian marriages: Scheme for 
providing legal/financial assistance/rehabilitation to Indian wome n deserted by their overseas 
Indian Spouses.  
 
k. 25th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Passport Seva Project – Targets and Achievements 
 
l. 3rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for 2014-15  

24 
 
m. 5th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for 2015-16 
 
n. 13th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on India‟s Soft Power Diplomacy including role of Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations and Indian Diaspora 
 Minister‟s Statements in respect of other pending Reports is proposed to be made during the 
forthcoming Session of Parliament.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry is in agreement with their observati ons regarding the 
scope for improvement in the process by which budgetary demands are prepared at the Unit level but 
it has also submitted that the mismatch between funds demanded and actual utilization is largely on 
account of its technical assistance and  development cooperation schemes, projects and programmes 
being implemented abroad where certain extraneous factors come into play which are beyond its 
control. The Ministry, inexplicably, has not intimated about steps taken towards formulating a zero -
based budgeting process, which incorporates continuous evaluation and assessment of budgetary 
allocation against fund utilization.  The Zero Based Budgeting seems all the more imperative now 
where the Committee observe significant and unrealistic gaps between the allocations sought, BE and 
RE and the expenditure actually incurred. While acknowledging the factors put forth by the Ministry, 
the Committee desire that the Ministry take fool proof steps to secure all clearances and pre -emptive 
steps before going ahead with the international aid projects.    
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry will continue to improve its budgetary assessment and management in line with 
the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendations of better unit -based budgeting. Ministry has instituted a 
mechanism of holding Quarterly Budget Management Meetings with majo r Divisions and Spending 
Units, chaired by Foreign Secretary or Financial Advisor, where spending as well as demands are 
assessed in detail based on project -wise status of implementation. This has assisted in the Ministry 
projecting more realistic demands for a given financial year for the Revised Estimates and for the 
subsequent financial year for the Budget Estimates.  
 The overarching principle of zero -based budgeting guides the continuous evaluation and 
assessment of budgetary allocation and optimal fun ds utilization in Ministry‟s budget management. 
The Ministry will continue to make more efforts in this direction to realize credible budgetary 
demands justified by past efficient utilization of funds and objective assessment of anticipated 

25 
expenditure bas ed on implementation progress, in line with the Hon‟ble Committee‟s 
recommendation to further improve budgetary assessment, management and utilization. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 On examining utilization of budgetary allocation during 2017-18, the Committee find that the 
Ministry has an amount of Rs. 4223.85 crore to spend in the last quarter. Thus, 30.85 percent of the 
RE allocation is remaining for spending in last quarter, which is slightly less than the Ministry of 
Finance guidelines of expenditure within 33% of allocation. The Committee have made a note of the 
specific steps taken by the Ministry to improve financial management and spending pattern. It is 
perplexing to note that while on one hand, there has been a discrepanc y in budgetary demands made 
by MEA and actual allocations provided, on the other hand, even the lower Revised allocated outlays 
are not spent by the Ministry. The budgetary cuts inflicted upon the Ministry of External Affairs 
seem to be a fall out of its o wn expenditure pattern. The Committee are satisfied to note that the 
Ministry has now felt that the gap between budgetary demands and allocation can be narrowed down 
by demonstrating robust and prudent expenditure in first two quarters of the financial yea r and 
presenting a positive case before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should first demonstrate efficient utilization of funds in first two 
quarters of the year by observing the progress at Unit leve l and also maintain it at optimal level so 
that the Ministry of Finance at least not reduce the funds at the RE stage. Simultaneously, the 
Committee would recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs convince the Ministry of Finance 
to well-equip them financially so that the foreign policy objectives do not get restricted due to lack of 
financial resources. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee, the Ministry has made concerted 
efforts to improve expenditure in the fi rst two quarters of a financial year to be in a realistic position 
to seek additional funds from Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. In FY 2017 -18, Ministry‟s 
expenditure in the first two quarters of the FY was 44.81% of the BE 2017 -18 allocation. In FY 
2018-19, Ministry has achieved expenditure of 55.6% of the BE 2018 -19 allocation in the first two 
quarters.  
 Ministry assures the Hon‟ble Committee of its commitment towards continuing to make 
further efforts to improve the utilisation pattern of its alloc ated budget while addressing the inherent 
political, security, geological and other challenges faced in implementing projects abroad.  
 Ministry has also been engaging with Ministry of Finance to keep them informed them of 

26 
funds required to meet our intern ational commitments and to emphasize the importance of providing 
adequate budgetary allocations for the same.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under the Head „Embassies and Missions‟ 
has witnessed an upward trend, moving from Rs. 2528.56 crore in BE 2016 -17 to Rs. 2631.47 crore 
in RE 2017-18 and to Rs. 2701 crore in BE 2018 -19. With an increase in allocation at the RE Stage 
vis-à-vis BE stage over the past four years, it is observed that this head is an exception to the general 
trend of budgetary allocation of MEA. The Ministry has enlisted five parameters for deciding the 
opening of new Missions, viz, assessment of India‟s geo -political priorities; intensity of bilateral 
engagement; welfare of Indian Diaspora; commercial, developmental and cultural interest; and 
reciprocal arrangement with the country concerned, on a case to case basis. With a view to expanding 
India‟s global footprint, the Ministry is in the process of consultation with concerned Departments of 
Government of India for opening of New Missions in different regions of the world, beginning with 
Africa. With regard to opening of Missions  in Latin America or Baltic States, the Ministry informed 
that it will be the next step of MEA, but it is difficult to persuade the Ministry of Finance to create 
posts to run the Mission/Posts. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should chal k out a 
roadmap along with timelines for opening of new Missions/Posts, and inform the Committee about 
the same. While determining the location of new Missions, the Ministry should strike a balance 
between the demand and the extent of the country's presenc e in our country. So far as the issue of 
creation of human resource is concerned, the Committee desire that the Ministry ought to take up the 
matter at the highest level to persuade the Ministry of Finance in this matter. 
 The Committee have been continuou sly reminding the Missions for improvement in 
monitoring of performance and evaluation of existing Missions/Posts. In this regard, the Foreign 
Secretary in his candid submission apprised that the Ministry has introduced an online monitoring 
system on weekl y and monthly basis, however it needs further improvement. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly desire that centralized monitoring mechanism is established to ensure an efficient 
and timely delivery of services in the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation that while determining the location of new 
Missions a balance should be struck between the demand and the extent of the country‟s presence in 
our country  has been incorporated in the Ministry‟s plan o f opening of new Missions and Posts 
abroad.  

27 
 In March 2018, t he Union Cabinet approved the opening of 18 new Missions in Africa 
(Rwanda, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Republic of Congo, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, 
Mauritania, Cape Verde, Sierra Leone, Chad, Sao Tome and Principe, Eritrea, Somalia, Guinea 
Bissau, Swaziland, Liberia, and Togo)  over a four year period from 2018 to 2021. Of these, six 
Missions will be opened in 2018 and 2019 as follows: Mission in Rwanda has been opened in July -
August 2018;  personnel have been identified for Missions in Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, and 
Guinea; and, administrative processes are under way for Missions in Republic of Congo and Burkina 
Faso.  
 The Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) for monitorin g of Mission and 
Posts was introduced by Ministry‟s Directorate General of Inspection (DGI) in 2016. PEMS is a 
dynamic two-way interface between Ministry and Missions/Posts, providing an objective, transparent 
and participatory process to evaluate performa nce of Missions/Posts and to identify Missions/Posts 
for DGI‟s on -site inspection. PEMS is currently being modified to put in place an annual appraisal 
system by which Missions/Posts will be evaluated on a set of objective identified areas to measure 
performance. The modified portal is expected to be launched shortly. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee note that against sanctioned strength of 2697, the actual strength in CPO is 
2051. The Ministry has stated that steps have  been taken to improve service conditions of the CPO 
personnel, including indenting of 224 posts of different non -gazetted level from SSC.  However, the 
Committee do no find these steps as sufficient, particularly when most of the 92 PSKs operating as 
arms of 37 Passport Offices are working with inadequate staff. Furthermore, to bring passport 
services closer to the citizens, the Ministry in association with the Department of Posts had initiated 
opening up of 251 POPSKs in two phases. Of these, 60 POPSKs ar e functional. These POPSKs also 
require granting officers. The Committee insist that the sovereign functions of passport services like 
processing and issuance of passports should always be carried out by the staff of MEA while the non- 
sovereign functions are vested with the staff of Department of Posts. 
Expressing disapproval of the persistent manpower crunch in CPO, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry augment manpower in the CPO and its network of Passport Offices, 
PSKs and POPSKs either th rough direct recruitment or on deputation. Furthermore, training 
programmes should be conducted for the staff of Department of Posts to familiarize them about 
Passport services so as to avoid technical glitches and human errors in delivery of passport services.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 

28 
Reply of the Government 
 The Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation that the sovereign function of passport services 
should be carried out by MEA staff is being followed.  As on 31 October 2018, 229 out of 251 
POPSKs have been inaugurated. In the Passport Seva Project model, the tasks of „A‟ Counter pertain 
to application acceptance after biometric data collection and initial scrutiny of documents and are 
carried out by the service provider M/s TCS in the existing Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs); while the 
tasks at the „B‟ and „C‟ counters pertain to sovereign functions of verification and grant of passports. 
In POPSKs, only the „A‟ counter tasks would be carried out by officia ls of the Department of Posts, 
while those of „B‟ and „C‟ counters would be performed by officials of the Central Passport 
Organization (CPO). 
 Augmentation of the manpower strength of the CPO and its offices is a priority of the 
Ministry. The total sanctioned strength of the CPO cadre is 2697 against which the working strength 
is 1996 as on 10 May 2018. In addition, 15 Technical and 6 supporting staff man the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) of the Passport Seva Project.  Ministry has engaged 446 Data Entry 
Operators through an outsourced service provider to bridge the gap between the sanctioned strength 
and the working strength for the non-gazetted posts.  
 The difficulty in filling the vacant posts in the CPO cadre stems from the extant Recruitment 
Rules. Direct recruitment is possible only in the grades of Office Assistant, Junior Passport Assistant 
and Assistant Superintendent. Ministry has been regularly placing its indents with the Staff Selection 
Commission for recruitment in these grades as per the vacancies.  
 The Granting Officers are in the grades of Superintendent and Senior Superintendent where 
100% recruitment is by promotion of Assistant Superintendents. There is no scope for direct entry or 
taking officials on deputation, or promotion of Assistant  Superintendents through Limited 
Departmental Competitive Examination. Further, there is a shortage of Assistant Superintendents 
with the requisite qualifying service to be promoted as Superintendent.  
Ministry has taken several steps to improve the servic e conditions of CPO personnel by re -
structuring and expanding the CPO cadre to ensure that vacant posts available to them are filled by 
promotion. In the years 2016 -17, 2017 -18 and till date in 2018 -19, regular meetings of the 
Department Promotion Committe e have been held for promotion of eligible officials to the next 
grade. The cadre position as on 11 May 2018 is enclosed at Annexure-A (Gazetted) and Annexure-B 
(non-Gazetted).  
 Ministry has also decided to undertake a Cadre Review to address the issue of  manpower 
shortage in the CPO. 
 

29 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The scale of passport related services can be estimated from the fact that approximately 5.44 
crore passport related applications have been processed and Rs. 5.34 crore services rendered through 
the Passport Seva Portal (PSP) system in 2017. The Committee are satisfied to learn that several steps 
have been taken to bring about qualitative and quantitative improvements in the delivery of passport 
services in the country. The Committee, however, find th at during 2015, 2016 and 2017 only 123,80 
and 17 Passport Sewa Camps were organized respectively. The Committee do not agree with the 
justification given by the Ministry for organizing lesser number of Passport Sewa Camps during the 
last three years. Since  the POPSKs have just started functioning and mostly cover big cities with 
Head Post Offices, the purpose of organizing Passport Sewa camps still exists. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Passport Sewa Camps should be organized in all far away area s in order to 
bring the Passport delivery services to the door of the citizens. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
Reply of the Government 
 One of the objectives behind setting up POPSKs is to take passport services closer to the 
people. The Ministry and Department of Posts have decided to set -up POPSKs in 251 Head Post 
Offices/ Post Offices of which 229 have been inaugurated as of 31 October 2018. Both the Ministries 
are working towards making the remaining POPSK functional at the earliest.  
 Currently, almost early 12,000 appointments are being released daily in these POPSKs, and 
nearly 14 lakhs passports have been issued through POPSKs till 31 October 2018. Consequently, the 
requirement of holding Passport Seva Camps has come down during this period.  
 Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee and Passport Seva Camps 
would be planned in far -flung places to take passport d elivery services to the doorsteps of the 
citizens. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under the Minor Head „Entertainment 
Charges‟ have been reduced in RE 2017 -18 vis-à-vis BE 2017-18 and the same amount of Rs. 70.50 
crore has been retained at the BE 2018-19. Although there has been an increase in the number of high 
level visits in last three years, the same is not reflected in the budget cycle as the bills pertaining to 
visits are not settled in the same fiscal year. For expeditious settlement and processing of bills by the 
Protocol Division, a new system was put in place under which agencies, service providers, vendors 
and hotels were required to submit their bills within two weeks, delayed/ incomplete submission of 
bills continued. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure a time 

30 
bound process of submission of bills relating to a visit and processing to manage fiscal discipline and 
prudence.  The Ministry should take adequate steps to s trictly clear the bills of a visit in the same 
financial year in order to avoid rolling over the settlement of bills to next year. Towards this 
direction, all the pending bills should be cleared in this financial year by seeking additional funds at 
the RE Stage.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry accepts the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee. The Ministry will 
pursue fiscal discipline and prudence towards time -bound settlement of bills relating to visits within 
the given financial year. The Ministry will proactively follow -up with service providers for 
submitting their bills for processing and settlement soon after a visit so as to avoid rolling over the 
expenditure to the next financial year. If required, additional  funds will be provided for the 
„Entertainment Charges‟ budget head at the RE stage. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
The Committee note that there has been an increase in allocation for South Asian University 
from Rs. 260 crore in B E 2017-18 to Rs. 378.30 crore in RE 2017 -18 and to Rs. 375 crore in BE 
2018-19. The Ministry has informed that work related to the construction of the SAU campus has 
gained momentum in the last year and therefore, adequate funds have been provisioned for 
contribution towards creation of capital assets. In view of the slow and tardy progress of the 
construction of permanent campus in the previous years, this is a welcome development.  The 
Committee are aware that construction work for the SAU campus has been  devised under four 
packages. The Ministry has informed that work under Package I for boundary wall and site office has 
been completed, work under Package II for five building is in full progress and scheduled to be 
completed by December 2018; and work und er Package III is slated to be complete by January 2020. 
However, the Ministry has not provided a specific schedule for completion of work under Package 
IV. The Committee are happy to know that after much prodding, Pakistan has made a part of the 
payment o f US$ 2.259 million against an overdue payment. The efforts for getting the remaining 
contribution should be continued till it is deposited. Given the record of sluggish progress in the 
construction of SAU, the Committee recommend that the Ministry ensure that work related to 
Package II and III are completed as per schedule and issues related to works of Package IV are sorted 
out expeditiously. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard at 
regular intervals.  

31 
Reply of the Government 
The current progress of construction work for the SAU campus is as follows: 
Package-II (five buildings): Work under this package is being undertaken in an expeditious manner.  
As of September 2018,  the structure works for the building housing the Faculties of Life Sciences 
and Earth Sciences has been completed. Miscellaneous structure works have also been completed. 
Internal works are nearing completion from basement up to third floor, and work is i n progress for 
works till the last floor. The superstructure work in two Faculty Housing Blocks has been completed 
and internal and external works are in progress. The foundation for the fourth faculty and housing 
block has been completed. The superstructure work for the main building of faculty club, guest house 
and civil work for swimming pool has been completed. Miscellaneous, internal and external works 
are in progress. Overall progress in this package as of September 2018 was 56%. 
Package-III (seven bu ildings): As of September 2018 , the RCC structure work for the faculty of 
Physics, Chemistry, Maths, IT and Law and Humanity has been completed. The structure work for 
Administration Block, Library, Institute of South Asian Studies, Faculty of Art Design a nd 
Convention Centres, and Utility Building are at various stages of construction. Overall progress in 
this package as of September 2018 is 35%. 
Package IV : The works on remaining buildings could not be planned due to various land issues. 
However, based on  the recent directions of Hon‟ble Supreme Court, permission has been accorded 
for construction in the geo-morphological ridge area. In respect of litigations pertaining to acquisition 
of land, the final verdict of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in one leading c ase is awaited which will 
determine the outcome in similar cases in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court and the Hon‟ble High Court of 
Delhi. Ministry has already deposited an amount Rs. 10.39 crore with the Hon‟ble Supreme Court as 
compensation to the land owner. On ce these issues are resolved, construction for the buildings under 
Package IV will also be able to commence. 
In 2009, Cabinet approval was accorded for USD 239.93 million (approx. Rs. 1200 crore at the then 
exchange rate) for GoI‟s assistance to South Asian University, of which USD 198 million (approx. Rs. 
990 crore at the then exchange rate)  was towards capital cost for campus construction with the 
project to be completed by 2014. However, due to delays in construction attributable to factors like 
non-receipt of approvals from various statutory authorities and encumbrances on the allotted land, the 
project could not commence before 2016. This has also resulted in cost escalation over the amount 
approved by the Cabinet. The University has now sent a revised Detailed Project Report (DPR) to the 
Ministry in which the preliminary cost estimate has been revised to Rs. 3115.73 crore (approx. USD 
430 million at prevalent exchange rate) . The revised DPR is being processed for vetting by CPWD 
and fresh approval of the Cabinet will be sought for the revised cost of the project. 

32 
 Pakistan has paid a sum of USD 7,339,563 but balance contribution of USD 521,631 is 
remaining. SAU through the SAARC Secretariat has taken up the case for early release of the balance 
payment. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 200 crore was provided for Nalanda University 
in BE 2017 -18, but it was reduced at RE Stage and an outlay of Rs. 200 crore has been kept in BE 
2018-19. It was expected that the splitting up of tender into severa l packages and establishment of 
Nalanda Mentor Group (NMG), the construction of Nalanda University would be facilitated and 
expedited. However, the downward allocation in RE 2017 -18 and an allocation of Rs. 200 crore at 
BE 2018-19 tell a different story. The Committee observe that the University has started three courses 
since 2014 but they are unable to start new courses or enhance the intake of students due to non -
availability of accommodation. The delay in completion of Nalanda University – an internatio nal 
institution of excellence for pursuit of intellectual philosophical and historical studies – is highly 
unfortunate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government streamline the 
process in all the packages and draw a clear roadmap for  the completion of this project with fixed 
timelines. Necessary funds should also be provided for timely completion of the progress. The 
Ministry should explore opportunities to channelize contribution for this project from other 
participating countries to buttress domestic funds.        
       
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry, in coordination with Nalanda University, has taken measures to expeditiously 
complete the campus construction project. The University has constituted a Project Monitoring 
Committee (PMC) consisting of two experts from civil engineering and electrical engineering fields 
respectively, one expert from the Government of Bihar and one from the Ministry of External 
Affairs. The PMC has been mandated with the task of overseeing the construc tion project in addition 
to the monitoring done by the Architect Consultant and the Project Management Consultant. The 
status of work is as follows: 
Package I-A (Internal Roads and Earthwork for Water Bodies):  Work in this package has been 
completed.  
Package I -B (Non-Residential Building):  Work commenced in end of April 2017 and till end of 
April 2018, 31% of the work in this package has been completed. The scheduled period of 

33 
completion is February 2020. The contractor has been instructed to compress the micro-schedule and 
increase manpower, materials and machinery to accelerate work and minimize the delay.  
Package 1-C (Residential Buildings): The tender is under process.  
 Article 3 of the MoU on establishment of Nalanda University states that “funding f or the 
establishment and operations of the University will be on a voluntary basis” . Therefore, 
contributions from countries such as Australia, China, Thailand, and Lao PDR were purely voluntary 
and for specific purposes. However, in view of the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendations, Ministry 
will explore opportunities of channelizing contributions for the project from other countries which 
have signed the MoU. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 While analyzing the major Head „Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation‟, the 
Committee observe a wide array of unpredictable budgetary allocation to various sub -heads.  The 
Committee make a note of the practical challenges posed by geo -political realiti es and security 
concerns in execution of international projects.  The Committee have been informed that in keeping 
with India‟s Neighbourhood First Policy‟, there has been deepening of India‟s developmental 
engagement with our immediate neighbourhood by im plementing large as well as small scale 
infrastructure projects.   
 The Committee strongly urge that the Ministry observe pragmatism and prudence while 
planning and proper execution of developmental aid and assistance to other countries.  In view of the 
unfortunate mismatch between the BE and RE stage budgetary demands and allocation of Ministry of 
External Affairs, the Committee are not very confident about the Foreign Secretary‟s assurance that 
additional fund will be flagged to Ministry of Finance at a l ater stage. The Ministry should make 
earnest efforts to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to have a considered view of the bilateral, 
regional and multilateral implications of not having adequate funds for developmental partnership. 
The Committee further desire that a strategy should be formulated to effectively counter the presence  
of other regional powers by increasing our presence through widening as well as deepening of our 
developmental partnership with our neighbourhood in consonance with the „Nei ghbourhood   First 
Policy‟.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry agrees with Hon‟ble Committee‟s observation regarding need for pragmatism and 
prudence in planning and proper execution of developmental aid and assistance. Ministry is closely 

34 
monitoring p rogress of development cooperation projects being implemented with Government of 
India‟s assistance to ensure that projects are completed within the scheduled timeframes, have 
continuity of resources, and achieve the desired impact. The Ministry, in line w ith „Neighbourhood 
First Policy‟ of the Government of India, has been constantly in engagement with our neighbouring 
countries for identification and implementation of development projects in these countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 The Committee observe that there has been an increase in budgetary allocation under „Aid to 
Bangladesh' from Rs. 125 crore in BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 175 crore in BE 2018 -19. The BE allocation of 
2017-18 i.e. Rs. 125 crore has been reduced to Rs. 65cro re. The Committee have made a note of 
Ministry‟s reply on drastic reduction in allocation under this head at RE Stage due to slow pace of 
spending. Furthermore, the expenditure under this budget head till January, 2018 has been Rs. 50.25 
crore. The Ministr y has informed that enhanced allocation in BE 2018 -19 has been primarily 
provisioned for expediting work on Akhaura -Agratala rail link. The Committee also note that 
Government of Bangladesh have taken time to come forward with proposals of Small Developmen t 
Projects. 
While satisfied with the increased allocation under „Aid to Bangladesh‟ in BE 2018 -19, the 
Committee express their disapproval of the slow pace of utilization by MEA during FY 2017 -18. 
With the provisioning of requisite finances, the Committee would recommend that the Ministry fully 
utilize allocations for Akhaura -Agartala rail link and complete the same within the agreed timeline. 
The Government of India is also urged to use its good offices to engage with its Bangladeshi 
counterpart for promptly furnishing proposals on Small Development Projects.    
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee to engage with Government of Bangladesh 
for promptly furnishing proposals on Small Development Projects has been taken on board, and the 
Ministry has been able to conclude the MoUs for three Small Development Projects at the cities of 
Rajshahi, Khulna and Sylhet in Bangladesh and project implementation has begun. 
 The Akhaura -Agartala rail link project on the Bangladeshi side is being executed by 
Bangladesh Railways with the financial assistance of Government of India. The work on the 
Bangladesh side has been awarded in April 2018. Close supervision and periodic rev iews are being 
undertaken to achieve full utilization of allocation for the Akhaura -Agartala Rail Link Project and to 
complete the same within the stipulated timeline.  

35 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 Due to historical, strategic and civilizational linkages, Bhutan has traditionally been the 
largest recipient of India‟s aid and assistance programmes and budgetary allocation to them are 
provided from both Revenue and Capital heads. The Committee are disa ppointed to observe a 
massive reduction in budgetary allocation in both aid as well as loan and advances to Bhutan. The 
two main reasons for this drop in allocation, as cited by the Ministry, are completion or near 
completion of few projects and geographic al challenges confronting Punatsangchu I and II projects. 
The Committee are happy to learn that the ongoing GOI-assisted Hydro-electricity Projects in Bhutan 
are making desired progress without any shortage of funds. The Kholongchhu Project under the pre -
construction activities and signing of concession agreement is under discussion. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry ensure that the various GOI -assisted HEPs in Bhutan are completed 
within the agreed timelines.  
Reply of the Government 
 In FY 2018-19, Bhutan continues to be the largest recipient of Government of India‟s aid and 
assistance programme. During Bhutan‟s 11 th Five Year Plan (2013 -18), India‟s contribution of Rs. 
5000 Crore is the largest source of external assistance received by Bhutan. The  reduction in  
allocation in aid grant as well as aid loans to Bhutan is due to reduced requirement of funds for GoI -
assisted Hydro -Electric Projects (HEPs), Punatsangchhu -I, Punatsangchhu -II and Mangdechhu,  
under implementation as these projects have crossed their respective peak construction stages.  
 Mangdechhu HEP is progressing steadily and is expected to be commissioned in 2018. In the 
Punatsangchhu-I and II HEPs, remedial measures to respond to geological challenges have been 
undertaken by the respe ctive project managements and additional measures are being considered in 
consultation with the Project Consultant and technical experts. The Technical Coordination 
Committee (TCC) comprising subject matter experts including from GoI‟s Central Water 
Commission and Central Electricity Authority; representatives from Royal Government of Bhutan; 
and the Project Management, deliberates and recommends remedial measures for addressing the 
technical issues facing these two HEPs. The TCC also obtains additional ass istance of experts from 
premier GoI institutions, including National Institute of Rock Mechanics, IIT Delhi, IIT Chennai and 
Geological Survey of India, to address technical issues facing the projects. The recommendations of 
the TCC are considered during t he meetings of the Project Authorities, comprising representatives 

36 
from GoI and the Royal Government of Bhutan, which are held regularly. Apart from regular Project 
Authority meetings, both HEPs are regularly monitored at various levels within the Ministry. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 The Committee notice that there has been a substantial increase in allocation under the budget 
head „Aid to Nepal,‟ from 375 crore in BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 650 crore in BE 2018 -19. The jump is 
73.33% o ver the last fiscal. The Committee are aware that the situation in Nepal had led to a 
considerable delay in the implementation of our projects. It is heartening to know that with an 
improved political situation, several ongoing projects are stated to achie ve significant progress, and 
post-earthquake reconstruction works are scheduled to start. The renewed vigour in the 
implementation of our ongoing projects in Nepal is a welcome step. The Committee urge that the 
Ministry prepare a blueprint for the completi on of various projects in Nepal in a smooth and timely 
fashion. The Committee hope that the wide ranging and expanding partnership will give a fresh 
impetus to our bilateral ties.  
Reply of the Government 
 Allocation of Rs. 375 crore under the „Aid to Nepa l‟ budget head was fully utilized in FY 
2017-18. In close coordination with the Government of Nepal (GoN), a number of projects were 
completed in FY 2017 -18 including (i) Construction of new bays at four sub -stations at Raxaul, 
Parwanipur, Kataiya and Kusa ha; (ii) Construction of two GoI -assisted 132 kV cross -border 
transmission lines from Raxaul (India) to Parwanipur (Nepal) and from Kataiya (India) to Kusaha 
(Nepal); (iii) Construction of 2700 shallow tube wells in 12 districts of Nepal under the Nepal -Bharat 
Maitri Irrigation Project; and (iv) Small Development Projects in health, education and community 
infrastructure sectors. 
  The Ministry has laid particular focus on expeditious implementation of development 
projects, establishing clear timelines and continuous monitoring and review. Timelines are prepared 
in consultation with concerned agencies in India and Nepal. Major ongoin g GoI -assisted 
development projects in Nepal are being monitored at various levels, including in Prime Minister‟s 
PRAGATI platform, at the level of External Affairs Minister, and senior officials‟ level, to ensure 
smooth and expeditious implementation of p rojects and achievement of targets within specified 
timelines.  
 A bilateral „Oversight Mechanism‟, co -chaired by the Ambassador of India to Nepal and the 
Foreign Secretary of Nepal, was established in 2016 and has held regular meetings to review progress 
and address issues in project implementation. Progress of projects being implemented in Nepal also 

37 
depends upon GoN making land available for these projects and providing necessary local permits 
and other clearances. Ministry continues to follow up closely  with relevant agencies on the Indian 
side as well as with GoN to ensure expeditious implementation of all major ongoing development 
projects. Going forward, the key focus of the Ministry is to ensure expeditious delivery of projects 
through close coordination and partnership with relevant stakeholders in India as well as GoN.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
The Committee observe an increase of 20% in budgetary allocation under the head „Aid to Sri Lanka‟ 
in BE 2018 -19 in view of th e anticipated commencement of some development projects during the 
course of the year. The Committee note that the reduction in RE 2017-18 was mainly due to the delay 
in land allotment for the third phase of the housing project. The Committee are of the vi ew that the 
Ministry‟s requirement of an enhanced allocation in BE 2018 -19 stands in stark contrast to its 
utilization pattern of Rs. 28.84 crore till 31 January 2018 against an allocated amount of Rs. 75 crore 
in RE 2017 -18. The Committee would recommend that the Ministry make realistic budgetary 
demands backed by robust expenditure so that underutilization of funds is not cited as a justification 
for budgetary cuts in MEA‟s budget at the RE 2018-19 stage.  
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry values the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee. Expenditure was towards the 
last quarter in FY 2017 -18, essentially due to the payment schedules of projects which were in turn 
linked to achievement of milestones. By the end of FY 2017 -18, Ministry completely utilized the RE 
allocation of Rs. 75 crore under the „Aid to Sri Lanka‟ budget head. 
 The projections for BE 2018 -19 are based on a realistic assessment of progress in the 
implementation of ongoing projects and anticipated expenditure on new projects. The Ministry  will 
make further adjustments at the RE 2018 -19 stage based on review of the progress during the course 
of the FY. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 The Committee notice that the budgetary allocation under the sub -head „Aid to Maldives‟ has 
been increased from Rs. 75 crore in BE 2017 -18  to Rs. 125 crore in RE 2017 -18 as well as in BE 
2018-19.  The Ministry stated that the 66.67 per cent increase in al location during RE 2017 -18 was 
on account of implementation of Coastal Surveillance System project, regular payment towards 
training course and scholarships for civilians and physical progress of the Institute of Security and 

38 
Law Enforcement Studies (ISLES ). The assertion that in view of the prevailing political situation in 
Maldives, project related expenditure is likely to be lower than what was envisaged has been duly 
noted by the Committee.  The Committee observe that only 19 per cent physical progress has been 
accomplished in construction work of ISLES. The Committee, therefore, recommend that allocation 
should be made on a realistic basis. The Committee would further recommend that the Government 
reach out to the Government of Maldives to ensure the sm ooth implementation of our projects.  The 
Committee also desire that the construction of the long -delayed ISLES should be expedited and 
completed by May, 2019.   
Reply of the Government 
 The implementation of the ISLES project has been affected due to undue delay in the issuance 
of work permits by the Government of Maldives in recent months. So far, the physical progress of the 
project stands at 26%. The issue of delay in work permits has been raised bilaterally with the 
Government of Maldives, and the Ministry continues to pursue the matter. While all efforts are being 
made to achieve the completion of the project on schedule, funds allocation would be reviewed at RE 
2018-19 stage to align the same with the actual progress of the project bearing in mind the  prevailing 
political situation in Maldives. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 The Committee note that under the head „Aid to Myanmar‟ allocation  has been enhanced 
from Rs. 225 crore in BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 280 crore in BE 2018 -19 in view of the fund requirements 
for various ongoing infrastructure projects.  The Committee have been informed that both the 
components-waterways and roads - of the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project have 
shown steady progress. Given the timely ava ilability of funds, the Committee are hopeful that the 
execution of various ongoing projects in Myanmar would be expedited.  The Committee desire that 
the Ministry in consultation with the concerned stakeholder in Myanmar draw a roadmap for 
completion of t he Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project to ensure smooth and timely 
completion of the transport corridor.   
Reply of the Government 
 The enhanced allocation of funds under „Aid to Myanmar‟ in BE 2018 -19 would facilitate in 
completing the activities scheduled to be completed under various ongoing projects. Works under the 
original waterways component of the Kaladan project were completed in FY 2017 -18. Various 
additional waterways works, approved in 2015, are also in an advanced stage of implementat ion. 

39 
Civil works for construction of road under the Kaladan project is currently underway. The Ministry is 
in constant engagement with the concerned authorities in the Government of Myanmar through our 
Mission in Yangon to secure their support for smooth and expedited progress, where required.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 It is noticed that the budgetary allocation under the head „Aid to African countries‟ has 
witnessed a downward spiral from Rs. 330 crore in BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 2 00 crore in BE 2018 -19 
based on the expenditure pace. The Ministry has informed that there exists a possibility of upward 
revision of allocation at RE 2018 -19 based on actual progress of project and pace of utilization.  The 
Committee note that the regular  and high level review of projects undertaken under India -Africa 
Forum Summit (IAFS) is carried out and accordingly policy decisions are taken. It is learnt that both 
sides have gained experience in institutionalizing and implementing development partnersh ip 
programmes. The Committee are happy to observe that 48 countries have benefitted from Pan Africa 
e-Network (PAeNP) project and 169 sites/centres have been integrated with it. The Committee 
discern that the developmental partnership between India and Afr ica is premised on three editions of 
IAFS and the PAeNP.  The progress of various projects under IAFS and PAeNP has been well 
received. The Committee, therefore, desire that while the good work may be continued, the lessons 
learnt from such experiences be utilized in our other development partnership programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry is vigorously engaged with the host countries through the concerned Indian 
Missions and implementing Agencies for timely implementation of GoI -assisted developm ent 
projects in African countries. The Ministry partners with host countries in identification of major 
impediments like lack of resources, awareness about the utility of the projects/capacity building etc., 
so as to take appropriate remedial steps for tim ely implementation of various projects. Information 
about the training programmes/scholarships for African nationals is being effectively disseminated, 
through Indian Missions abroad, to ensure maximum participation. Training 
programmes/scholarships have  generated enthusiasm among African students leading to gained 
momentum of our endeavors.  The learning from implementation of projects in African countries in 
the past are being factored in during future planning, identification and execution of projects.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
 
 

40 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under the head „Aid to Latin America‟ has 
been kept constant at Rs. 20 crore during the BE 2017 -18 as well as BE  2018 -19.  The Committee 
find the r eason offered by the Ministry for keeping the allocation constant as unconvincing.  The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the budgetary allocation provided under this Head is not at all 
commensurate with the importance this region has to our overall f oreign policy.  The Committee 
would strongly recommend that the Government enhance our engagement with Latin American 
countries in form of our visible developmental aid programmes and assistance. 
Reply of the Government 
 Over the last few years, our political as well as trade and commercial engagement with the 
Latin American and Caribbean region has intensified significantly. In the last couple of years, several 
high-level visits both incoming and outgoing have been exchan ged and political and official 
consultations have been conducted with all major countries in the region. High level visits by 
Hon‟ble President, Vice President, Prime Minister and External Affairs Minister have been planned 
throughout 2018.  
 Major commitm ents like supply of tractors to Cuba, upgradation of Information and 
Communication Technology system of the CARICOM Secretariat and setting up of Centres of 
Excellence in Information Technology are being implemented. The supply of an Ocean Passenger 
Ferry to Guyana has been making progress and it is expected that the order will be placed for its 
manufacture with the selected Indian company in FY 2018-19. 
 Other mechanisms of providing funding assistance, such as Lines of Credit and soft loans, are 
being exp lored to finance developmental and infrastructure -related projects. Such financing 
mechanisms encourage the beneficiary governments to be an active stakeholder in the project which 
in turn ensures its long term sustainability. Ministry, in line with the Ho n‟ble Committee‟s 
recommendation, will take steps to further enhance our development partnership with Latin 
American countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 The Committee are happy to learn that the Shaheed Behesti Terminal in the Port has been 
inaugurated in December 2017. The Committee further note that the budget head „Chabahar Port‟, 
created in Fiscal 2016-17, has been allocated Rs. 150 crore in BE 2018 -19.  However, the Committee 

41 
observe a drastic reduction in this head during the 2017 -18 from Rs. 150 crore (BE 2017 -18) to Rs. 
0.10 crore (RE 2017-18).  The justification provided by the Ministry for this massive budgetary cut is 
the non-completion of procurement tendering process from the Iranian side and the subsequent delay 
in purchasing of equipment. 
Although the situation was beyond the Ministry‟s hands, in the considered view of the 
Committee, fluctuations in allocation under this head, catering to stra tegic oceanic port is not in the 
interest of our international credibility on delivering connectivity projects. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry pursue a pro -active policy to engage the Iranian side to accelerate the 
tendering process so as to fast track the purchase of requisite equipments to complete the project in a 
time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 Chabahar Port development is being pursued proactively and monitored regularly by the 
Ministry and Ministry of Shipping. Ministry has been actively engaging with the Government of Iran, 
and the Iranian Parliament has approved the Trilateral Agreement between India, Iran and 
Afghanistan on Establishment of International Transport and Transit Corridor (Chabahar 
Agreement). During the visit of the President of Iran to India in February 2018, it was agreed that the 
Coordination Council would meet as per the stipulated timelines in the Trilateral Agreement. 
Government of Iran has also agreed to organize a business promotion event at Ch abahar, with 
participation of countries from the region and beyond, with the objective of showcasing the economic 
opportunities offered by the Chabahar Port.  Efforts are also being made to popularise the port – an 
international North -South Transport Corrid or Friendship motor rally passed through Chabahar in 
June 2018. 
Some notable developments in the recent months with regard to the project are as follows: 
Procurement and supply of equipment has been taken forward.  The contract for four Rails Mounted 
Quay Cranes was awarded on 30 November, 2017, and the order for 14 Rubber Tyred Gantry Cranes 
has been placed on 21 march 2018. 
The Lease Contract for Shahid Beheshti Port Phase-I during Interim Period was signed between India 
Ports Global Limited (IPGL) and th e Port and Maritime Organization of Iran on 17 February 2018 
during the State Visit of President of Iran to India. 
The Iranian side has agreed in principle to delink the USD 150 million funding from contract 
activation; and IPGL has initiated the process of selection of a local partner to operate the port. 
The process of formation of a local Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV to operate the port has been taken 
forward with the transfer of 35% of share capital in April 2018, with a view to commence interim 
operation by June 2018. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 

42 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 The Committee note that the budget heads - „Aid to Mauritius‟ and „Aid to Seychelles‟ were 
created in FY 2016 -17 and an amount of Rs. 300 crore and Rs. 350 crore respectively have been 
provisioned for them.   It is observed that in pursuance of India‟s Security and Growth for all in the 
Region (SAGAR) vision, a renewed thrust has been given to the Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA) and it‟s member States.  Given the salience of Ind ian Ocean Region to our strategic 
developmental aspirations, the Committee urge that the Ministry ensure that the allocated funds are 
optimally and fully utilized with tangible gains in ground implementation.  The Committee also 
desire that the Government of India deepen our engagement with all the Indian Ocean countries. 
Reply of the Government 
 Fund allocations under the „Aid to Mauritius‟ and „Aid to Seychelles‟ budget heads in FY 
2017-18 were fully utilized. Realistic projections have also been made for  FY 2018-19 to keep up 
with the pace of implementation of our bilateral projects in these two countries. Allocation will be 
reviewed at the RE 2018 -19 stage based on physical progress in implementation of these projects. 
Ministry values the Hon‟ble Committ ee‟s recommendation to deepen engagement with all Indian 
Ocean countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
 The Committee note that the sanctioned strength of the Ministry is 8208, while the working 
strength is 7012. The Committee are unhappy to learn about the huge gap between the sanctioned and 
actual strength in the Ministry of External Affairs, leading to vacant posts in vital departments. Over 
the years, the Ministry has provided the same justification that the gap is due to dela y in recruitment 
which is beyond its control. The Committee also observe that to tide over this manpower crunch, 
various steps such as induction of officers from other Ministries, engagement of Consultants etc have 
been taken. The Committee take serious cognizance of the persistent vacant posts in the Ministry and 
find the steps taken by the Ministry as inadequate and half -hearted. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry impress upon the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and Union Public 
Service Commission (UPSC) to enhance the direct recruitment process to fill up the vacant positions 
in the Ministry so that it is appropriately staffed. The Committee would also recommend that the 
Ministry continue inducting expertise from other Ministries, academi a, think tanks and the private 
sector, as needed to ensure the quality of manpower is also augmented simultaneously.   
 

43 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken concerted action to ensure adequate human resources as follows: 
Requisite indents were placed with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for ASOs, Steno /PAs, 
Junior Secretarial Assistants and MTSs. Regular follow -up was done with SSC. Accordingly, 125 
ASOs and 35 Stenos/PAs joined the Ministry in May 2018. In addition, 28 more JSAs are expected to 
join the Ministry. Recruitment of nearly 80 MTSs is in its final stages. 
  Regarding resources at the officer level, 38 IFS officers of the 2017 batch have joined the 
Ministry. After regular follow -up, UPSC has recommended one candidate to the post of Jun ior 
Interpreter in 2018. Further, Ministry has placed an indent with UPSC for five vacancies in the grade 
of Legal Officer Grade II. 
To augment its human resources, Ministry has continued to take officers on deputation from 
various line Ministries and Departments of Government of India as well as State Governments. More 
than 70 such officers on deputation are currently working in the Ministry. 
Ministry engages consultants, including retired Government officials as well as from the open 
market, with expertis e in varied fields including project management, international law, consular 
services and disarmament. More than 50 such consultants are currently engaged by the Ministry. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 32) 
 The Committee observe that out of the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 440.64 crore in BE 
2018-19, for the major head Secretariat General Service, Rs.17.09 crore has been earmarked for 
expenditure on Protectorate General of Emigrants (PGoE). The allocation of Rs. 14.82 crore at 
BE 2017-18 was raised to Rs. 21.89 crore at the RE stage.  The Ministry stated the reason for 
increase in allocation to PGoE during the RE 2017 -18 was due to payments to the Implementing 
Agency for running the e -Migrate project. The Committee observe that the bulk of the 
expenditure under PGoE is for the sub -head 'Information Technology.' It is observed that against 
the sanctioned strength of Protector of Emigr ants (POE) offices of 87 posts, 62 posts are 
occupied. The Ministry has informed that there is no proposal of shifting of present POE offices. 
However, in principle approval has been obtained for opening one POE office in Bengaluru, 
Karnataka and a PoE Cell has also been staged in Lucknow under PoE Rai Bareli.   
 The Committee have taken a serious note of the negligence accorded to PGoE post merger, as 
can be discerned from the budgetary allocation. It is a matter of deep concern that another vital 
department of MEA, namely POE offices, have been enduring manpower constraint. The 

44 
Committee strongly recommend that the Government pay special attention to strengthen the POE 
offices through adequate provisioning of finances and human capital. The Ministry is further 
urged to improve the working conditions of POE offices  by either shifting them to new buildings 
or by investing on infrastructural development of the offices in the process of establishment or to 
be established and apprise the Committee about the progress in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry  has been giving high importance to augmenting manpower in POE offices. 
Officers of the Ministry as well as from other Ministries/Departments have been posted to POE 
offices on deputation basis. Contractual staff have also been hired against sanctioned vac ant 
positions as per administrative requirements to ensure that the important functions performed by 
these offices are not hampered. Ministry is also taking active steps to fill the 14 vacancies in POE 
offices expeditiously. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 34) 
 The Committee note that the Foreign Service Institute conducts in service training for Indian 
Foreign Service (IFS) officers and other MEA personnel, courses for foreign diplomats and other 
professional training course.  The Minis try has informed that the demand for country specific 
courses have increased in recent times. The Committee are concerned to note the 15 -20 % 
shortfall in utilization of allocated funds under the sub -head 'training' for past three financial 
years. The just ification offered by the Ministry for such underutilization is the delayed 
implementation of some modernization proposals.  The Ministry is strongly urged to observe 
fiscal prudence in expenditure on the Sub -head „Training‟ by optimum utilization of availa ble 
funds. The Committee also desire that a continuous system of evaluation be established so that 
the inputs and feedback received from the trainees are duly incorporated at regular intervals for 
value addition of the training programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
 A summary of funds utilization in past three FYs by the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) on 
training-related activities, met from FSI‟s „Other Administrative Expenses‟ (OAE) budget head, is as 
follows: 
 
 

45 
 (In Rupees crores) 
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Allocation  
Expenditur
e  
2015-16 10.77 9.14 (84.9%) 
2016-17 12.00 9.77 (81.4%) 
2017-18 15.42 14.54 
(94.3%) 
 
As seen above, utilization of available funds for training activities has improved in FY 2017 -18, as 
compared to previous years. FSI has an established a system of training evaluation. Inputs and 
feedback received from trainees are duly incorporated in designing and conducting of future training 
programmes. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
 Upon careful scrutiny of th e schemes, programmes and organizations relating to Overseas 
Indians, the Committee find that the Ministry's verbal assertion that highest priority has been 
accorded to Overseas Indian Affairs post- merger, does not find resonance in the budgetary allocation. 
While comparing the budget and allocation of erstwhile MOIA and MEA on schemes/programmes 
related to Overseas Indians, the Committee discern that a number of schemes have witnessed a 
reduction in allocation. Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre, India D evelopment Foundation, 
Overseas Indian Centre, Overseas Citizenship of India, Parvasi Bhartiya Kendra have been given 'nil' 
allocation in BE 2018 -19; there has been drastic budgetary cut to India Centre for Migration, Know 
India Programme, Promotion of Cul tural ties with Diaspora, Legal Assistance to women facing 
problems in NRI marriages. The sudden closure OIDF -OI and OIFC without any substitute 
arrangement and without taking a policy decision on establishment of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendras, the 
Committee are apprehensive about the objectives of merger being realized. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government seriously have a re -look 
at the budgetary allocation to various schemes and programmes in order to ensure that our 
engagement with Diaspora is mutually beneficial, welfare of our Overseas Indians is secured, and our 
migrant workers, students and women are particularly protected in their country of destination. The 
Ministry should ensure that due priority and financial sanctity is  given to schemes and programmes 
related to Overseas Indians. 
 

46 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry attaches a great deal of importance to engagement with the Indian diaspora. 
Following the merger of erstwhile MOIA with MEA, a review of all the schemes/programmes was 
undertaken to rationalize resources and avoid duplication of work and effor t. As a result, some 
schemes were revamped, some were closed, new and some ones were initiated. The Study India 
Programme (SIP) for young diaspora  was found to be similar to the Know India Programme (KIP) 
and it was decided to close SIP. The Overseas India n Facilitation Centre (OIFC), an Autonomous 
Body set up as a not -for-profit Trust in 2007 to facilitate investments into India by overseas Indians 
was closed down in March 2017, as its functions were similar to the mandate of the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion such as the „Invest India‟ platform. Similarly, the India Development 
Foundation for Overseas Indians (IDF -OI), an Autonomous Body set up as a not -for-profit Trust in 
2008, was closed down in March 2018, as contributions received in IDF -OI were mainly for GoI‟s 
flagship schemes such the National Mission for Clean Ganga and the Swachh Bharat Mission, which 
are separately administered by their respective administrative agencies . Performance of the scheme 
„Tracing the Roots‟ was found unsat isfactory with only 18 applications received in 8 years, and the 
Government expenditure on the scheme was discontinued. 
 Budgetary allocation for expenditure on various schemes and programs for our engagement 
with the Indian Diaspora and welfare of oversea s Indians, particularly migrant workers, students and 
women will be reviewed, at the RE 2018-19 stage and more funds will be allocated, if required. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 38) 
 The Know India Programme (KIP) is a significant scheme to reconnect the Indian Diaspora 
youth with their roots. The Committee observe that in the last financial year, 46 KIPs were conducted 
with almost 240 participants. With the increase in the India Diaspora, there have been rising demands 
from different Indian Missions and Posts abroad to organize more KIPs. However, due to limited 
resources and manpower, the Ministry is currently working on a proposal from CGI New York and 
EOI Paris for two KIPs editions in 2018. The Committee are of the opinion that manpower and 
financial paucity should not be a hurdle in expanding KIPs to meet the increasing demand from 
Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
External Affairs make sustained efforts for spreading awar eness about the programme and allocate 
additional funds for Know India Programmes which have received a warm reception from future 
generations of the Indian Diaspora. 
 

47 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry values the Hon‟ble Committee‟s encouragement and a ppreciation of the Know 
India Programme (KIP).  Allocation to the KIP head was enhanced in FY 2017 -18 from BE of 
Rs.0.90 crore to RE of Rs. 5.56 crore enabling successful organization of all six editions of KIP with 
240 participants in FY 2017-18. 
 Ministry continues its efforts to spread awareness about KIP. The proposal for organizing 
additional KIP editions from France and the US could not be materialize as first and second 
generations of young Indian diaspora participants who have not visited India earl ier are not easily 
available. Now two special KIP editions have been initiated to be held annually  from 2018 -19 
onwards for participants in the age group of 45 -65 years from seven Girmitiya countries – Fiji, 
Guyana, Mauritius, South Africa, Suriname, Trinidad & Tobago, Reunion Island – who have not 
visited India before and belong to lower income group.  It is expected that this new programme will 
be useful in promoting Indian tourism amongst other persons of Indian origin as well as foreigners 
encouraging them to visit India at their own cost. These new editions are in addition to six KIPs 
during 2018-19 with 40 participants in each group. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is a skill development scheme of MEA aimed at 
enhancing the skill set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and job roles in line with 
international standards to facilitate overseas employment opportunities. On the basis of a MoU 
signed in 2016, PKVY is to be implemented by the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) through the National Skill Developm ent Corporation (NSDC). The 
Committee note that the budgetary allocation for PKVY was Rs. 10 crore at BE 2017 -18, which was 
reduced to Rs. 3 crore in RE 2017 -18 and an allocation of Rs. 5 crore has been made in BE 2018 -19. 
The Committee do not favour such poor allocation for the scheme of skill development of 
prospective workers.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the allocation should be enhanced at RE 
2018-19 stage so that the maximum number of potential emigrant workers are trained across India. 
The Committee also note that on its part, MSDE has set up 13 India International Skill Centres 
(IISCs) under Skill India Mission for this Yojana. The Committee are not aware about the criteria for 
the selection of places for establishing such centres. The Comm ittee strongly recommend that while 
identifying the places for establishing the Centres, areas from where a significant number of workers 
go abroad should be given the priority. The Committee would also recommend that MEA take up the 
issue of the slow implementation and low utilization under this scheme by MSDE at the highest level 

48 
and apprise the Committee of the outcome of such an endeavour. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY), a joint collaboration of the Ministry and the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE), includes domain training as technical 
top-up and certification benchmarked to international standards (MSDE‟s responsibility) and Pre -
Departure Orientation training (MEA‟s responsibility) for migrant workers. The National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC) is MSDE‟s implementation partner for PKVY.  
 Initially, the scheme‟s focus is on sectors in demand in Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
countries primarily in the Gulf countries and Malaysia. MSDE is  setting up India International Skill 
Centres (IISCs) in different parts of India, and sixteen IISCs are operational covering sectors 
including Domestic Workers, Retail, Hospitality, Capital Goods, Healthcare, Construction, 
Automotive and Security. Around 500 students have been enrolled in these centres.  
 This Ministry transferred Rs. 10 crore to National Skill Development Fund (NSDF) 
operated by the NSDC in FY 2016 -17, of which MSDE has informed that around Rs. 3 crore have 
been utilized on IISCs. Accordingly, allocations for the PKVY budget head was reduced in RE 2017 -
18 from Rs. 10 crore to Rs. 3 crore, which could also not be transferred to NSDF n view of the 
surplus funds already available with NSDC. In FY 2018 -19, a provision of Rs. 5 crores has been 
made, which would be assessed in the RE 2018 -19 stage. At the same time, one -day Pre Departure 
Orientation Training (PDOT) programmes as part of PKVY have been rolled out by this Ministry in 
Mumbai and New Delhi on a pilot basis for workers going to the Gu lf region from the beginning of 
FY 2018-19. Around 8800 prospective emigrant workers have been imparted PDOT in four months. 
Ministry is considering expanding the one-day PDOT programmes to other major cities in India.   
 There have been regular meetings by Ministry with officials of MSDE and NSDC. A high -
level review meeting of PKVY was co -chaired by EAM and Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
& Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in April 2018. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
 The Committee have noted that scheme on „Legal Assistance to Women Facing problems 
in NRI marriages‟ is the only gender specific scheme being implemented by MEA for Overseas 
Indians. The Committee are dismayed  to note that there has been a drastic reduction in allocation 
under this scheme, from Rs. 0.25 crore in BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 0.01 crore in BE 2018-19. The Ministry 
has informed the Committee that after bringing this scheme under the ambit of Indian Community  

49 
Welfare Fund (ICWF), budgetary allocation has been reduced to a token amount in BE 2018 -19 and 
the existence of the budget head will be assured in light of feedback received. The Committee have 
noted that various steps have been taken by the Ministry to c reate awareness among Indian nationals 
about NRI marital issues. The Committee would urge that the Ministry actively monitor the efficacy 
of the new modality under ICWF in providing legal and other assistance to distressed Indian women. 
Further, adequate b udgetary funds and awareness drive should be launched to ensure that such a 
gender specific scheme does not get lost under the ICWF which caters to multiple issues. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has continuously endeavoured to address problems pert aining to distressed 
Indian women who have been abused, cheated or abandoned by their NRI/PIO spouses. As 
recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee earlier and with an aim to provide financial and legal 
assistance to distressed Indian women married to NRI spous es by Indian Missions and Posts, the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) guidelines were revised in September 2017. Under the 
revised ICWF guidelines the assistance amount for distressed Indian women was increased to US$ 
4000 per case on a means -tested basis; scope of assistance was enhanced to include boarding and 
lodging; and, funds disbursement to lawyers/NGOs providing assistance would be made through 
Indian Missions/Posts. 
 Indian Missions and Posts have been asked to widen the empanelment of lawyers,  NGOs and 
Community Organizations to provide guidance, counseling services and assistance. Many Indian 
Missions have designated „Open House‟ meetings in which any distressed Indian national can 
approach Mission for assistance and guidance. Ministry is empowering aggrieved Indian nationals by 
providing information and guidance about procedures, mechanisms for serving judicial summons on 
the offending overseas Indian spouse; filing a case in an Indian court or police station; issuing Look -
Out Circulars; impounding and cancelling of Indian passport of the offending spouse etc.  
 Ministry has prepared a comprehensive bilingual FAQs providing information on legal 
provisions prevailing in foreign countries and database of organizations, NGOs and lawyers who are 
registered or empaneled with Indian Missions and Posts. This information has also been made 
available on Ministry‟s website at http://www.mea.gov.in/faq-hi.htm. State authorities and Regional 
Passport Offices have been asked to translate the above -mentioned FAQs, legal provisions and 
revised guidelines for legal and financial assistance under ICWF and other relevant information into 
local languages to be posted on their respective websites. 
 An Integrated Nodal Agency (INA), as recommended by the Expert Commi ttee on NRI 
Marital Disputes set up by the Ministry, has been constituted. The INA, aimed to be an effective 
mechanism to provide a single-window timely solution to the problems of affected women, is headed 

50 
by Ministry of Women and Child Development with s enior officials from Ministries of External 
Affairs, Home Affairs, and Law and Justice as members. The INA has held five meetings so far.  
 NRI marital issues are also taken up during bilateral meetings and Consular Dialogues held 
with foreign countries. T he State Commissions for Women are being involved for providing 
appropriate guidance and counseling to distressed Indian women abandoned in India by their NRI 
spouses and assisting women to get in touch with district legal authorities who have empaneled 
lawyers who also work on pro-bono basis with them.  
 Under the Videsh Sampark series initiated by Ministry, outreach events are held in 
partnership with State Governments with an aim to brief State Governments and relevant 
stakeholders about the programmes, schemes and welfare measures of the Ministry and cooperation 
is sought to disseminate information. Such outreach events have been held in Telangana, 
Maharashtra, Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. Ministry is in the process of producing a film/ad 
on NRI marital disputes as part of its awareness campaign in Hindi and regional languages. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 43) 
 The Committee observe that the grants to institutions and autonomous bodies to five major 
institutions, namely Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), Indian Council for World Affairs 
(ICWA), Society for Research and information System for Non -Aligned and Other Developing 
Countries (RIS), India Centre for Migration (ICM) and India Development Foundation of Oversea s 
Indians (IDF -OI) are provided for in the minor head „Other Expenditure‟.  While analyzing the 
budgetary allocations made to these institutions, the Committee discerned that the bulk of grants is 
provided to ICCR while the allocation to other four is abysmally low.   
 With an enormous mandate of undertaking research activities across the spectrum of 
international affairs, ICWA has been organizing conferences, Sapru House Lectures conferences and 
conducting track-two interactions.  RIS, on the other hand provides research inputs on economic and 
social matters, ICM specifically studies overseas labour markets and workers. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs accord requisite importance to research activities 
undertaken by these inst itutions by placing adequate funds at their disposal and channelizing the 
inputs emanating from  their research activities in the formulation of foreign policy and engagement 
with Overseas Indians. 
 
 

51 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry attaches significant importance to the research and analysis of evolving 
international affairs. Contribution of ICWA in organizing conferences, lectures and conducting track -
two interactions, research of RIS on economic and social matters, and  analysis of overseas labour 
markets by ICM provides valuable inputs for Ministry‟s overall foreign policy formulation. Grant -in-
Aid is provided to these organizations based on their demand for grants and past trend of expenditure. 
The recommendation of th e Hon‟ble Committee is noted and will be kept in mind while allocating 
funds for these organizations.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
 
  

52 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 The Committee observe that the minor head „International Cooperation‟ caters to expenditure 
for obligatory contributions to UN and other international organizations of which India is a member. 
While analyzing the allocatio ns under this head, the Committee discerned that enhanced allocation 
has been provided in the RE 2017 -18 and BE 2018 -19 for contributions to UN, South Asian 
University Construction Project, BIMSTEC Secretariat. Quite surprisingly, no allocation has been 
made for India Development Foundation and Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre. The Committee are 
unconvinced by the justification extended by the Ministry about the closure of India Development 
Foundation- Overseas India (IDF -OI) and nil allocation for the O verseas Indian Facilitation Centre. 
While the allocation to sub-heads pertaining to cooperation with international and regional groupings 
have remained either constant or has been enhanced but those pertaining to our Overseas Indians 
namely, IDF -OI and OIC F has been provided with nil allocation. The closure of organizations 
without establishment of any substitute mechanism for carrying out their functions appears to be an 
arbitrary move. In the opinion of the Committee, such arbitrariness in budgetary deman ds and 
fluctuation in functional organization reflects poorly on the Ministry‟s vision of the global order and 
role of our Overseas Indian in it. Consequently, the Committee urge that the Ministry eschew the 
practice of tinkering with allocations to organi zations by abruptly closing them. The Committee 
would also desire to be apprised about the substitute mechanism being adopted to carry out the 
functions which were hitherto being performed by IDF-OI and OICF.     
 
Reply of the Government 
 The India Development Foundation for Overseas Indians (IDF -OI) and the Overseas Indians 
Facilitation Centre (OIFC) were erstwhile Autonomous Bodies of the Ministry, to which Grant -in-
Aid was provided from the Ministry‟s budget for their operational expendi ture. With the closure of 
these Autonomous Bodies, budget allocation had to discontinued, since allocation could not be kept 
for entities which no longer existed. Closure of these two Autonomous Bodies was in keeping with 
the directions of Ministry of Fina nce and NITI Aayog, based on the recommendations made by the 
Expenditure Management Commission to review and streamline funding of Autonomous Bodies by 
the Government. The reasons for the closure of IDF-OI and OIFC are given below:  

53 
India Development Found ation for Overseas Indians:  IDF-OI was set up in 2008 by the erstwhile 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs with the approval of the Union Cabinet as a not -for-profit Trust 
to facilitate philanthropic contributions by overseas Indians for social and develop ment projects in 
India. Since the Trust received contributions of only Rs.36.80 lakhs between December 2008 and 
March 2015, a comprehensive review was undertaken and Government of India‟s flagship 
programmes such as National Mission for Clean Ganga and Swa chh Bharat Mission as well as 
development projects selected by State Governments were identified in sectors such as education, 
sanitation, health, and women and child development, for encouraging contributions by overseas 
Indians. As a result of these effo rts, IDF-OI received contributions of Rs.10.17 crore between April 
2015 and March 2018, with most of the contributions being for projects related to either the National 
Mission for Clean Ganga or the Swachh Bharat Mission. Since these two programmes are se parately 
administered by their respective administrative agencies, therefore, to enhance synergies and improve 
efficiency and avoid duplication of work, the IDF -OI Board of Trustees decided to close down the 
Trust by 31 March 2018. This decision was implem ented with the approval of the Union Cabinet. 
Since there were no administrative, operational or financial liabilities beyond 31 March 2018, 
therefore budgetary allocation was not kept in the Ministry‟s budget for IDF-OI for FY 2018-19.   
Overseas Indians Facilitation Centre: OIFC was set up in 2007 by the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs (MOIA) as a not -for-profit Trust in partnership with the Confederation of Indian 
Industry. Following the merger of erstwhile MOIA with the Ministry of Externa l Affairs in February 
2016, OIFC‟s work was reviewed and it was observed that work relating to promotion of Foreign 
Direct Investments (FDI) into India, including from Non -Resident Indians and Persons of Indian 
Origin, had been re -allocated to the Departme nt of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) under 
Government of India‟s Allocation of Business Rules in February 2016; the Ministry‟s Economic 
Diplomacy Division was coordinating promotion of FDIs with DIPP and as such its mandate 
overlaps with that of OI FC; increasingly State Governments and business organizations have direct 
outreach to overseas Indians for investment promotion and other purposes; and, the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas Convention and related seminars by the Ministry provide opportunity to exch ange views and 
ideas with the Indian diaspora, including through focused sessions on investments, which are held in 
coordination with DIPP. Accordingly, to enhance synergies and improve efficiency and avoid 
duplication of work as recommended by the Expendi ture Management Commission with regard to 
funding of Autonomous Bodies by the Government, it was decided with the approval of the Union 
Cabinet to close down OIFC, which was done with effect from 31 March 2017. 
 With regard to the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recom mendation to ensure that the functions carried 
out by the erstwhile IDF -OI and OIFC are continued through a substitute mechanism, it is submitted 

54 
that contributions from overseas Indian donors are being coordinated directly by agencies 
administering Govern ment‟s flagship development programmes for contributions to the Swachh 
Bharat Kosh or for the Namami Gange Mission etc, including with the assistance of Indian Missions 
and Posts abroad; and the promotion of FDI is being handled directly by DIPP, in coordi nation with 
the Ministry‟s Economic Diplomacy and Overseas Indian Affairs Divisions and Indian Missions and 
Posts abroad. DIPP has since established the „Invest India‟ platform to provide investment facilitation 
services for investors, including overseas Indians.  
 Ministry assures the Hon‟ble Committee that it continues to give high priority to matters 
regarding overseas Indians and ensuring regular interaction and outreach with the Indian Diaspora. 
There are two dedicated Divisions in the Ministry to handle overseas Indian affairs, which administer 
many schemes and programmes in coordination with Indian Missions and Posts abroad, such as the 
Know India Programme, the Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children, and the Bharat Ko Jaaniye 
Quiz, besides the flagship Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention and its related seminars.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
  

55 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
  The Plan and Non -Plan distinction in expenditure budgeting has been discontinued and 
currently budget classifications are in terms of Revenue and Capital Heads and Scheme and Non -
scheme sections. The Committee are happy to learn th at the bifurcation of scheme and non -scheme 
section has resulted in better appreciation of budgetary requirements and allocation for projects 
related to international commitments as aid related spending has come under a single classification. 
In view of the declining share of the scheme section in the last fiscal, the Ministry has carried out an 
intensive monitoring and review of the technical and aid development assistance project, including at 
the levels of External Affairs Minister and Foreign Secretary. The Ministry is hopeful that the aid and 
non-aid outlays will be evenly distributed in the next two financial years.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should take appropriate measures in this direction and 
keep them i nformed.  Notwithstanding the fact that the expenditure covered under the Scheme 
section exclusively pertains to two Major Heads namely „Technical and Economic Cooperation with 
other countries‟ and „Advances to Foreign Governments‟, which constitute the ce ntral plank of a 
country‟s international credentials, this section has not been kept immune from budgetary cuts. The 
Committee are dismayed to note that despite repeated recommendations that budgetary cuts should 
not be effected in such a critical aspect o f our global engagement and diplomacy, it has neither found 
much reverberation in MEA‟s fiscal prudence nor in Ministry of Finance‟s budgetary allocation to 
the former. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government refrain from making 
financial cuts under the scheme section of MEA's budget pertaining to International aid and 
commitments as it directly impinges on our foreign relations and international image abroad.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry assures the Hon‟ble Committee that  it will make firm and focused efforts to 
utilize its allocated funds in an efficient and timely manner for its overall budget and particularly for 
the „Scheme‟ Section, while addressing the inherent political, security, geological and other 
challenges faced by the Ministry in implementing projects abroad, and while remaining prudent in 
the spending of public funds. The Ministry is focused in achieving anticipated implementation 
progress in all key result areas and demonstrating robust expenditure in the fi rst half of the financial 

56 
year, which would assist in making a positive case with Ministry of Finance to narrow the gap 
between the Ministry‟s funds demands and allocations.  
 In FY 2018-19, Ministry achieved expenditure of 32.38% of its BE 2018 -19 allocation in the 
first quarter (1 April to 30 June 2018), which is much higher than the minimum 25% benchmark; and 
by the end of the second quarter (till 30 September 2018), Ministry achieved expenditure of 55.65% 
of its BE 2018-19 allocation, which is higher than the minimum 50% benchmark.  
 As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, the Ministry will make strenuous efforts to 
secure adequate budgetary support from Ministry of Finance, especially for its international technical 
aid and assistance commitments, based on this robust spending demonstrated by the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 The Committee observe that as  a key instrument of our foreign policy, the scope and 
magnitude of developmental partnership has widened tremendously over the past few years. A n 
allocation of Rs. 5093.77 crore was made in BE 2017 -18, which was reduced to Rs. 4273.82 crore in 
RE 2018 -19. An outlay of Rs. 5148.55 crore, which is 34% of total MEA‟s budget has been 
earmarked in BE 2018 -19. The reduction to the tune of 9% at RE 2017 -18 stage was based on 
physical and financial progress of projects under various Heads.  While recognizing the practical 
challenges faced by the Ministry in execution of various projects under this Head and its subsequent 
impact on making budgetary demands,  the Committee feel that the allocation under this Major Head 
is indicative of our international commitments and of our bilateral relations with various countries. 
With the inclusion of the major Head under the scheme section, the Committee in their previo us 
Report on Demands for Grants were hopeful that it will remain immune from budgetary cuts of the 
Ministry of Finance. However, that has not been the case and significant reduction has been made at 
the RE stage.  
 The Committee recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs undertake a thorough review 
of all Aid projects and prepare a roadmap for their completion. Based on this review exercise, the 
Ministry can prevent any reduction at RE stage and if required liaise with the Ministry of Finance for 
additional financial resources at that stage. The Committee would also like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of setting up an autonomous aid 
disbursal body along the lines of USAID to avoid the arbitrary  cut‟s imposed by the Ministry of 
Finance and prioritization being done within the available allocations. This would make the DPA 
more predictable and play a vital role for ushering developmental diplomacy.   
 

57 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry is constantly monitoring the p rogress of GoI -assisted development cooperation 
projects to ensure that projects are completed within the scheduled timeframes, have continuity of 
resources, and achieve the desired impact. In line with the recommendations of the  Committee, 
projects are being reviewed at regular intervals and at multiple levels in the Ministry as well as with 
all concerned stakeholders. A roadmap of milestones specific to each project is part of the monitoring 
process that is updated and reviewed in consultation with the respective project management 
consultants. 
 The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) was created in 2012 within MEA to 
channel Indian development and technical assistance through various schemes and projects that are 
aligned with India‟s overall foreign policy priorities and aims, and that respond to the needs and 
requests of the recipient partner countries. DPA consists of three Divisions, handling different 
streams of development cooperation, and are overseen by Secretary (Economic Relations) in the 
Ministry. DPA‟s work involves close coordination and consultation with concerned Territorial 
Divisions of the Ministry where the projects are located, as they are the principal interlocutors with 
partner countries. Projects and schemes are initiated in Territorial Divisions as per overall foreign 
policy priorities and objectives, and then handed over to DPA for implementation. There is 
continuous coordination by DPA with other Divisions of the Ministry, as required, during the 
implementation stage. Funds requirements are assessed and calibrated carefully to ensure continuity 
of resource flow for smooth project implementation. Ministry has not faced any serious constraints 
vis-à-vis budget till now. The existing institutional set -up with a healthy mix of cross -Ministry 
expertise and consultants from outside Government has served well in the Ministry‟s ability to 
execute and deliver its development cooperation and technical assistance programmes. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation to the sub -head 'Expenditure on Public 
Diplomacy' was Rs. 21.66 crore in BE 2017-18, Rs. 20.55 crore in RE 2017-18 and is Rs. 21.87 crore 
in BE 2018-19.  The marginal decrease in RE 2017-18 as cited by the Ministry was on account of the 
transfer of certain routine activities to the Secretariat Establishment budget. The Committee observe 
that out of the allocated budget in BE 2018 -19, more than 90% has been earmarked for 'Advertising 
and Publicity'. The Ministry has cited two objectives of this Division - introducing and acquainting 
people within the country about India's foreign policy objectives and promoting India in foreign 
countries. For attainment of these twin objectives, the Ministry has been emphasizing on traditional 

58 
as well as digital platforms. The Committee have been informed that while constantly endeavouring 
to follow global trends in Public Diplomacy, it has been adapting to best international practices as per 
Indian requirements.  
 In the considered view of the Committee, the budgetary allocation made to the XPD Division 
is not in proportion to the critical role played by it in creating awareness about India's Foreign policy 
priorities and effective global engagement. There is further room for incorporating the best global 
practices to make this Division truly dynamic and consequently, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should undertake an assessment study of successful global practices. The Committee would 
also urge that the Ministry expand its public outreach through an innovative and grassroots presence. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has taken steps for conducting the exercise recommended by the Hon‟ble 
Committee to learn from the best global practices being followed by the publicity and information 
wings of other Foreign Ministries and how the same may be adapted by the Ministry . The Ministry 
has also undertaken several innovative public outreach initiatives in recent times. The Ministry will 
further focus on extending the reach of these initiatives and take them to the desired beneficiaries. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 46) 
 The Committee note that there are ten key principles and objectives guiding our foreign 
policy. The Ministry has informed that the Government follows a pragmatic and outcome -oriented 
foreign policy. The Committee were surprised by the Ministry's submission that there is no 
overarching and formalized policy document covering all aspects of our foreign policy.  However , 
policy initiatives and strategies such as „Neighbourhood First‟ Policy, „Act East‟, SAGAR maritime 
doctrine, revitalizing ties with West Asia, simultaneous engagement with all powers, focus on 
regional connectivity and Humanitarian Assistance and Disaste r Relief (HADR), reform of 
multilateral institutions, including of the UN Security Council, reconnecting with Diaspora, 
constitute the elements of this multi -faceted approach to India‟s international relations and our 
diplomatic strategy. The Committee als o note the existence of mechanisms of consultation and 
coordination between MEA and other arms of Government to ensure that factors shaping India‟s 
foreign policy are in tune with the country‟s national priorities.  
The Committee are cognizant of India's d eepening engagement at the bilateral, regional as 
well as multilateral level. The Committee are of the considered view that the formulation of a grand 
strategy encompassing the broad aspects of our foreign policy with short term, medium term and long 

59 
term objectives is the need of the hour. By imparting coherence and clarity on our hitherto long 
established and enduring principles of foreign policy, the grand foreign policy strategy will also 
bolster the case for enhanced allocation by the Ministry of Finan ce. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs take all requisite institutional as well intellectual 
steps to spell out a coherent and balanced grand strategy for India in the world.   
Reply of the Government 
 The process of formulating a road map for India‟s international engagement is an ongoing one. 
The Ministry undertakes continuous stock -taking of changes in the global landscape with a view to 
identify challenges and opportunities over a short, medium and l ong-term horizon. It is this process 
that has led to enunciation of the „Neighbourhood First‟ policy, the „Act East‟ policy and the SAGAR 
maritime doctrine.  
 Our policy of simultaneous engagement with all major powers, our new and more intensive 
orientation towards the Indian Ocean region, recent strengthening in our relations with West Asia and 
the Gulf, and upgradation in the scale of our vision for relations with African countries, are all 
reflective of a more energetic, coherent and focused approach.  
 The immediate and most fundamental factor shaping our foreign policy thinking is the flux 
and transition that characterizes the current world order. There is a clear trend of new voices and 
issues arising in the overall global discourse. In such a scenari o, while locking in to a particular 
strategy may not prove to be an ideal approach in the long run; it is indeed very important for us to 
have our own world view – and we do. India‟s world view is essentially centered on the concept of 
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam – the world is one family.  This is increasingly being enunciated at global 
platforms through references by our leaders to various ideas under this concept.  
 Keeping this unique Indian world view at its core, the Ministry will continue to take 
institutional as well as intellectual steps to implement a pragmatic and outcome -oriented foreign 
policy, which is agile and responsive in the face of short term developments and forward looking in 
dealing with emerging global trends in the longer term.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
  

60 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs over the past 
few years, the Committee have noted four discernible trends in budgetary allocation and utilization, 
namely mismatch between budgetary demand and actual allocation; uneven quarterly expenditure; 
reduction in allocation at the RE level and actual expenditure ev en less than RE and; failure to 
convince Ministry of Finance for higher allocation in consonance with the ever increasing foreign 
policy mandate. Overcoming these cyclical patterns have remained the most daunting challenge 
before the MEA. Emphasizing on th e need for a well -defined and focused budgetary planning 
process, the Committee in their Fifteenth Report on Demands for Grants had specifically 
recommended that the Ministry create a formal mechanism to work out the budgetary exercise in a 
holistic manner. The Ministry was further asked to consider the concept of zero based budgeting. In 
the Committee's view,  the current practice of making budgetary projections at the Unit level in an 
arbitrary fashion appears to be the major factor behind the mismatch in  demand and allocation and 
further recurrent budgetary cuts imposed by the Ministry of Finance at all stages of budgetary 
allocation. Notwithstanding observance of measures of economy, rationalized spending and 
restrictive conditions of international aid a nd projects, the discrepancy between the projections and 
actual allocations has become a defining aspect of the annual Demands for Grants of MEA. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the firm opinion that the Ministry should follow a two -pronged strategy 
in budget management to solicit adequate budgetary allocations at every stage. First, an exhaustive 
internal reform should be initiated by working out a formal budgetary mechanism with regular 
monitoring and evaluation of each Unit at the highest level. Second, the Ministry should endeavour to 
consistently engage with the Ministry of Finance at all possible levels to convince them about the 
significance of allocating substantial budgetary allocations to a Ministry that not only has burgeoning 
foreign policy goals but also is a carrier of India‟s image abroad. The Government of India pre -poned 
the presentation of the Budget by a month or so to 1 February, 2017 with a view to ensure amongst 
others that the budgetary process was completed on time and funds allocated  to various 
Ministries/Departments were available to them from day one of the Fiscal. The Committee, however, 
observe from the data on spending furnished by the Ministry that major expenditure will still be 
booked in the second half of the Fiscal 2017 -18. Being the first year of the initiative, the Committee 
would refrain from forming any opinion in the matter. However, they desire a detailed note in the 

61 
matter from the Ministry so as to arrive at a considered view. Since this major initiative ought to 
affect all Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, the Committee desire that while 
preparing this note the Ministry of External Affairs should seek inputs from the Ministry of Finance 
as well. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has instituted a m echanism of having Quarterly Budget Management Meetings, 
chaired by Foreign Secretary or Financial Advisor, for reviewing quarterly expenditure and assessing 
future funds requirements by the Ministry‟s various Divisions and Spending Units. As a result, 
utilization of allocated funds has improved significantly, and in FY 2018-19, the Ministry was able to 
achieve expenditure of 55.65% of its BE 2018 -19 allocation by the end of the second quarter, i.e. till 
30th of September 2018. The Ministry has also been engaging with Ministry of Finance to keep them 
informed of funds required to meet international commitments and to emphasize the importance of 
providing adequate budgetary allocations to the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee observe that against a projected demand of Rs. 20,873 crore by MEA, only 
72% of the demand i.e. Rs. 15,011 crore has been provided in BE 2018 -19. In comparison to BE 
2017-18, there has been a marginal increase of 1.44% in budgetary allocation to MEA during BE 
2018-19. However, in terms of percentage of MEA‟s budget to the overall budget of the Government, 
there has been a decline from 0.69% to 0.62% vis-a-vis BE 2017-18. The Ministry‟s contention that 
for the first time the budgetary allocation of MEA has crossed Rs. 15,000 crore appears to be of no 
solace to the Committee. 
 Despite the Committee's strong emphasis on enhanced budgetary allocation to MEA in 
keeping with its expanded foreign policy goals and objectives, the budgetary allocation made in BE 
2018-19 has been modest. The Ministry of External Affairs is strongly urged to undertake a cross -
Ministry as well as cross - country (of Ministries/Departments with the mandate of managing foreign 
affairs) comparative analysis of budgetary allocations and apprise the Committee of such an 
endeavour within three months. The Committee are of the considered  opinion that such a readily 
available data can serve as a potent tool for convincing the Ministry of Finance about the necessity of 
granting enhanced allocation to MEA. In view of the burgeoning global footprint and mandate of the 
Ministry, the Committee further suggest that the Ministry of External Affairs explore other funding 
mechanisms in cooperation with Line Ministries to ensure foreign policy objectives are achieved 
successfully.  

62 
Reply of the Government 
 As recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee, the  Ministry has commissioned a cross -
Ministry as well as cross -country comparative study of budgetary allocations of 
Ministries/Departments with the mandate of managing foreign affairs. The study is likely to be 
completed by March 2019.  
 Ministry closely coordinates with other Ministries/Department in implementation of projects 
abroad, such as Ministry of Power, Ministry of Defence, Department of Science & Technology, 
Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways etc. along with maintaining close  liaison with Ministry of 
Finance for seeking funds at various stages of the budgetary cycle, based on physical progress of 
projects.   
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 The Committee observe that there has been enhanced allocation un der the head 'Passport and 
Emigration' at both RE 2017 -18 and BE 2018 -19 stages. The reason for increase in allocation is on 
account of opening up of new Post Office Passport Seva Kendra (POPSK), to clear pending 
payments to States/UTs and printing of travel documents. The Committee observe that while the head 
is called 'Passport and Emigration', expenditure under this Head caters to expenditure on Passport 
related items only. The budget provision for emigration is provisioned under the sub -head Protector 
General of Emigrants (PGoE). The Committee, therefore, suggest that the nomenclature of this Minor 
Head, should be revisited so as to make it in line with the activities for which the expenditure is 
incurred. 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the Hon‟ble Comm ittee‟s recommendation, the Ministry has requested the Office of 
Controller General of Accounts for making suitable amendments to the nomenclature of this budget 
head.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Police Verification process comprises a vital aspect of timely issuance of passports and 
towards smooth and expeditious delivery of passport. The launching of the m -Passport App is a 
commendable step in that direction. Wherever it is applied, it brings  the average time to receive PVR 
to 5 days. The Committee, however, find that it has been launched in very few states. The 

63 
Committee, therefore, recommend that steps should be taken to support and incentivize various State 
Governments to adopt a uniform po lice verification process expeditiously by launching the m -
Passport App for smooth verification of passport services in a time-bound manner.   
                      Reply of the Government 
 The following States and Union Territories have introduced the m-Passport Police App for the 
purpose of Police Verification necessary prior to the issue of passport: 
S. No. State Name 
No. of District  
Police Headquarters  
No. of  
Police 
Stations 
1.  Chandigarh 1 1 
2.  Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1 2 
3.  Daman and Diu 1 8 
4.  Delhi 10 10 
5.  Haryana 1 2 
6.  Jharkhand 1 1 
7.  Karnataka 2 110 
8.  Kerala 2 4 
9.  Madhya Pradesh 2 90 
10.  Maharashtra 37 966 
11.  Puducherry 3 35 
12.  Punjab 1 23 
13.  Tamil Nadu 39 1337 
14.  Uttarakhand 2 26 
15.  West Bengal 2 80 
Total 105 2695 
 Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee and is requesting the 
remaining State Governments to introduce m-Passport Police App in a time-bound manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
 
 

64 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Committee observe that a constant outlay of Rs. 0.10 crore has been provisioned under 
the Head „International Conferences/Meetings‟ for the past two years. The Ministry has informed 
that following the creation of a Conference Division in 2016 for organizing and managing 
multilateral conferences and summits, this b udget head merely caters to small scale events that had 
not been envisaged by the concerned Territorial or Nodal Division. The Committee also note that a 
review mechanism headed by the Foreign Secretary has been created for evaluating outcomes of the 
Conferences organized. In the opinion of the Committee, existence of two heads for similar 
activities creates accounting complexities and therefore, it would urge the Ministry to have a single 
budget Head for organizing Conferences of all scale and magnitude. F urthermore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry channelize effectively the various intellectual inputs emanating from 
Conferences into the foreign policy formulation process.  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee are noted. The Ministry is holding internal 
discussions to ensure that in future expenditure on various international conferences and meetings by 
the Ministry is booked under one Head, subject to programming constraints such as evens or 
meetings being organized at short notice.   
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee that the Ministry channelize effectively the 
various intellectual inputs emanating from Conferences into the foreign policy formulation process is 
duly noted for compliance. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 While analyzing the budgetary allocation under the sub -head „Other Expenditure‟, the 
Committee were struck by the fact that it catered to expenditure on disparate and unrelated activities. 
Within the ambit of this sub-head is included expenditure on activities like grant to Indian diplomatic 
Missions/Posts abroad, schemes and programmes related to Overseas Indians, from maintenance of 
VVIP aircrafts, Vice President's visit, demarcation of boundaries, Kailash Mansarov ar Pilgrimage. 
The Committee note that Ministry has taken due cognizance of this large budget head covering 
diverse activities. The Committee recommend that the Ministry split this budget head into smaller 
sub heads minor heads with related activities under one sub head so as to make the budgetary practice 
look rational and coherent. The greater the clarity in budgetary practice and nomenclature of sub -
heads, the greater is the possibility of making a strong case for larger allocation from the Ministry of 

65 
Finance. It is specifically recommended that the schemes and programmes pertaining to the Overseas 
Indians be put under a separate budget head.  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee is duly noted for compliance. Foreign 
Secretary, as the Chief Accounting Authority of the Ministry, has approved the rationalization and 
streamlining of the various budget heads in the Ministry‟s budget, as per functional congruence of the 
various types of expenditure, as recommended by the Hon‟ble  Committee. Since the proposed 
amendments in the nomenclature will entail a major reorganization of the budget, Ministry is in the 
process of holding consultations with the Office of the Controller General of Accounts to ensure that 
the nomenclature changes of the budgetary heads make the budget more rational and coherent to the 
expenditure under the respective heads. In this exercise, the schemes and programmes pertaining to 
overseas Indians will be placed together under an appropriate budget head. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 31) 
 The Committee note the Foreign Secretary‟s submission that the shortage of language 
capability has been on account of drastically reduced recruitment in the Indian Foreign Service 
between 1982 and 2005.  T he Committee also note that concrete steps have been taken by the 
Ministry to augment linguistic specialization which inter -alia includes compulsory training in 
Compulsory Foreign Language to all promotee IFS officers, establishment of Language Lab in FSI,  
employing local people in Missions/Posts. The Committee have learnt that the Ministry is planning to 
create a translation, Interpretation Division to do away with practice of using outside interpreters. 
The Committee are of the view that the shortage of l inguistic resources in the Ministry of External 
Affairs acts as a great impediment to our diplomatic outreach and therefore the issue needs to be 
accorded highest priority and urgency. The Committee, therefore, urge that the Ministry expedite the 
creation of a separate Translation and Interpretation Division. The Committee  also desire to be 
apprised about the progress made in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry accords utmost importance to development and augmentation of language 
capability of its officers through encouraging specialized training in interpretation for IFS officers 
and allotment of Compulsory Foreign Language to inductees entering the IFS. The Ministry is in the 
process of formulating a comprehensive policy for translation and  interpretation that would address 
our requirement in the mid to long term. This policy would also cover all aspects including 

66 
recruitment, cadre management and regular training of the Interpreters Cadre and related issues for 
IFS officers who have trained  as interpreters. The Ministry is undertaking a study of international 
best practices. The Translation and Interpretation Division has also been set up in the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
 The Committee note that following the merger of erstwhile MOIA with MEA, Overseas 
Indian Affairs (OIA) Divisions have been created to deal with the issues relating to the engagement 
of the Indian Diaspora. The Ministry has informed that by streamlining the various 
schemes/programmers and establishing greater synergy with related Divisions, the merger has led to 
greater integration and adoption of a holistic approach to issues related to Overseas Indians. It is 
noted that four principles of protection, welfare, proactive engagement and outreach guide the diverse 
programmes and schemes pertaining to Overseas Indians. The Committee also note the specific steps 
taken by the Government to convert brain-drain into brain gain. 
  While recognizing the benefits flowing out of the merger of MOIA with MEA, the 
Committee observe considerable ad hocism leading to the issues relating to the Overseas Indian 
Affairs getting neglected. Even two years after the merger, no separate budget head has been 
provided for matters related to Overseas Indian A ffairs. Allocation for the various schemes and 
organizations related to Overseas Indians are being made under the budget Head 'Other 
Expenditures'. This odd budgetary practice speaks volume about the seriousness attached to such a 
critical aspect of the Mi nistry's work, post -merger. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Ministry create a distinct budget head specifically pertaining to Overseas Indians. Pertaining 
to mechanisms to incorporate the feedback of the Indian Diaspora into the Forei gn Policy agenda, the 
Committee note that the Ministry is taking feedback not only through considering the 360 degree 
spectrum, it is taking feedback from the States as well. However, there is no such formal mechanism 
for taking feedback from the Indian Di aspora and incorporating the same into the Foreign Policy 
agenda. Therefore, the Ministry is urged to establish a formal mechanism for integrating the concerns 
and feedback of Indian Diaspora so that the same is fruitfully converged in the work of the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
 Following the merger of erstwhile MOIA with MEA, a review of all the schemes/programmes 
was undertaken to rationalize resources and avoid duplication of work and effort. As a result, some 
schemes were revamped, some were clos ed, new and some ones were initiated. The Study India 
Programme (SIP) for young diaspora  was found to be similar to the Know India Programme (KIP) 

67 
and it was decided to close SIP. The Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), an Autonomous 
Body set up as  a not-for-profit Trust in 2007 to facilitate investments into India by overseas Indians 
was closed down in March 2017, as its functions were similar to the mandate of the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion such as the „Invest India‟ platform. Similarly, the India Development 
Foundation for Overseas Indians (IDF -OI), an Autonomous Body set up as a not -for-profit Trust in 
2008, was closed down in March 2018, as contributions received in IDF -OI were mainly for GoI‟s 
flagship schemes such the National Mission for Clean Ganga and the Swachh Bharat Mission, which 
are separately administered by their respective administrative agencies . Performance of the scheme 
„Tracing the Roots‟ was found unsatisfactory with only 18 applications received in 8 years, a nd the 
Government expenditure on the scheme was discontinued. 
 As per the revised format of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD), 10 PBD Conferences were 
held in 2016, chaired by External Affairs Minister and co-chaired by respective GoI Cabinet Minister. 
Recommendations from these Conferences were circulated to GoI Ministries and other stakeholders. 
Three PBD Conferences were held in 2017 and six are scheduled to be held in 2018. The Know India 
Programme has been revamped with an increase in the number of KIP  editions from two to six per 
year. In 2016 -17, seven KIP editions were successfully organized including one Bharat Ko Janiye 
Quiz. In 2017 -18, six KIP editions were held with participation of 240 diaspora youth. The 
Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Childre n (SSDC) was revamped and the scheme was extended 
from 40 to 66 countries and scholarships slots were increased from 100 to 150.   
 In 2017, Ministry launched an outreach initiative with State Governments under its Videsh 
Sampark series with the objective of seeking cooperation of States in addressing issues pertaining to 
welfare and protection of our citizens abroad and briefing State Governments on the Ministry‟s 
various initiatives. A Conference of sitting Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) Parliamentarians was 
organized in January 2018 which was attended by 137 PIO MPs and Mayors, providing an 
opportunity for an additional level of sustained interaction with the Indian diaspora. A Regional PBD 
was organized in Singapore in January 2018.  
 The revamped progra mmes and initiatives undertaken by the Ministry are part of a 
mechanism under which Ministry has intensive and sustained engagement with the Indian Diaspora.  
 The issue of a separate budget head for expenditure on activities pertaining to overseas 
Indians and the Indian diaspora is being taken up in consultation with Office of Controller General of 
Accounts. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
 

68 
(Recommendation No. 37) 
 The Committee find that there has been a declining trend in allocation to the Overseas 
Citizenship of India (OCI) scheme due to a reduction in the pendency of cases. However, the 
Committee fails to decipher the rationale behind nil allocation to this scheme during BE 2018 -19. 
Following the plethora of steps taken by the Ministry, there has b een a reduction in pendency under 
the OCI Card Scheme. The Committee observe that for the smooth conversion of POI cards into OCI 
cards, the procedures have been simplified and bare minimum time lines have been fixed. The 
Ministry has informed that while p rinting of OCI cards is going on in missions in London and 
Washington and the Consulates in Chicago, Sydney, Melbourne and New York, printing of OCI 
cards is expected to commence soon in High Commission in Singapore and Consulates in Houston 
and Atlanta. The Committee fail to understand how the process of conversion of PIO cards and OCI 
cards will happen with NIL allocation? The Committee urge that the Ministry make realistic 
budgetary projections and seek additional budget for the Scheme at the RE stage to  execute the task 
of conversion of PIO cards to OCI cards in a time-bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 41) 
 The Committee are happy to note that the budgetary allocation under 'Awareness 
Campaign/Media Plan' has witnessed a four -fold increase from Rs. 2.5 crore in 2017 -18 (BE) to Rs. 
11 crore in 2018-19 (BE). The Committee also note that the Ministry has extensively used the social 
and print media to spread awareness among potential emigrants on safe and legal migration. It is also 
satisfying to note that the budgetary allocation of Rs 11 crore provided at the RE 2017 -18 stage has 
been fully utilized. The Committee would urge that the Ministry carry out an impact assessment 
study of the awareness campaign and in light of its findings, establish a formal mechanism for 
continuous monitoring and evaluation of these campaigns. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry proactively engage with th e State Governments to deepen the information and awareness 
campaigns. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry values the Hon‟ble Committee‟s appreciation for the awareness campaign/media 
plan, and is pleased to report that the enhanced allocated funds were fully utilized in FY 2017-18.  

69 
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee for an impact assessment of the media 
campaign is noted for implementation.  
 Ministry continues to proactively engage with the State Governments to deepen the reach and 
scope of the awareness campaign. Ministry is seeking support and cooperation from various States in 
screening the campaign on Safe and Legal Migration in private cinema halls and cable TV channels 
besides other means available at the disposal of the State Government s including electronic and print 
media. External Affairs Minister has chaired a meeting with State NRI Ministers and senior officials 
to discuss issues relating to safe and legal migration and address issues of NRI marital disputes.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 42) 
 As regards advisories issued to the migrants, the Committee note that the Ministry does 
prepare advisories each time there is a crisis and it does circulate them widely through XP Division 
and through website. However, pe ople go through a third country without the knowledge of the 
Ministry. The Ministry has very little control over that situation. The Ministry has admitted the fact 
that it is trying to evolve an evacuation policy and currently it is in the stage of consult ations with the 
Missions. Once that is there, one can have effective preventive mechanism for those who misuse it. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry finalise the evacuation policy at the earliest so that 
Indian citizens can be evacuated safely in emergent situation with due promptitude.  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee has been noted and the Ministry will hold 
internal consultations in this regard.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 44) 
 The Committee note that in BE 2018 -19, ICCR has been provided with an enhanced 
allocation of Rs. 255 crore.  The Ministry has informed that ICCR carries out a detailed budgetary 
exercise based on realistic achievable objectives in line with overall prior ities of the Government for 
cultural diplomacy.  As a pre-eminent organization of Ministry of External Affairs with a mandate of 
India‟s soft abroad, ICCR‟s activities are spread across the globe ranging from providing 
scholarships to organizing exhibition s to performing arts and visuals arts programme.  The 
Committee are happy to learn that over the past few years, ICCR has fully utilized the allocation 
provided to it at the RE stage.  The Committee, however, are concerned to note the issue of under -

70 
staffing of ICCR.   Moreover, in the opinion of the Committee, even the increased budgetary 
allocation provisioned to ICCR is not in sync with its wide -ranging activities. Realizing that as a not 
for profit and 100 per cent grantee organization under Ministry of  External Affairs there exist limits 
for ICCR to raise extra -budgetary resources to cater to its expansive activities.  The Committee 
would therefore, recommend that the Government embark on a recruitment drive to tide over the 
existing manpower crunch in ICCR.  Given the increasing salience of soft power projection in our 
Foreign Policy and the centrality of ICCR‟s role in it, the Committee are of the considered view that 
the latter should have augmented financial and manpower resources. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has been making efforts to take required measures to resolve ICCR‟s manpower 
crunch. While a formal proposal for creation of new posts is being formulated, steps for filling vacant 
posts have been taken such as approaching the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) again to provide 
the list of candidates who could not clear the final stage of selection and are wait listed; selection of a 
recruitment agency for conducting examinations to select candidates for vacant posts; outsourcing of 
services wherever possible is being considered; and review of recruitment rules, as needed. 
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 45) 
 The Committee are aware that ICCR‟s Cultural Centres abroad are the principal instrument of 
India‟s institutio nal cultural outreach. The Ministry has informed that the policy of establishing 
Indian Cultural Centres is a well thought out decision and designed in alignment with our foreign 
policy priorities. The Committee observe that ICCR is currently in the proces s of consolidating its 
activities of its Cultural Centres and the proposal for opening up of new Culture Centres will be taken 
up once the process is completed. With regard to the current projects in Washington, Paris and Tel 
Aviv, action is being initiate d for its establishment.  The Committee note that ICCR is also in the 
process of putting in place a standard format for conducting feasibility study before establishment of 
new Cultural Centers Overseas. The Committee recommend that the Ministry equip ICCR  with 
requisite financial resources at the RE stage to expedite the completion of ongoing projects in 
Washington and Paris which have been lying in limbo for a considerable period of time.  The 
Committee also desire to be apprised about the outcome of the consolidation process and feasibility 
study once it is completed. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee to expedite completion of ongoing projects 
in Washington and Paris is duly noted and adequate financial resources will be allocated, as required.  

71 
 As part of its consolidation process, ICCR is seeking inputs from various Missions and Posts 
by circulating a standard format for proposing new Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) to enable a 
thorough assessment of the need and feasibility of an ICC in those countries. Diplomatic relations, 
financial resources, availability of suitable property etc. are key parameters of this exercise.  
[File No. AA/Parl./125/31/2018] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                        DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                                
11 February, 2018                                                                                     Chairperson,                                  
22 Magha, (Saka)                                                                   Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
  

72 
Appendix I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2018-19) HELD ON 11 FEBRUARY, 2019 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 11 February, 2019 from 1500hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. '2'  Block „A‟, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.. 
PRESENT 
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
 2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 3. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 5. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 6. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
         Rajya Sabha 
 7. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
8. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
 11. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 Secretariat 
  
 2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on:  
(i)  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report of the Committee on External Affairs on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2018-19. 
(ii)  XXXXXZ    XXXXXZ   XXXXXXXX. 

73 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incor poration in 
the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted the 
draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the members and present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

74 
Appendix II 
 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations     46                                                              
              
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 
28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 36, 38, 39, 40 and 43. 
  
 Total-28 
Percentage:  68.86% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.    14 
Total-01 
 Percentage: 2.17% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 6, 18, 33 and 46 
Total- 04 
 Percentage: 8.69 % 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
 Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 5, 8 11, 13, 17, 31, 35, 37, 41, 42, 44 and 45. 
                                            Total- 13 
Percentage: 28.26% 
 
 