 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report on the subject ‘Sino-India Relations 
including Doklam, border situation and cooperation in international 
organizations’] 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2019 /Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
25 
 

 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report on the subject ‘Sino-India Relations 
including Doklam, border situation and cooperation in international 
organizations’] 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on   13.2.2019 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 13.2.2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
          February, 2019 / Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COEA NO. 140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2019 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................  16 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government ’s Replies...…………………………………  35 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  36 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………  40 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. ANNEXURE – A ……………………………………………………………………..42 
II. ANNEXURE – B ……………………………………………………………………. 47 
III. APPENDIX – I  
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 11.2.2019…………….…  50           
IV. APPENDIX II  ………………………………………………………………………. 52                                          
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2018-19) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurj eet Singh Aujla 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Ramen Deka 
 7. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
12. Shri P.R. Senthiln athan 
 13. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 15. Shri Venakateswara Rao (Babu) Magantti  
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 18. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 19. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 20. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 21. Vacant 
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Jose K. Mani 
24. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
25. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
26. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
27. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
28. Smt. Kanimozhi 
29. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
30. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
 31. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  -   Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    -  Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  -  Additional Director 
4. Shri Maneesh Mohan Kamble -  Under Secretary 
 
(ii)  

 
 
        INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2018-19) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty Second Report on the subject ‘Sino-India Relations including Doklam, border situation 
and cooperation in international organizations’. 
 
2. The Twenty Second Report was presented to the Parliament on 4 September, 2018. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 3 January, 2019. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report on Action Taken at their Sitting held 
on   11 February, 2019. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-
I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fif th Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-
II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                   DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                      
11 February, 2019                                                                                Chairperson,                                
22 Magha,1940 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations Twenty Second Report on 
the subject ‘Sino-India Relations including Doklam, border situation and cooperation 
in international organizations ’ which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the 
Table of the Rajya Sabha on 4 September, 2018. 
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the 19 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
          Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 18 
  Total- 15  
 
 (ii) 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL 
 
(iii) 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration:- 
Recommendation Nos.  11 and 19    Total- 02 
 
(iv) 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited:- 
Recommendation  Nos.  13 and 17               Total- 02 
           
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations. 

2 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee have noted that India does not accord any diplomatic 
recognition to Taiwan despite the flourishing nature of exchanges between the 
countries, such as in the fields of people to people contacts, trade and personal 
exchanges. The Ministry has argued that it does not want to upend this policy of the 
Government of India in deference to China ’s sensitivity on the matter. Nonetheless, it 
treats the relationship with Taiwan as a trade relationship rather than a diplomatic one, 
and has recently acquiesced in China ’s demand to refer to Taiwan as “Chinese 
Taipei”. It comes as a matter of concern to the Committee that even when India is 
overly cautious about China ’s sensitivities while dealing with Taiwan and Tibet, 
China does not exhibit the same deference while dealing with India ’s sovereignty 
concerns, be it in the case of Arunachal Pradesh or that of the China-Pakistan 
Economic Corridor (CPEC) in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK). Given the fact of 
China’s muscular approach of late while dealing with some of the issues pertaining to 
India, it is difficult for the Committee to be content with India ’s continuing with is 
conventionally deferential foreign policy towards China. Dealing with a country like 
China essentially requires a flexible approach. The Committee strongly feel that the 
Government should contemplate using all options including its relations with Taiwan, 
as part of such an approach.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:- 
 
“The Government follows a consistent policy with respect to Taiwan. We do not 
have diplomatic relations with Taiwan. However, we do pursue engagement in 
trade, investment, scientific, culture, people- to-people and other such functional 
areas with Taiwan.” 
 
7. The Committee note the response of the Ministry wherin they have 
merely endorsed the commitment towards consistent policy with respect to 
Taiwan. They have merely stated “we do pursue engagement in trade, 
investment, scientific, culture, people- to-people and other such functional areas 
with Taiwan ”.  The Committee, however, are keen to know the specific step s 
being taken to improve substantive relations with Taiwan in the areas mentioned 
by the Ministry. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
8. The Committee have noted the significant inroads made by China in India ’s 
neighbourhood and their impact on India ’s outreach activities in these countries. 
Despite the Ministry ’s ambivalence on whether this reflects some sort of a deliberate 
encirclement policy of India by China, the Committee would be inclined to see it as 

3 
 
nothing less than a veiled containment policy. Therefore, it is imperative that India 
should urgently take up the business of re-energizing its ties with our neighbouring 
countries. It is clear that we now have to contend with the possibility of some of the 
countries in our neighbourhood playing the China card as leverage in their relations 
with us. In Committee’s opinion India vis-a-vis China has the unbeatable advantage of 
having always being seen as a reliable and trustworthy partner. Therefore, to deal with 
the emerging situation, India needs to bring into play adroit and pro-active diplomacy 
on the one hand while significantly augmenting the delivery and efficiency of its 
development assistance in the Region on the other. The Committee desire to be 
apprised about the steps taken by the Government towards this end and both the short 
and long term outcomes of such endeavours.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The Government accords highest priority to India ’s relations with our 
neighbouring countries. Under its 'Neighbourhood First' policy, Government is 
committed to developing friendly and mutually beneficial relations with all its 
neighbours. India is an active economic partner of its neighbours and is involved 
in various development projects in these countries. India also has extensive ties 
with neighbouring countries in education, culture, trade and investments as well 
as defence and security cooperation.  
 
 India is of the firm view that as two large countries having wider regional and 
global interests, India and China must pursue their relationships with other 
countries in a manner that does not become a source of concern for each other, 
and is based on mutual respect and sensitivity to each other ’s concerns and 
aspirations. 
 
Details of India’s engagements with major countries in the Indian Ocean Region 
are enclosed at Annexure - A.” 
 
10. While noting the significant in-roads made by China in India ’s 
neighbourhood and their impact, the Committee had recommended the 
Ministry to re-energize its ties with neighbouring countries and also bring 
in pro-active diplomacy by augmenting the delivery and efficiency of its 
developmental assistance to these countries. The Committee acknowledge 
the Government ’s efforts towards developing an active economic partne r 
in these neighbouring countries and its involvements in various 
developmental projects. However, the Committee find lacunae in 
implementation of ‘Neighbourhood First ’ Policy and feel that there is an 
inordinate delay in completion of  several Projects due to various reasons 

4 
 
including resources crunch. The Committee find that the ongoing 
development of projects that are seemingly tantamount to encirclement of 
India by China is certainly a matter of concern for India. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that there is an urgent need to augment the 
developmental assistance to neighbouring countries to counter the Chinese 
assertiveness in the region with an objective to bring in an adroit and pro-
active diplomacy. The Committee may be apprised about the long ter m 
and short term policy changes in that direction and its impact thereon.  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
11. The Committee have noted that while China is resorting to containment of 
India in South Asia, its own vulnerabilities in South-East Asia are adequately exposed 
and could be appropriately taken into account by India. Due to historical and 
contemporary factors, China’s ties with some of the countries in the region have come 
under strain and this presents India with the right opportunity to develop counter 
pressure on China. The Committee are pleased to note that the Government is 
sensitive about the issue and has already started taking steps in the desired direction 
by significantly augmenting projects assistance to Bangladesh and by signing a first 
time LoC of $ 500 million with Vietnam for defence purchases. India has also taken a 
firm stand on the Belt and Road Initiative. Further, the Foreign Secretary in his candid 
submission before the Committee has emphasized the need to look after our 
neighbourhood and the Indian Ocean. Therefore, the Committee would desire that 
these isolated measures notwithstanding, the Government should very proactively 
pitch for an enhanced role in South-East Asia and the Indian Ocean region as a 
foreign policy tool in the medium and long term. India ’s model of assistance as has 
been stated previously is being seen as more favourable to the interests of the 
recipient countries, but is sometimes short on timely delivery. Wherever India forays, 
it has the advantage of this positive image of trust and reliability built assiduously and 
painstakingly over decades.  
 
          Reply of the Government 
 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:- 
 
“The Government of India under its Act East Policy has taken several proactive 
measures to engage with the countries of the Indo-Pacific region, especially in 
South-East Asia.  
 
 The Act East Policy which was upgraded in 2014 from the Look East Policy -- 
major pillar of our foreign policy since the early 1990s -- focuses on the 
extended neighbourhood in the Indo-Pacific region. The policy which was 
originally conceived as an economic initiative, has gained political, strategic and 

5 
 
cultural dimensions including establishment of institutional mechanisms for 
dialogue and cooperation. The key principles and objectives of Act East Policy 
is to promote economic cooperation, cultural ties and develop strategic 
relationship with countries in the Indo-Pacific region through continuous 
engagement at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels thereby providing 
enhanced connectivity to India ’s Northeastern States with other countries in our 
neighbourhood.  
 
 India has strategic partnership with a number of countries in the region, 
including Indonesia, Vietnam, Malaysia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Australia, 
Singapore and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and forged 
close ties with all countries in the Indo-Pacific region. Apart from ASEAN, 
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and East Asia Summit (EAS), India has also 
been actively engaged in regional fora such as Bay of Bengal Initiative for 
Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Asia 
Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC) and Indian 
Ocean Rim Association (IORA), all of which contribute to the realisation of 
India’s Act East Policy.  
  
 In addition, various plans at bilateral and regional levels include steady efforts 
to develop and strengthen connectivity of India ’s Northeast with the ASEAN 
region through trade, culture, people- to-people contacts and physical 
infrastructure (road, airport, telecommunication, power, etc.). Some of the major 
ongoing projects include Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project, the 
India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway Project, Rhi-Tiddim Road Project 
and Border Haats. A Line of Credit of US$ 1 billion has also been offered by 
our Prime Minister at the ASEAN-India Summit for enhancing physical and 
digital connectivity between India and ASEAN. 
 
 Our engagement with the countries of the South East Asia was further 
reinforced through the ASEAN-India Commemorative Summit, which was 
hosted by India on 25 January 2018 in New Delhi to mark the 25th Anniversary 
of ASEAN-India Dialogue Relations.  During the Summit, all ten States of the 
ASEAN agreed with India to further strengthen and deepen the ASEAN-India 
Strategic Partnership for mutual benefit, across the whole spectrum of political-
security, economic, socio-cultural and development cooperation, for building of 
a peaceful, harmonious, caring and sharing community in our region.  
 
Details of India’s engagements with major countries in the Indian Ocean Region 
are enclosed at Annexure - A. 
 
Details of India’s engagements with South East Asia may be seen at Annexure - 
B.” 
 
13. The Committee had recommended to the Government to pro-
actively pitch for an enhanced role in both the regions as a part of its 
foreign policy tool kit. In their reply, the Ministry has merely supplied the 
information about a general status of bilateral relations with the countries 

6 
 
in these regions and has not elaborated further on the efforts made by the 
Government    to    enhance    their    role. This   shows  the Ministry is still  
tentative about specific actions to be undertaken in those reg ions. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should come out with a 
defined policy to play a pivotal role in the development of the countries in 
Indian Ocean region in cooperation with neighbouring South East Asian 
countries as well as to establish peaceful & harmonious bilateral relations 
with them.  
 (Recommendation No. 11) 
 
14. India and China have a protracted boundary dispute where China is in illegal 
occupation of several thousand square kilometres of Indian territory. China disputes 
the international boundary between India and China. In the eastern sector, China 
disputes the legality of the McMahon Line by asserting that it was drawn by the 
imperialist British power (though this objection has not prevented it from accepting 
the same “imperialist” McMahon Line as its border with Myanmar) and China claims 
approximately 90,000 sq. Km. Of India territory in the State of Arunachal Pradesh as 
South Tibet. China remains in illegal occupation of 38,000 sq. Km. in the State of 
Jammu & Kashmir. It has also acquired illegally 5180 square kilometres of territory 
from Pakistan in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir and further claims about 2,000 square 
kilometres in the States of Himachal Pradesh and Uttrakhand. China also disputes 
alignment of its boundary with India in the Sikkim sector. The fact that Arunachal 
Pradesh is an integral and inalienable part of India has been clearly conveyed to the 
Chinese side on several occasions including at the highest level. From time to time, 
the issue of inaccurate depiction of India ’s boundaries is being taken up with 
concerned foreign country. The Committee view this matter very seriously and urge 
that India ’s diplomatic energies be channelled to ensure that instances related to 
inaccurate depictions of India ’s boundaries are taken up forcefully and with urgency 
with the respective countries. Though negotiations on the boundary dispute are going 
on simultaneously with China, it must also be ensured that such baseless claims which 
are devoid of any amount of credibility or justification are fully exposed before the 
international community.  

7 
 
 With regard to the land boundary alignment in Sikkim, the Committee view it 
to be a clear case of deliberate misrepresentation by China. First, in 2006 they asked 
for working out the alignment there as an early harvest and later repudiated it by 
arguing that the alignment in the Sikkim sector has already been decided. The 
Committee desire that Indian position should remain firm on the ground that the 1890 
Anglo-Chinese Convention can at best provide the ‘basis of alignment ’ of the 
boundary but not dictate the actual demarcation. They also desire that India should 
make it amply clear to China that India will adhere to the 2012 Understanding reached 
by the Special Representatives that the tri-junction boundary points between India-
China and third countries will be finalized in consultation with the concerned 
countries only. 
Reply of the Government 
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated as 
under:- 
 
“The Boundary Dispute: India and China have appointed a Special 
Representative (SR) each to explore the framework for a boundary settlement 
from the political perspective of the overall bilateral relationship. Twenty-one 
meetings of the SRs have been held so far. The last meeting was held in 
Chengdu (China) on 24 November 2018.  
 
 The two sides have agreed on a three-stage process for the resolution of the 
boundary question. The first stage was completed with the signing of the 
“Agreement on the Political Parameters and Guiding Principles for the 
Settlement of the India-China Boundary Question ” in April 2005. On the basis 
of these political parameters and guiding principles, in the second stage, the two 
Special Representatives, have initiated discussion to reach a consensus on an 
“Agreed Framework” of the boundary settlement. 
 With regard to the India-China boundary in the Sikkim sector, there are still 
steps to be covered before the boundary is finalized. Further, as per the 
agreement reached between the Governments of India and China in 2012 the tri-
junction boundary points between India, China and third countries is to be 
finalized in consultation with the concerned countries. Since 2012, no discussion 
has been held on the tri-junction with Bhutan. Nonetheless, the Common 
Understanding of 2012 provided a strong basis for India to object to China ’s 
attempts to change the status quo with regard to the tri-junction between India, 
China and Bhutan.  
 
 It is part of the mandate of our Special Representatives who are engaged in 
discussions to find a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable settlement of the 
boundary question, including in the Sikkim sector. Further discussions regarding 
finalization of the boundary have been taking place under the Special 
Representatives framework. India has consistently taken a positive approach to 

8 
 
the settlement of its own boundary with China, along with the associated issue 
of the tri-junctions. 
 
Wrongful depiction of Indian maps: From time to time, we come across 
instances of inaccurate depiction of India ’s external boundaries in foreign maps. 
Government of India strongly takes up such inaccurate depiction of India ’s 
external boundaries with concerned foreign governments.” 
 
16. Observing the  long pending boundary dispute between India and 
China in almost all the boundaries in the states of Arunanchal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir and also of Himachal Pradesh and Uttrakhand the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should take specific 
measures for an early boundary settlement. The Ministry in their action 
taken reply have merely stated the facts about the developments taken so 
far after the appointment of a Special Representative from both the sides 
to explore the framework of boundary settlement.  
The Committee had considered the issue of illegal occupation of 
significant Indian territory by China and inaccurate depiction of India ’s 
boundaries indicates a continued desire to keep the dispute simmering on 
the part of China.  As the reply of the Ministry does not specifically state 
any of the steps taken to rectify the situation, the Committee are not 
convinced that the Ministry is taking up this matter of inaccurate 
depiction of boundaries seriously. They, therefore, reiterate that India 
should introduce an element of urgency into the border dispute resolution 
negotiations, and urge China to adhere to the 2012 understanding reached 
by Special Representatives of India and China that tri-junction boundary 
points between India-China and third countries should be finalized in 
consultation with concerned countries. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of progress in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
17. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite a marked progress in recent 
years, the border road infrastructure on the India-China border is grossly inadequate, 
as confirmed by its own observations from its visits to sections of the border regions. 
In fact on a number of important sectors we are dependent on single access routes, a 

9 
 
risky proposition in times of conflict. Worse, many roads are not built to withstand 
military traffic. Chinese had specifically taken advantage of this in the 1962 war and 
therefore we ought to draw lesions from the past on this matter. The Committee have 
been assured by the three Ministries viz. Ministry of Defence, Ministry of External 
Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs about likely improvements in the state of border 
roads. The Committee have been seized of the problems related to inadequate 
infrastructure including roads along the India-China border and desire that BRO 
works to achieve full connectivity. The main reasons attributed to the delay as stated 
by the Ministry of Defence is terrain, delay in getting environment clearances, 
inadequate infrastructure with BRO, etc. Considering the gravity of the situation, and 
given the recent Doklam crisis, the Committee are of the strong views that the 
Government should significantly enhance the level of priority it gives to border roads. 
During its visits to the India-China border areas, the Committee were shown pictures 
of infrastructure developed on both the sides of the border and major discrepancies 
were clearly visible. The Committee therefore, feel that the India side needs to do a 
lot more. It goes without saying that better connectivity clearly gives an advantage to 
China in terms of defence preparedness. The Committee, therefore, desire that for a 
strong Indian presence on the border, better infrastructure should be created for 
habitation and transportation so that our armed forces may not feel any difficulty in 
accommodation, logistics, movement and infrastructure as well as storage and 
movement of arms and ammunition in emergency. 
The Committee have a distinct feeling that BRO as an organization with 
antiquated rules of delegation needs a thorough overhaul in the changed 
circumstances. The Committee were informed that the Border Roads Organization 
(BRO) has been extensively re-organized, that the responsibilities of BRO have been 
shifted from the Ministry of Road Transport to the Ministry of Defence, and that work 
of border roads has been taken up with urgency. The Committee recommend that 
Government should make concerted efforts to improve border road infrastructure 
along the India-China border and a status note on the progress achieved should be 
furnished to the Committee at the action-taken stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated as 
under:-  

10 
 
 
“The infrastructure in border areas is an essential pre-requisite to support our 
defences, facilitating rapid mobilization, application of combat potential and 
sustenance of forces. It is one of the key imperatives of operational 
preparedness. Due impetus to upgradation and development of infrastructure 
along India-China borders is being given, in particular, with a number of 
initiatives taken to focus the efforts of Border Roads Organization (BRO) 
towards timely development of road infrastructure as per operational priorities.  
 
 To support our defence preparedness to meet any contingency, development of 
requisite infrastructure has been planned to support operational and logistic 
requirements. This includes construction of roads along border areas, strategic 
railway lines and tunnels, to ensure all weather connectivity. Details of various 
actions, including policy measures, which have been undertaken by the 
Government to augment infrastructure development by BRO are as follows: 
 
(a) Government has taken various initiatives to improve the road infrastructure 
development process. The initiatives include enhanced powers to BRO to 
expedite sanctioning of various jobs and hire/procure additional resources, 
increased powers for procurement of indigenous/ex-import equipment and 
mechanisms to resolve relevant issues with State Governments. 
 
(b) To increase their functional capability, BRO has been instructed to 
incorporate latest technology for construction of roads over permafrost 
regions/difficult areas to enable all weather connectivity to forward areas. To 
expedite forward connectivity towards India-China border, BRO resources are 
being re-deployed to these forward areas and a number of roads in the hinterland 
have been handed over to other agencies.  
 
(c) Procurement of modern equipment for BRO has been planned to overcome 
terrain difficulties in areas where BRO is deployed.  
 
(d) Further, outsourcing of roads to reputed contractors/firms, execution of road 
projects in Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode has also 
been incorporated, as a change in road construction philosophy of BRO.” 
 
 (Recommendation No. 15) 
 
19. The Committee are further perturbed to note that only some of the border 
posts are connected by all weather roads. This sorry situation has accumulated over 
the years. The Home Secretary during oral deposition has admitted that our state of 
infrastructure should have been much better. Now there are concerned efforts to 
address this infrastructure deficit. Not all the roads sanctioned by the Government 
have become operational. It is expected that the remaining roads will be operational 
by the year 2020. The Committee strongly desire the government to take timely steps 
to complete the remaining roads without any further delay. 

11 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
20. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The Government has taken various measures to improve infrastructure along 
India-China border (please also see response to Recommendation No. 14). 
Government had approved construction of 25 roads measuring 751.58 km under 
Indo-China Border Road Phase (ICBR-I) for providing better connectivity to 
ITBP Border Outposts. Out of 25 roads, 14 roads have been completed and 
connectivity has been established on 7 additional roads. The project is expected 
to be completed by 2020.” 
 
21. Observing the visible discrepancies in the border roads 
infrastructure on the Indian side, and acknowledging the importance of 
better connectivity in the border areas alongside India-China border in 
view of Doklam issue, the Committee had desired that the Government 
should accord priority for constructing border roads. The Committee note 
from the action taken reply that upgradation and development of 
infrastructure along the Indo-China border is proceeding. Among the 
several steps taken by the Government in this regard are the enhancement 
of power of BRO, initiatives to incorporate latest technologies for 
construction of roads, procurement of modern equipment, and 
outsourcing of works to other agencies. However, the Committee note that 
out of 25 roads approved for construction for providing better connectivity 
to ITBP border outposts, only 14 roads have been completed and 
connectivity has been established on 7 additional roads. The project is 
expected to be completed by 2020. The Committee also note that despite 
the assurances provided by the MoD, MEA and MHA, nine roads are yet 
to be constructed. Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their 
recommendation to make concerted efforts to complete the roads without 
any further delay as they form an integral part of military transport of 
arms and ammunition and also movement of Territorial Army for 
maintaining internal security and resisting foreign aggression.  
 
 

12 
 
 (Recommendation No. 16) 
 
22. During their Study Tour to Guwahati, Tawang, and Gangtok in May 2018, the 
Committee had observed that some roads for local connectivity under Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) are being constructed and maintained by the State 
Governments in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim. At present, these roads are 
inadequate for military purposes but they can definitely be envisaged as a back-up 
access route in times of exigencies. It is imperative for national security that we 
should not be dependent on single point access and for that we should develop a 
network of peripheral roads along the border. In the Committee ’s opinion roads under 
the PMGSY scheme are best suited for this purpose provided they can be adapted to 
serve national security interests. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of Defence should coordinate with the respective State Governments along 
the India-China border to suitably enhance the design and standard specifications of 
the PMGSY roads in the area.  
Reply of the Government 
 
23. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has replied:- 
 
“The Ministry of Defence has been requested to take action in this regard.” 
 
 
24. The Committee understand the position of the Ministry of External 
Affairs when it has to co -ordinate with other Ministries for 
implementation of recommendations made by Committee, but at the same 
time they would also emphasize that the basic directions and guidance in 
threats to International Border Security ought to be provided by the 
Ministry of External Affairs itself. The Committee had recommended that 
India’s defence strategy can be strengthened by preparing a back- up 
access route in times of exigencies by designing the PMGSY roads along 
the India China border areas so as to be useful for civilian as well as 
military purposes. The Committee feel that MEA has responded casually 
without bringing out specific outcomes of their request to MOD in 
accordance with the aforesaid recommendations.  It seems the Ministry 
has not pursued the matter with the Ministry of Defence in full letter and 

13 
 
spirit.  The Committee, therefore,  once again strongly recommend the 
Ministry to persuade MoD to coordinate with the respective State 
Governments along the India-China border to suitably enhance the design 
and standard specification of the PMGSY roads in that area and apprise 
the Committee as these issues need to be resolved on priority in view of 
national interest.  
 
 (Recommendation No. 19) 
 
25. There is no gainsaying that deepening economic engagement between India 
and china has been a stabilizing force in the overall India china relationship, with the 
bilateral trade expected to cross US $ 80 billion , in 2017. However, factors related to 
the extent to which the trade deficit is totally loaded against India, non-tariff barriers 
imposed by China to Indian goods and services, dumping of goods, lack of genuine 
investment profile on the part of China, security imperatives, etc are some of the 
concerns which India faces on the matter. While cumulative Chinese investments in 
India are substantially low at around US$ 5 billion, the value of Indian projects 
currently under execution by Chinese companies is estimated to be as high as US 63 
billion. So basically, China is engaged in project exports in India, without bringing its 
own capital for investment. Such a trend is not healthy for the overall growth of 
India’s economy. Therefore, the committee recommend that India should persuade 
Chinese companies to bring more investment into India, rather than merely resorting 
to project exports. In view of the national security imperatives, Chinese investment 
proposals should be examined with circumspection on a sectoral basis. The 
continuously rising trade deficit which has increased to US 51.9 billion in 2016-17 
and is at present US$ 63 billion is unsustainable and requires concrete steps to be 
taken for redressal. The Committee, therefore desire that to bridge the gap serious 
efforts should be made with China to lower trade barriers at the highest level, 
including the Ministerial Level Joint Economic Group and at the Strategic Economic 
Dialogue. 
 On another plane the Committee fail to understand as to why the Government 
has not been able to leverage with China the fact of a massive $80 billion market next 
door as to compel it to bring some degree of equity in the bilateral trade. The 

14 
 
Committee would like to have the considered views of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Finance of this vexed issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
26. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has replied:- 
 
“The widening trade deficit for India with China is a serious cause of concern, and the 
Government is making earnest efforts at the highest level with China to bridge the gap 
and to lower trade barriers. The two countries have signed the Five Year Development 
Programme for Economic and Trade Cooperation in September 2014, in order to lay 
down a medium term roadmap for promoting balanced and sustainable development 
of economic and trade relations between India and China, on the principles of equality 
and mutual benefit.  
 
 During the Informal Summit between our Prime Minister and the Chinese 
President in Wuhan in April 2018, Prime Minister highlighted our concern over the 
growing trade deficit with China. The issue was also taken up by the Trade Ministers 
of the two countries during the 11 th session of India-China Joint Group on Economic 
Relations (JEG) held in New Delhi on 26 March 2018, wherein the Chinese side 
noted India ’s concerns regarding long existing trade imbalance and requests for 
market access of Indian products and services. The Chinese side expressed its 
commitments to address these concerns.  
  
 The inter-ministerial delegations were led by Department of Commerce on 4-5 
June 2018 and 1-2 August 2018 to interact with the Chinese authorities and resolv e 
the market access issues. During the visit of the Indian delegation in June 2018, the 
Protocol for export of non-Basmati rice was finalised and it was subsequently signed 
in the presence of the two leaders at Qingdao on 9June 2018. The first consignment of 
rice of 100 tons was shipped on 28 September 2018 and 30 September 2018. 
Thereafter, in October 2018 another consignment of rice was shipped to China 
followed by 260 tons shipped in November 2018.  
 
 On 6 November 2018, a delegation led by Commerce Secretary further 
pursued market access issues in the discussion with Mr. Wang Shouwen, Vice 
Minister and Ministry of Commerce of China.  
 
 The Vice Minister, General Administration of Customs of China (GACC), led 
a six-member delegation to India on 28 November 2018, and Department of 
Commerce convened a meeting of various Ministries and associated agencies to 
discuss the various issues of market access of various products such as milk and milk 
products, agricultural products such as soyameal meal, fruits and vegetables and 
pharmaceutical products for which India has been seeking market access from China. 
A protocol on the export of fish meal and fish oil from India to China was signed on 
28 November 2018 with the GACC, paving the way for export of Indian fish meal and 
fish oil to China.  
 
 As a result of sustained efforts of the Government, some of the market access 
issues have been party resolved during the past few months such as rice, soybean 

15 
 
meal, rapeseed meal, etc. The Government, though our Embassy in Beijing, is 
regularly following up with the Chinese side to expedite pending market access issues 
and facilitating our exporters in establishing contacts in China through B2B meetings. 
 
 We have conveyed our expectation to the Chinese side that we would receive 
continuous support from them so that we can increase our bilateral trade in 
sustainable and balanced way and also in facilitating market access for Indian goods 
and services in China.” 
 
27. The Committee observed that the widening trade deficit between 
India-China was made worse by China following a policy of ‘project 
exports’ to India without bringing its own capital for investment. The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry persuade 
Chinese companies to bring in more investment to I ndia without 
jeopardizing our national security. The Committee are unhappy at the 
reply given by the Ministry without touching these issues and only mention 
of some steps being taken to promote exports with China. The Committee 
though feel that the Indo-China trade relations are thriving on an import 
of $60 Billion done by India from China as against pending market access 
for our exporters in products such as fruits and vegetables, milk and milk 
products, pharmaceutical products etc which are still pending with the 
Chinese Government. Only partial success has been achieved in resolving 
the issue of market access to these products in Chinese markets but the 
actual difference will be felt through  concrete steps by persuading Chinese 
companies to bring in more investment to India and by keeping a check on 
Chinese investment proposals  only. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
that the Ministry should take  these initiatives for a sustainable and 
balanced bilateral trade and to bridge the gap in trade deficit. The 
Committee may be apprised of a systematic plan of action formulated to 
make our exports to China rise to at least half of the $80 billion and 
outcome thereof.  
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
1.15 On a factual analysis of China-India bilateral relations, the Committee note 
that India ’s engagement with China goes back to the hoary past. The deep-rooted 
multifaceted bilateral relations, with an intrinsic element of culture and spirituality 
added, have witnessed dramatic changes over the past seven decades, especially the 
last three when the two countries have started vying for a common global economic 
space. These ties are also defined by a sense of contrast and competition. Therefore, 
the Committee are inclined to believe that as such the relationship between India and 
China cannot be seen through some conventional prism. Simultaneously, the 
Committee are also aware of the differences in the relationship which at times have 
tended to move negatively due to China ’s attitudes. India has to also factor in that 
post-modernization, China ’s economy today is five times the size of the Indian 
economy, with the consequent difference in capabilities, economic, military and 
political. It is within this asymmetry that India has to define for itself a relationship 
with China by successfully avoiding adversarial posturing. The success of India ’s 
overall foreign policy hinges on how skilfully this element of statecraft is achieved. 
 
 Despite some hostile posturing by China, which has been woven into the 
fabric of otherwise peaceful ties, the Committee have reasons to be enthused by a 
broad consensus reached by the two countries in Astana in June, 2017. As per this 
understanding, the two countries have decided that their ties should become a factor 
for regional and global stability and that the two countries shall ensure that their 
differences do not become disputes. The Committee strongly believe that if future 
relations between India and China could be governed by the spirit of this 
understanding, then nothing can stop the ties from evolving positively to the next 
stage. In today ’s world it has almost become cliché to say that friendly ties between 
these two countries are important for a just regional and global order.  
 
 In the Committee ’s opinion, the time has now arrived for the exposition of this 
understanding by the two countries by re-energizing our bilateral dialogue 
mechanisms and enhancing our communication in order to build trust and 
understanding. At the same time it should also be ensured that India’s national interest 
is fully safeguarded and our core concerns shown due respect and sensitivity. The 
Committee observe that even when the two countries have forged a Closer 
Developmental Partnership since 2014, there is an unmistakable element of hostility 
which at times find expression in a number of statements and incidents, like the 
Doklam crisis which occurred last year.  
 
 The Committee are of the opinion that an objective and in-depth assessment of 
the relationship needs to be carried out promptly by the Government so that a broad 
national consensus is evolved on how to deal effectively with China. Competition and 
cooperation are two discernible running strands in our relations with China. It is 

17 
 
important for India to segregate the collaborative elements and competitive elements 
from the relationship and then to deal with each one of them on merit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India ’s relations with China have developed in diverse areas in the recent 
years. During the visit of President Xi Jinping to India in September 2014, the two 
sides forged a ‘Closer Developmental Partnership’ that forms the core of our bilateral 
relationship. This Partnership was further strengthened during the visits of Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi to China in May 2015 and in April 2018. 
 
 In India ’s multifaceted engagement with China, in areas where we have 
commonality of views, engagement has expanded and upgraded in recent years. 
Issues where there are differences are being handled through dialogue to seek a fair, 
reasonable and mutually acceptable solution based on mutual respect and due 
sensitivity to each other’s interests, concerns and aspirations.  
  
 Both sides share a view that India-China bilateral relationship is poised to 
play a defining role in the 21st Century in Asia and in the world. They have agreed to 
work towards strengthening the Closer Developmental Partnership for mutual benefit. 
In view of the significance of the bilateral relationship, the two sides have agreed to 
continue their engagement at various levels to enhance mutual understanding and 
trust and to address outstanding issues in the spirit of showing mutual respect and 
sensitivity to each other’s interests, concerns and aspirations.  
 
 Bearing testimony to the significance of this relationship, Prime Minister 
Modi and President Xi held their first ‘Informal Summit ’ in Wuhan in April 2018. 
Informal Summit between the two leaders reflected the desire on both sides to raise 
the level of our relations. It helped the two leaders in forging a common 
understanding of the future direction of India-China relations built upon mutual 
respect for each other ’s developmental aspirations and prudent management of 
differences with mutual sensitivity. The outcomes of the Informal Summit reflect the 
importance attached by both countries to their bilateral relations and the broad 
consensus on the direction of future progress of this relationship. 
 
 Both sides agree that progress in bilateral relations should be guided by the 
consensus reached between their leaders that at a time of global uncertainty, India-
China relations are a factor of stability, and that the two countries must not allow their 
differences to become disputes. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
1.18 The Committee are pleased to note that in recent years the defence relationship 
between India and China has been substantially enhanced with the stationing of all 
three wings of the Indian Armed Forces in Beijing and with institutionalization of the 
Annual Defence and Security Dialogue. However, the Defence Cooperation remained 
suspended in 2017, presumably for a variety of reasons including differences on One 
Belt One Road and the Doklam incident and various proposals made by the 

18 
 
Government of India were not responded to by China. As per MEA, in this year i.e. 
2018, Defence Exchanges are expected to resume. The Committee hope that the 
restoration of Defence Exchanges between the two countries will lead to further 
normalization and a better business environment will be created in the bilateral ties. 
The Committee however, are concerned to note that we are still waiting for a Chinese 
proposal to come in this regard. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
defence cooperation is an effective way of ushering mutual trust and confidence 
between any two countries. Now that the Chinese side has indicated its willingness to 
resume these exchanges in 2018, the Committee urge the Government of India to take 
initiative and send their proposals for resuming Defence Exchanges to China, without 
waiting for proposals from their side. An early resumption of defence cooperation will 
be in the long term interest of our bilateral ties with China.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Following the Wuhan Informal Summit between Prime Minister Modi and 
President Xi Jinping in April 2018, defence and mil- to-mil exchanges between India 
and China have witnessed significant forward movement. In particular, visit of the 
State Councillor and Defence Minister of China Gen. Wei Fenghe to India in August 
2018 and the meeting of the Defence Secretary-level Annual Defence and Security 
Dialogue in Beijing in November 2018 have provided momentum to India-China 
defence and mil-to-mil exchanges.  
 
 During the visit of State Councillor and Defence Minister of China Gen. Wei 
Fenghe to India from 21-24 August 2018, the two sides held extensive discussions on 
bilateral defence related engagement as well as regional and international 
developments. The two sides decided to expand the engagement between their Armed 
Forces relating to training, joint exercises and other professional interaction; to work 
towards a new bilateral MoU on Defence Exchanges and Cooperation to replace the 
MoU signed in 2006; and to work towards full implementation of ongoing confidence 
building measures as well as greater interactions at the working level to ensure the 
maintenance of peace and tranquillity in border areas.  
 
 The 9th India-China Annual Defence and Security Dialogue (ADSD) was held 
in Beijing on 13 November 2018. The Dialogue was co-chaired by Defence Secretary 
Shri Sanjay Mitra and Deputy Chief of Joint Staff Department of Central Military 
Commission Lt. General Shao Yuanming. During the meeting, both sides agreed to 
enhance exchanges and interactions through reciprocal high-level visits and agreed on 
specific defence exchanges for 2019. Defence Secretary also called on State 
Councillor and Defence Minister of China, General Wei Fenghe on 15 November 
2018. 
 
 During 2018, several senior level defence and military delegations from India 
and China visited each other ’s countries. These include visits of delegations from the 
the National Defence University of China in June and from the Western Theatre 
Command of the PLA in July, and visit of an Indian delegation led by the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief of the Eastern Command to China in August. The two 
sides successfully held the joint training exercise Hand- in-Hand 2018 from 10 to 23 
December 2018 at Chengdu, China.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 

19 
 
 (Recommendation No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee have noted that India does not accord any diplomatic 
recognition to Taiwan despite the flourishing nature of exchanges between the 
countries, such as in the fields of people to people contacts, trade and personal 
exchanges. The Ministry has argued that it does not want to upend this policy of the 
Government of India in deference to China ’s sensitivity on the matter. Nonetheless, it 
treats the relationship with Taiwan as a trade relationship rather than a diplomatic one, 
and has recently acquiesced in China ’s demand to refer to Taiwan as “Chinese 
Taipei”. It comes as a matter of concern to the Committee that even when India is 
overly cautious about China ’s sensitivities while dealing with Taiwan and Tibet, 
China does not exhibit the same deference while dealing with India ’s sovereignty 
concerns, be it in the case of Arunachal Pradesh or that of the China-Pakistan 
Economic Corridor (CPEC) in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK). Given the fact of 
China’s muscular approach of late while dealing with some of the issues pertaining to 
India, it is difficult for the Committee to be content with India ’s continuing with is 
conventionally deferential foreign policy towards China. Dealing with a country like 
China essentially requires a flexible approach. The Committee strongly feel that the 
Government should contemplate using all options including its relations with Taiwan, 
as part of such an approach.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:- 
 
“The Government follows a consistent policy with respect to Taiwan. We do not 
have diplomatic relations with Taiwan. However, we do pursue engagement in 
trade, investment, scientific, culture, people- to-people and other such functional 
areas with Taiwan.” 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
8. The Committee have noted the significant inroads made by China in India ’s 
neighbourhood and their impact on India ’s outreach activities in these countries. 
Despite the Ministry ’s ambivalence on whether this reflects some sort of a deliberate 
encirclement policy of India by China, the Committee would be inclined to see it as 
nothing less than a veiled containment policy. Therefore, it is imperative that India 
should urgently take up the business of re-energizing its ties with our neighbouring 
countries. It is clear that we now have to contend with the possibility of some of the 

20 
 
countries in our neighbourhood playing the China card as leverage in their relations 
with us. In Committee’s opinion India vis-a-vis China has the unbeatable advantage of 
having always being seen as a reliable and trustworthy partner. Therefore, to deal with 
the emerging situation, India needs to bring into play adroit and pro-active diplomacy 
on the one hand while significantly augmenting the delivery and efficiency of its 
development assistance in the Region on the other. The Committee desire to be 
apprised about the steps taken by the Government towards this end and both the short 
and long term outcomes of such endeavours.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The Government accords highest priority to India ’s relations with our 
neighbouring countries. Under its 'Neighbourhood First' policy, Government is 
committed to developing friendly and mutually beneficial relations with all its 
neighbours. India is an active economic partner of its neighbours and is involved 
in various development projects in these countries. India also has extensive ties 
with neighbouring countries in education, culture, trade and investments as well 
as defence and security cooperation.  
 
 India is of the firm view that as two large countries having wider regional and 
global interests, India and China must pursue their relationships with other 
countries in a manner that does not become a source of concern for each other, 
and is based on mutual respect and sensitivity to each other ’s concerns and 
aspirations. 
 
Details of India’s engagements with major countries in the Indian Ocean Region 
are enclosed at Annexure - A.” 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
11. The Committee have noted that while China is resorting to containment of 
India in South Asia, its own vulnerabilities in South-East Asia are adequately exposed 
and could be appropriately taken into account by India. Due to historical and 
contemporary factors, China’s ties with some of the countries in the region have come 
under strain and this presents India with the right opportunity to develop counter 
pressure on China. The Committee are pleased to note that the Government is 
sensitive about the issue and has already started taking steps in the desired direction 
by significantly augmenting projects assistance to Bangladesh and by signing a first 
time LoC of $ 500 million with Vietnam for defence purchases. India has also taken a 

21 
 
firm stand on the Belt and Road Initiative. Further, the Foreign Secretary in his candid 
submission before the Committee has emphasized the need to look after our 
neighbourhood and the Indian Ocean. Therefore, the Committee would desire that 
these isolated measures notwithstanding, the Government should very proactively 
pitch for an enhanced role in South-East Asia and the Indian Ocean region as a 
foreign policy tool in the medium and long term. India ’s model of assistance as has 
been stated previously is being seen as more favourable to the interests of the 
recipient countries, but is sometimes short on timely delivery. Wherever India forays, 
it has the advantage of this positive image of trust and reliability built assiduously and 
painstakingly over decades.  
 
          Reply of the Government 
 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Acton Taken Reply, has stated:- 
 
“The Government of India under its Act East Policy has taken several proactive 
measures to engage with the countries of the Indo-Pacific region, especially in 
South-East Asia.  
 
 The Act East Policy which was upgraded in 2014 from the Look East Policy -- 
major pillar of our foreign policy since the early 1990s -- focuses on the 
extended neighbourhood in the Indo-Pacific region. The policy which was 
originally conceived as an economic initiative, has gained political, strategic and 
cultural dimensions including establishment of institutional mechanisms for 
dialogue and cooperation. The key principles and objectives of Act East Policy 
is to promote economic cooperation, cultural ties and develop strategic 
relationship with countries in the Indo-Pacific region through continuous 
engagement at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels thereby providing 
enhanced connectivity to India ’s Northeastern States with other countries in our 
neighbourhood.  
 
 India has strategic partnership with a number of countries in the region, 
including Indonesia, Vietnam, Malaysia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Australia, 
Singapore and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and forged 
close ties with all countries in the Indo-Pacific region. Apart from ASEAN, 
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and East Asia Summit (EAS), India has also 
been actively engaged in regional fora such as Bay of Bengal Initiative for 
Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Asia 
Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC) and Indian 
Ocean Rim Association (IORA), all of which contribute to the realisation of 
India’s Act East Policy.  
  
 In addition, various plans at bilateral and regional levels include steady efforts 
to develop and strengthen connectivity of India ’s Northeast with the ASEAN 
region through trade, culture, people- to-people contacts and physical 
infrastructure (road, airport, telecommunication, power, etc.). Some of the major 
ongoing projects include Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project, the 
India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway Project, Rhi-Tiddim Road Project 

22 
 
and Border Haats. A Line of Credit of US$ 1 billion has also been offered by 
our Prime Minister at the ASEAN-India Summit for enhancing physical and 
digital connectivity between India and ASEAN. 
 
 Our engagement with the countries of the South East Asia was further 
reinforced through the ASEAN-India Commemorative Summit, which was 
hosted by India on 25 January 2018 in New Delhi to mark the 25th Anniversary 
of ASEAN-India Dialogue Relations.  During the Summit, all ten States of the 
ASEAN agreed with India to further strengthen and deepen the ASEAN-India 
Strategic Partnership for mutual benefit, across the whole spectrum of political-
security, economic, socio-cultural and development cooperation, for building of 
a peaceful, harmonious, caring and sharing community in our region.  
 
Details of India’s engagements with major countries in the Indian Ocean Region 
are enclosed at Annexure - A. 
 
Details of India’s engagements with South East Asia may be seen at Annexure - 
B.” 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
1.36 India has firmly rejected the One Belt One Road (OBOR) or Belt and Road 
Initiative (BRI) Forum being proposed by China. As details are unravelling, it is 
becoming increasingly apparent that BRI has been rooted in opaqueness and it 
appears to be a vehicle for Chinese hegemonic geo-political, financial and commercial 
interest. The Committee are of the  opinion that India as a responsible member of the 
comity of nations had earnestly pointed out the fundamental flaws in BRI related to 
lack of universally recognized international norms, good governance, rule of law, 
openness, transparency and equality. Although initially India was the lone voice of 
sanity on this matter and also invited misplaced criticism, the reality of this venture is 
belatedly dawning on several recipient nations. Unlike Asian Infrastructure 
Investment Bank (AIIB), the BRICS Development Bank or Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO), OBOR is not a multilateral project. It is a series of current or 
proposed projects that will be undertaken through bilateral agreements between China 
and partner countries. There is no multinational framework nor institutional 
arrangements through which participating countries cannot only link themselves with 
China but with each other as well. To the Committee, BRI seems to be the very 
antithesis of the developmental philosophy India pursues abroad through its various 
development assistance programmes. Therefore, the Committee would go on record to 
appreciate India ’s principled stand on the matter. The Committee also feel that the 
matter ought not be deemed as closed with mere rejection of the BRI. In fact the 
Committee sense a huge opportunity for India in the global arena. It is time that India 
should accelerate its own connectivity projects under various initiatives such as ‘Act 
East Policy’, ‘Neighbourhood First Policy’, ‘Go West’ Strategy, ‘Spice Route’, etc. as 
a counter to the narrative of BRI which seems to have gained some currency in our 

23 
 
neighbourhood and elsewhere. It is high time to showcase a more just, more equitable 
and more user friendly developmental assistance model to the countries who have 
fallen for the lure of BRI without realizing its far reaching deleterious consequences. 
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that it is still open for China to propose and 
India to consider, in the light of its own interests, bilateral cooperation to improve 
connectivity between India and China. India could make use of AIIB and BRICS 
Development Bank to fund domestic and cross-border infrastructure projects which 
will promote its own economic prospects and improve connectivity with its 
immediate and extended neighbourhood.    
 
 While on this aspect, the Committee are perturbed to note that despite 
India’s strong sovereignty objections to China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), 
it is being openly trumpeted as a gift to Pakistan by China. India cannot but oppose 
the CPEC which violates India ’s territorial integrity. The Committee desire that 
China’s double standards should be exposed. It opposes any project in Arunachal 
Pradesh for which funding has been sought from international financial institutions on 
the grounds that this is disputed territory. Of late it has been opposing even Central 
projects in the State. At the same time it conducts construction activities in Indian 
territory which China itself acknowledges as “disputed”. China ’s claims, therefore, 
that its projects in Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir do not affect issues of India ’s 
territorial integrity and national sovereignty defy logic. India has been categorical in 
asserting that PoK is an integral part of India and hence any projects by a third 
country in that territory without our consent are completely unacceptable to us. The 
Committee would desire that India should take up the matter of CPEC at various 
international fora, so as to make our opposition clear and to simultaneously put 
pressure on China so as to make it realize its double-standards.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OBOR/CPEC: Our rejection of the so-called ‘China-Pakistan Economic Corridor ’ 
(CPEC) that violates our sovereignty and territorial integrity has been clearly 
articulated on a number of occasions. The international community is well aware of 
our position that the entire State of Jammu & Kashmir is an integral and alienable part 
of India. We have made it clear that no country, organization, company or individual 
should carry out any project or relevant activities in or passing through Indian 
territory, including those areas of the State of Jammu & Kashmir which are under 
illegal occupation of Pakistan, without the permission of the Government of India. 
India cannot accept a project that ignores its core concerns on sovereignty and 
territorial integrity.  
 
 Government has been consistently undertaking measures to object to China ’s 
push for an increased profile for its One Belt One Road (OBOR)/Belt Road Initiative 
(BRI) through references in resolutions at the UN and documents issued by other 
international organizations/conferences. Details of Government ’s efforts made so far 
are enclosed at Annexure - C.  
 
India’s Connectivity Projects: Expansion and strengthening of connectivity is an 
integral part of India ’s economic and diplomatic initiatives. India shares international 

24 
 
community’s desire for enhancing physical connectivity and believes that it should 
bring greater economic benefits to all in an equitable and balanced manner. We are 
working with many countries and international institutions in support of physical and 
digital connectivity in our own immediate and near neighbourhood. 
 
 Government is of firm belief that connectivity initiatives must be based on 
universally recognized international norms, follow principles of financial 
responsibility, have balanced ecological and environmental protection and 
preservation standards, and be pursued in a manner that respects sovereignty and 
territorial integrity.  
 
 Under the ‘Act East Policy ’, we are pursuing the Trilateral Highway project; 
under our ‘Neighbourhood First’ policy we are developing multimodal linkages with 
Myanmar and Bangladesh; under our ‘Go West’ strategy, we are engaged with Iran on 
Chabahar Port and with Iran and other partners in Central Asia on International North 
South Transport Corridor. BBIN initiative is aimed at enhancing logistics efficiencies 
in South Asian region. We have also acceded to the TIR Convention (International 
Road Transports Convention) in June 2017 and the Ashgabat Agreement in February 
2018. 
 
 Government is also making concerted efforts through various plans at bilateral 
and regional levels that include steady efforts to develop and strengthen connectivity 
of North East India with ASEAN region through trade, culture, people- to-people 
contacts and development of physical infrastructure (road, airport, 
telecommunication, power etc). Some of the Major projects to develop physical 
infrastructure and trade include Kaladan multi-modal Transit Transport Project, India-
Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway Proejct, Akhaura Agartala Railway Link, Rhi-
Tiddim Road Project, Border Haats etc. Connectivity with Bangladesh is also being 
strengthened through Indo-Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
2.9 The Committee understand that the uncalled for Chinese intrusion at Doklam 
was a blatant but unsuccessful attempt to unilaterally change the status quo by shifting 
the India, Bhutan, China tri-junction from Batang La to Gyomochen, thereby 
seriously affecting India’s security interests by enhancing China ’s ability to dominate 
the vulnerable Siliguri corridor. The Chinese actions were in clear violations of the 
1988 and 1998 agreements between Bhutan and China which stipulated no change in 
the status quo while boundary negotiations were still in progress. These moves were 
also in violation of the 2012 Common Understanding reached between the Special 
Representatives of India and China to determine the tri-junction boundary points only 
in consultation with the concerned third country. Doklam was not a sovereignty issue 
for India, as the disputed territory was Bhutanese, but nevertheless it was a major 
security challenge for us. The Committee would like to put on record their highest 
appreciation for the brave and timely action of our security forces which checked with 
PLA troops from continuing with their road construction activity in South Doklam. 
The Committee also pay tribute to the skilful diplomatic efforts of the Ministry due to 
which the stand-off was defused without bloodshed. The Committee are also informed 

25 
 
that during the entire period of the face-off situation, India maintained close 
consultations and coordination with Bhutan at various levels and between various 
agencies. In the Committee ’s view it attests to the enduring and time tested relations 
between India and Bhutan. The Committee would commend the Government ’s 
overall handling of the crisis as it managed to send necessary signals to China that 
India will not acquiesce in its unilateral and forceful attempts to change the status quo 
at any of India ’s territorial boundaries. However, the Committee remain concerned 
that Chinese infrastructure  built uncomfortably close to the tri-junction has not yet 
been dismantled.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Since the disengagement of Indian and Chinese border personnel in the 
Doklam area on 28 August 2017, there have been no new developments at the face-
off site and its vicinity. The status quo prevails in this area.  
 
 In our high-level exchanges with China, Government has consistently 
maintained that peace and tranquility in the India-China border areas is an important 
pre-requisite for the smooth development of bilateral relations. 
 
 Government keeps a constant watch on all developments having a bearing on 
India’s security and takes all necessary measures to safeguard it. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
2.22 From the specific deliberations held about road construction activities in 
Doklam area, the Committee conclude that it was not the first time that PLA troops 
entered the Doklam area. As the Doklam area is a disputed territory between Bhutan 
and China, PLA has been crossing the Batang La-Meruga La- Sinchela Ridge Line 
over the years and making ingress into the Bhutanese territory. But this time, the PLA 
came with the objective of changing the status quo because they came in substantial 
numbers and brought along construction equipment with them. It had also been 
informed to the Committee that Chinese had built the track across the Batang La- 
Merugla La – Sinchela Ridge Line over the last 25 years. It was because of this track 
that they were able to reach the face-off site. It is clear to the Committee that the PLA 
took advantage of the absence of the Bhutanese troops at Batangla-Meruga La – 
Sinchela Ridge Line which is Bhutan ’s sovereign territory. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that India should constantly engage with Bhutan on the subject 
of North Doklam so as to dissuade the PLA from making direct ingress into Southern 
Doklam in future to shift the tri-junction point southwards. 
 
 The Committee are concerned about the multiple reports which allude to 
Chinese presence around Doklam plateau and the statement from Chinese authorities 
about chances of similar happenings in future also, even after stand-off ended. 
Though the Government has categorically denied any Chinese activities near the 
actual face-off site, an ambivalent view has been expressed while confirming such 
activities for other areas in the Doklam plateau. Reports suggesting that significant 
road-building towards the Indian border has already occurred are also of concern to 

26 
 
the Committee. The Defence Secretary has argued that the PLA troops were within 
their own territory and there was nothing unusual about their deployment. The 
Government has categorically denied that there is any direct threat from Chinese 
troops presently. The Committee, however are of the opinion that while dealing with 
China, it is always better to have a sense of ‘healthy scepticism ’. Even if they have 
withdrawn their troops from Doklam for the time being, China ’s strategic intentions 
should not be taken casually. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Government 
not to let its vigil down in order to prevent any untoward incident in future.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 There are no road construction activities at or in the vicinity of the face off 
site. In fact, there are no new developments at the face off site and its vicinity since 
the 28 August 2017 disengagement. The status quo prevails in this area. 
 
 
 Our concern emanated from the Chinese attempts to build a road in South 
Doklam, which not only changed the prevailing status quo in that area, but also had 
serious security implications for India. This was prevented from happening through 
the disengagement process on 28 August 2017.  
 
 In particular, the following actions have been taken to prevent any untoward 
incident in future: (a) close monitoring of the PLA activities in Doklam is being 
carried out; and (b) inputs and our security concerns are being shared with the Royal 
Bhutan Army with requirement to increase surveillance of PLA activities in Doklam.  
 
 In our high-level exchanges with China, Government has consistently 
maintained that peace and tranquility in the India-China border areas is an important 
pre-requisite for the smooth development of bilateral relations. 
 
 Government keeps a constant watch on all developments having a bearing on 
India’s security and takes all necessary measures to safeguard it. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
2.25 India and China have a long history of military face-offs along the border but 
Doklam was the longest one so far after the Sumdorung Chu incident, and arguably 
the most grave in its implications. In terms of the security implications and number of 
troops involved it was on a fairly higher scale than the previous such incidents. At the 
end of 72 day stand-off it was made clear to China that India will not countenance any 
change in status quo or unilateral attempts to change the tri-junction between India, 
Bhutan and China. Our defence forces and our diplomatic corps have shown firmness 
in responding to the crisis without actually being drawn into any kind of political 
rhetoric. The Committee hope that all this must have made it clear to the Chinese not 
to attempt any such misadventure again. The Committee would strongly desire that 
India should continue to monitor the Chinese activities along the border in general 
and the area in particular very intensely, to improve the military infrastructure 
(particularly roads) and equipment (particularly high-technology gear) and to  prepare 
our security forces to respond befittingly to any contingency. 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Close monitoring of the Chinese activities along the border is being carried 
out. Government remains fully seized of the security needs of the country and is 
prepared to deal with and counter all kinds of security challenges at our borders. 
Government regularly reviews the threat perception to secure our borders and protect 
our national interest. Appropriate measures are taken from time to time to maintain 
and upgrade the country ’s defence preparedness to safeguard the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and security of India. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
2.32 It is quite heartening for the Committee to note that India and Bhutan 
maintained a very high degree of coordination and understanding during the Doklam 
stand-off, thus ensuring a mutually beneficial resolution of the issue. Otherwise also, 
on matters pertaining to the border security, there is regular communication between 
the two countries because of the unique nature of the ties between them. The 
Committee are also aware that boundary talks between China and Bhutan are also 
continuing and 24 rounds of this discussion have been held so far. While Bhutan has 
been continuously maintaining that Doklam is their territory, China has been trying to 
persuade it to barter Doklam for some territory further north. Bhutan requires all 
support and assurances from its time tested ally India for it take a firm position on this 
issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India accords highest priority to its relations with Bhutan. India and Bhutan 
maintain close consultation and coordination on different issues of mutual interest. 
Government of India is firmly committed to partner the Royal Government of Bhutan 
for its 12 th Five Year Plan (2018-2023) as per the development priorities of Bhutan, 
and to advance India-Bhutan ties across diverse areas of mutual interest.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
3.12 The Committee are informed that both India and China agree that boundary 
issue is a complex one and requires patience. Both sides are committed to resolve the 
issue through peaceful negotiations and in a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable 
manner. The sides have also underscored that this issue should not affect their 
function cooperation. The Committee have noted that there is no commonly 
delineated Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the border areas between India and China. 
As a result on account of differences in the perception of LAC, situations of border 
transgressions have arisen on the ground from time to time. Such situations could 
have been avoided if we had a common perception of the LAC. The boundary dispute 

28 
 
between the two countries is a long running one and it will take considerable time for 
solution to emerge. It is difficult for the Committee to escape the perception that 
China sees it as being in its interests to keep the dispute alive indefinitely for the 
purpose of throwing India off-balance whenever it so desires. Till such time as a 
definite solution can be negotiated, the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in the 
India-China border areas is an important pre-requisite for the smooth progression of 
bilateral relations. Because of persistent problems on boundary issues, the 
Government of India regularly takes up such transgressions along the LAC with the 
Chinese side through established mechanisms i.e. Border-Personnel Meetings, 
Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination (WMCC) and normal 
diplomatic channels. The Committee are of the strong view that while it must be 
ensured that Peoples Liberation Army (PLA) is not allowed to establish facts on the 
ground, the situation must also not be allowed to spiral out of control in case of 
transgressions. In this regard, the Committee would strongly desire that a 
comprehensive Border Engagement Agreement is concluded between the Indian 
Army and the PLA, subsuming all established mechanisms for confidence building 
including border personnel meetings, flag meetings, meetings of the Working 
Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on border affairs (WMCC) and other 
diplomatic channels. The Committee believe that there is a demonstrated need for a 
significant increase in the resources being allocated by the Government of India to the 
armed forces and other civilian and paramilitary agencies operating in the area, 
including the SSB. The Committee also gained the distinct impression that there is a 
case for improved co-ordination between the Army and the Air Force, which could 
provide better airborne early warning and control support to the forces on the ground 
when difficult situation arise, including through the deployment of unmanned aerial 
vehicles or drones. Furthermore, the Committee wish to emphasize the fact our armed 
forces and security agencies must ensure that our persuasive deterrence continues to 
be effective and constantly adapted to take into account psychological, cyber and 
other technological changes that China may and indeed will continue to confront us 
with. Both sides should also ensure that for normal functioning of ties it is 
indispensable that our border largely remains peaceful. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Border transgressions: Intended towards maintaining peace and tranquility in the 
India-China border areas in order to ensure smooth development of bilateral relations, 
India continues to work towards materializing the spirit of the following agreements 
already existing with China: (i) Agreement between the Government of the Republic 
of India and the Government of the People's Republic of China on the Maintenance of 
Peace and Tranquility Along the Line of Actual Control in the India-China Border 
Areas signed on 7 September 1993; (ii) Agreement between the Government of the 
Republic of India and the Government of the People's Republic of China on 
Confidence Building Measures in the Military Field Along the Line of Actual Control 
in the India-China Border Areas signed on 29 November 1996; (iii) Protocol between 
the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the People's 
Republic of China on Modalities for the Implementation of Confidence Building 
Measures in the Military Field Along the Line of Actual Control in the India-China 
Border Areas signed on 11 April 2005; and (iv) Agreement between the Government 
of the Republic of India and the Government of the People's Republic of China on the 

29 
 
Establishment of a Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on India-
China Border Affairs. 
 
 Government regularly takes up any transgression along the LAC with the 
Chinese side through established mechanisms including border personnel meetings, 
flag meetings, meetings of Working Mechanism for Consultation & Coordination on 
India-China Border Affairs, as well as through diplomatic channels.  
 
Security at border: The security infrastructure along the Indo-China border is 
dynamic in nature and keeps evolving as per strategic and tactical imperatives. All the 
security agencies and forces are working in coordination. 
 
 Government remains fully seized of the security needs of the country and is 
prepared to deal with and counter all kinds of security challenges at our borders. 
Government regularly reviews the threat perception to secure our borders and protect 
our national interest. Appropriate measures are taken from time to time to maintain 
and upgrade the country ’s defence preparedness to safeguard the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and security of India. 
 
 We have conveyed to the Chinese side that peace and tranquility in the India-
China border areas is an important pre-requisite for the smooth development of 
bilateral relations. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
3.32 The Committee are perturbed to note that despite a marked progress in recent 
years, the border road infrastructure on the India-China border is grossly inadequate, 
as confirmed by its own observations from its visits to sections of the border regions. 
In fact on a number of important sectors we are dependent on single access routes, a 
risky proposition in times of conflict. Worse, many roads are not built to withstand 
military traffic. Chinese had specifically taken advantage of this in the 1962 war and 
therefore we ought to draw lesions from the past on this matter. The Committee have 
been assured by the three Ministries viz. Ministry of Defence, Ministry of External 
Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs about likely improvements in the state of border 
roads. The Committee have been seized of the problems related to inadequate 
infrastructure including roads along the India-China border and desire that BRO 
works to achieve full connectivity. The main reasons attributed to the delay as stated 
by the Ministry of Defence is terrain, delay in getting environment clearances, 
inadequate infrastructure with BRO, etc. Considering the gravity of the situation, and 
given the recent Doklam crisis, the Committee are of the strong views that the 
Government should significantly enhance the level of priority it gives to border roads. 
During its visits to the India-China border areas, the Committee were shown pictures 
of infrastructure developed on both the sides of the border and major discrepancies 
were clearly visible. The Committee therefore, feel that the India side needs to do a 
lot more. It goes without saying that better connectivity clearly gives an advantage to 
China in terms of defence preparedness. The Committee, therefore, desire that for a 
strong Indian presence on the border, better infrastructure should be created for 
habitation and transportation so that our armed forces may not feel any difficulty in 

30 
 
accommodation, logistics, movement and infrastructure as well as storage and 
movement of arms and ammunition in emergency. 
 
 The Committee have a distinct feeling that BRO as an organization with 
antiquated rules of delegation needs a thorough overhaul in the changed 
circumstances. The Committee were informed that the Border Roads Organization 
(BRO) has been extensively re-organized, that the responsibilities of BRO have been 
shifted from the Ministry of Road Transport to the Ministry of Defence, and that work 
of border roads has been taken up with urgency. The Committee recommend that 
Government should make concerted efforts to improve border road infrastructure 
along the India-China border and a status note on the progress achieved should be 
furnished to the Committee at the action-taken stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Infrastructure in border areas is an essential pre-requisite to support our 
defences, facilitating rapid mobilization, application of combat potential and 
sustenance of forces. It is one of the key imperatives of operational preparedness. Due 
impetus to upgradation and development of infrastructure along India-China borders 
is being given, in particular, with a number of initiatives taken to focus the efforts of 
Border Roads Organization (BRO) towards timely development of road infrastructure 
as per operational priorities.  
 
 To support our defence preparedness to meet any contingency, development of 
requisite infrastructure has been planned to support operational and logistic 
requirements. This includes construction of roads along border areas, strategic railway 
lines and tunnels, to ensure all weather connectivity. Details of various actions, 
including policy measures, which have been undertaken by the Government to 
augment infrastructure development by BRO are as follows: 
 
(a) Government has taken various initiatives to improve the road infrastructure 
development process. The initiatives include enhanced powers to BRO to expedite 
sanctioning of various jobs and hire/procure additional resources, increased powers 
for procurement of indigenous/ex-import equipment and mechanisms to resolve 
relevant issues with State Governments. 
 
(b) To increase their functional capability, BRO has been instructed to incorporate 
latest technology for construction of roads over permafrost regions/difficult areas to 
enable all weather connectivity to forward areas. To expedite forward connectivity 
towards India-China border, BRO resources are being re-deployed to these forward 
areas and a number of roads in the hinterland have been handed over to other 
agencies.  
 
(c) Procurement of modern equipment for BRO has been planned to overcome terrain 
difficulties in areas where BRO is deployed.  
 
(d) Further, outsourcing of roads to reputed contractors/firms, execution of road 
projects in Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode has also been 
incorporated, as a change in road construction philosophy of BRO.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 

31 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
3.33 The Committee are further perturbed to note that only some of the border 
posts are connected by all weather roads. This sorry situation has accumulated over 
the years. The Home Secretary during oral deposition has admitted that our state of 
infrastructure should have been much better. Now there are concerned efforts to 
address this infrastructure deficit. Not all the roads sanctioned by the Government 
have become operational. It is expected that the remaining roads will be operational 
by the year 2020. The Committee strongly desire the government to take timely steps 
to complete the remaining roads without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has taken various measures to improve infrastructure along India-
China border (please also see response to Recommendation No. 14). Government had 
approved construction of 25 roads measuring 751.58 km under Indo-China Border 
Road Phase (ICBR-I) for providing better connectivity to ITBP Border Outposts. Out 
of 25 roads, 14 roads have been completed and connectivity has been established on 7 
additional roads. The project is expected to be completed by 2020. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
3.34 During their Study Tour to Guwahati, Tawang, and Gangtok in May 2018, the 
Committee had observed that some roads for local connectivity under Pradhan Mantri 
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) are being constructed and maintained by the State 
Governments in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim. At present, these roads are 
inadequate for military purposes but they can definitely be envisaged as a back-up 
access route in times of exigencies. It is imperative for national security that we 
should not be dependent on single point access and for that we should develop a 
network of peripheral roads along the border. In the Committee ’s opinion roads under 
the PMGSY scheme are best suited for this purpose provided they can be adapted to 
serve national security interests. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of Defence should coordinate with the respective State Governments along 
the India-China border to suitably enhance the design and standard specifications of 
the PMGSY roads in the area.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Defence has been requested to take action in this regard.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 

32 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 24 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
4.7 The Committee have noted that despite fundamental differences on issues such 
as the expansion of UN Security Council, global disarmament, India ’s membership in 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), etc., 
the two countries have shown some convergence of interests by cooperating on 
various issues in the multilateral arena. Some of the areas of this bilateral convergence 
and coordination are the global environment, sustainable development, global health 
issues, human rights, the global trading system as well as economic and financial 
issues. Though the Committee broadly welcome these indications of international 
cooperation between India and China, they have some reservations when it comes to 
having a common standing on issues such as climate change and human rights, where 
the two countries ’ records and interests differ. When it comes to climate change 
negotiations, India and China have different standing points due to their disparate 
consumption and emission profiles. India ’s per capita carbon dioxide emission is 
significantly lower than that of China and as of today India ’s voice on the issue is 
likely to find greater resonance within the developing block. It would be therefore, 
advisable for India to take an appropriate independent stand on the climate 
negotiations. Similarly, the Committee see no common ground for India, as a 
democracy, coordinating its efforts at the United Nations Human Rights Council with 
China. The Ministry has informed that both countries are of the view that UNHRC 
should be a platform for promoting human rights through dialogue and cooperation 
and not finger-pointing. The Committee are of the opinion that if China is constantly 
blocking India’s request to list Masood Azhar as a terrorist under UNSC Resolution 
1267, we also need not hesitate to point out China ’s poor track record at UNHRC in 
respecting human rights in Tibet, Xinjiang and with respect to other dissenters in its 
territory. Making a common cause with China on the issue, given its record vis-a-vis 
the human rights of its citizens appears to be contrary to our stated stand on human 
rights. 
 
 However, it is important that cooperation in other fields where the two 
countries have convergence of views should continue unhindered. It is important to 
promote mutually beneficial cooperation between the two countries and the 
Committee are of the opinion that there is ample scope for cooperation in cultural 
fields such as language, philosophy, Confucianism, Buddhism, tourism, etc. On the 
domestic front in each case the two countries face the same set of challenges whose 
scale is also comparable. These challenges relate to water scarcity, education, 
women’s issue, rural and urban development, urbanization, poverty, unemployment, 
environmental issues, etc. There is also a lot of scope for cooperation in the field of 
cleaning of rivers, agriculture, including dairying and fisheries. The Committee would 
strongly desire that synergies in the above fields are energetically explored as a 
measure of deepening India-China relations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 

33 
 
Climate Change Negotiations: While there are differences in consumption and 
emission profiles between India and China, it may be noted that India and China are 
both part of three major groups in the climate change negotiations i.e. the G-77 & 
China, BASIC, and Like Minded Developing Countries (LMDC). India's position in 
these negotiations is often closer to the LMDC group position.  It may also be noted that 
the above referred groups may have a common position on some issues, while 
individual countries / sub-groups can take independent positions on other issues. 
China’s posture on some issues like equity and differentiation are similar to ours. 
Moreover, given the diversity of the interests within the G-77 & China, it is not always 
possible for it to have a common position on all issues. In the immediate future, the 
spirit of cooperation between India and China on Climate Change related negotiations is 
expected to continue. It may also be noted that technical negotiations are led by the 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) and this Ministry 
supports MoEF&CC as required. 
 
Human Rights:  It may be mentioned that at the United Nations Human Rights 
Council (UNHRC) in Geneva, India and China have been engaging with each other 
on issues before the Council. While there may be some divergences on specific issues, 
the two countries have been of the view that UNHRC should be a platform for 
promoting human rights through ‘dialogue and cooperation’ and not ‘finger-pointing.’ 
There is a common understanding against intrusive resolutions etc. at such forum that 
tend to target countries. Both countries have sought more focus on the right to 
development and socio-economic rights. 
 
 In their approach towards Universal Periodic Review (UPR), both the 
countries view the UPR as a mechanism for engaging constructively with States on 
their human rights records. China during the review of the Third Cycle of India ’s 
UPR in June 2017 appreciated India ’s initiatives for promotion and protection of 
human rights in the society. It made three recommendations on issues of promoting 
sustainable economic and social development for the enjoyment of human rights by 
its people; on combating violence against women and measures for protecting rights 
of persons with disabilities, the elderly and other vulnerable group. India accepted all 
the recommendations given by China. During the adoption of India’s UPR outcome in 
September 2017, China was the first country to take the floor and again spoke in 
positive terms. When China presented its Third Cycle of UPR in November 2018, 
India noted various measures undertaken by China in ensuring housing, public health 
services and other specific measures targeting women, children, elderly and persons 
with disabilities. It also recommended China to ensure well-being of all its people 
based on inclusive development, take measures for improving women ’s development 
including participation of women in public affairs, improve the social security system 
for all. 
 
India-China cooperation in culture and on common developmental challenges: 
With a view to build greater synergies in the cultural and people- to-people ties 
between the two countries, India and China have decided to establish a High Level 
Mechanism on Cultural and People- to-People Exchanges. The first meeting of this 
High Level Mechanism was held on 21 December 2018 in New Delhi. The meeting, 
which was co-chaired by the External Affairs Minister of India and the State 
Councillor and Minister of Foreign Affairs of China, brought together all the existing 
bilateral cultural and people- to-people engagements between India and China under 

34 
 
one umbrella and, thus, added more substance and purpose to the efforts on both sides 
to promote greater cultural and people-to-people echanges between them.  
 
 Further, as two major countries and emerging economies, India and China, 
given their vast developmental experiences and national capacities, see utility in 
joining hands to take lead in offering innovative and sustainable solutions to 
challenges faced by humankind in the 21st century. These include combating 
diseases, coordinating action for disaster risk reduction and mitigation, addressing 
climate change and ushering digital empowerment. The two sides have agreed to pool 
together their expertise and resources in these areas and create a global network 
dedicated to these challenges for the larger benefit of humanity. Such cooperation was 
an important area of discussion between Prime Minister and President Xi Jinping 
during their Informal Summit in Wuhan in April 2018.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
3.11 India and China have a protracted boundary dispute where China is in illegal 
occupation of several thousand square kilometres of Indian territory. China disputes 
the international boundary between India and China. In the eastern sector, China 
disputes the legality of the McMahon Line by asserting that it was drawn by the 
imperialist British power (though this objection has not prevented it from accepting 
the same “imperialist” McMahon Line as its border with Myanmar) and China claims 
approximately 90,000 sq. Km. Of India territory in the State of Arunachal Pradesh as 
South Tibet. China remains in illegal occupation of 38,000 sq. Km. in the State of 
Jammu & Kashmir. It has also acquired illegally 5180 square kilometres of territory 
from Pakistan in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir and further claims about 2,000 square 
kilometres in the States of Himachal Pradesh and Uttrakhand. China also disputes 
alignment of its boundary with India in the Sikkim sector. The fact that Arunachal 
Pradesh is an integral and inalienable part of India has been clearly conveyed to the 
Chinese side on several occasions including at the highest level. From time to time, 
the issue of inaccurate depiction of India ’s boundaries is being taken up with 
concerned foreign country. The Committee view this matter very seriously and urge 
that India ’s diplomatic energies be channelled to ensure that instances related to 
inaccurate depictions of India ’s boundaries are taken up forcefully and with urgency 
with the respective countries. Though negotiations on the boundary dispute are going 
on simultaneously with China, it must also be ensured that such baseless claims which 
are devoid of any amount of credibility or justification are fully exposed before the 
international community.  
 
 With regard to the land boundary alignment in Sikkim, the Committee view it 
to be a clear case of deliberate misrepresentation by China. First, in 2006 they asked 
for working out the alignment there as an early harvest and later repudiated it by 
arguing that the alignment in the Sikkim sector has already been decided. The 
Committee desire that Indian position should remain firm on the ground that the 1890 
Anglo-Chinese Convention can at best provide the ‘basis of alignment ’ of the 
boundary but not dictate the actual demarcation. They also desire that India should 
make it amply clear to China that India will adhere to the 2012 Understanding reached 
by the Special Representatives that the tri-junction boundary points between India-
China and third countries will be finalized in consultation with the concerned 
countries only. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Boundary Dispute: India and China have appointed a Special Representative (SR) 
each to explore the framework for a boundary settlement from the political 
perspective of the overall bilateral relationship. Twenty-one meetings of the SRs have 
been held so far. The last meeting was held in Chengdu (China) on 24 November 
2018.  

37 
 
 
 The two sides have agreed on a three-stage process for the resolution of the 
boundary question. The first stage was completed with the signing of the “Agreement 
on the Political Parameters and Guiding Principles for the Settlement of the India-
China Boundary Question ” in April 2005. On the basis of these political parameters 
and guiding principles, in the second stage, the two Special Representatives, have 
initiated discussion to reach a consensus on an “Agreed Framework” of the boundary 
settlement. 
 
 With regard to the India-China boundary in the Sikkim sector, there are still 
steps to be covered before the boundary is finalized. Further, as per the agreement 
reached between the Governments of India and China in 2012 the tri-junction 
boundary points between India, China and third countries is to be finalized in 
consultation with the concerned countries. Since 2012, no discussion has been held on 
the tri-junction with Bhutan. Nonetheless, the Common Understanding of 2012 
provided a strong basis for India to object to China’s attempts to change the status quo 
with regard to the tri-junction between India, China and Bhutan.  
 
 It is part of the mandate of our Special Representatives who are engaged in 
discussions to find a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable settlement of the 
boundary question, including in the Sikkim sector. Further discussions regarding 
finalization of the boundary have been taking place under the Special Representatives 
framework. India has consistently taken a positive approach to the settlement of its 
own boundary with China, along with the associated issue of the tri-junctions. 
 
Wrongful depiction of Indian maps: From time to time, we come across instances 
of inaccurate depiction of India’s external boundaries in foreign maps. Government of 
India strongly takes up such inaccurate depiction of India ’s external boundaries with 
concerned foreign governments. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
4.15 There is no gainsaying that deepening economic engagement between India 
and china has been a stabilizing force in the overall India china relationship, with the 
bilateral trade expected to cross US $ 80 billion , in 2017. However, factors related to 
the extent to which the trade deficit is totally loaded against India, non-tariff barriers 
imposed by China to Indian goods and services, dumping of goods, lack of genuine 
investment profile on the part of China, security imperatives, etc are some of the 
concerns which India faces on the matter. While cumulative Chinese investments in 
India are substantially low at around US$ 5 billion, the value of Indian projects 
currently under execution by Chinese companies is estimated to be as high as US 63 
billion. So basically, China is engaged in project exports in India, without bringing its 
own capital for investment. Such a trend is not healthy for the overall growth of 
India’s economy. Therefore, the committee recommend that India should persuade 
Chinese companies to bring more investment into India, rather than merely resorting 
to project exports. In view of the national security imperatives, Chinese investment 
proposals should be examined with circumspection on a sectoral basis. The 
continuously rising trade deficit which has increased to US 51.9 billion in 2016-17 
and is at present US$ 63 billion is unsustainable and requires concrete steps to be 

38 
 
taken for redressal. The Committee, therefore desire that to bridge the gap serious 
efforts should be made with China to lower trade barriers at the highest level, 
including the Ministerial Level Joint Economic Group and at the Strategic Economic 
Dialogue. 
 
 On another plane the Committee fail to understand as to why the Government 
has not been able to leverage with China the fact of a massive $80 billion market next 
door as to compel it to bring some degree of equity in the bilateral trade. The 
Committee would like to have the considered views of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Finance of this vexed issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Widening trade deficit for India with China is a serious cause of concern, and 
the Government is making earnest efforts at the highest level with China to bridge the 
gap and to lower trade barriers. The two countries have signed the Five Year 
Development Programme for Economic and Trade Cooperation in September 2014, in 
order to lay down a medium term roadmap for promoting balanced and sustainable 
development of economic and trade relations between India and China, on the 
principles of equality and mutual benefit.  
 
 During the Informal Summit between our Prime Minister and the Chinese 
President in Wuhan in April 2018, Prime Minister highlighted our concern over the 
growing trade deficit with China. The issue was also taken up by the Trade Ministers 
of the two countries during the 11 th session of India-China Joint Group on Economic 
Relations (JEG) held in New Delhi on 26 March 2018, wherein the Chinese side 
noted India ’s concerns regarding long existing trade imbalance and requests for 
market access of Indian products and services. The Chinese side expressed its 
commitments to address these concerns.  
  
 The inter-ministerial delegations were led by Department of Commerce on 4-5 
June 2018 and 1-2 August 2018 to interact with the Chinese authorities and resolve 
the market access issues. During the visit of the Indian delegation in June 2018, the 
Protocol for export of non-Basmati rice was finalised and it was subsequently signed 
in the presence of the two leaders at Qingdao on 9June 2018. The first consignment of 
rice of 100 tons was shipped on 28 September 2018 and 30 September 2018. 
Thereafter, in October 2018 another consignment of rice was shipped to China 
followed by 260 tons shipped in November 2018.  
 
 On 6 November 2018, a delegation led by Commerce Secretary further 
pursued market access issues in the discussion with Mr. Wang Shouwen, Vice 
Minister, Ministry of Commerce of China.  
 
 The Vice Minister, General Administration of Customs of China (GACC), led 
a six-member delegation to India on 28 November 2018, and Department of 
Commerce convened a meeting of various Ministries and associated agencies to 
discuss the various issues of market access of various products such as milk and milk 
products, agricultural products such as soyameal meal, fruits and vegetables and 
pharmaceutical products for which India has been seeking market access from China. 
A protocol on the export of fish meal and fish oil from India to China was signed on 

39 
 
28 November 2018 with the GACC, paving the way for export of Indian fish meal and 
fish oil to China.  
 
 As a result of sustained efforts of the Government, some of the market access 
issues have been party resolved during the past few months such as rice, soybean 
meal, rapeseed meal, etc. The Government, though our Embassy in Beijing, is 
regularly following up with the Chinese side to expedite pending market access issues 
and facilitating our exporters in establishing contacts in China through B2B meetings. 
 
 We have conveyed our expectation to the Chinese side that we would receive 
continuous support from them so that we can increase our bilateral trade in 
sustainable and balanced way and also in facilitating market access for Indian goods 
and services in China. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please refer to Para 27 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
3.24 The Special Representative (SR) mechanism between the two countries is a 
viable way to pursue the resolution of boundary dispute. The Committee are aware 
that it is a three stage process and the first stage was already over with the signing of 
an “Agreement on the Political Parameters and Guiding Principles on the settlement 
of the India-China Boundary Question ” in April, 2005. One of the guiding principles 
clearly established that settled populations will not be disturbed and the Committee 
are perturbed to note that by constantly claiming parts of Arunachal Pradesh, which 
are populated by lakhs of Indian citizens, China is not adhering to this guiding 
principle. Similarly, Points Nos. 12 and 13 of the written Common Understanding 
reached between the SRs in December 2012 were clearly violated by China during the 
recent Doklam stand-off. Though, the Committee hold high hopes on the SR process, 
they are equally wary of the inconsistencies displayed by China from time to time. In 
so many respects the track record of China does not inspire confidence in the 
committee. The Committee would therefore, strongly desire that India should prevail 
upon China to ensure that application of the principles arrived at are given due respect 
and adhered to and that sanctity of the process should be scrupulously maintained by 
China. The Committee desire to be briefed regularly on the progress, if any, being 
made in pursuing bilateral negotiations to conclusively define the border. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In 2003, India and China agreed to appoint a Special Representative (SR) each 
to explore from the political perspective of the overall bilateral relationship the 
framework for a boundary settlement. There have been twenty-one meetings of the 
Special Representatives so far, the last in Chengdu on 24 November 2018. An 
“Agreement on the Political Parameters and Guiding Principles for the Settlement of 
the India-China Boundary Question” was signed between India and China on 11 April 
2005. At present the two Special Representatives are exploring the framework for a 
settlement covering all sectors of the boundary. The two sides are committed to 
seeking a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable solution to the boundary question 
through dialogue and peaceful negotiations. The two sides agree that peace and 
tranquility in the border areas is an important pre-requisite for the smooth 
development of India-China relations. 
 The 21st round of Special Representatives ’ talks was held between the Special 
Representatives of India and China on the Boundary Question, Shri Ajit Doval, 
National Security Advisor of India and H.E. Mr. Wang Yi, State Councillor and 
Minister of Foreign Affairs of China, in Chengdu on 24 November 2018. The talks 
were constructive and forward looking, and focussed on taking forward the India-
China Closer Developmental Partnership in pursuance of the guidance provided by 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping at their Informal Summit at 
Wuhan in April 2018. 
 The Special Representatives undertook a comprehensive review of earlier 
rounds of talks under the SR mechanism. Recalling the strategic guidance and support 
to their work provided by the leaders at the Wuhan Summit, the Special 
Representatives resolved to intensify their efforts to achieve a fair, reasonable and 

41 
 
mutually acceptable solution to the India-China boundary question at an early date. 
They underlined the importance of approaching the boundary question from the 
strategic perspective of India-China relations and agreed that an early settlement of 
the boundary question serves the fundamental interests of both countries. 
 The Special Representatives agreed that pending the final resolution of the 
boundary question, it is important to maintain peace and tranquility in the border areas 
and to ensure that the boundary question does not affect the overall development of 
the bilateral relationship. In this context, they noted the mature handling of issues 
relating to the India-China border areas since the Wuhan Summit. 
 Acknowledging the importance of predictability in border management, and in 
that context, underscoring the importance of maintaining strategic communication at 
all levels, the Special Representatives held discussions on various confidence building 
measures to promote exchanges and communication between their border personnel. 
They directed the bilateral Working Mechanism on Consultation & Coordination for 
Border Affairs to work out further details in this regard. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
3.35 The Committee also note that a lot of border infrastructure projects have been 
delayed due to want of environmental clearance. In some of the cases the delay was 
unconsciously long, given the fact that India ’s national security is at stake at most 
places on India-China border. It has now been informed that the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest has over the last 2-3 years significantly streamlined their 
processes. With this development, the Committee are hopeful of expeditious 
clearances leading to progress in various border infrastructure projects. The 
Committee strongly desire that the issue of environmental clearance involving 
sensitive border infrastructure should be suitably taken up with the respective state 
and central authorities so as to reconcile satisfactorily environmental imperatives with 
national security requirements. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change has accorded general 
approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion of 
forest land for construction and widening of border roads in the areas falling within 
100 kms aerial distance from the Line of Actual Control (LAC). Besides this, 
Empowered Committee has also been constituted by the States of Sikkim, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura to resolve issues related 
to land acquisition, forest/wild clearance, allotment of quarries etc.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2018] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
11 February, 2019 
22 Magha 1940 (Saka) 
                    
 
 
 
 
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
Chairperson, 
                 Committee on External Affairs 
 

42 
 
ANNEXURE - A 
 
Details of India’s engagements with countries in the neighbourhood 
 
1. Nepal  
 
 India ’s ties with Nepal are unique, characterized by open border, close 
historical and cultural links, people- to-people contacts, and wide ranging economic 
and development linkages. India ’s partnership with Nepal has been expanding 
through, inter-alia, expediting implementation of GoI-assisted connectivity and 
economic projects such as development of cross-border power transmission lines, 
construction of cross-border rail links, construction of roads infrastructure in Nepal, 
development of Integrated Check Posts along the India-Nepal border, hydro-power 
projects, and initiatives to enhance people to people contacts, training and capacity 
building. Further, under the concessional Lines- of-Credit of total amount US $1.65 
billion extended to the Government of Nepal, a number of infrastructure projects are 
under implementation in Nepal.  
 
 Several bilateral mechanisms are in place between India and Nepal in the areas 
of trade, commerce, power, water resources, connectivity and development 
cooperation to expand India ’s overall engagement with Nepal and to strengthen 
India’s development cooperation with Nepal. Several new initiatives in areas such as 
inland waterway connectivity, enhanced partnership in agriculture, economic 
connectivity, cross-border rail links have been taken to deepen India ’s partnership 
with Nepal.  
 
2.  Bhutan  
 
 India and Bhutan enjoy special ties of friendship and cooperation underpinned 
by utmost trust, goodwill and mutual understanding. India is Bhutan ’s largest 
development partner. India ’s development assistance to Bhutan ’s Five Year Plans 
(FYPs) since 1961 encompasses diverse areas that positively impact the socio-
economic development in Bhutan. Government of India had committed development 
assistance package of INR 4500 Cr and economic stimulus assistance of INR 500 Cr 
to Bhutan for its XI FYP (2013-18) out of which INR 4942 Cr has already been 
disbursed for major projects in diverse sectors and other Small Development Projects. 
The Government of India is committed to partnering Bhutan ’s for its XII FYP (2018-
2023) as per Bhutan’s development priorities.  
 
 The development assistance to Bhutan FYPs is in addition to the assistance 
extended for the construction of Hydro-Electric Projects (HEPs) in Bhutan. So far, 
Government of India has constructed three Hydroelectric Projects (HEPs) in Bhutan 
totalling 1416 MW (336 MW Chukha HEP, 60 MW Kurichhu HEP and 1020 MW 
Tala HEP), which are operational and exporting surplus power to India. Currently, 
there are three HEPs viz. 1200 MW Punatsangchhu-I, 1020 MW Punatsangchhu-II 
and 720 MW Mangdechhu under implementation.  
 
 Government of India ’s development cooperation programme with Nepal and 
Bhutan are based on the priorities of the people and governments of Nepal and 
Bhutan. India's engagement with Nepal and Bhutan stand firmly on its own. India's 

43 
 
development assistance to Nepal and Bhutan has, apart from generating goodwill for 
India among people of the two countries, strengthened the economic linkages with the 
two countries. Government of India will continue to undertake development projects 
and extend development assistance in consultations with Nepal and Bhutan and 
deepen the bilateral partnership across diverse sectors for mutual benefit. 
 
3. Bangladesh  
 
 Development cooperation is an important aspect of India-Bangladesh 
relations. From modest beginnings in the years after Bangladesh's liberation, India's 
development cooperation with Bangladesh has grown in size and coverage. 
Development partnership has been extended to Bangladesh considering creation of 
strategic long-term assets and connectivity with our North-Eastern Region as well as 
keeping in mind the goal of creating goodwill in Bangladesh through implementation 
of Small Developmental Projects (SDPs) in the short term. It may be noted that 
Bangladesh has not subscribed to Belt and Road Initiative of China, so far. 
 
 Development partnership between India and Bangladesh consists of three 
main elements: loans extended to Bangladesh in the form of Lines of Credit (LoCs); 
cooperation extended through grants; and capacity building in Bangladesh. 
 
 Government of India (GOI) has extended four Lines of Credit (LOC) (of US$ 
862 million in 2011, US$ 2 billion in 2015, US$ 4.50 billion in 2017 and US$ 500 
million in 2017) total amounting to US$ 7.862 billion, to fund various infrastructure 
development projects in Bangladesh. This amount of US$ 7.862 billion is the highest 
amount offered to any single country under GOI’s LOC program.  
 
 GOI is also undertaking various development projects under Ministry of 
External Affairs ’ ‘Aid to Bangladesh ’ budget. These projects are chosen keeping in 
mind geographical spread, socio-economic benefits and priorities of the Government 
of Bangladesh. Development projects funded through grants of the Government of 
India have been implemented in sectors such as education, IT, health, water, disaster 
management, etc.  
 
 In the last five years, GOI has completed a total of 36 grant projects worth 
around USD 15.1 million. Currently 44 projects are under implementation with an 
outlay of around USD 179.4 million. 
 
 India offers training slots to Bangladesh under the Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme and scholarships for meritorious students 
through the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR).Capacity building support 
to Bangladesh is also being extended in different areas including police, 
administration, customs, narcotics, railways and judiciary.  
 
4.  Myanmar  
 Myanmar shares over 1600 kms of border with India, and stands at the 
junction of our ‘Act East ’ and ‘Neighbourhood First ’ policies. Development 
cooperation is an important aspect of India-Myanmar relations.  
 

44 
 
 Development cooperation focuses on demand-driven projects and expands 
across sectors such as connectivity infrastructure, capacity building, human resource 
development, setting-up of institutions, etc. India has provided assistance amounting 
to more than $1.75 billion, of which projects worth nearly $1 billion are completely 
grant-funded, and others included concessional financing. As the bulk of our 
development assistance is under the 'Grant- in-Aid' window, it inherently avoids the 
creation of unsustainable financial burdens on the host country. 
 
 A line of credit from India worth $500 million is available to the Government 
of Myanmar for undertaking various projects. Projects related to telecommunication 
networks, railways rolling stock and equipment and agricultural machinery have 
already been taken up under this line and more projects are under consideration.  
 
 Thus, our projects spreading across sectors such as roads and railways, 
telecommunication, education and agricultural sectors aim to create long-term, 
sustainable and relevant institutions for capacity building and human resource 
development in these critical areas.  
 
 Major Infrastructure projects include Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport 
Project, 69 Bridges, Rih-Tedim Road etc. 
 
 In the area of capacity building, two flagship projects that India has been 
involved in are the Myanmar Institute of Information and Technology (MIIT) in 
Mandalay, being developed at a cost of $24 million, which is one of the most sought 
after institutes of higher learning in IT in Myanmar. India is also contributing to skill 
and human resource development by helping set up two research centers in Yezin 
Agricultural University - the Advanced Centre for Agricultural Research and 
Education (ACARE) in Nay Pyi Taw with an outlay of $9 million, and a Rice Bio-
Park in Nay Pyi Taw.  
 
 In the cultural field, India has contributed to the spectacular restoration of the 
Ananda pagoda in Bagan and will shortly begin undertaking an extensive project on 
the restoration and conservation of as many as 92 structures that had been damaged 
following the earthquake in Bagan in 2016. In the health-care field, India has 
undertaken projects to upgrade facilities in the Yangon Children's Hospital, the Sittwe 
General Hospital and the Monywa General Hospital. 
 
 In addition, whenever Myanmar has had to face natural calamities, such as 
Cyclone Nargis in 2008, the earthquake in Shan State in 2010 and Cyclone Komen in 
2015, India has been among the first to undertake humanitarian relief operations. 
 
5. &6. Sri Lanka and Maldives 
 
 The Government has taken steps to revitalise our traditional ties with Sri 
Lanka and the Maldives. We have a multifaceted and comprehensive cooperation; 
with frequent high-level engagements and wide-ranging development cooperation 
with these countries. Our engagement focuses on greater connectivity, cooperation in 
all domains and broader people- to-people contacts. Government continues to accord 
highest priority to India ’s relations with these important countries in our 
neighbourhood. In the recent years, India has become an active development partner 

45 
 
of Sri Lanka and the Maldives and is undertaking various projects in these countries.  
Sri Lanka is one of the major recipients of development assistance given by the 
Government of India. Since 2005, the total GoI commitment is INR 3005 crore as 
grant assistance and INR 13,149 crore under Line of Credit.   
 
 Government is aware of Chinese activities in Sri Lanka and the Maldives. 
Chinese involvement in projects such as power plants, ports, roads, railways, bridges 
etc. in Sri Lanka and the Maldives are known. Government keeps a constant watch on 
all developments related to these Chinese projects and takes all necessary measures to 
safeguard our interests.  
 
 There have been concerns from the very beginning regarding economic 
viability of some of the projects funded by China in Sri Lanka and the Maldives. We 
have been sharing these concerns strongly with the Governments of these countries. 
Subsequent events have given credence to these concerns. The restructuring of the 
Hambantota Port in Sri Lanka, for example, underlines the need for thorough cost-
benefit analysis of the projects at the preliminary stage itself. Substantial investments 
by China in projects which are otherwise unviable raise questions and concerns about 
the actual objectives that these projects aim to achieve. We continue to articulate our 
position to the Governments of Sri Lanka and the Maldives that economic projects 
and initiatives must follow principles of financial responsibility to avoid projects that 
would create unsustainable debt burden for communities. 
 
7. Afghanistan  
 
 India and Afghanistan have a strong relationship based on historical and 
cultural links. In recent past, India-Afghanistan relations have been further 
strengthened by the Strategic Partnership Agreement (SPA) signed between the two 
countries in 2011. SPA between the two sides, inter alia, provides for assistance to 
help rebuild Afghanistan's infrastructure and institutions, education and technical 
assistance to re-build indigenous Afghan capacity in different areas, encouraging 
investment in Afghanistan's natural resources, providing duty free access to the Indian 
market for Afghanistan's exports support for an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned, broad-
based and inclusive process of peace and reconciliation, and advocating the need for a 
sustained and long-term commitment to Afghanistan by the international community.  
 
 India has played a significant role in the reconstruction and rehabilitation 
process in Afghanistan. India's extensive developmental assistance programme, which 
now stands at around US$ 2 billion, is a strong signal of its abiding commitment to 
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan. This makes India one of the leading 
donor nations to Afghanistan and by far the largest donor in the region. Government 
of India has taken on a number of medium and large infrastructure projects in its 
assistance programme in Afghanistan.  Some of these include: construction of a 218 
km road from Zaranj to Delaram for facilitating movement of goods and services to 
the Iranian border; construction of 220kV DC transmission line from Pul-e-Khumri to 
Kabul and a 220/110/20 kV sub-station at Chimtala; upgrading of telephone 
exchanges in 11 provinces; expansion of national TV network by providing an uplink 
from Kabul and downlinks in all 34 provincial capitals for greater integration of the 
country.   
 

46 
 
 India believes that sustainable development of Afghanistan requires long-term 
investment in Afghanistan to help it exploit its natural resource wealth. India is, thus, 
at the forefront in promoting investment in Afghanistan. A consortium of public and 
private Indian companies has been formed to make one of the biggest investments in 
the country's mining sector in the Hajigak iron ore reserves. In an effort towards 
capacity building in mining area, a Mines Institute is proposed to be established in 
Kabul with GoI technical & financial support.   
 
 Some of the ongoing/completed Indian projects in Afghanistan include: new 
Afghan Parliament building (inaugurated in December 2015); Afghan-India 
Friendship Dam (Salma Dam); Doshi&Charikar substations (both completed); 
Restoration of Store Place; establishment of new Diagnostic Centre (completed) & 
construction of Decentralized Waste Water Treatment System at Indira Gandhi 
Institute of Child Health (IGICH); establishment of Afghan National Agriculture 
Science & Technology University, Kandahar; commitment to supply 1.1 million MT 
of wheat to Afghanistan (711,882 MT of wheat or equivalent in cash already 
delivered at a cost of Rs. 989.45 crore);  commitment to contribute US$ 1 million 
annually over next five years to Afghan Red Crescent Society for treatment of Afghan 
children with Congenital Heart Disease (214 children have already been treated under 
this aid till mid-March 2016); grant- in-aid of US$ 1 million to Habibia High School 
over next 10 years; and grant- in-aid of US$ 1 million to IGICH over next 5 years. 
India has also committed to contribute substantially in improving transportation 
system in Kabul and has decided to donate 1000 buses to Afghanistan along with 
upgradation related infrastructure.   
 
 A significant addition to India's development portfolio in Afghanistan is the 
Small Development Projects (SDP) scheme, in the fields of agriculture, rural 
development, education, health, vocational training, etc.  
 
 In the area of skill development, GoI offers training to Afghan 
officials/nationals in diverse fields through 500 ITEC slots and 25 slots under TCS 
Colombo plan are allocated annually to Afghanistan. Specialized ITEC courses are 
held for Afghan Government Officials on specific demand, 614 ICAR scholarships 
under India-Afghanistan Fellowship Programme commenced in 2012-13 lasting up to 
2020-21(208 fellowships have been utilised so far), training via tele-education at 
ANASTU, Kandahar and Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health, Kabul.  GoI also 
grants ICCR scholarships to 1000 Afghans every year to pursue under graduate 
courses in various Indian universities in major cities across India.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
ANNEXURE - B 
India’s Outreach to South East Asia 
 
 With the objective to further strengthen ties with the countries of the Southeast 
Asian region and to achieve its rightful place amid economic reforms and changing 
global security environment, India ’s Look East Policy was launched in 1992. 
Engagement with the Association of Southeast Asians (ASEAN) was a primary 
component of India ’s reach out to region. Over the years, India has achieved 
significant progress and became sectoral dialogue partner in 1992, full dialogue 
partner in 1996, and initiated summit level partnership in 2002, which was elevated to 
strategic partnership in 2012.  
 
 In 2014, the ‘Look East Policy ’ was upgraded to become a more action-
oriented ‘Act East Policy ’. In his speech at the East Asia Summit in 2014 in Nay Pyi 
Taw, Myanmar, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi remarked, “Since entering office 
six months ago, my government has moved with a great sense of priority and speed to 
turn our ‘Look East Policy’ into ‘Act East Policy’.”  
 
 Over the past four years, the Act East Policy has proved to be a success. With 
ASEAN at its core, India is not only robustly engaging the countries of the Southeast 
Asian region but also Northeast Asia, Oceania, and East Asia. India has affirmed to 
ASEAN centrality in the Indo-Pacific. Through the Indo-Pacific construct, India 
envisages a greater role for itself in the wider region. The upgrade from Look East to 
Act East not only highlights the importance of the region through a more proactive 
and pragmatic approach, but also addresses key strategic, economic and cultural 
opportunities and recognises the role of the Diaspora. Comprehensively engaging 
ASEAN, across the three pillars of politico-security, economic and socio-cultural 
cooperation has been the key thrust area of the Act East Policy.  
 
 As a Strategic Partner of the ASEAN, India is also actively associated with 
various ASEAN-led forums dealing with defence and strategic issues. These include 
the East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), ASEAN Defence 
Ministers Meeting Plus and the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum. Apart from these 
mechanisms, other groupings include BIMSTEC, Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC) 
and Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA). At bilateral level, India has 
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership with Indonesia and Vietnam; and Strategic 
Partnership with Singapore, Malaysia and Australia.  
 
 India is also actively engaged with Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Island 
countries (PICs) through political understanding, security and defence cooperation, 
and economic engagement. India ’s sustained engagement with Indo-Pacific region is 
evident from frequent high level visits; strong defence cooperation, which includes 
training, ship visits, joint coordinated patrols, defence sales and defence supplies; 
close security cooperation especially in counter-terrorism and other transnational 
crimes; comprehensive economic engagement; regular dialogues on education and 
skill development; capacity building through scholarships and ITEC programmes; 
cultural cooperation including promotion of Indian culture through Indian cultural 
centres and growing ties with the Diaspora. 
 

48 
 
 To give traction to Act East Policy, India has made special efforts. Since May 
2014, at the level of President, Vice President and Prime Minister visits have taken 
place to all 10 ASEAN countries and other countries in the region namely Australia, 
New Zealand, Fiji and PNG. Among other visits, the most prominent one was the visit 
of all ten ASEAN leaders to New Delhi to participate in ASEAN-India 
Commemorative Summit and celebrate 25 years of ASEAN-India dialogue 
partnership in January 2018. At bilateral level, there have been several high-level 
visits too. Prime Minister Modi visited three Southeast Asian countries (Indonesia, 
Malaysia and Singapore) in May-June 2018 and became the first Indian Prime 
Minister to deliver the keynote address at Shangri-La Dialogue on 1 June 2018. 
External Affairs Minister Smt Sushma Swaraj has also visited Myanmar, Cambodia, 
Vietnam, Singapore, Indonesia and Thailand. President of India also visited Australia 
and Vietnam in November. Indonesian President visited India in December 2016, 
Singapore Prime Minister in October 2016, former Malaysian Prime Minister in 2017, 
former Australian Prime Minster in April 2017 and former Vietnam President in 
March 2018.  
 
 In November 2014, PM Modi visited Fiji to attend the first Forum for India –
Pacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC) Summit. This was followed by a second FIPIC 
Summit Jaipur in August 2015.  
 
 Famously regarded as Three C ’s, Commerce, Culture and Connectivity are 
three main pillars of the policy. India-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (FTA) in Goods 
came into force on January 1, 2011 and conclusion of negotiations in Free Trade in 
Services and Investment Agreements was announced during the Commemorative 
Summit in December 2012. India-ASEAN FTA has already brought together 1.8 
billion people and a US$ 2.5 trillion economy. India-ASEAN trade and investment 
relations have been growing steadily, with ASEAN being India ’s fourth largest 
trading partner. In 2017-18, India ’s trade with ASEAN stands at US$ 81.33 billion, 
which is approx. 10.6 percent of India ’s overall trade. India ’s export to ASEAN 
comprises of 11.28 percent of India ’s total exports. Investment flows are also 
substantial both ways, with ASEAN accounting for approximately 18.28 percent of 
investment flows into India since 2000.  
 
 To strengthen commercial ties, ASEAN-India connectivity summit was held in 
December 2017 in New Delhi, ASEAN-India Business and Investment Meet and 
Expo on 23 January 2018 in New Delhi and other Trade and Investment Meets held in 
Northeast such as Act East Expo in June 2017 in Shillong. India also has a business 
outreach programme for CLMV countries.  
 
 India has endeavoured to widen and deepen people- to-people ties with the 
region. India now has Electronic-Tourist Visa Authorisation (E-TVA) scheme for 
tourists from several countries including Australia, New Zealand, all the ASEAN 
countries and some PICs. Steady progress has been achieved in the area of human 
resource development and capacity building. India has also established a dialogue on 
education and skills development with Australia, New Zealand, Indonesia, Singapore, 
and Malaysia. India has continued support through cultural scholarships, MGC 
scholarships, ITEC programmes, etc to the countries in the region. India has set up 
Indian Chairs in the Universities of Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia. 
Indian Cultural Centres have been established in Jakarta and Bali in Indonesia, 

49 
 
Bangkok (Thailand), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), and Suva and Lautoka (Fiji) and 
Sydney (Australia). India, in association with the countries in the Southeast Asian 
region, has undertaken a massive project on revival of the Nalanda University which 
seeks to culturally and politically bridge the East and South Asian regions. Through 
Buddhism and Hinduism links, synergies are being built and with greater efforts for 
intra-regional and regional connectivity efforts on building physical, economic, 
digital, and people to people linkages.  
 
 A major effort has been made to acquaint our partners in Southeast Asia with 
our heritage as well as the modern manifestations of our culture. India has invested in 
the restoration and renovation of heritage cultural sites in the region, prominent 
among them is the restoration of Angkor Vat and Ta Prohm temple in Cambodia, Vat 
Phou temple in Laos, and Cham monuments in My Son in Vietnam. India ’s 
participation in restoration of cultural/heritage sites in the region adds a new 
dimension to India’s multifaceted and excellent relations in the region. With a view to 
promoting capacity building in CLV countries and Pacific Islands countries, 
specifically Least Developed Countries and Small Island States, India has extended 
soft financing facilities through LOCs/suppliers credit. Diaspora is a significant part 
of Act East Policy. There have been efforts to engage with the diaspora in the region. 
To this end, ASEAN-India Pravasi Bhartiya Divas was held in early January 2018 in 
Singapore. There are significant diapsora in many of the ASEAN countries and East 
Asian countries.  
 
 Connectivity is a major thrust area of the Act East Policy. Road routes are 
being developed, especially the Trilateral Highway in Myanmar and link roads 
through Lao and Cambodia up to the coastal highway in Vietnam. At the same time, 
there is ongoing work to develop transit (Kaladan) as well as deep sea ports (Dawei) 
in Myanmar which will promote connectivity. India has taken special efforts to 
develop a coherent strategy, particularly for linking ASEAN with our Northeast. 
Measures, including building transport infrastructure, encouraging airlines to the 
region, and contacts between academic and cultural institutions are underway. To this 
effect, India has announced a LoC of US$ 1 billion to ASEAN countries for 
undertaking projects to promote physical and digital connectivity. India has taken up 
pilot projects to establish digital villages in CLMV countries with a grant of US$ 10 
million in each of the four countries.  
 
 Defence cooperation is a strong component of the Act East Policy. India has 
cooperation on counter terrorism with Thailand, Malaysia, Australia & Indonesia. 
India has also strengthened cooperation through Agreements on Combating 
International Terrorism, Organised Crimes and Illicit Drug Trafficking. India has 
concluded agreements on mutual legal assistance on criminal matters and extradition 
treaties with certain ASEAN countries and are expanding its scope to include others. 
India is also committed towards capacity building in the field of security and defence. 
During the visit of PM Modi to Vietnam in September 2016, a defence LoC worth 
US$ 500 million was extended for procurement of defence equipment from India. In 
October 2018, India also launched a massive operation to provide assistance to the 
earthquake and tsunami victims in Indonesia, dispatching two aircraft carrying relief 
material to the country. India also has regular bilateral joint exercises with several 
Southeast Asian countries. For instance, 25th Singapore-India Maritime Bilateral 
Exercise (SIMBEX) was conducted in November 2018.   

50 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2018-19) HELD ON 11 FEBRUARY, 2019 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 11 February, 2019 from 1500hrs. to 1550 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. '2', Block ‘A’, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.. 
PRESENT 
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
 2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 3. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 5. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 6. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
         Rajya Sabha 
 7 . Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
8. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
 11. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 Secretariat 
  
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on:  
(i)    XXXXXZ    XXXXXZ   XXXXXXXX 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report on the subject ‘Sino-India Relations 

51 
 
including Doklam, border situation and cooperation in international 
organizations’ 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. 
The Committee adopted the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken 
Reports incorporating the suggestions made by the members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

52 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE TWENTY FIFTH REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
                                        
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 
18. 
 
                                                                                                                       Total-   15 
Percentage: 78.94 % 
 
 (ii) 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
                                                   
Total-0 
Percentage: 0 
 
  
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration:- 
 
Recommendation No. 11 and 19 
                 
Total- 02 
Percentage: 10.53 % 
 
(vi) 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited:- 
 
Recommendation Nos. 13 and 17 
                                                                                                                          
Total- 02 
Percentage: 10.53 % 
 
 
 