 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report on the subject ‘Indo-Pak Relations.'] 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018 / Pausha, 1939 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2017-18) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
19 
 

 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Sixteenth Report on the subject ‘Indo-Pak Relations’.] 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 5 January, 2018 
          Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 5 January, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
            January, 2018 / Pausha, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2018 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................  43 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government ’s Replies...………………………………… 57 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  58 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………  68 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 3.1.2018…………               80                                                 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (16th Lok Sabha)………………………………………………..    82 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2017-18) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
   Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurj eet Singh Aujla 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 7. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Jose K. Mani 
12. Shri P.R. Senthil Nathan 
 13. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 15. Shri Magannti Venakateswara Rao  
 16. Shri Mohd. Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 18. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 19. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 20. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 21. Vacant 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
 26. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 27. Smt. Kanimozhi 
 28. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
29. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy   
30. Dr. Karan Singh 
 31. Shri D. P. Tripathi  
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri P.C. Koul   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3.  Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha -  Additional Director 
4.  Ms. Smita Singh  -  Executive Assistant 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2017-18) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Nineteenth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report on the subject ‘Indo-
Pak Relations'. 
 
2. The Sixteen th Report was presented to the Parliament on 11 August, 2017. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 14 November, 2017. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their 
Sitting held on 3 January, 2018. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been 
given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on 
External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                  DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                           
3 January, 2018                                                               Chairperson,                                
13 Pausha,1939 (Saka)                                Committee on External Affairs  
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Sixteenth Report on 
the subject ‘Indo-Pak Relations’ which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of the Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2017. 
 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all 
the 22 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 4, 7, 7, 10, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 & 21  Total- 10 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
  NIL                                           Total-0  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:- 
    Recommendation Nos.  2, 3, 6, 9, 20 & 22                       Total- 6  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:- 
Recommendation Nos.  5, 8, 11, 13, 14 & 15    Total- 6 
                                                                                                                  
3.    The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter-I and 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished 
to them at an early date. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations. 

2 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Terror Free Environment- a pre-requisite for peaceful relations 
5.    The Committee had recognized that India - Pakistan relations had witnessed recurrent 
periods of tensions and strains and were historically complicated. The Committee had noted 
that there were multifarious issues concerning India and Pakistan such as territorial disputes 
over Siachen and Sir Creek, Pakistan's support to terrorist outfits, cross border infiltration, 
fomenting unrest in Indian State of Jammu &Kashmir, economic & cultural cooperation, 
Confidence Building Measures (CBMs), religious tourism and other related humanitarian 
issues. Recent developments had further complicated the relations. The Indian strategy of 
dealing with Pakistan has political, economic, cultural and military dimensions. The military 
dimension has been used only for defending the sovereignty of the country. Right from the 
time of attaining freedom, India has always worked relentlessly for a peaceful resolution of 
all contentious issues between the two countries. A peaceful and lasting solution to what has 
been essentially a bilateral discord has eluded over the past seven decades due to the 
intransigent attitude of Pakistan and its misconceived adversarial connect to the relations 
between the two neighbours. Moreover, the subcontinent has seen four debilitating wars 
which had exacted significant cost on both the warring sides. Notwithstanding the continuing 
impasse of decades altogether, the Committee were of the considered opinion that the road to 
peace and economic prosperity in the region was possible only through dialogue and 
enforcement of the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration in letter and spirit by the 
two nations. The Government of India has always followed that dictum, however, for various 
reasons there has not been the expected response from the other side. The Committee felt that 
the present geo-political situation beckoned Government of India to utilize its diplomatic 
finesse at all appropriate fora, as also its economic clout in equal measures, so that Pakistan 
is convinced that the continuing attrition was in nobody's interest and it was persuaded to join 
the process of dialogue at the earliest. The Committee, nonetheless, had remained concerned 
that the preponderant role of the Pakistani military in that country, and its desire to maintain 
hostility on its borders in order to justify this preponderance, remained a long term obstacle 
to a peaceful resolution. 
6.    The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that the Committee ’s observations and 
recommendations, inter alia, recognize the complexity of the bilateral relationship between 

3 
 
India and Pakistan. It is reiterated that Government desires good neighbourly relations with 
Pakistan. The Government had conveyed its readiness to resolve all outstanding issues 
peacefully and bilaterally in keeping with the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration.  
However, this necessarily requires an environment free from terror, hostility and violence. It 
is for Pakistan to honour its publicly stated commitment not to allow any territory under its 
control to be used against India in any manner and take effective and credible action to put an 
end to cross border terrorism. The Committee may wish to appreciate that this remains the 
foundation of our approach. 
7. Recognizing the complexity and multi-dimensionality of issues relating to Indo-
Pak relations, the Committee had recommended that the Government of India use its  
diplomatic and economic might at every available forum to convince Pakistan about the 
futility of the recurrent conflicts between two neighbouring countries and con vince 
them to join the dialogue process
.  The Government of India has reiterated their 
readiness for resolution of all outstanding issues peacefully and bilaterally. However, 
the Government has not mentioned any fresh initiative undertaken by either side to 
create a conducive environment for engagement. It is a fact that by neither publi cly 
accepting nor acting against terrorism emanating from its soil, Pakistan has displayed 
its unwillingness to create a conducive environment for improving bilateral ties. 
However, this should not deter the Government of India from taking steps from its sid e 
so that the situation of stalemate does not linger.   
In the Committee’s view, the Government of India as a responsible and credible 
stakeholder should continuously endeavour to utilize its diplomatic clout to create a 
conducive environment and to remove the stumbling blocks in resolving outstanding 
issues through dialogue and enforcement of the Simla Agreement and the Lahore 
Declaration in letter and spirit.  The Committee would like to be informed about the 
outcomes of such efforts. 
 (Recommendation No. 2) 
Resumption of the Dialogue Process 
8.    The Committee had noted that the dialogue process between India and Pakistan has gone 
through numerous highs and lows in their bilateral relations. It had remained susceptible to 

4 
 
unforeseen incidents which have derailed the peace process several times. A structured 
dialogue process between the two sides has been functioning since 2004 under the rubric of 
Composite Dialogue Process (2004-2008) and Resumed Dialogue Process (2011-13). Based 
on a compromise approach, the peace process had enabled the two countries to discuss all 
issues including Jammu &Kashmir. The Dialogue led to a ceasefire along the LoC, 
encouraged the possibilities of bilateral trade, inspired better people to people contacts and 
helped create conditions conducive for mature negotiations. During this process, a number of 
Track Two mechanisms outside the formal channels of diplomacy had also played an 
important role. The Committee had further discerned that the dialogue process between the 
two countries has followed a cyclical process of dialogue-terrorist attacks-dialogue. As a 
result, the modalities for starting the Composite Bilateral Dialogue had not been finalized till 
then. Having dialogue in the wake of terrorist attacks emanating from Pakistani soil has been 
the most challenging issue with successive Indian Governments. The Mumbai terror attack in 
November, 2008 pushed the peace process close to the brink of failure but it was not scuttled. 
In between, several efforts were made to initiate the dialogue process but it faced a big 
setback in the aftermath of the terrorist attack on the Air Force base in Pathankot in January, 
2016. 
The Committee were of the considered opinion that peace process should not be held 
hostage to the acts of terrorism and both the countries must keep the channels of 
communication open, even during the worst of crises and not let non-state actors and their 
state sponsors derail or dictate the foreign policy objectives of sovereign nations. They 
further believed that the engagement between neighbours cannot be stopped indefinitely. 
Dialogue process encompassed three key ingredients ̶building cooperative mechanisms, 
dispute redressal and a humanitarian aspect. The Committee had found the Government's 
policy of suspending formal level dialogue with Pakistan owing to national security concerns 
as justified by compulsions. However, as averred in the previous recommendation, the 
Committee had strongly urge the Government of India to use its good offices with all 
appropriate players and agencies so that Pakistan is made to realize the futility of continued 
imbroglio and is duly persuaded to join the dialogue at the earliest. In the meantime, the 
Committee had desired the Government to work out a clear-cut policy with regard to do's and 

5 
 
don'ts in the bilateral relation as also the faultlines that both sides would be expected to 
scrupulously follow as non-negotiable. 
9.    In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that the Government ’s 
consistent policy has been that it desires good-neighbourly relations with Pakistan and is 
committed to addressing all outstanding issues bilaterally through peaceful means in 
accordance with Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration. However, this necessarily 
requires an environment free from terror, hostility and violence. The Government does 
follow a clear-cut policy which is the basis for its approach to engaging Pakistan. It firmly 
believes that there can be no compromise on the issue of cross border terrorism. It is for 
Pakistan to honour its publicly stated commitment not to allow any territory under its control 
to be used against India in any manner and take effective and credible action to put an end to 
cross border terrorism. The Government has maintained the channels of communications 
open with Pakistan, including through respective diplomatic missions, and regular contacts 
between the border guarding forces on both sides. The Government has also attached 
importance to addressing all humanitarian issues including those related to fishermen, 
prisoners, inadvertent crossers, nationals and medical treatment. Consistent efforts have been 
made to secure the early and expeditious release and repatriation of prisoners and fishermen. 
At the same time, assistance has been extended to Indian nationals in distress in Pakistan. 
Government has also facilitated the visits of pilgrim groups under the bilateral protocol. At 
the same time, it has been made clear to Pakistan that a meaningful structured 
Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue would be possible only in an environment free from terror 
and violence.  
10.     The Committee having noted that the dialogue process between India and 
Pakistan has been yielding tangible outcomes in the past in addressing the various 
contentious issues between the two countries, had urged the Government of India to 
spell out a coherent and comprehensive policy regarding bilateral relations as a pre-
requisite to kick start the dialogue process.   In its reply, the Ministry has not spelt ou t 
any new initiative except stating that  the Government of India ’s consistent policy has 
been of having good neighbourly relations with Pakistan and strong commitment to 
resolve all outstanding issues bilaterally through peaceful means, in accordance with 

6 
 
the Simla Agreement (1972) and the Lahore Declaration (1999) and existence of 
preliminary levels of engagement through respective diplomatic missions and regular 
contacts between the border guarding forces. The Committee are of the consider ed 
opinion that both sides need to draw up a clear roadmap in their bilateral relations . 
Both the neighbouring countries should appreciate the geo-political realities and give a 
fresh impetus to the bilateral ties with concrete, comprehensive and long lasting 
dialogue process based on such a policy. Towards this direction, India as well as the 
Government of Pakistan should engage afresh and proceed with a step-wise proce ss to 
dialogue, moving from peripheral to core issues. 
(Recommendation No.3) 
Devising a National Security Framework  
11.    The Committee had noted that India's policy and approach towards Pakistan had been 
formulated on three broad principles, namely peaceful resolution of outstanding issues in 
keeping with the Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration, normalization of ties without 
compromising national security considerations and responding firmly to cross border 
terrorism. The Committee were, however, constrained to observe that the repeated existence 
of multiple crises resulting from militancy, insurgency, terrorist attacks, unsettled border 
disputes etc. clearly demonstrated the need for a National Security Framework and a coherent 
strategy towards Pakistan. 
While the Government might say that a lot has been controlled, the goings-on, on the 
Western border had created a public perception that anti-national activities through proxies 
were still being carried out with impunity. Such a situation could have been avoided had the 
Government put in place a National Security Framework. The Committee had desired that a 
comprehensive National Security Framework be worked out after evolving consensus on its 
various aspects. The Committee had desired that the Ministry of External Affairs should play 
a rightful role in shaping such a Framework without any further loss of time. 
12.     The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Reply stated that the 
Government notes and values the enormous public support for its strong and decisive 
response to check anti-national activities. This has been possible through significantly 

7 
 
improved coordination within the Government and more confident leadership. Committee is 
assured that necessary inter-ministerial coordination mechanisms and framework are in place 
to respond to emergent challenges in a consistent manner.  
13.     India ’s  approach and policy towards Pakistan is premised on three overarching 
principles namely, peaceful resolution of outstanding issues in consonance with the 
Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration; normalization of ties subject to national 
security and firm response to cross border terrorism. In view of the repeated existe nce 
of multiple crises resulting from militancy, insurgencies, terrorist attacks, unsettled 
border disputes etc, the Committee had strongly felt the need for a National Secur ity 
Framework and a coherent strategy towards Pakistan.  
The Committee take note of the assurance provided by the Ministry in its reply 
that necessary inter-ministerial coordination mechanism and framework are in place to 
tackle emergent challenges. The Ministry ’s silence over the Committee ’s specific 
request that they craft a National Security Framework is regrettable. The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that the Government should cr aft 
a National Security Framework that would categorically outline a broad doctrine, 
response mechanism and Standard Operating Procedures for concerne d Ministries on 
all possible aspects of our national security concerns. The Committee would further like 
to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.  
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
Enhanced Border Security & Surveillance 
14.    The Committee had appreciated the Border Security Force (BSF) for their 
commendable task of safeguarding the India-Pakistan border. In view of the prevailing 
volatile situation along the border, the Committee had recommended that the Government  
take tangible steps to strengthen and modernize border security. The Committee particularly 
expressed their concern towards poor road conditions along the border and desired that along 
with fencing, the Government should take focused steps to properly maintain the existing 
roads and construct good and well lit roads along the Indo-Pak border for proper vigilance. 
While appreciating the proposed decision of the Government to introduce a Comprehensive 

8 
 
Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS), the Committee had suggested that it 
should be completed in a time-bound manner without any cost and time overruns. 
The Committee had noted that modern technological means, including sophisticated 
electronic sensors and powerful satellites, were the need of the hour to ensure real-time 
surveillance on the borders. The Committee were happy to note that ISRO was working very 
ambitiously on that project and adequate funds for the same were also available. The 
Committee were hopeful that ISRO would complete the project in a time-bound manner and 
hand over the same to the Border Management Department for effective border surveillance. 
The Committee might be apprised about the action taken in that direction. The Committee 
were also concerned to observe that Punjab has become a hotbed for drugs and illegal 
smuggling through the border. The Committee had, therefore, strongly suggested that BSF 
should sufficiently shore up defences against drug trafficking and there should be a greater 
synergy between various agencies to counter drug menace in the State of Punjab. Coastal 
security being equally important, the Committee had also recommended the Government to 
take measures to strengthen coastal security and surveillance and it should be made fool 
proof by establishing a high level co-ordination mechanism between the Indian Coast Guard 
and other agencies such as the Navy, Central Industrial Security Force, Customs, Ports, 
Fisheries, Marine, Police etc. 
15.    In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the following 
is the status of various actions being taken on the above observations based on the inputs 
received from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Border Security Force (BSF) and the 
Indian Coast Guards (ICG): A report on utilization of Space technology in Border 
management and estimated financial implication involved in the action plan for effective use 
of space technology based tools, duly worked out by task force is under consideration at 
MHA for implementation.
 
The following preventive steps have been taken by BSF to curb the smuggling of drugs 
along India-Pakistan border: 
a. Vulnerability mapping of BOPs is being reviewed time to time from the point of view 
of cross-border crimes and being strengthened by deploying additional manpower, 
special Surveillance Equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support. 

9 
 
b. Effective domination of the borders by carrying out round the clock surveillance of 
the border viz. Patrolling, laying nakas, establishment of observation posts all along 
the IB and strengthening of existing defences of the BOPs. 
c. Installation of Border Floodlight on the IB. 
d. Introduction of Force multipliers and Hi-Tech Surveillance equipment to reduce 
stress level of troops and enhance the surveillance of border. Constant efforts are 
being made to procure the latest surveillance equipment for further enhancing the 
border domination. 
e. Up-gradation of intelligence network and coordination with sister agencies. 
f. Conduct of special operations along the border and in depth areas. 
g. Anti-Tunneling exercise is being conducted on regular basis in vulnerable area 
h. Use of technical solution/ force multipliers. 
In addition to the various projects of construction of roads in border areas being 
undertaken by CPWD, the following requirement of Border Road has been projected with 
MHA:
 
(i) Jammu: proposal for construction of 179 Kms Border roads is in process. Out of 179 Kms 
Border Roads, MHA has approved 33.10 Kms as a Pilot project, out of 33.10 Kms the work 
is in progress and the status is as under:-
 
a. Manihari Sector – 16.50 Kms 
b. Abdulian Sector – 05.45 Kms 
c. Paragwal Sector – 04.20 Kms 
For the balance 146 Kms road, Govt of Jammu and Kashmir has been requested to 
provide the details of land required to be acquired for this proposal and other details. 
(ii) Punjab: For construction of road bridge and culverts in Punjab approval has been 
accorded to an estimated expenditure of Rs. 8.2 crore for consultancy work and design of 
road, bridges, culverts etc. for initiation of tender on EPC mode for construction of lateral 
and Axial Road along India-Pakistan Border in Punjab State (610 Kms).
 
(iii) Rajasthan: For construction of Lateral road along Border fencing and connecting Border  
roads from BOPs to lateral roads in Rajasthan Sector (1207.42 Kms) is under process of 
internal approvals.
 

10 
 
(iv) Gujarat: Out of 340 Kms sanctioned Border Road in Gujarat, 279.680 Kms Boarder road 
has been completed and remaining 60.320 Kms of Border roads work in Gujarat Boarder 
between BP No. 1012 to 1051 put on hold.
 
(a) In order to have smooth coordination between Indian Coast Guard, Indian Navy (IN), 
Coastal Police and other stakeholders, various high level meetings are conducted to review 
the Coastal Security construct. Some of the meetings held to review the coastal security are 
as follows:- 
i. On completion of every Coastal Security exercise, conducted biannually by ICG in 
each Coastal State, a meeting on Coastal Security chaired by the Chief Secretary  of the 
respective Coastal State and attended by senior representatives of the stakeholders involved 
in Coastal Security is held. During the meeting, the observations of the coastal security 
exercise are discussed and remedial measures are taken. 
In addition, Hon'ble Raksha Mantri holds regular meetings to assess the status of the 
Coastal Security activities. Further, Secretary Border Management/ MHA holds regular 
meetings to review the Coastal Security mechanism which are attended by all the stake 
holders including ICG and the Indian Navy . With a view to ensure timely implementation 
of various decisions taken by the Government in respect of Coastal Security of the 
country, the Government has constituted a ‘National Committee on Strengthening 
Maritime and Coastal Security against threats from the Sea ’ with Cabinet Secretary as the 
Chairman. The Committee meets twice a year and monitors the activities of Coastal 
Security. Till date, 14 such meetings have been held. 
(b) The joint efforts of the various stakeholders viz. IN, ICG, Coastal Police and various state 
authorities have positively contributed towards strengthening the Coastal Security apparatus. 
Post 26/11, the following significant measures have been undertaken by the Indian Coast 
Guard for enhanced security mechanism against seaward threats:- 
(i) Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Coastal Security in all Coastal States/UTs 
have been promulgated for coordination between all stake holders. 
(ii) The deployment of ships/ Interceptor Boats/Air Cushion Vehicles have increased 
from 10-11 ships in 2009 to 30-35 in 2016. 

11 
 
(iii) On an average, 8-10 aircraft  are deployed daily for maritime and coastal aerial 
surveillance 
(iv) Number of Boarding Operations have increased significantly i.e. from 2274 
boardings in 2009 to 1,39,541 boardings in July 2017. 
(v) A total of 158 Coastal Security Exercises  and 265 Coastal Security Operations  have 
been conducted since Jan 2009 for revalidating the Coastal Security SOPs and Coastal 
Security mechanism. 
(vi) Community Interaction Programmes (CIPs) for the fishermen have been conducted to 
bring awareness amongst fisher folk for strengthening coastal security mechanism. Since 
2009, a total of 5673 CIPs have been conducted. During the CIP, the fishermen are also 
apprised about the need to alert security agencies regarding any suspicious/foreign boats 
sighted by them at sea. 
(vii) The ab-initio training of Marine Police personnel by Coast Guard is undertaken to 
strengthen the coastal security construct and achieve enhanced surveillance along the 
coastal areas. This training consists of three weeks orientation module and one week of 
OJT module. So far, more than 4000 police personnel have been trained by the Indian 
Coast Guard. 
(c) For strengthening Coastal security System and augmenting electronic surveillance 
mechanism, an electronic/ radar chain called Coastal Surveillance Network (CSN), having 
radars, AIS, day/night cameras and met sensors is being established in two phases. In the 
 CSN Phase-I, 46 remote radar stations  have been established to provide electronic and 
optical surveillance of areas of high sensitivity and high traffic density along the Indian coast 
up to a range of 25 nautical miles and 15 nautical miles respectively. 
(d) In order to provide near gap free surveillance in CSN Phase-II, 38 Radar Stations, 04 
Mobile Surveillance Systems  and integration of 13 Radar Stations of VTMS Gulf of Kutch 
and VATMS Gulf of Khambhat are proposed. The RFP for the Project has been issued and the 
same is likely to be implemented by 2019. 
(e)    ICG and IN are two maritime services operating in same domain, hence have 
overlapping responsibilities with regard to maritime security. Although, the primary duties of 
the two services are different, there are many commonalities in operations and administrative 

12 
 
setup of these services. In order to have a close coordination between the two maritime 
services, various systems have been put into place. The various activities undertaken for 
ensuring coordination are enumerated as follows. 
(f)    Meetings and Conferences. Various instruments have been formalized for close 
coordination between the two services at all levels.  Following are some of the forums of 
interactions between the two services:- 
(i)     The annual NAVGUARD meeting at Headquarters level (NHQ and CGHQ) ensures 
that inter-service relations are maintained.   
(ii)    The meeting of IN-CG Operations Working group is held annually for close 
coordination on operations issues. Similar working group meetings are held for close 
interaction between the teams of Technical, Training, Human Resources and Plans 
level working groups. 
(iii)    At Command level, meetings on similar lines (COM NAVGUARD) are conducted 
for addressing local issues and for improving field level coordination. 
 
(g)     Cross Training and Cross Deputation between IN and ICG. Further to conducting of 
regular meetings and interactions, the following training and deputations are undertaken 
between the two services:- 
(i)    The ab-initio training of Coast Guard Officers, Subordinate Officers (SOs) and 
Enrolled Personnel (EPs) are undertaken at Naval training establishments. Also, 
specialist training courses for Officers and EPs are undertaken at the various training 
centres across the country. The common training between the two services helps to 
shape in inter-personnel relationships amongst the rank and file. Coast Guard Officers 
and men deputed to Naval Training establishments for undertaking training of Naval 
and Coast Guard personnel. Also, Naval personnel visit Coast Guard Training Centre, 
Kochi for short courses.  Such types of short courses are undertaken to familiarize the 
Naval fraternity about the Coast Guard charter of duties.    
(ii)    In addition to common training programmes, cross deputation of Officers and 
men are undertaken between both the services which in turn improve synergy and 
coordination between the two services. 

13 
 
(h)    Exercises and Operations.    In order to improve the inter-service issues at the tactical 
level in the field, various joint and coordinated operations/ exercises are conducted. ICG 
units participate in yearly Naval exercises such as DGX, SPRINGEX, SUMMEREX, 
TROPEX etc. The Naval units also participate in various Coast Guard exercises like SAREX, 
NATPOLREX, etc. 
(j)    Miscellaneous:   The coordination between IN and ICG on offshore security is achieved 
through Offshore Security Coordination Committee (OSCC) and Regional Contingency 
Committee (RCC).  
 
16.    The Committee are cognizant of the numerous threats like ceasefire violations, 
border incursions and drug trafficking that have serious implications for our borde r 
security. The Committee while expressing their concern over the poor road c onditions 
in border areas, had urged the Government to ensure proper and all weath er 
connectivity roads along the border  in order to strengthen border security. The 
Committee find that the Border Roads Organization has projected various 
requirements of roads in Jammu, Punjab, Rajasthan and Gujarat. Given the immense 
importance of transportation infrastructure, the Committee reiterated that the 
Government should ensure adequate finances and requisite support for timely 
completion of all these border roads on a priority basis.   The Committee are perturbed  
to note that a report on utilization of space technology in border management and 
estimated financial implications involved in the action plan is still under consideration . 
The Committee urge the Government to expedite the process of approval and 
implementation as per the agreed action plan process and apprise the Committee of the 
status of its implementation without any further delay. 
The Committee note that significant measures have been undertaken by the 
Indian Coast Guard to strengthen security system and augment electronic surveillance 
mechanism. In view of the overlapping responsibilities between the Indian Coast 
Guard, Indian Navy and Coastal Police, the Committee note the existence of the various 
coordinating mechanisms and exercises that have been worked out for their smooth and 
efficient functioning. The Committee would urge the Government to establish an 
institutionalized mechanism for coordination between various stakeholders involved in 

14 
 
maritime security to counter sea borne threats. In order to bolster comprehensive  
security of our border with all neighbouring countries, particularly Pakistan, the 
Government should also establish a joint coordination mechanism of all the three 
services - the Army, the Navy and the Air Force and the security forces guarding the  
borders. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Assessment Study on Challenges faced at Siachen 
17.    The Committee had noted that strategic considerations in the wake of Pakistani 
aggression had led to the occupation of the Siachen Glacier in 1983. The Committee were 
cognizant of various operational and natural challenges faced by our security forces while 
guarding the commanding heights of the region. It was further observed that 13 rounds of 
official talks at the Defence Secretary level have been held so far to resolve the dispute. The 
Committee were satisfied to know that the Indian Army is at an advantageous position vis-à-
vis Pakistani forces in Siachen. The Committee was of the considered opinion that the 
deployment of Indian forces at Siachen under looming security threat from Pakistan cannot 
be de-linked from the overall security of the Kashmir region. In view of the fact that India is 
currently occupying strategic heights and advantage at Siachen, it was Pakistan ’s agenda to 
push for demilitarization of the glacier. Moreover, the Committee observed that the present 
cooperation between China and Pakistan has assumed worrying proportions and therefore, 
the Committee had recommended the Government of India to analyse the challenges clearly 
and accordingly persist with the right strategy. 
18.    The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply stated that the Committee ’s 
recommendation is taken note of. It is reiterated that the Government continuously monitors 
the developments and takes all necessary steps to protect the national interest and security of 
the country. 
19.    Realizing the multiple operational as well as natural difficulties surrounding the 
positioning of our security forces at the strategic Siachen Glacier, the Committee had in 
their Sixteenth Report recommended that the Government carry out an assessment of 
the myriad challenges posed by the deployment of our troops at such commanding 
heights. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that it has noted the 

15 
 
recommendation of the Committee and that it continuously monitors the developments 
and takes all necessary steps to protect the national interest and security of the country, 
The Committee would like to be reassured about specific measures being taken by the 
Government on the Siachen situation. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Well Pronounced strategy to deal with Pakistan’s subversive activities 
20.    It was disquieting to note that Pakistan has been indulging in various anti-India 
activities, which inter alia included sponsoring terrorism, drug trade, circulation of fake 
Indian currency, patronizing Sikh extremist leaders, cross-border infiltration, smuggling of 
narcotics etc. In the opinion of the Committee, such overt and covert activities were nothing 
less than a proxy war against India. The Committee had noted that Pakistan has been engaged 
in low intensity warfare against India through its Intelligence agency –Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI) and its militant proxies, notably the Laskar-e-Taiba (LET) and similar 
groups. Those activities are being undertaken with the twin objectives of organizing and 
guiding anti-India activities and spreading anti-India feelings amongst certain sections of 
population located long our sensitive border. 
The Committee had expressed strong disapproval of Pakistan ’s continued strategy of 
spearheading subversive activities in India through ISI. The Committee had felt that the 
Government’s measures to curb such activities lack the necessary determination. It was 
understood that recognizing and proving such clandestine activities was difficult. However, 
in so far as action against such acts being committed within our borders was concerned, the 
Government needed to be more decisive so as to send a clear cut message to the sponsors of 
these acts. The Committee had, therefore, encouraged the Government of India to pursue a 
well-coordinated strategy to deal with such nefarious designs that pose a serious threat to our 
internal as well as external security. The Committee had further liked to be apprised about 
the action taken in that regard at the earliest. 
21.    The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that the Committee is assured that 
Government takes all necessary actions to protect its national and national security interests. 
This has been demonstrated by the Government on a number of occasions. The undertaking 
of cross LoC counter terrorist operations last year was one such example. Besides, our forces 

16 
 
continue to appropriately respond to ceasefire violations and attempts at cross border 
infiltration. The Government does not lack determination in responding to subversive 
activities and has, in fact, been more decisive than in the past in dealing with it. A well-
coordinated response is very much in evidence, both in understanding the surgical strikes and 
in neutralizing cross-border terrorists.
 
Besides, the details of drugs seized, apprehension and infiltration bid foiled by BSF, 
during the last three years and current year (upto 31.08.2017), are as under: 
Year Seizure of drugs quantity (in Kgs) Infiltration 
Cases Apprehension Killed Foiled 
2014 434.934 3 - - 3 
2015 409.213 62 - - 62 
2016 352.737 25 11 3 25 
2017 (Aug) 393.96 14 - 5 14 
The following preventive steps have been taken by BSF to curb the infiltration along 
India- Pakistan International border: 
a. Vulnerability mapping of BOPs is being reviewed time to time from the point of view 
of cross-border crimes and being strengthened by deploying additional manpower, special 
    Surveillance Equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support. 
b. Effective domination of the borders by carrying out round the clock surveillance of     
the border viz. Patrolling, laying nakas, establishing of observation posts all along the IB 
and strengthening of existing defences of the BOPs. 
c. Installation of Border Floodlight on the IB 
d. Introduction of Force multipliers and Hi-tech Surveillance equipments to reduce     
stress level of troops and enhance the sureillance of border. Constant efforts are being 
made to procure the latest surveillance equipments for further enhancing the border     
domination. 
e. Up-gradation of intelligence network and coordination with sister agencies. 
f. Conduct of special operations along the border and in depth areas. 

17 
 
g. Anti-Tunneling exercise is being conducted on regular basis in vulnerable areas. 
h. Use of technical solution/force multipliers. 
i. Mobilization of 26 SP companies from India-Bangladesh Border to India-Pakistan  
border. 
j. Induction of additional 07 battalions on Indo-Pak border. 
22.    
The Committee had expressed grave concern about Pakistan ’s strategy of 
carrying out subversive and anti-India activities, particularly through its Intelligence 
Agency – Inter Services Intelligence (ISI). Therefore, the Committee had urged the 
Government to devise a well-coordinated strategy to effectively counter and stop such  
sinister plans and their execution with the aid and support of Pakistan. The Committee 
has taken note of the preventive steps taken by Government to respond to the various 
security threats posed by Pakistani sponsored terrorism. The Committee strongly urge 
the Government to establish a well-defined mechanism for effective coord ination and 
execution of our policies and strategies dealing with matters pertaining to our security 
concerns. The Committee would like to be apprised about the mechanism develope d in 
this regard at the earliest.  
 (Recommendation No. 8) 
Pressurize Pakistan to act against Terrorism 
23.    The Committee are aware that terrorism remained a core concern in relationship with 
Pakistan and knowing that Pakistan ’s policy of abetting and aiding terrorism against India 
was not new but it has assumed challenging proportions over the last two decades and that 
Mumbai, Pathankot, Uri, Nagrota and other attacks emanating from Pakistani soil 
underscored the continued threat of cross border terrorism, to our overall security. Further, 
noting that the Pakistani Government, instead of acting upon the evidences provided by 
India, had adopted a dual strategy of denial and portrayal of itself as a victim of terrorism, the 
Committee felt that both these postures of Pakistan on terrorism are misplaced. The existence 
of ample evidence against the Mumbai attacks, masterminded by Lask ar-e-Taiba/Jamat-ud-
Dawa Chief Hafiz Saeed and Zakir- ur-Rehman Lakhvi and the Pathankot attackers spoke 
volumes about Pakistani hand in those terrorist attacks. Further, Pakistan ’s inaction against 
these perpetrators of terrorism made their intentions questionable, especially following the 

18 
 
access provided to Pakistan by the Government of India at Pathankot. India and Pakistan are 
not equal victims of terrorism in the sense that, terrorism in India was inflicted by Pakistan 
while terrorist attacks in Pakistan were self inflicted. 
The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Government should continue to 
constructively counter Pakistan ’s misplaced and ominous strategy of deniability and 
equivalence at bilateral, regional as well as international levels and corner Pakistan for not 
acting on its 2004 commitment of not allowing its territory to be used for acts of terrorism 
against India. Moreover, the Government should continue its efforts to mount pressure on 
Pakistan to expedite the Mumbai attack trials. The Government of India ought to also spell 
out well considered policy options-military as well as non-military, including diplomatic to 
deter and deal with Pakistani sponsored terrorism that has been going on for decades. 
The Committee had also observed that following the recent terrorist attacks on our 
security establishments, the Government had taken numerous follow-up measures to fill the 
critical gaps. The Committee were also happy to learn about the enhanced international 
recognition of the dangers posed by terrorist networks and organizations operating from 
Pakistan. The Committee had, however, urged the Government to ensure a thorough security 
review of its various establishments on a regular basis with an objective for greater synergy 
between security agencies and intelligence agencies and also apprise the Committee about  
outcomes of such exercises. Prioritizing our national security considerations, the Committee 
had further recommended the Government to enhance its military capabilities by the 
modernization of its armed forces and use of advanced technology. 
24.    In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the 
Government continues to consistently raise the issue of Pakistan sponsored terrorism in 
bilateral, regional and multilateral fora. During the 71 st session of the UNGA in September 
2017, External Affairs Minister made a strong statement about the dangers posed by 
terrorism emanating from Pakistan. These have been further amplified through our Rights to 
Reply at UNGA. Due to consistent efforts of the Government, there is international 
recognition of the dangers posed by terrorism emanating from Pakistan and reflected in 
various joint statements issued during bilateral visits and multilateral summits. For instance, 
the Joint Statement issued on 14 September 2017 during the visit of the Prime Minister of 

19 
 
Japan to India, inter alia urged that “all countries to ensure that their territory is not used to 
launch terrorist attacks on other countries.... The two Prime Ministers called for Pakistan to 
bring to justice the perpetrators of terrorist attacks including those of the November 2008 
terrorist attack in Mumbai and the 2016 terrorist attack in Pathankot.”
 
The BRICS Statement issued on 4 September 2017 also expressed concern at the 
threat posed by the terrorist organisations, including Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammad and 
Lashkar-e- Taiba, to the regional and the world.  The US, in its new Strategy on Afghanistan 
and South Asia that was announced on 21 August 2017, inter alia called upon Pakistan to 
take decisive actions against safe havens and sanctuaries within the territory under its control. 
 The India-EU Joint Statement on Cooperation in Combating Terrorism issued as part of the 
annual Summit, on 6 October 2017, mentioned designated Pakistan-based terror groups and 
individuals including Hafeez Saeed,  Zaki- ur-Rehman  Lakhvi,  Dawood  Ibrahim,  Lashkar-
e-Tayibba,  Jaish-e-Mohammad, Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, Haqqani Network and their affiliates 
and “agreed  to  strengthen  cooperation  to  take  decisive  and  concerted actions against 
them.” While condemning  the  recent  terror  attacks  in  Pathankot,  Uri,  Nagrota, 
 Anantnag  (Amarnath  Yatra),  Srinagar  and  recalling  the  November 2008 terror attacks in 
Mumbai, “the leaders also called for the perpetrators of  these  attacks  to  be  brought  to 
 justice.” 
 
International bodies like the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have expressed 
concerns at the continuing activities of the UN proscribed terrorist organisations like 
Lashkar-e-Tayyaba, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, Falah-i-Insaniyat in Pakistan and the ease with which 
they continue to access funds. In recognition of these concerns, the FATF, at its Plenary 
meeting on 2 November 2017 in Argentina, asked Pakistan to continue to report on the 
actions taken to curb terror financing for the proscribed individuals and entities and also 
asked the State Bank of Pakistan to report on the effectiveness of the measures taken to curb 
terror financing in Pakistan. 
 
The Committee is further informed that the Government undertakes a regular review 
of the security of its establishments and ensures synergy between security agencies and 
intelligence agencies. Specific inputs with regard to the outcome of such reviews have been 
requested from the concerned Ministries/ authorities. The Government also takes note of the 
Committees recommendation to enhance India ’s military capabilities by modernization of its 

20 
 
armed forces and use of advanced technology. This is an ongoing process which is 
undertaken by the Ministry of Defence in order to ensure requisite defence. 
 
25.    The Committee are pleased to learn about India ’s consistent policy of exposing 
Pakistani sponsored terrorism at bilateral, regional and multilateral forums. Taking 
cognizance of the fact that the process of modernization of armed forces and use of 
advanced technology to effectively deal with the security threats from across the border  
is underway, the Committee had desired to be informed about the outcome of the 
ongoing process of augmenting our defence preparedness.  
    Against the background of increasing terrorist attacks on our security 
establishments, the Committee had also asked the Government to undertake a thorough 
security review of its establishment and also ensure greater synergy between the 
security and intelligence agencies to prevent such attacks in future. The Committee a re 
not convinced with the reply furnished by the Ministry regarding review of the secu rity 
establishments and would appreciate a more comprehensive and specific response.  
     Furthermore, the Government was asked to expedite the Mumbai attack trials 
by mounting international as well as bilateral pressure on Pakistan. However, the 
Committee note that these trials are currently in abeyance; while Pakistan has been in a 
state of outright denial. With the available proof and circumstantial evidence, the 
Government should continue its international efforts to ensure that the perpetrators of 
such heinous crimes are punished so as to convey a clear message to Pakistan that any 
assault on our security will be firmly dealt with. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Exposing Pakistani support to terrorism  
26.    The Committee were aware that cross border terrorism, law and order problems in the 
Kashmir Valley and material as well as financial support from Pakistan to terrorists and 
extremist groups operating in J&K were the main concerns of the Government and the 
biggest hurdles in the dialogue process. The Committee were dismayed to observe the spurt 
in unrest and violence in the Kashmir Valley since the death of a Hizb-ul Mujahideen 
terrorist in an encounter on July 8, 2016. Frequent attempts for infiltration of terrorists from 

21 
 
across the border have become a regular feature. The Committee, however, were happy to 
observe that our forces have prevented a large number of infiltration attempts through the 
border and have started eliminating the terrorists in the valley in a planned way. Moreover, 
our intense diplomatic outreach had led the international community to recognize the role 
being played by Pakistan in fomenting cross-border terrorism in India. 
The Committee had desired that such efforts should continue till Pakistan is exposed 
internationally and its stopped such activities and also till the false narrative of human rights 
violations in Jammu &Kashmir being created at international fora was exposed. The 
Committee were further concerned to observe the growing sense of alienation in the 
Kashmiri youth, largely due to their radicalization by anti-national elements and the lack of 
adequate employment opportunities. The Committee had also observed that a series of 
attempts have been made by the Government of India to mainstream the youth of J&K by 
providing better education and employment to them but it had not yielded the desired results. 
The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Government should take all possible measures 
including infrastructural and economic developments prevent radicalization of youth by 
Pakistani supported anti-national elements within Jammu & Kashmir. 
 
27.    The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply responded that according to available 
information, the Rs. 80,000 crores special assistance package announced by the Prime 
Minister for J&K is already being fast tracked. Nearly Rs 20,000 crores has already bee n 
released. 63 development projects are being implemented in the areas of roads, power, new 
and renewable energy, tourism, health, education, water resources, sports, urban 
development, textiles. These measures have already made an impact on the youth of the State 
and contributed to declining support for violence and anti-national activities.
 
According to additional inputs received from BSF, the civic action programmes 
generally carried out by BSF in border areas (Development Block/Police stations having IB 
in border districts bordering IB/LOC) and remote and inaccessible areas of the state which 
are affected by terrorism. It acts as a bridge between the security forces and the local people.
 
During CFY year 2017-18, CAP committee approved to allot an amount of Rs. 
1,67,98,360/- to conduct Football tournament, medical camps and skill development 
programme in J&K region. In addition proposal to conduct Bharat Darshan Tour for School 

22 
 
Children and All India tour for inmates residing in Gujjar and Bakerwal Hostels is under 
consideration.
 
CAP activities conducted by BSF in J&K region in 2016-17 as under: 
S. No. Budget allotted Expenditure Activities 
1 Rs. 
1,30,66,000/-
 
Rs. 1,30,65,377/- (i) Medical Camp 
(ii) Sports activities 
(iii) Bharat Darshan Tour 
(iv) Construction of toilet blocks 
2 Rs. 1,50,000/- Rs. 1,50,000/- Distribution of Artificial Limbs 
3 Rs. 70,00,000/- Rs. 70,00,000/- For setting up or a resource centre at Kupwara 
(J&K) through “Self employed women associations” 
Ahmedabad.
 4 Rs. 43,26,000/- Rs. 43,26,000/- 
 
Further, to curb the infiltration following preventive steps have been taken by BSF 
along India--Pak International border: 
a. Vulnerability mapping of BOPs is being reviewed time to time from the point of view 
of cross-border crimes and being strengthened by deploying additional manpower, Spl 
Surveillance Equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support. 
b. Effective domination of the borders by carrying out round the clock surveillance of 
the border viz. Patrolling, laying nakas, establishing of observation posts all along the IB and 
strengthening of existing defences of the BOPs. 
c. Installation of Border Floodlight on the IB. 
d. Introduction of Force multipliers and Hi-Tech Surveillance equipments to reduce 
stress level of troops and enhance the surveillance of border. Constant efforts are being made 
to procure the latest surveillance equipments for further enhancing the border domination. 
e. Up-gradation of intelligence (Int) network and coordination with sister agencies. 
f. Conduct of special operation along the border and in depth areas. 
g. Anti-Tunneling exercise is being conducted on regular basis in vulnerable areas. 

23 
 
h. Use of technical solution/force multipliers. 
28.    Pakistan’s unconscionable support to the terrorist & extremist groups operating 
in the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir is not only an assault on the territorial 
integrity and security of our country but is also a blatant violation of well established 
internationally recognized norms and behavior. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the Government pursue a vigorous diplomatic outreach to various 
international players in order to expose Pakistani sponsored terrorism, both within and 
outside India. The Government of India was also advised to undertake significant steps 
to bolster the economic and infrastructural development of Indian state of Jammu & 
Kashmir with the dual objective of ending the growing sense of alienation among the 
Kashmiri youths and to counter Pakistan ’s motivated strategy of radicalizing them. In 
its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has not provided the relevant details of efforts 
made to extend diplomatic outreach to expose Pakistan ’s reprehensible act of 
supporting terrorists operating in India and creating a false narrative of human rights 
violations in the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir during the period after presentation 
of Report till date and the outcome of these efforts.  The Committee are, however, 
pleased to note the gamut of activities ranging from a special assistance package to 
goodwill generation programmes like sporting fixtures, Bharat Darshan etc to involve 
the Kashmiri youth. In this regard, the Committee feel that the Government should 
assess the impact of such measures and continue to enhance them. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Pro-active Approach on Jammu and Kashmir, including PoK 
29.    The Committee had reiterated that the basic facts pertaining to Jammu and Kashmir 
being an integral and inalienable part of India were well documented and established. Our 
national position on Jammu &Kashmir had been clearly enunciated in the Parliamentary 
Resolution adopted unanimously by both the Houses of Parliament on 22 February, 1994. 
After illegally occupying PoK, Pakistan had been making attempts through terror funding 
and covert support to terrorists to destabilize the Kashmir Valley. The Committee had further 
noted that Pakistan, through unsubstantiated and baseless allegations of violations of human 
rights in Kashmir valley, had been trying to create a false narrative about the Indian State of 

24 
 
Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee were of the strong opinion that in the event of Pakistan 
not mending its ways, it was time the Government should become proactive and assertive 
about our rightful claims on PoK, including Gilgit-Baltistan. The Committee had strongly felt 
that India should firmly keep PoK at the top of the agenda - along with terrorism – and insist 
that Pakistan vacate the area under its illegal occupation as also the portion ceded to China, 
forthwith. The Committee had also urged the Government to launch a diplomatic campaign 
to explain India’s stand on PoK and expose Pakistan’s duplicity to all friendly countries. This 
was all the more necessary given that the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) was 
being built through PoK in violation of India’s sovereignty. 
30.    The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that the 
international community is well aware of India ’s position that the entire state of J&K is an 
integral part of India, and that Pakistan is in illegal occupation of a part of J&K. The 
Government has, from time to time, continues to sensitise the members of the international 
community that they should not engage with the renegade entities from the Pakistan occupied 
Kashmir which would amount to interference in the internal affairs of India. Further, the 
Government has, in a consistent and coherent manner, apprised the international community 
about cross border terrorism as the main cause of situation in the Indian state of Jammu and 
Kashmir. The Right to life, which is one of the most important human rights, is under threat 
from terrorism.
 
The international community largely supports India ’s position and recognises that the 
situation created by cross border terrorism in the Indian state of J&K. The Joint Statement 
issued during the visit of the Prime Minister to the US on June 26, 2017 inter alia stated that 
“the leaders called on Pakistan to ensure that its territory is not used to launch terrorist 
attacks on other countries. ”  Further, on August 21, 2017 while unveiling the new US 
Strategy for South Asia particularly Afghanistan, President of USA Mr. Donald Trump, 
noted that “20 U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organizations are active in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan -- the highest concentration in any region anywhere in the world. ” The BRICS 
Leaders Declaration adopted at Xiamen, China (September 04), India-Japan Joint Statement 
(September 14) and the India-EU Joint Statement (October 6) specifically referred to 
strengthening cooperation against terrorist groups including Haqqani Network, Lashkar-e-

25 
 
Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammad and D-Company, who are operating from Pakistan. There is 
clearly greater international understanding of the dangers posed to regional and global peace 
and security from the terrorism emanating from Pakistan and of the fact that the issue of 
Jammu and Kashmir must be resolved bilaterally and through peaceful means.  
 
31.    The Committee reaffirmed the de jure position of Jammu and Kashmir being an 
integral part of India and any attempt to destabilize this territory would not be 
tolerated as it would amount to interference in our internal matters. The Committee 
fully endorsed the view of the Government that cross-border terrorism in the Indian 
state of Jammu & Kashmir is a serious violation of the right to life of the people 
residing there. The Committee are pleased to learn about the groundswell of suppor t of 
the international community on India ’s stance on Jammu & Kashmir, particularly on  
the issue of cross border terrorism, as evident in the US strategy for South Asia, BRICS 
Leaders Declaration and the India-EU Joint Statement However, there is no mention 
about the stance of the international community regarding Pakistan occupied Kashmir 
(PoK) which is under illegal occupation by Pakistan. 
     Over the years, the Pakistani Government has not only illegally occupied a 
portion of Jammu & Kashmir but also asserted it claims thereon. The most astonishing 
aspect of such assertion has been Pakistan ’s handing over a portion of PoK to China 
and the recent China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) further aggravates our 
sovereignty concerns. In the light of such developments, the Committee feel that India 
needs to outline a coherent and comprehensive policy on Jammu & Kashmir, inclu ding 
PoK. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation of pursuing a  pro-
active and assertive position on our rightful claims to PoK, including Gilgit-Baltistan.  
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Dealing with Pakistan's unsafe nuclear arsenal 
32.     The Committee were aware that being nuclear armed states, any conflict situation 
between India and Pakistan attracted considerable attention at regional as well as 
international levels. The Committee had observed that the nuclear doctrines of the two 
countries were quite contradictory. While the Indian nuclear doctrine was well articulated 
and specific, Pakistan had deliberately pursued an opaque and ambiguous doctrinal position, 

26 
 
refusing to abjure “first use” of nuclear weapons. Additionally, India intended to use nuclear 
weapons for establishing deterrence while Pakistan's nuclear arsenal was meant to 
compensate for conventional weapons asymmetry with India. The Committee had noted that 
the growing China Pakistan cooperation, especially in missile and nuclear programmes. The 
Committee were, however, also aware that serious doubts had been raised about Pakistan ’s 
nuclear infrastructure and installations, for reasons enumerated in the preceding narrative. As 
things stood that time, the Committee were in agreement with the Government's assessment 
of the Pakistani nuclear threat and the possibility of inadvertent tactical nuclear weapons use, 
which would have had serious implications not only on the region but across the globe. In 
light of the expanding Pakistani nuclear arsenal and its deliberately ambiguous doctrine, the 
Committee had strongly recommended the Government to aggregate its nuclear capability 
and enhance its deterrence capabilities. The Committee also urged the Government to 
internationally publicize the challenges and implications of the Pakistani mix of terrorism 
and concerns about safety of its current nuclear weapons and programme as a threat to 
regional and global security. 
33.     In its Action taken Reply the Ministry stated that the recommendation has been 
forwarded to the NSCS for appropriate action. In coordination with PP&R Division, D&ISA 
Division of the Ministry of External Affairs will be holding an outreach with think-tanks in 
coming months to convey these aspects. 
34.     The physical safety and security of Pakistan ’s nuclear arsenal technology and 
infrastructure has been an issue of widespread skepticism. In such a situation, the 
possibility of these sensitive and dreaded technologies getting into the hands of non -
state actors remains high. Expressing deep concerns over Pakistan ’s deadly 
combination of terrorism and insecure nuclear weapons, the Committee would ur ge the 
Government to augment its deterrence capabilities on one hand and mobilize the 
international community about such dangerous situations which can be a potent threat 
to international peace and security. The Ministry of External Affairs intends to hold an 
outreach with think-tanks on these aspects. The Committee would suggest the Ministry 
to keep the Committee informed on further developments in the matter.  
 

27 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Greater economic integration at bilateral and regional level 
35.    The Committee had discerned three trends in economic ties between India and Pakistan. 
First, the trade between the two countries albeit paltry, exhibited immense potential. 
Secondly, India had consistently maintained a substantial trade surplus with Pakistan over the 
years. Thirdly, even though bilateral trade was governed by preferential and non preferenti al 
routes, the SAPTA agreement was an important mechanism for preferred bilateral trade 
between the two countries. It is disconcerting to note that the mismatch between India and 
Pakistan both in intention and approach towards normalization of relationship extended to 
trade and economic ties. While India has proactively taken a host of initiatives to bolst er 
economic ties, Pakistan had adopted a parochial approach. Moreover, the existing political 
relationship, Pakistan's narrow economic approach towards India as well as the region and 
Pakistan's continued support to terrorism had acted as serious impediments to normalization 
of economic ties. Since the Government of Pakistan had not adhered to its commitment of 
removing the trade restrictions on the land route as well as reciprocating the Most Favoured 
Nation (MFN) status to India, as agreed at the 7 th Commerce Secretary level talks in 
September, 2012 at Islamabad, further progress in improving the bilateral trade would now 
hinge on the fulfillment of  commitments made by Pakistan. The Committee had, therefore, 
desired that all possible efforts should be made to persuade Pakistan for taking reciprocal 
steps of extending MFN status to India and removing trade restrictions on the land route as 
agreed in the 7 th Commerce Secretaries talks. The engagement could be taken to a further 
level if Pakistan follows the preferential arrangements under South Asian Free Trade Area 
(SAFTA) and they allowed transit of Indian exports to Afghanistan through its territory. The 
Committee had urged the Government of India to reach out to Pakistan to move out of its 
narrow approach and embrace the various positive steps taken by India as a responsible 
economic player in the region. 
36.    
The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply stated that the ‘roadmap’ 
agreed with Pakistan in 2012 for further liberalization of bilateral trade remains 
unimplemented, owing to pending action from Pakistan side, including lifting of all 
restrictions on imports through Wagah. In addition, Pakistan is yet to fulfill its commitments 
under SAFTA process as well. Government takes note of the Committee ’s recommendations 

28 
 
related to trade and commerce and these would be taken up for discussions as and when a 
conducive environment is created by Pakistan for starting a structured Comprehensive 
Bilateral Dialogue. 
 
37.    Greater economic integration and trade is widely recognized as a potent tool 
towards the improvement and normalization of ties between India and Pakistan with a 
history of difficult relationship. Bilateral trade between these two neighbours is 
governed predominantly by the South Asian Preferential Trade Agreement (SAPTA).  
The realities of bilateral trade behaviour amply demonstrate Pakistan ’s obstinate 
attitude of hindering bilateral ties by neither implementing the preliminary steps 
needed for implementation of the roadmap agreed in 2012 nor reciprocating India ’s 
grant of  Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status. Such obdurate behavior by Pakistan not 
only acts as an impediment to constructive economic engagement with India but also to 
greater economic integration of the region. The Committee therefore, desire that the 
Government should carry forward the efforts to convince the Pakistani establishment 
about the benefits flowing out of greater economic integration in improvement of our 
ties and integration of the region, without waiting for conducive environment for a 
structured dialogue on more complicated issues.  
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Urgent Need for Technological and Infrastructural equipment at ICP, Attari 
38.     The Committee had observed that with the opening of the Integrated Check Post (ICP) 
Attari in 2012, the handling of trade between India and Pakistan has improved significantly. 
The Committee had, however, found that there was a further need to improve the efficiency 
of the ICP through better technological handling. The Committee particularly desired that the 
Land Ports Authority of India (LPAI) should fulfill its mandate to provide world class 
infrastructure and improved mechanization and technological penetration at ICP Attari. The 
Committee had desired that the infrastructural impediments at ICP like limited storage space, 
lack of mechanized loading/unloading, loose cargo holding area etc. should be done away 
with on priority basis. The Committee had also observed that there was an increased 
turnaround time for trucks due to manual loading and unloading of goods, lack of 
containerization of cargo and inadequate infrastructure for handling cargo coming through 

29 
 
railways and, as such, desired that necessary steps should be taken to remove these 
impediments also. The Committee had further desire that steps should be taken for the 
removal of restrictions on the number of items that can be freely exported through ICP and 
for the rationalization of non-tariff barriers like the plant quarantine, in consultation with 
Pakistan. So far as the facilities at ICP Attari are concerned, the Committee had expressed its 
dissatisfaction that despite earlier reminders, the procurement of full body truck scanners has 
been inordinately delayed and require that this be expedited. In addition, hand-held survey 
instruments advance X-ray scanning machine for baggage and advanced pellet scanning 
equipment should be procured at the earliest because all these are essential for security 
purpose and to facilitate the smooth movement of goods across the border. The Committee 
had noted that such equipment is already deployed on the Pakistani side. 
39.    In its written reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that the Committee ’s 
recommendations have been taken up with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and the 
Ministry of Home Affairs for taking action. 
 
40.    Keeping in view the role played by Integrated Check Post (ICP), Attari in safe and 
systematic movement of goods and passengers, the Committee are of the opinion that 
there is an urgent need to improve the efficacy of ICP, Attari by removing the 
infrastructural bottlenecks and using better technology & equipment. Paradoxically, 
the Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry only states that the matter have been 
taken up with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry as well as the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. The lack of progress following this point to the need for enhanced coordinat ion 
between the Ministries on the issues of such importance having economic as well as 
security ramifications.  Taking a serious view of the matter, the Committee reiterate 
that the procurement of various advanced equipment and technology such as hand  held 
survey instruments, advanced x-ray machines, full body truck scanners etc a re 
expedited. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the status of such 
procurement within three months.  
 
 

30 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Augmenting People to People Contact 
41.     India ’s soft power capabilities were manifested globally in its rich cultural heritage, 
music, varied cuisines, traditional knowledge base and literature. The Committee were aware 
that India and Pakistan share mutually overlapping bonds of culture and tradition which has 
led to people to people contacts on a regular basis. The Committee had further noted that 
religious tourism between the two countries is regulated by a Protocol constituting an 
Agreement between India and Pakistan on Visit to Religious Shrines signed in 1974 and a 
significant number of pilgrims have been undertaking visits from both the sides. In this 
connection, the Committee had urged the Government to explore the feasibility of a 
pilgrimage access to Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib, particularly in the light of the 550th 
Prakash Parab in 2019. 
The Committee felt that by building a robust bridge of mutual understanding and 
trust, people to people contacts can be a potent force in improving ties between the two 
countries in the long run. The role of ICCR and other relevant organizations can play a useful 
role in this regard. Further, such contacts would widen the peace constituency in both the 
countries. However, the Committee were disheartened to note that strained relations between 
the two countries have always cast a shadow on cultural exchanges. In the recent past, India 
has drastically reduced the number of visas issued to Pakistani nationals and strict limitations 
have been imposed in permitting visits of Indians. The Committee had agreed that the 
generous approach of the Indian Government in the past, permitting people to people 
contacts, has not yielded tangible gains in resolving the antagonism between the two 
neighbours. The Committee, however, felt that the Government should initiate fresh 
diplomatic measures at all relevant platforms with a view to make Pakistan aware of the 
follies of its present policy towards India and persuade it to make the necessary course 
correction at the earliest. This would ensure that people to people contacts are resumed 
expeditiously to create a favourable atmosphere for dialogue and peace process. 
42.    
The Ministry of  External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply stated that Protocol 
constituting an Agreement between India and Pakistan on Visit to Religious Shrines, signed 
in September 1974, provides for facilitating group tourism visa [up to 20 groups/ ‘parties’ per 

31 
 
year] to visit a select list of religious places from each country. Recently, in November 2017, 
a visit of a Sikh Jatha was facilitated to Nankana Sahib in Pakistan under the bilateral 
Protocol on the occasion of the Birthday of Guru Nankak Dev ji.  While Gurudwara 
Kartarpur Sahib is not part of the Protocol, visit of the Indian pilgrims to the Gurudwara has 
been facilitated in earlier instances. Government has taken note of the Committee ’s 
recommendation in the context of the Prakash Parab in 2019. Government attaches 
importance to addressing humanitarian issues and promoting friendly exchanges. However, 
these issues cannot remain immune to developments in larger bilateral relations.  
 
43.    In their Sixteenth Report, the Committee had noted that having originated from a 
common subcontinent, both India and Pakistan share a strong historical and cultural 
bonds. Instead of using overlapping commonalities to develop trust and goodwill, they 
have been held hostage to the political imbroglio between the two countries caused by 
the adamant attitude of Pakistan. While analyzing the cultural dimension of Indo-Pak 
relations, the Committee opined that people to people contacts between India and 
Pakistan can be used as a connecting link between the two, particularly during times of 
crisis and had recommended for greater people to people contact, relaxation of visa 
norms and enhanced religious tourism. The Ministry, however, in their Action Taken 
Reply has largely focused on the religious dimension and not mentioned anything about 
the fresh initiatives taken for improving people to people contact.  
     The Committee note that pilgrimage access to Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib  is 
not part of the Protocol constituting an Agreement between India and Pakistan on Visit  
to Religious Shrines signed in 1974. Nevertheless, the very fact that visit of Indian 
pilgrims to Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib in Pakistan has been facilitated in e arlier 
instances could be a positive precedent for urging Pakistan to provide better pilgr image 
access to the Gurudwara in view of 550 th Prakash Parab in 2019. The Committee would 
strongly recommend the Government to make concerted efforts to facilitate su ch access 
through extending outreach to Pakistan at all possible levels. The Committee would also 
urge the Government to keep people to people contact open and functioning by working 
out a visa policy that is sensitive to the people of both the countries. Enhanced people to 

32 
 
people contact will not only assuage distrust and discord but also facilitate a conducive 
environment for a resumption of the dialogue process.  
(Recommendation No. 17) 
International Support on India’s position  
44.    It was indeed heartening to know that there was a wide support from the international 
community for India ’s position i.e. peaceful resolution of all outstanding issues between 
India and Pakistan within a bilateral framework on the basis of Simla Agreement (1972) and 
the Lahore Declaration (1999) without any third party intervention or mediation. The 
Committee were also happy to learn that India ’s concern with regard to cross-border 
terrorism has been largely acknowledged and echoed by the international community. It was  
highly satisfying to observe the American recognition of the danger posed by terrorism, 
emanating from Pakistani soil. Through various statements and speeches, USA had urged 
Pakistan to take actions against various terrorist organizations like Lashkar-e-Taiba, Haqqani 
Network and Jaish-e-Mohammad and has called on Pakistan to expeditiously bring to justice 
the perpetrators of 26/11 Mumbai attacks, Pathankot and other terrorist attacks. The 
designation of Syed Salauddin, the leader of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen as “Specially Designated 
Global Terrorist” on June 26, 2017 was a much awaited result of India‟s incessant efforts. 
The  Committee are happy that India’s time tested friend Russia’s position vis-à-vis Indo-Pak 
conflict and the issue of Jammu &Kashmir has remained principled and unchanged i.e. 
differences between the two should be resolved on a bilateral basis in accordance with Simla 
Agreement (1972) and Lahore Declaration (1999). The Committee had however, observed 
that the China-Pakistan proximity has assumed worrisome proportions. 
It was quite inexplicable that a country so sensitive about sovereignty and territorial 
integrity has been oblivious about our sovereignty concerns on CPEC. It was worrisome to 
discern that some of the projects under CPEC are in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK), a part 
of the Indian State of Jammu & Kashmir which has been in illegal occupation of Pakistan 
since 1947. 
The Committee had urged the Government to continue its diplomatic outreach and 
political engagement to create a favourable international opinion on the threat posed by 
Pakistani sponsored terrorism to the region in general and to India in particular. The 
international community need to realize that the use of terrorism as a state policy by a 

33 
 
nuclear-armed Pakistan is not only India’s problem also but also a grave global concern. The 
Committee had therefore, suggested that the Government deepen and widen our engagement 
with both the USA as well as Russia on this issue. The Committee had strongly 
recommended the Government to continue its outreach to China at diplomatic as well as 
political levels to express our deep concerns regarding CPEC. The Government should also 
continue the dialogue with its international partners, including China, for listing of Jaish-e-
Mohammad chief Masood Azhar under the 1267 Sanctions regime of the UN Security 
Council till it is achieved. 
45.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Take Reply stated that as recommended 
by the Committee, India remains engaged with the US, Russia and China on various issues of 
mutual interest, including that of terrorism.  Counter terrorism is emerging as an important 
area of our bilateral engagement with the United States. Both countries are already closely 
working in this area. The Trump Administration has showed strong intent to strengthen 
cooperation with India in this area. The US designated Syed Salahuddin as Specially 
Designated Global Terrorist on 26 th June 2017. Both countries have also constituted a new 
Consultation Mechanism for Terrorist Designations, which was agreed to during the Prime 
Minister’s visit to USA in June 2017. Both countries are also working to strengthen our 
bilateral cooperation through regular sharing of information on terrorist entities. On 21 
August 2017, President Trump unveiled his new Strategy for Afghanistan and South Asia. 
We have welcomed the new Strategy which continued US commitment to and presence in 
Afghanistan; positively assesses India ’s role; and categorically asks Pakistan to give up 
support to terrorist groups. The new US Strategy is a reflection of our growing convergence 
in views and interests. 
It is pertinent to mention that the US and Russia has supported the efforts at the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to express concerns at the continuing activities of the 
proscribed individuals and entities in Pakistan. Their support has ensured that FATF, at its 
plenary meeting on 2 November 2017 called upon Pakistan to report on the action being 
taken to curb terror financing, especially in respect of the proscribed entities and individuals. 
Government is aware that China is assisting Pakistan in the development of the so-
called ‘China-Pakistan Economic Corridor ’ (CPEC). The inclusion of the so-called CPEC, 
which passes through parts of the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir under illegal occupation 

34 
 
of Pakistan, as a flagship project of China ’s One Belt One Road (OBOR) or the ‘Belt and 
Road Initiative ’ (BRI) reflects lack of appreciation of India ’s concerns on the issue of 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Government has conveyed to the Chinese side, including 
at the highest level, its concerns about their activities in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir and 
asked them to cease these activities. Government will continue to convey these concerns to 
the Chinese side at all appropriate opportunities. 
Government has raised the issue of listing of Jaish-e-Mohammad Chief Masood 
Azhar under the 1267 sanction regime with China, including at the highest level, and has 
pointed out that China’s position on listing of well known terrorists under the 1267 sanctions 
regime should be in consonance with its stated positions on terrorism. Government remains 
engaged with China as well as with the international community to sensitise them about 
India’s concerns, and about the threat terrorism poses to international peace, security and 
development.      
46.    The Committee are glad to know the widening international support to India ’s 
genuine concerns over cross border terrorism. This reflects that the diplomatic eff orts 
of the Indian Government are bearing fruit. The support of United States of America, 
Russia, EU and BRICS is commendable. The China- Pakistan Economic Corridor 
(CPEC), part of China ’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), however, remains an issue of 
serious sovereignty concern for India. Moreover, Chinese veto on listing of Jaish-e-
Mohammad chief Masood Azhar continues to be a challenge to Indian diplomacy.  The 
Committee feel that India enjoys considerable moral high ground vis-à-vis Pakistan and 
should thereby make pragmatic use of this standing to convey to the global community 
about the security implications of Pakistani sponsored terrorism and mount pressure 
on the latter to take concrete actions. The Committee would also desire the Government 
of India to continue making concerted efforts through diplomatic outreach to sensitize 
China about the manner in which CPEC and non-listing of Masood Azhar in UN 
Sanction List impinges on our sovereignty and security interests. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
Full Utilization of our rights under Indus Waters Treaty  
47.    The Committee were aware that the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960, signed between India 
and Pakistan, forms the basis for sharing of water of the Indus river and its tributaries. As per 

35 
 
the treaty, India has the right to use the Eastern Rivers (Sutlej, Beas and Ravi) while Pakistan 
would use the Western rivers (Indus, Jhelum and Chenab). The Treaty further permitted the 
limited use of water of the Western rivers by India for the following purposes: domestic use, 
non-consumptive use, agricultural use, generation of hydroelectric power and storage. The 
Committee also observed that Article IX of the treaty dealt with settlement of differences and 
disputes by the Permanent Court of Arbitration. Moreover, provisions have also been made 
for reference to a Neutral Expert and a Court of Arbitration. By withstanding various wars 
and hostilities, the Indus Waters Treaty had been widely perceived as one of the prominent 
examples of peaceful resolution of a dispute between the two sides. The Committee had, 
however, observed that in this case Pakistan has also tried to stall the Kishanganga 
Hydroelectric Project on river Kishanganga and the Ratle Hydroelectric Project on River 
Chenab, but the Committee were happy to know that the World Bank had given the required 
clearance and further talks would continue in a positive direction. The Committee were of the 
opinion that there should be no vacillation in this regard and India should take a committed 
stand to fully utilize India's treaty rights, maintaining its workability and to go ahead with the 
proposed projects to utilize its share of water in accordance with the provisions in the Indus 
Waters Treaty. 
48.    In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs responded that the 
Government agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. All efforts are being made 
for full utilisation of the rights within the framework of the Indus Waters Treaty. In this 
context, a number of projects have been contemplated on the Eastern and the Western rivers 
which are in different stages f planning, investigations, appraisal, approval and execution. 
These include Bhakra Nangal Hydroelectric Project on river Sutlej and Pong Dam on river 
Beas which have been successfully executed. Some other projects, such as Miyar Nallah, 
Lower Kalnai and Pakal Dul Hydroelectric Projects on tributary of Chenab river; 
Kishenganga project on the tributary of Jhelum river; and Ratle Hydroelectric Project on 
River Chenab, are at different stages of implementation.   
Earlier this year, an agreement has been reached between the States of Punjab and 
J&K in March 2017 to resume the construction of Shahpurkandi Project, which was lying 
suspended since 2014. Besides, the Government of J&K in August 2017 has approved the 

36 
 
execution of Ujh Multipurpose Project with assistance from the Central Government. Both 
these would allow utilization of the rights on the Indus waters system. 
49.       The Committee are pleased to note that following their recommendation, the 
Government is making all requisite efforts for full utilization of our treaty rights u nder 
the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960. Towards this direction, a series of projects have been 
contemplated on the Eastern and Western rivers. The Committee have also learnt that 
these projects are in different stages of planning, investigations, appraisal, approval 
and execution. The Committee, therefore, would recommend that the Government 
should ensure that all necessary mechanisms and procedures are put in place f or timely 
completion of all projects, without any time and cost overruns. The Committee would  
also desire to be provided with a detailed status note of the various projects under 
consideration at the earliest.    
(Recommendation No. 20) 
Humanitarian Approach to the Fishermen Issue 
50.     The Committee had noted that fishermen of India and Pakistan intrude/stray into each 
other’s territory in search of fish and as a consequence the security forces of both the 
countries apprehend them and confiscate their boats. The Committee had gone deep into the 
issues of fishermen and found that many actions are required to be taken on the part of the 
Government. The Committee had observed that Indian fishermen were often crossing the 
International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) due to non-enforcement of regulatory 
provisions with desired strictness. The Committee had observed that there exists two 
mechanisms for humanitarian exchanges, the Consular Access Agreement of 2008 and the 
India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners, but these were largely inoperative. It was 
highly unfortunate that the last visit of the Judicial Committee was held back in 2013. The 
Committee had observed that the issue of Indian fishermen crossing the IMBL encompasses 
three aspects economic, humanitarian and security. While the economic aspect of the 
problem related to providing social security and support to the families of arrested fishermen, 
the humanitarian aspect concerned the hardships faced by the arrested fishermen and the 
need for ensuring machinery which results in faster consular access and early release. The 
Committee had observed that the security dimension of this problem was significant and 

37 
 
required timely remedial measures. The risk of an Indian fishing vessel being captured and 
commandeered by subversive forces as in 2008 is always alive.  
The Committee had drawn the attention to a major loophole in the system. Fishermen 
were provided with subsidy by the State Government for installation of GPS system and 
distress alarm transmitters on their boats. Several times fishermen entered into Pakistani 
territory while switching off their GPS so that the boats were not tracked for surveillance. 
The Committee, therefore, had desired that boats should be installed with GPS. This was 
necessary for the security surveillance by any agency. The Government should take all 
necessary steps to plug that security loophole. 
The Committee had maintained that the demand for a “No Arrest Policy ” is not in 
consonance with the sovereign rights of the States under United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the SEA (UNCLOS). The Committee had, however, recommended that the 
Government take additional measures to ensure early release of the arrested fishermen as the 
current machinery of redressal was not sufficiently responsive to the humanitarian interests 
of the fishermen. There was a discrepancy between the official figure and actual number of 
the fishermen arrested by Pakistan because the list of prisoners is exchanged twice a year and 
there are longer delays in consular access to the fishermen. The Committee had, therefore, 
desired that consular access and support should be provided in the shortest possible time and 
a person knowing the local language of fishermen should be sent for that purpose. The 
Committee also insisted the Government to ensure that the fishermen are provided insurance 
cover by the fishing boat owners and in case of their detention due to trespassing of territorial 
waters, the boat owners should be made liable towards social security of the arrested 
fishermen’s family during the period when fishermen were in prison. The Committee also 
found that maximum numbers of boats captured by Pakistan are not released even after the 
release of fishermen. The Committee had desired that the matter might be taken up with 
Pakistan for release of boats along with the released fishermen. In that regard, the feasibility 
of using the sea route after the release may also be explored. There was an urgent need for 
robust arrangements with Pakistan on that issue. 
51.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply stated that Government 
attaches the highest importance to the safety, security and welfare of Indian fishermen. As 

38 
 
soon as reports of apprehension of Indian fishermen by Pakistan authorities are received, 
Government, through diplomatic channels, immediately takes up the matter with Government 
of Pakistan to secure their early release and repatriation along with their boats. 
Under the Bilateral Agreement on Consular access of 2008, both sides exchange lists 
of prisoners, including fishermen on 1 January and 1 July every year. As per the lists 
exchanged on July 1, 2017, there were 78 fishermen in Indian custody; 494 fishermen in 
Pakistan’s custody who are believed to be Indian nationals. 145 of these Indian fishermen 
have been repatriated, so far. We continue to pursue early release and repatriation of the 
remaining Indian fishermen and their boats. 
Due to persistent efforts by the Government, a total of 1406 Indian fishermen and 57 
Indian Fishing Boats have been released and repatriated so far, since 2014. A visit of a 
fishermen delegation to Pakistan in March 2016 was also facilitated to assess the condition of 
22 boats for repatriation. However, despite persistent efforts, Pakistan has so far not allowed 
follow up visit for repatriation of these boats.  
The last visit of India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners comprising retired 
High Court Judges from both sides took place from 25-31 October 2013 in India. The next 
visit is to be hosted by Pakistan. It has been proposed to Pakistan to revive the mechanism of 
Judicial Committee. Pakistan is yet to respond in the matter. 
As regard security measures, the Indian Coast Guards (ICG) has been carrying out the 
following actions to prevent Indian fishermen from crossing the notional Indo-Pak 
International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL):  
a. One ship is deployed 24x7 for patrolling along the notional IMBL. Increased 
deployment of surface units is done along the notional IMBL and off the Gujarat/ 
Maharashtra coast as and when required. 
b. The surface deployment is also supplemented by regular aerial surveillance by Coast 
Guard aircraft. 
c. Community Interaction Programmes (CIPs) for the fishermen are conducted regularly 
to bring awareness amongst fisher folk for strengthening security mechanism. In this CIP, 

39 
 
the fishermen are advised not to cross the IMBL and are educated about the methods to 
identify their position with respect to prominent landmarks. 
d. Extensive Boarding Operations at sea are conducted along the notional IMBL and off 
the Gujarat/ Maharashtra coast to enhance the physical verification of various vessels 
operating in the Maritime Zones of India. During the Boarding Operations, the fishermen 
are advised not to cross the IMBL and those found operating close to the IMBL are 
shepherded back. 
e. ICG provides Security/ Search and Rescue cover for undertaking repatriation of 
fishing boat and crew from Pakistan to India through the maritime route. 
f. As part of Coastal Surveillance, an electronic/radar chain called CSN, comprising of 
Chain of Static Sensors (CSS) having radars, AIS, day/night cameras and met sensors is 
being established in two phases. In the CSN  Phase-I, 46 remote radar stations have been 
established and operationalised. In Phase-II, 38 Radar Stations, 04 Mobile Surveillance 
Systems and integration of 13 Radar Stations of VTMS Gulf of Kutch and VATMS Gulf 
of Khambhat are proposed. The Phase-II of the project is likely to be implemented by 
2019. 
52.    The Committee had clearly highlighted all the three aspects – economic, 
humanitarian and security – relating to Indian fishermen crossing the Indian Maritime 
Boundary Line (IMBL) and pointed out the major loopholes in the existing system. The 
Committee find that a better GPS system and distress alarm transmission have not 
been installed on the boats of fishermen, leaving a serious security loophole. More 
effective efforts should be made with regard to early release of fishermen and their 
boats. There is always a discrepancy between the official figures and actual number of 
fishermen arrested by Pakistan. No commitment has been made by the Gove rnment to 
provide social security to the families of fishermen arrested by Pakistan and for release 
of fishermen with their boats through sea route. The Committee, therefore, would like 
the Government to take concrete measures on all the aspects of fishermen captured  by 
Pakistan and apprise them of the progress on the Committee ’s original 
recommendation in this regard. The India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisone rs, 
which has been inactive since 2013 should remain functional and operative, irrespective 
of the oscillating ties with the Government of Pakistan. 

40 
 
     The Committee note the various security measures undertaken by the Indian 
Coast Guard (ICG) to prevent Indian fishermen from crossing the notional Indo-Pak 
International Maritime Boundary Line. The Committee would, however, like these to 
be sufficiently bolstered for ensuring the safety and security of our fishermen on the 
Indo-Pak borders. The Committee also recommend that the Government maintain an  
updated database of the fishermen and prisoners in custody of Pakistan for effe ctive 
return and repatriation policy planning. A massive awareness campaign should also be 
launched along with a portal to reach out to a larger number of fishermen. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
Revisiting Indo-Pak ties 
53.    While analyzing the Indo-Pak relations, the Committee had noted that both the 
neighbours share a complex and difficult relationship. Various outstanding issues between 
the two sides had led to immense animosity and distrust and thereby crippling initiatives to 
bring sustainable peace. The Committee were of the firm opinion that terrorism aided and 
abetted from Pakistan remains the fulcrum around which the relations revolved today. Th e 
fixation of Pakistan ’s deep state with destabilizing India through cross border terrorism 
appeared to be the prime factor behind the persistence of adversarial relations between the 
two countries. Despite gloomy predictions about the inevitability of antagonism between 
India and Pakistan, the Committee were of the strong view that if proper diplomatic measures 
were taken by both the countries to address the present stumbling block ( i.e. the absence of 
structured dialogue) and if there was more cultural and economic engagement, there was a 
hope for conflict resolution. For achieving success in that regard, there is an urgent need to 
clearly spell out short-term, mid-term as well as long-term policy, strategy and approach to 
Pakistan so as towards enable a synergetic response amongst various Ministries, involved in 
dealing with all aspects of our relationship with Pakistan. Such a policy must be clearly 
articulated to the Indian public, which had been bewildered by the repeated oscillations 
between friendship and hostility in recent years. The Government must have evolved the 
modalities and framework for engagement on the basis of the Simla Agreement of 1972 and 
the Lahore Declaration of 1999 and proceeded in an incremental manner. Peace on the LoC, 
elimination of cross-border terrorism and genuine investigation and punishing the 
perpetrators of the Mumbai and Pathankot attacks could be the probable centre point of the 

41 
 
agenda. For the dialogue process to restart Pakistan must abide by its 2004 commitment of 
not allowing its territory for use of terrorism against India and to realize that the goodwill and 
generosity of India cannot be taken for granted. Therefore, the Committee had recommended 
the Government to adopt a National Security Framework that would spell out our overall 
strategy and approach and also lead to a consistent policy guideline to act upon. The 
Framework should have imparted a much needed coherence and synergy to our policy vis-a-
vis Pakistan. Once that was done, the Committee felt that there was a need to widen and 
deepen cultural sporting and economic engagement, which in turn would create a more 
favourable environment for the resolution of bilateral political disputes. The Committee had 
recommended that the Government continue cultural, sporting, and humanitarian exchanges 
as these cannot permanently be held hostage to the irresponsible behavior of Pakistan.
 
54.    In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that the Government has followed a 
consistent policy towards Pakistan based on the following broad principles:
 
 In keeping with pursuit of ‘neighbourhood first ’ policy and vision of friendly 
neighbourly relations and a synchronously progressing South Asia region, the 
Government has advocated peaceful, friendly and cooperative relations with Pakistan, 
in an environment free from the shadow of terrorism, violence and hostility. In this 
context, the Government has reached out to Pakistan whenever the opportunity arose.  
 All outstanding issues between India and Pakistan should be resolved peacefully and 
bilaterally in keeping with the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration.  
 Determination and resolve to not compromise on issues of national security and give a 
firm response to cross border terrorism. This resolve has been demonstrated through the 
counter terrorism operations by the Indian armed forces against various terrorist 
launching pads across the Line of Control and strong response to the unprovoked 
ceasefire violations by Pakistan along the Line of Control and the International 
Boundary inflicting significant casualties to terrorists and those providing support to 
them.  
Government has clearly conveyed to Pakistan that talks and terror cannot go together. 
A meaningful and purposeful dialogue can be held in an environment free from terror, 

42 
 
violence and hostility. The onus is on Pakistan to create such an environment. The sporting 
and cultural contacts, as recommended by the Committee can be meaningful if these are 
supported by credible and effective action against cross border terrorism from Pakistan ’s 
side. Government continues to take steps to address humanitarian issues, related to 
fishermen, prisoners, inadvertent crossers, nationals in distress and medical treatments.
 
55.    Four wars, multiple crises, mutual distrust and hostility have marred the 
relationship between India and Pakistan over seventy years. Despite the geographical 
contiguity, historical linkages and cultural bonds, differences have always prevaile d 
over similarities, making durable peace a distant dream. Looking at India-Pakistan 
relations in their entirety, the Committee feel that geo-political realities require both 
the countries to revive the dialogue process. Given the complexity of our relationship, 
there will invariably be disagreement over the nature and terms of the engagemen t 
process. The Committee would recommend an incremental approach to such a 
resumption of the dialogue process by starting with less contentious issues. Such an 
approach can begin with encouraging people to people contacts and enhancing bilater al 
trade. Pakistan needs to show intent and conviction to abide by its 2004 commitment of 
not allowing its territory to be used for anti-India activities.  The Government of Ind ia 
should adopt a strategic approach towards using its soft power resources to mount 
international pressure and influence on Pakistan to act against various terrorist 
organizations operating from its soil and also to complete the Mumbai attack trials. 
Pakistani support to such terrorist groups is inimical not only to India ’s security but 
also to that of the entire South Asian Region. The Committee, therefore, at the cost of 
sounding repetitive, recommend that India and Pakistan should revisit their 
relationship within the framework of the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration 
with the objective of managing the contentious issues and enhancing the prospects of 
mutual welfare of both peoples.
 
 
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee recognize that India - Pakistan relations have witnessed recurrent 
periods of tensions and strains and are historically complicated. The Committee note that 
there are multifarious issues concerning India and Pakistan such as territorial disputes over 
Siachen and Sir Creek, Pakistan's support to terrorist outfits, cross border infiltration, 
fomenting unrest in Indian State of Jammu &Kashmir, economic & cultural cooperation, 
Confidence Building Measures (CBMs), religious tourism and other related humanitarian 
issues. Recent developments have further complicated the relations. The Indian strategy of 
dealing with Pakistan has political, economic, cultural and military dimensions. The military 
dimension has been used only for defending the sovereignty of the country. Right from the 
time of attaining freedom, India has always worked relentlessly for a peaceful resolution of 
all contentious issues between the two countries. A peaceful and lasting solution to what is 
essentially a bilateral discord has eluded over the past seven decades due to the intransigent 
attitude of Pakistan and its misconceived adversarial connect to the relations between the two 
neighbours. Moreover, the subcontinent has seen four debilitating wars which have exacted 
significant cost on both the warring sides. Notwithstanding the continuing impasse of 
decades altogether, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the road to peace and 
economic prosperity in the region is possible only through dialogue and enforcement of the 
Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration in letter and spirit by the two nations. The 
Government of India has always followed this dictum, however, for various reasons there has 
not been the expected response from the other side. The Committee feel that the present geo-
political situation beckons Government of India to utilize its diplomatic finesse at all 
appropriate fora as also its economic clout in equal measures so that Pakistan is convinced 
that the continuing attrition is in nobody's interest and it is persuaded to join the process of 
dialogue at the earliest. The Committee, nonetheless, remain concerned that the preponderant 
role of the Pakistani military in that country, and its desire to maintain hostility on its borders 
in order to justify this preponderance, remains a long term obstacle to a peaceful resolution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee ’s observations and recommendations, inter alia, recognise th e 
complexity of the bilateral relationship between India and Pakistan. It is reiterated that 
Government desires good neighbourly relations with Pakistan. The Government had 
conveyed its readiness to resolve all outstanding issues peacefully and bilaterally in keeping 
with the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration. However, this necessarily requires an 

44 
 
environment free from terror, hostility and violence. It is for Pakistan to honour its publicly 
stated commitment not to allow any territory under its control to be used against India in any 
manner and take effective and credible action to put an end to cross border terrorism. The 
Committee may wish to appreciate that this remains the foundation of our approach. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
The Committee are aware that India shares 3,323 km of its international border 
with Pakistan. These borders are shared by four Indian States and there are two 
Ministries − Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence − responsib le for border 
management and security. The Committee are happy to find that a multi-pronged approach 
has been adopted to contain cross-border infiltration and smuggling from Pakistan. During 
their study visit to Leh, Attari and Wagah borders, the Committee were apprised about the 
prevailing situation along the border as well as the challenges of guarding the borders at 
difficult and varied terrains. The Committee had also learnt that the Government has decided 
to seal the Eastern and Western Indo-Pak border by 2018 through a Comprehensive 
Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS). The Committee are also pleased to know 
about the existence of various mechanisms between the two countries for periodic monitoring 
of the border and for dealing with minor border related issues. The Committee also observe 
that apart from patrolling by surface and air assets, electronic surveillance of the maritime 
border between the two countries is also being done. By implementing the “One Border One 
Force” principle, the Government has taken a right step towards imparting greater coherence 
in border management and security. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that the Comprehensive Integrated 
Border Management System (CIBMS) Pilot Project in Jammu spanning 5.6 Kms is under 
implementation and is likely to completed by August 2018. The remaining two Pilot Projects 
in Gujarat and Punjab are under consideration and finalization of QR. The Government 
appreciates the Committee ’s understanding on the implementation of the “One Border One 
Force” principle that has been long awaited. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
It is disquieting to note that Pakistan has been indulging in various anti-India 
activities, which inter alia include sponsoring terrorism, drug trade, circulation of fake Indian 

45 
 
currency, patronizing Sikh extremist leaders, cross-border infiltration, smuggling of narcotics 
etc. In the opinion of the Committee, such overt and covert activities are nothing less than a 
proxy war against India. The Committee note that Pakistan has been engaged in low intensity 
warfare against India through its Intelligence agency –Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and its 
militant proxies, notably the Laskar-e-Taiba (LET) and similar groups. These activities are 
being undertaken with the twin objectives of organizing and guiding anti-India activities and 
spreading anti-India feelings amongst certain sections of population located long our 
sensitive border. 
 
The Committee express strong disapproval of Pakistan ’s continued strategy of 
spearheading subversive activities in India through ISI. The Committee feels that the 
Government’s measures to curb such activities lack the necessary determination. It is 
understandable that recognizing and proving such clandestine activities is difficult. However, 
in so far as action against such acts being committed within our borders is concerned, the 
Government needs to be more decisive so as to send a clear cut message to the sponsors of 
these acts. The Committee, therefore, would encourage the Government of India to pursue a 
well-coordinated strategy to deal with such nefarious designs that pose a serious threat to our 
internal as well as external security. The Committee would further like to be apprised about 
the action taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee is assured that Government takes all necessary actions to protect its 
national and national security interests. This has been demonstrated by the Government on a 
number of occasions. The undertaking of cross LoC counter terrorist operations last year was 
one such example. Besides, our forces continue to appropriately respond to ceasefire 
violations and attempts at cross border infiltration. The Government does not lack 
determination in responding to subversive activities and has, in fact, been more decisive than 
in the past in dealing with it. A well-coordinated response is very much in evidence, both in 
understanding the surgical strikes and in neutralising cross-border terrorists. 
 
Besides, the details of drugs seized, apprehension and infiltration bid foiled by BSF, 
during the last three years and current year (upto 31.08.2017), are as under: 
 
Year Seizure of 
drugs quantity 
(in Kgs) 
Infiltration 
Cases Apprehension Killed Foiled 
2014 434.934 3 - - 3 
2015 409.213 62 - - 62 

46 
 
2016 352.737 25 11 3 25 
2017 (Aug) 393.96 14 - 5 14 
 
The following preventive steps have been taken by BSF to curb the infiltration along 
India- Pakistan International border: 
a) Vulnerability mapping of BOPs is being reviewed time to time from the point of view 
of cross-border crimes and being strengthened by deploying additional manpower, 
special Surveillance Equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support. 
 
b) Effective domination of the borders by carrying out round the clock surveillance of 
the border viz. Patrolling, laying nakas, establishing of observation posts all along th e 
IB and strengthening of existing defences of the BOPs. 
 
c) Installation of Border Floodlight on the IB 
 
d) Introduction of Force multipliers and Hi-tech Surveillance equipments to reduce 
 stress level of troops and enhance the sureillance of border. Constant efforts are being 
 made to procure the latest surveillance equipments for further enhancing the border 
domination. 
 
e) Up-gradation of intelligence network and coordination with sister agencies. 
 
f) Conduct of special operations along the border and in depth areas. 
 
g) Anti-Tunneling exercise is being conducted on regular basis in vulnerable areas. 
 
h) Use of technical solution/force multipliers. 
 
i) Mobilization of 26 SP companies from India-Bangladesh Border to India-Pakistan 
border. 
j) Induction of additional 07 battalions on Indo-Pak border. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
The Committee reiterate that the basic facts pertaining to Jammu and Kashmir being 
an integral and inalienable part of India are well documented and established. Our national 
position on Jammu &Kashmir has been clearly enunciated in the Parliamentary Resolution 
adopted unanimously by both the Houses of Parliament on 22 February, 1994. After illegally 
occupying PoK, Pakistan has been making attempts through terror funding and covert 

47 
 
support to terrorists to destabilize the Kashmir Valley. The Committee further note that 
Pakistan, through unsubstantiated and baseless allegations of violations of human rights in 
Kashmir valley, has been trying to create a false narrative about the Indian State of Ja mmu 
and Kashmir. The Committee are of the strong opinion that in the event of Pakistan not 
mending its ways, it is time the Government should become proactive and assertive about our 
rightful claims on PoK, including Gilgit-Baltistan. The Committee strongly feel that India 
should firmly keep PoK at the top of the agenda - along with terrorism – and insist that 
Pakistan vacate the area under its illegal occupation as also the portion ceded to China, 
forthwith. The Committee would also urge the Government to launch a diplomatic campaign 
to explain India’s stand on PoK and expose Pakistan’s duplicity to all friendly countries. This 
is all the more necessary now that the ChinaPakistan EconomicCorridor (CPEC) is being 
built through PoK in violation of India’s sovereignty.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The international community is well aware of the India ’s position that the entire State 
of J&K is an integral part of India, and that Pakistan is in illegal occupation of a part of J& K. 
The Government has, from time to time, continues to sensitise the members of the 
international community that they should not engage with the renegade entities from the 
Pakistan occupied Kashmir which would amount to interference in the internal affairs of 
India. 
 
Further, the Government has, in a consistent and coherent manner, apprised the 
international community about cross border terrorism as the main cause of situation in the 
Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Right to life, which is one of the most important 
human rights, is under threat from terrorism. 
 
The international community largely supports India ’s position and recognises that the 
situation created by cross border terrorism in the Indian State of J&K. The Joint Statement 
issued during the visit of the Prime Minister to the US on June 26, 2017 inter alia stated that 
“the leaders called on Pakistan to ensure that its territory is not used to launch terrorist 
attacks on other countries. ”  Further, on August 21, 2017 while unveiling the new US 
Strategy for South Asia particularly Afghanistan, President of USA Mr. Donald Trump, 
noted that “20 U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organizations are active in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan -- the highest concentration in any region anywhere in the world.” 
 
The BRICS Leaders Declaration adopted at Xiamen, China (September 04), India-
Japan Joint Statement (September 14) and the India-EU Joint Statement (October 6) 
specifically referred to strengthening cooperation against terrorist groups including Haqqani 

48 
 
Network, Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammad and D-Company, who are operating from 
Pakistan. 
 
There is clearly greater international understanding of the dangers posed to regional 
and global peace and security from the terrorism emanating from Pakistan and of the fact that 
the issue of Jammu and Kashmir must be resolved bilaterally and through peaceful means.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
It is known that on September, 29, 2016 the Indian Army carried out a limited counter 
terrorism operation along the LoC. The Government of India made a public statement that 
the operation was limited and calibrated in scope and nature. The surgical strikes were 
carried out on the basis of credible and specific intelligence inputs about positioning of 
terrorist launch pads along LoC and cumulative build up of terrorist attacks, stemming from 
Pakistani soil. The Committee make a note of the Foreign Secretary ’s statement that these 
strikes did not indicate an abandonment of India's policy of strategic restraint, rather it 
amounted to a tactical change and not in the content of the policy. The Committee also opine 
that the surgical strikes were demonstrative of India ’s restraint and mature response. The 
Committee are satisfied to know that the international, as well as regional community 
perceived India’s position positively and a number of countries also issued statements in its 
support. 
 
The Committee welcome the successful launching of surgical strikes in a restrained 
and focused way by the Indian Army. The Committee feel that by carrying out these 
operations, the Army has effectively raised the cost of using terrorism on Indian territory and 
placed the onus on Pakistan to act, rather than on India to observe restraint. The Committee 
are of the firm opinion that strategic restraint has been a cornerstone of our defence strat egy. 
The Committee would thereby, urge the Government to maintain continuity in this policy and 
simultaneously complement it with intense diplomatic outreach to highlight Pakistan's 
continued support for terrorism. The Committee are hopeful that better sense will prevail in 
Pakistan and it will abandon the strategy of carrying out low intensity warfare against India, 
which remains an insuperable obstacle to peace.
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Committee’s recommendation is carefully noted. As outlined in response to 
Recommendation no 8 and 10, Government continues to maintain consistent policy towards 
Pakistan and Government ’s efforts have contributed to enhanced recognition among the 
international community about the threat posed by terrorism emanating from Pakistan.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 

49 
 
 
(Recommendation No 16) 
As a country with strong faith in international law and the principles of United 
Nations, India made a reference to United Nations in 1948 following Pakistan’s aggression in 
the state of Jammu & Kashmir. However, Pakist an’s inability to abide by the conditions of 
UN Resolution 47 made things difficult on the ground. The Committee note that the United 
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) was deployed in 1949 
under the Karachi Agreement of 1949. The Committee observe that following the Simla 
Agreement of 1972, no resolution has been passed by the UN on the issue of Kashmir. 
 
  The Committee are of the firm opinion that after the signing of Simla Agreement and 
the coming into effect of the Line of Control, which superseded the cease-fire line of the 
Karachi Agreement of 1949, there is no scope for UN intervention on the issue of Indian 
State of Jammu & Kashmir. It has been made adequately clear that all outstanding issues 
between India and Pakistan need to be resolved peacefully and bilaterally in accordanc e with 
the Simla Agreement (1972) and the Lahore Declaration (1999). The marginal role played by 
UNMOGIP and virtually no official UNSC resolution on Kashmir in the last four decades is 
a testimony to such a recognition. The Committee, however, feel that UN as a global 
organization with the primary objective of maintenance of international peace and security 
could serve as a useful platform, together with other multilateral bodies in highlighting 
India’s concerns on Pakistani sponsored terrorism. Following the 9/11 attacks, global 
terrorism has emerged as a grave menace before the international community. India has been 
a victim of cross border terrorism for decades. The Committee would, therefore, urge the 
Government of India to reach out to various UN and other fora and highlight this problem of 
terrorism which has been imposed on us by our neighbour in defiance of all acceptable norms 
of international behaviour. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has consistently advocated in various international fora, the requirement of a 
policy of zero tolerance on terrorism including cross border terrorism.India proposed the 
adoption of a “Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism ” (CCIT) to the United 
Nations General Assembly in 1996.  Due to the position of some members who wish to 
qualify the definition of terrorism, consensus on the text of the Convention has not yet been 
achieved.   
There is growing international support for this initiative. In the World Summit held in 
September 2005, leaders stressed the need to make every effort to reach an agreement on and 
conclude a comprehensive convention on international terrorism in that session itself.  

50 
 
Several countries including the permanent members of the UN Security Council have 
voiced support for such a convention. Meetings/Summit of prominent multilateral groupings 
such as NAM (September 2016), BRICS (October 2016, September 2017) and SCO (June 
2017) have also called for the early finalization of CCIT. 
Negotiations to finalize the CCIT would continue to take place in the Sixth 
Committee of the UNGA, with a view to reach a consensus on the matter. 
Besides, as a result of consistent efforts of the Government, a number of terrorist 
individuals and entities that are based or operating from Pakistan have been designated under 
the UNSCR 1267 Sanctions Committee. These include – Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jamaat-ud Dawa, 
Jaish-e-Mohammed, Hafiz Saeed, D-Company, Dawood Ibrahim, among others. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No 17) 
 
It is indeed heartening to know that there is a wide support from the international 
community for India ’s position i.e. peaceful resolution of all outstanding issues between 
India and Pakistan within a bilateral framework on the basis of Simla Agreement (1972) and 
the Lahore Declaration (1999) without any third party intervention or mediation. The 
Committee are also happy to learn that India‟s concern with regard to cross -border terrorism 
has been largely acknowledged and echoed by the international community. It is highly 
satisfying to observe the American recognition of the danger posed by terrorism, emanating 
from Pakistani soil. Through various statements and speeches, USA has urged Pakistan to 
take actions against various terrorist organizations like Lashkar-e-Taiba, Haqqani Network 
and Jaish-e-Mohammad and has called on Pakistan to expeditiously bring to justice the 
perpetrators of 26/11 Mumbai attacks, Pathankot and other terrorist attacks. The designation 
of Syed Salauddin, the leader of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen as “Specially Designated Global 
Terrorist” on June 26, 2017 is a much awaited result of India‟s incessant efforts. The  
Committee are happy that India ’s time tested friend Russia ’s position vis-à-vis Indo-Pak 
conflict and the issue of Jammu &Kashmir has remained principled and unchanged i.e 
differences between the two should be resolved on a bilateral basis in accordance with Simla 
Agreement (1972) and Lahore Declaration (1999). The Committee however, observe that the 
China-Pakistan proximity has assumed worrisome proportions. 
 
It is quite inexplicable that a country so sensitive about sovereignty and territorial 
integrity has been oblivious about our sovereignty concerns on CPEC. It is worrisome to 
discern that some of the projects under CPEC are in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK), a part 
of the Indian State of Jammu & Kashmir which has been in illegal occupation of Pakistan 
since 1947. 
 

51 
 
The Committee would urge the Government to continue its diplomatic outreach and 
political engagement to create a favourable international opinion on the threat posed by 
Pakistani sponsored terrorism to the region in general and to India in particular. The 
international community need to realize that the use of terrorism as a state policy by a 
nuclear-armed Pakistan is not only India’s problem also but also a grave global concern. The 
Committee would therefore, suggest that the Government deepen and widen our engagement 
with both the USA as well as Russia on this issue. The Committee would strongly 
recommend the Government to continue its outreach to China at diplomatic as well as 
political levels to express our deep concerns regarding CPEC. The Government should also 
continue the dialogue with its international partners, including China, for listing of Jaish-e-
Mohammad chief Masood Azhar under the 1267 Sanctions regime of the UN Security 
Council till it is achieved.
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, India remains engaged with the US, Russia and 
China on various issues of mutual interest, including that of terrorism. Counter terrorism is 
emerging as an important area of our bilateral engagement with the United States. Both 
countries are already closely working in this area. The Trump Administration has showed 
strong intent to strengthen cooperation with India in this area. The US designated Syed 
Salahuddin as Specially Designated Global Terrorist on 26 th June 2017. Both countries have 
also constituted a new Consultation Mechanism for Terrorist Designations, which was agreed 
to during the Prime Minister’s visit to USA in June 2017. Both countries are also working to 
strengthen our bilateral cooperation through regular sharing of information on terrorist 
entities. On 21 August 2017, President Trump unveiled his new Strategy for Afghanistan and 
South Asia. We have welcomed the new Strategy which continued US commitment to and 
presence in Afghanistan; positively assesses India ’s role; and categorically asks Pakistan to 
give up support to terrorist groups. The new US Strategy is a reflection of our growing 
convergence in views and interests. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that the US and Russia has supported the efforts at the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to express concerns at the continuing activities of the 
proscribed individuals and entities in Pakistan. Their support has ensured that FATF, at its 
plenary meeting on 2 November 2017 called upon Pakistan to report on the action being 
taken to curb terror financing, especially in respect of the proscribed entities and individuals. 
 
Government is aware that China is assisting Pakistan in the development of the so-
called ‘China-Pakistan Economic Corridor ’ (CPEC). The inclusion of the so-called CPEC, 
which passes through parts of the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir under illegal occupation 
of Pakistan, as a flagship project of China ’s One Belt One Road (OBOR) or the ‘Belt and 
Road Initiative ’ (BRI) reflects lack of appreciation of India ’s concerns on the issue of 

52 
 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Government has conveyed to the Chinese side, including 
at the highest level, its concerns about their activities in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir and 
asked them to cease these activities. Government will continue to convey these concerns to 
the Chinese side at all appropriate opportunities. 
 
Government has raised the issue of listing of Jaish-e-Mohammad Chief Masood 
Azhar under the 1267 sanction regime with China, including at the highest level, and has 
pointed out that China’s position on listing of well known terrorists under the 1267 sanctions 
regime should be in consonance with its stated positions on terrorism. Government remains 
engaged with China as well as with the international community to sensitise them about 
India’s concerns, and about the threat terrorism poses to international peace, security and 
development.      
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 (Recommendation No. 18) 
 
The Committee feel that the tortuous relationship between India and Pakistan has 
geo-strategic and geo-political implications in the entire region. The Committee note that 
given the constraint of raising bilateral topics in a regional forum, India has raised the issue 
of cross-border terrorism under the mechanism of the meeting of Ministers/Secretaries of 
Home/Interior of SAARC Members. The Committee are of the considered opinion that by 
acting as a stumbling block in all major regional connectivity and developmental projects, 
Pakistan has made SAARC almost a dysfunctional regional grouping. The Committee 
appreciate that India ’s concerns over cross-border terrorism has found regional support and 
backing. The withdrawal of Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Nepal from the proposed SAARC 
summit in 2016 is testimony to Pakistani sponsored terrorism being recognized as a regional 
concern. The Committee would urge the Government of India to have constructive 
engagement with all the SAARC countries to take effective measures for the implementation 
of the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism. The Committee are well 
aware of India ’s constructive role in reconstruction and development of Afghanistan. It is 
difficult to comprehend Pakistan ’s paranoia about India ’s active role in Afghanistan. In 
addition to cross border terrorism in India, Pakistan has been supporting the Afghan Taliban, 
Haqqani Network and other terrorist groups. The Committee welcome the Amritsar 
Declaration adopted at the Sixth Heart of Asia Conference in December, 2016. The 
Committee would recommend that the Government of India continue its support for 
reconstruction and developmental efforts in Afghanistan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Development cooperation has been the cornerstone of our Strategic Partnership with 
Afghanistan. Since 2001, India has extended assistance of nearly US$ 2 billion for socio-

53 
 
economic development, reconstruction and capacity building in Afghanistan. Major 
infrastructure projects that have been handed over include the Parliament building 
(December 2015) and Afghan-India Friendship Dam in Heart (June 2016). Last year, India 
announced a further assistance of US$ 1 billion to Afghanistan.  
 
In September 2017, a next generation ‘New Development Partnership' was 
announced. Under this, both sides have agreed to implement 116 new 'High Impact 
Community Development Projects' in 31 out of 34 provinces of Afghanistan in several areas, 
including in the areas of education, health, renewable energy, administrative infrastructure, 
roads, drinking water, irrigation and agriculture. Besides, India has also agreed to support 
Shahtoot Dam and drinking water project for Kabul; low cost housing for returning refugees 
from Pakistan in Nangarhar Province of Afghanistan; water supply network for Charikar city; 
road network in central Bamyan province; polyclinic in Mazar-e-Sharif; use of remote 
sensing satellite in resource management, among others.  
 
Building robust, reliable and year round connectivity to and from Afghanistan has 
been accorded a high priority. In June 2017, air-freight corridor was established between the 
cities of Kabul and Kandahar in Afghanistan and New Delhi in India. The corridor has been 
working smoothly and over 28 flights have successfully operated. It has been agreed to 
increase it frequency and add new cities. Efforts have been made for expediting and 
operationalizing connectivity through Chahbahar Port in Iran. The first consignment of wheat 
assistance to Afghanistan through Chahbahar port that was flagged off from Kandla port on 
29 October 2017 has reached Afghanistan. It has demonstrated the viability and connectivity 
of the route and would pave the way for full operationalisation of the Port. India has also 
announced its readiness to receive Afghan trucks to carry goods to and from India at the 
Integrated Check Post (ICP) at Attari. However, Pakistan continue to obstruct transit to 
Afghan trucks to ICP Attari. 
 
Human resource development and capacity building has been an anchor of our 
partnership. ICCR ’s Annual Special Scholarship Scheme for 1000 Afghan nationals to 
pursue studies at undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral completed in India completed ten 
years in 2016. Given its success and popularity, the scheme has been extended till 2021-22. 
From the academic year 2018-19, ICCR will also implement a special scheme of 500 
scholarships for the next of kin of the martyred Afghan security personnel. Besides, over 500 
slots are being offered to Afghan officials for short term training under the Indian Technical 
and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme. In addition, 614 scholarships have been 
extended to Afghan nationals for studies in the field of Agriculture in India.  
 
India has extended assistance to the Afghan National Defence & Security Forces 
(ANDSF). Since 2001, India has trained over 4,800 Afghan Army personnel and over 550 

54 
 
Afghan Air Force personnel. We have also provided equipment like ambulances, military 
vehicles, small arms, and transport helicopters. In 2015-2016, India provided Afghanistan 
with four Mi-25 helicopters to ANSDF. 
 
India’s role in socio-economic development in Afghanistan has been internationally 
recognised and received widespread support within Afghanistan. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
 The Committee are aware that the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960, signed between India 
and Pakistan, forms the basis for sharing of water of the Indus river and its tributaries. As per 
the treaty, India has the right to use the Eastern Rivers (Sutlej, Beas and Ravi) while Pakistan 
would use the Western rivers (Indus, Jhelum and Chenab). The Treaty further permits the 
limited use of water of the Western rivers by India for the following purposes: domestic use, 
non-consumptive use, agricultural use, generation of hydroelectric power and storage. The 
Committee also observe that Article IX of the treaty deals with settlement of differences and 
disputes by the Permanent Court of Arbitration. Moreover, provisions have also been made 
for reference to a Neutral Expert and a Court of Arbitration. By withstanding various wars 
and hostilities, the Indus Waters Treaty has been widely perceived as one of the prominent 
examples of peaceful resolution of a dispute between the two sides. The Committee, 
however, observe that in this case Pakistan has also tried to stall the Kishanganga 
Hydroelectric Project on river Kishanganga and the Ratle Hydroelectric Project on River 
Chenab, but the Committee is happy to know that the World Bank has given the required 
clearance and further talks would continue in a positive direction. The Committee are of the 
opinion that there should be no vacillation in this regard and India should take a committed 
stand to fully utilize India's treaty rights, maintaining its workability and to go ahead with the 
proposed projects to utilize its share of water in accordance with the provisions in the Indus 
Waters Treaty.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. All efforts are being 
made for full utilisation of the rights within the framework of the Indus Waters Treaty. In this 
context, a number of projects have been contemplated on the Eastern and the Western rivers 
which are in different stages f planning, investigations, appraisal, approval and execution. 
These include Bhakra Nangal Hydroelectric Project on river Sutlej and Pong Dam on river 
Beas which have been successfully executed. Some other projects, such as Miyar Nallah, 
Lower Kalnai and Pakal Dul Hydroelectric Projects on tributary of Chenab river; 

55 
 
Kishenganga project on the tributary of Jhelum river; and Ratle Hydroelectric Project on 
River Chenab, are at different stages of implementation.   
 
Earlier this year, an agreement has been reached between the States of Punjab and 
J&K in March 2017 to resume the construction of Shahpurkandi Project, which was lying 
suspended since 2014. Besides, the Government of J&K in August 2017 has approved the 
execution of Ujh Multipurpose Project with assistance from the Central Government. Both 
these would allow utilization of the rights on the Indus waters system. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
The Committee are aware that the Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India 
(TAPI) pipeline is a proposed natural gas pipeline connecting Central Asia and South Asia. 
The construction of the Turkmenistan leg of the pipeline started in 2015. However, its 
progress appears tardy in view of several challenges. The Committee note that security, 
funding and geology-detailed route survey are major hindrances to the operationalization of 
this pipeline. In light of these challenges, the feasibility of this project has been questioned. 
The Committee believe that the TAPI Pipeline Project will not only help in transporting gas 
but will also integrate the economically disconnected region and ensure the energy sec urity 
of all the four countries. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Government of India to 
continue constructive regional engagements for operationalization of this pipeline at the 
earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline Company Limited, 
i.e. TPCL, has engaged M/s. ILF Beratende Ingenieure GmbH (ILF) as Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) for carrying out Front End Engineering Design (FEED) and other p re-
project activities. M/s. ILF has recently commenced the activity pertaining to route survey 
work in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Final Investment Decision (FID) would be subject to 
techno-commercial viability of the project. 
 
TPCL has decided to have 56 inch diameter pipeline with a total estimated length  of 
1814 km and will transport 90 MMSCMD of natural gas, of which 38 MMSCMD is for 
India. 
 
The estimated cost of the project is US $15 billion according to the ADB 
commissioned report. ADB is the Transaction Advisor for the project. The overall TAPI 

56 
 
project duration is estimated to be 6¾ years from the start of the Front End Engineering 
Design (FEED) process till handling over of the pipeline for commercial operation. 
 
As per the Inter-Governmental Agreement, signed on 11th December 2010 among the 
four participating countries, the Parties have guaranteed the security and safety of that part of 
the TAPI Pipeline crossing their respective territories. 
 
During a meeting between MoS (I/C) PNG and visiting Foreign Minister of 
Turkmenistan in Delhi, India conveyed its commitment to play its role with responsibility in 
implementing the TAPI pipeline project. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
 
 
 
  

57 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
-NIL- 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the dialogue process between India and Pakistan has gone 
through numerous highs and lows in their bilateral relations. It has remained susceptible to 
unforeseen incidents which have derailed the peace process several times. A structured 
dialogue process between the two sides has been functioning since 2004 under the rubric of 
Composite Dialogue Process (2004-2008) and Resumed Dialogue Process (2011-13). Based 
on a compromise approach, the peace process had enabled the two countries to discuss all 
issues including Jammu &Kashmir. The Dialogue led to a ceasefire along the LoC, 
encouraged the possibilities of bilateral trade, inspired better people to people contacts and 
helped create conditions conducive for mature negotiations. During this process, a number of 
Track Two mechanisms outside the formal channels of diplomacy had also played an 
important role. The Committee further discern that the dialogue process between the two 
countries has followed a cyclical process of dialogue-terrorist attacks-dialogue. As a result, 
the modalities for starting the Composite Bilateral Dialogue have not been finalized till date. 
Having dialogue in the wake of terrorist attacks emanating from Pakistani soil has been the 
most challenging issue with successive Indian Governments. The Mumbai terror attack in 
November, 2008 pushed the peace process close to the brink of failure but it was not scuttled. 
In between, several efforts were made to initiate the dialogue process but it faced a big 
setback in the aftermath of the terrorist attack on the Air Force base in Pathankot in January, 
2016. 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that peace process should not be held 
hostage to the acts of terrorism and both the countries must keep the channels of 
communication open, even during the worst of crises and not let non-state actors and their 
state sponsors derail or dictate the foreign policy objectives of sovereign nations. They 
further believe that the engagement between neighbours cannot be stopped i ndefinitely. 
Dialogue process encompasses three key ingredients ̶building cooperative mechanisms , 
dispute redressal and a humanitarian aspect. The Committee find the Government's policy of 
suspending formal level dialogue with Pakistan owing to national security concerns as 
justified by compulsions. However, as averred in the previous recommendation, the 
Committee strongly urge the Government of India to use its good offices with all appropriate 
players and agencies so that Pakistan is made to realize the futility of continued imbroglio 
and is duly persuaded to join the dialogue at the earliest. In the meantime, the Committee 
would like the Government to work out a clear-cut policy with regard to do's and don'ts in the 

59 
 
bilateral relation as also the faultlines that both sides would be expected to scrupulously 
follow as non-negotiable.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government’s consistent policy has been that it desires good-neighbourly relations 
with Pakistan and is committed to addressing all outstanding issues bilaterally through 
peaceful means in accordance with Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration. However, this 
necessarily requires an environment free from terror, hostility and violence. 
 
The Government does follow a clear-cut policy that is the basis for its approach to 
engaging Pakistan. It firmly believes that there can be no compromise on the issue of cross 
border terrorism. It is for Pakistan to honour its publicly stated commitment not to allow any 
territory under its control to be used against India in any manner and take effective and 
credible action to put an end to cross border terrorism. 
 
The Government has maintained the channels of communications open with Pakistan, 
including through respective diplomatic missions, and regular contacts between the border 
guarding forces on both sides.  
 
The Government has also attached importance to addressing all humanitarian issues 
including those related to fishermen, prisoners, inadvertent crossers, nationals and medical 
treatment. Consistent efforts have been made to secure and early and expeditious release and 
repatriation of the prisoners and fishermen. At the same time, assistance has been extended to 
Indian nationals in distress in Pakistan. Government has also facilitated the visits of pilgrim 
groups under the bilateral protocol. 
 
At the same time, it has been made clear to Pakistan that a meaningful structured 
Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue would be possible only in an environment free from terror 
and violence.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 The Committee have noted that India's policy and approach towards Pakistan has 
been formulated on three broad principles, namely peaceful resolution of outstanding issues 
in keeping with the Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration, normalization of ties without 
compromising national security considerations and responding firmly to cross border 
terrorism. The Committee are, however, constrained to observe that the repeated existence of 
multiple crises resulting from militancy, insurgency, terrorist attacks, unsettled border 

60 
 
disputes etc. clearly demonstrates the need for a National Security Framework and a coherent 
strategy towards Pakistan. 
 
While the Government may say that a lot has been controlled, the goings-on, on the 
Western border have created a public perception that anti-national activities through proxies 
are still being carried out with impunity. Such a situation could have been avoided had the 
Government put in place a National Security Framework. The Committee desire that a 
comprehensive National Security Framework be worked out after evolving consensus on its 
various aspects. The Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should play a 
rightful role in shaping such a Framework without any further loss of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government notes and values the enormous public support for its strong and 
decisive response to check anti-national activities. This has been possible through 
significantly improved coordination within the Government and more confident leadership. 
Committee is assured that necessary inter-ministerial coordination mechanism and 
framework are in place to respond to emergent challenges in a consistent manner.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that strategic considerations in the wake of Pakistani aggression 
had led to the occupation of the Siachen Glacier in 1983. The Committee are cognizant of 
various operational and natural challenges faced by our security forces while guarding the 
commanding heights of the region. It is further observed that 13 rounds of official talks at the 
Defence Secretary level have been held so far to resolve the dispute. The Committee are 
satisfied to know that the Indian Army is at an advantageous position vis-à-vis Pakistani 
forces in the Siachen. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the deployment of 
Indian forces at Siachen under looming security threat from Pakistan, cannot be de-linked 
from the overall security of the Kashmir region. In view of the fact that India is currently 
occupying strategic heights and advantage at Siachen, it is Pakistan‟s agenda to push for 
demilitarization of the glacier. Moreover, the Committee observe that the present cooperation 
between China and Pakistan has assumed worrying proportions and therefore, the Committee 
would recommend the Government of India to analyse the challenges clearly and accordingly 
persist with the right strategy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

61 
 
The Committee ’s recommendation is taken note of. It is reiterated that the 
Government continuously monitors the developments and takes all necessary steps to protect 
the national interest and security of the country. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
The Committee are aware that cross border terrorism, law and order problems in the 
Kashmir Valley and material as well as financial support from Pakistan to the terrorists and 
extremist groups operating in J&K are the main concern of the Government and the biggest 
hurdles in the dialogue process. The Committee are dismayed to observe the spurt in unrest 
and violence in the Kashmir Valley since the death of a Hizb-ul Mujahideen terrorist in an 
encounter on July 8, 2016. Frequent attempts for infiltration of terrorists from across the 
border have become a regular feature. The Committee, however, are happy to observ e that 
our forces have prevented a large number of infiltration attempts through the border and have 
started eliminating the terrorists in the valley in a planned way. Moreover, our intense 
diplomatic outreach has led the international community to recognize the role being played 
by Pakistan in fomenting cross-border terrorism in India. 
 
The Committee desire that such efforts should continue till Pakistan is exposed 
internationally and its stops such activities and also till the false narrative of human rights 
violations in Jammu &Kashmir being created at international fora is exposed. The 
Committee are further concerned to observe the growing sense of alienation in the Kashmiri 
youth, largely due to their radicalization by anti-national elements and lack of adequate 
employment opportunities. The Committee also observe that a series of attempts have been 
made by the Government of India to mainstream the youth of J&K by providing better 
education and employment to them but it has not yielded the desired results. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Government should take all possible measures including 
infrastructural and economic developments prevent radicalization of youth by Pakistani 
supported anti-national elements within Jammu & Kashmir. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
According to available information, the Rs. 80,000 crores special assistance package 
announced by the Prime Minister for J&K is already being fast tracked. Nearly Rs 20,000 has 
already been released. 63 development projects are being implemented in the areas of roads, 
power, new and renewable energy, tourism, health, education, water resources, sports, urban 
development, textiles. These measures, have already made an impact on the youth of th e 
State and contributed to declining support for violence and anti-national activities. 

62 
 
 
According to additional inputs received from BSF, the civic action programmes 
generally carried out by BSF in border areas (Development Block/Police stations having IB 
in border districts bordering IB/LOC) and remote and inaccessible areas of the state which 
are affected by terrorism. It acts as a bridge between the security forces and the local people. 
 
During CFY year 2017-18, CAP committee approved to allot an amount of Rs. 
1,67,98,360/- to conduct Football tournament, medical camps and skill development 
programme in J&K region. In addition proposal to conduct Bharat Darshan Tour for School 
Children and All India tour for inmates residing in Gujjar and Bakerwal Hostels is under 
consideration. 
 
CAP activities conducted by BSF in J&K region in 2016-17 as under: 
 
S. No. Budget allotted Expenditure Activities 
1 Rs. 1,30,66,000/- Rs. 1,30,65,377/- (i) Medical Camp 
(ii) Sports activities 
(iii) Bharat Darshan Tour 
(iv) Construction of toilet blocks 
2 Rs. 1,50,000/- Rs. 1,50,000/- Distribution of Artificial Limbs 
3 Rs. 70,00,000/- Rs. 70,00,000/- For setting up or a resource centre at 
Kupwara (J&K) through ߧSelf employed 
women associationsߨAhmadabad. 
4 Rs. 43,26,000/- Rs. 43,26,000/- 
 
Further, to Curb the infiltration following preventive steps have been taken by BSF 
along India--Pak International border: 
 
(a) Vulnerability mapping of BOPs is being reviewed time to time from the point of view 
of cross-border crimes and being strengthened by deploying additional manpower, 
Spl Surveillance Equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support. 
 
(b) Effective domination of the borders by carrying out round the clock surveillance of 
the border viz. Patrolling, laying nakas, establishing of observation posts all along the 
IB and strengthening of existing defences of the BOPs. 
 
(c) Installation of Border Floodlight on the IB. 
 
(d) Introduction of Force multipliers and Hi-Tech Surveillance equipments to reduce 
stress level of troops and enhance the surveillance of border. Constant efforts are 
being made to procure the latest surveillance equipments for further enhancing the 
border domination. 

63 
 
 
(e) Up-gradation of intelligence (Int) network and coordination with sister agencies. 
 
(f) Conduct of special operation along the border and in depth areas. 
 
(g) Anti-Tunneling exercise is being conducted on regular basis in vulnerable areas. 
 
(h) Use of technical solution/force multipliers. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
The Committee note that fishermen of India and Pakistan intrude/stray into each 
other’s territory in search of fish and as a consequence the security forces of both the 
countries apprehend them and confiscate their boats. The Committee have gone deep into the 
issues of fishermen and found that many actions are required to be taken on the part of the 
Government. The Committee have observed that Indian fishermen are often crossing the 
International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) due to non-enforcement of regulatory 
provisions with desired strictness. The Committee observe that there exists two mechanisms 
for humanitarian exchanges, the Consular Access Agreement of 2008 and the India-Pakistan 
Judicial Committee on Prisoners, but these are largely inoperative. It is highly unfortunate 
that the last visit of the Judicial Committee was held back in 2013. The Committee observe 
that the issue of Indian fishermen crossing the IMBL encompasses three aspects economic, 
humanitarian and security. While the economic aspect of the problem relates to providing 
social security and support to the families of arrested fishermen, the humanitarian aspect 
concerns the hardships faced by the arrested fishermen and the need for ensuring machinery 
which results in faster consular access and early release. The Committee observe that the 
security dimension of this problem is significant and requires timely remedial measures. The 
risk of an Indian fishing vessel being captured and commandeered by subversive forces as in 
2008 is always alive.  
 
The Committee would like to draw the attention to a major loophole in the system. 
Fishermen are provided with subsidy by the State Government for installation of GPS system 
and distress alarm transmitters on their boats. Several times fishermen enter into Pakistani 
territory while switching off their GPS so that the boats are not tracked for surveillance. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that boats should be installed with GPS. This is necessary for 
the security surveillance by any agency. The Government should take all necessary steps to 
plug this security loophole. 
 
The Committee maintain that the demand for a “No Arrest Policy ” is not in 
consonance with the sovereign rights of the States under United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the SEA (UNCLOS). The Committee, however, would recommend that the 

64 
 
Government take additional measures to ensure early release of the arrested fishermen as the 
current machinery of redressal is not sufficiently responsive to the humanitarian interests of 
the fishermen. There is a discrepancy between the official figure and actual number of the 
fishermen arrested by Pakistan because the list of prisoners is exchanged twice a year and 
there are longer delays in consular access to the fishermen. The Committee therefore, desire 
that consular access and support should be provided in the shortest possible time and a 
person knowing the local language of fishermen should be sent for that purpose. The 
Committee would also insist the Government to ensure that the fishermen are provide d 
insurance cover by the fishing boat owners and in case of their detention due to trespassing of 
territorial waters, the boat owners should be made liable towards social security of the 
arrested fishermen’s family during the period when fishermen are in prison. The Committee 
also find that maximum number of boats captured by Pakistan are not released even after the 
release of fishermen. The Committee desire that the matter may be taken up with Pakistan for 
release of boats along with the released fishermen. In this regard, the feasibility of using the 
sea route after the release may also be explored. There is an urgent need for robust 
arrangements with Pakistan on this issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government attaches the highest importance to the safety, security and welfare of 
Indian fishermen. As soon as reports of apprehension of Indian fishermen by Pakistan 
authorities are received, Government, through diplomatic channels, immediately takes up the 
matter with Government of Pakistan to secure their early release and repatriation along with 
their boats. 
Under the Bilateral Agreement on Consular access of 2008, both sides exchange lists 
of prisoners, including fishermen on 1 January and 1 July every year. As per the lists 
exchanged  on July 1, 2017, there were 78 fishermen in Indian custody; 494 fishermen in 
Pakistan’s custody who are believed to be Indian nationals. 145 of these Indian fishermen 
have been repatriated, so far. We continue to pursue early release and repatriation of the 
remaining Indian fishermen and their boats. 
Due to persistent efforts by the Government, a total of 1406 Indian fishermen and 57 
Indian Fishing Boats have been released and repatriated so far, since 2014. A visit of a 
fishermen delegation to Pakistan in March 2016 was also facilitated to assess the condition of 
22 boats for repatriation. However, despite persistent efforts, Pakistan has so far not allowed 
follow up visit for repatriation of these boats.  
The last visit of India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners comprising retired 
High Court Judges from both sides took place from 25-31 October 2013 in India. The next 
visit is to be hosted by Pakistan. It has been proposed to Pakistan to revive the mechanism of 
Judicial Committee. Pakistan is yet to respond in the matter. 

65 
 
As regard security measures, the Indian Coast Guards (ICG) has been carrying out the 
following actions to prevent Indian fishermen from crossing the notional Indo-Pak 
International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL):  
(a) One ship is deployed 24 x 7 for patrolling along the notional IMBL. Increased 
deployment of surface units is done along the notional IMBL and off the Gujarat/ 
Maharashtra coast as and when required. 
(b) The surface deployment is also supplemented by regular aerial surveillance by Coast 
Guard aircraft. 
(c) Community Interaction Programmes (CIPs) for the fishermen are conducted regularly 
to bring awareness amongst fisher folk for strengthening security mechanism. In this 
CIP, the fishermen are advised not to cross the IMBL and are educated about the 
methods to identify their position with respect to prominent landmarks. 
(d) Extensive Boarding Operations at sea are conducted along the notional IMBL and off 
the Gujarat/ Maharashtra coast to enhance the physical verification of various vessels 
operating in the Maritime Zones of India. During the Boarding Operations, the 
fishermen are advised not to cross the IMBL and those found operating close to the 
IMBL are shepherded back. 
(e) ICG provides Security/ Search and Rescue cover for undertaking repatriation of 
fishing boat and crew from Pakistan to India through the maritime route. 
(f) As part of Coastal Surveillance, an electronic/radar chain called CSN, comprising of 
Chain of Static Sensors (CSS) having radars, AIS, day/night cameras and met sensors 
is being established in two phases. In the CSN  Phase-I, 46 remote radar stations have 
been established and operationalised. In Phase-II, 38 Radar Stations, 04 Mobile 
Surveillance Systems and integration of 13 Radar Stations of VTMS Gulf of Kutch 
and VATMS Gulf of Khambhat are proposed. The Phase-II of the project is likely to 
be implemented by 2019. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No 22) 
 
While analysing Indo-Pak relations, the Committee have noted that both the 
neighbours share a complex and difficult relationship. Various outstanding issues between 
the two sides have led to immense animosity and distrust and thereby crippling initiatives to 
bring sustainable peace. The Committee are of the firm opinion that terrorism aided and 
abetted from Pakistan remains the fulcrum around which the relations revolve today. The 
fixation of Pakistan ’s deep state with destabilizing India through cross border terrorism 

66 
 
appears to be the prime factor behind the persistence of adversarial relations between the two 
countries. Despite gloomy predictions about the inevitability of antagonism between India 
and Pakistan, the Committee are of the strong view that if proper diplomatic measures are 
taken by both the countries to address the present stumbling block (i.e. the absence of 
structured dialogue) and if there is more cultural and economic engagement, there is a hope 
for conflict resolution. For achieving success in this regard, there is an urgent need to clearly 
spell out short-term, mid-term as well as long-term policy, strategy and approach to Pakistan 
so as towards enable a synergetic response amongst various Ministries, involved in dealing 
with all aspects of our relationship with Pakistan. Such a policy must be clearly articulated to 
the Indian public, which has been bewildered by the repeated oscillations between friendship 
and hostility in recent years. The Government must evolve the modalities and framework for 
engagement on the basis of the Simla Agreement of 1972 and the Lahore Declaration of 1999 
and proceed in an incremental manner. Peace on the LoC, elimination of cross-border 
terrorism and genuine investigation and punishing the perpetrators of the Mumbai and 
Pathankot attacks could be the probable centre point of the agenda. For the dialogue process 
to restart Pakistan must abide by its 2004 commitment of not allowing its territory for use of 
terrorism against India and to realize that the goodwill and generosity of India cannot be 
taken for granted. Therefore, the Committee would recommend the Government to adopt a 
National Security Framework that would spell out our overall strategy and approach and also 
lead to a consistent policy guideline to act upon. The Framework should impart a much 
needed coherence and synergy to our policy vis-a-vis Pakistan. Once this is done, the 
Committee feel that there is a need to widen and deepen cultural sporting and economic 
engagement, which in turn would create a more favourable environment for the resolution of 
bilateral political disputes. The Committee would recommend that the Government continue 
cultural, sporting, and humanitarian exchanges as these cannot permanently be held hostage 
to the irresponsible behavior of Pakistan.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has followed a consistent policy towards Pakistan based on the 
following broad principles: 
 In keeping with pursuit of ‘neighbourhood first ’ policy and vision of friendly 
neighbourly relations and a synchronously progressing South Asia region, the 
Government has advocated peaceful, friendly and cooperative relations with Pakistan, 
in an environment free from the shadow of terrorism, violence and hostility. In this 
context, the Government has reached out to Pakistan whenever the opportunity arose.  
 
 All outstanding issues between India and Pakistan should be resolved peacefully and 
bilaterally in keeping with the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration.  
 

67 
 
 Determination and resolve to not compromise on issues of national security and give 
a firm response to cross border terrorism. This resolve has been demonstrated through 
the counter terrorism operations by the Indian armed forces against various terrorist 
launching pads across the Line of Control and strong response to the unprovoked 
ceasefire violations by Pakistan along the Line of Control and the International 
Boundary inflicting significant casualties to terrorists and those providing support to 
them.  
 
Government has clearly conveyed to Pakistan that talks and terror cannot go together. 
A meaningful and purposeful dialogue can be held in an environment free from terror, 
violence and hostility. The onus is on Pakistan to create such an environment. The sporting 
and cultural contacts, as recommended by the Committee can be meaningful if these are 
supported by credible and effective action against cross border terrorism from Pakistan ’s 
side. Government continue to take steps to address humanitarian issues, related to fishermen, 
prisoners, inadvertent crossers, nationals in distress and medical treatments. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
  

68 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
The Committee appreciate the Border Security Force (BSF) for their commendable 
task of safeguarding India-Pakistan border. In view of the prevailing volatile situation along 
the border, the Committee would recommend that the Government should take tangible steps 
to strengthen and modernize border security. The Committee would particularly express their 
concern towards poor road conditions along the border and desire that along with fencing, the 
Government should take focussed steps to properly maintain the existing roads and construct 
good and well lit roads along the Indo-Pak border for proper vigilance. While appreciating 
the proposed decision of the Government to introduce Comprehensive Integrated Border 
Management System (CIBMS), the Committee would suggest that it should be completed in 
a time-bound manner without any cost and time overruns. 
 
The Committee note that modern technological means, including sophisticated 
electronic sensors and powerful satellites, are the need of the hour to ensure real-time 
surveillance on the borders. The Committee are happy to note that ISRO is working very 
ambitiously on this project and adequate funds for the same are also available. The 
Committee are hopeful that ISRO will complete the project in a time-bound manner and hand 
over the same to the Border Management Department for effective border surveillance. The 
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this direction. The Committee are also 
concerned to observe that Punjab has become a hotbed for drugs and illegal smuggling 
through the border. The Committee, therefore, would strongly suggest that BSF should 
sufficiently shore up defences against drug trafficking and there should be a greater s ynergy 
between various agencies to counter drug menace in the State of Punjab. Coastal security 
being equally important, the Committee also recommend the Government to take measures to 
strengthen coastal security and surveillance and it should be made full proof by establishing a 
high level co-ordination mechanism between Indian Coast Guard and other agencies such as 
the Navy, Central Industrial Security Force, Customs, Ports, Fisheries, Marine, Police etc.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The following is the status of various actions being taken on the above observations 
based on the inputs received from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Border Security 
Force (BSF) and the Indian Coast Guards (ICG): 
 
A report on utilization of Space technology in Border management and estimated 

69 
 
financial implication involved in the action plan for effective use of space technology based 
tools, duly worked out by task force is under consideration at MHA for implementation. 
 
The following preventive steps have been taken by BSF to curb the smuggling of 
drugs along India-Pakistan border: 
 
a) Vulnerability mapping of BOPs is being reviewed time to time from the point of view 
of cross-border crimes and being strengthened by deploying additional manpower, 
special Surveillance Equipments, vehicles and other infrastructure support. 
 
b) Effective domination of the borders by carrying out round the clock surveillance of 
the border viz. Patrolling, laying nakas, establishing of observation posts all along the 
IB and strengthening of existing defences of the BOPs. 
 
c) Installation of Border Floodlight on the IB. 
 
d) Introduction of Force multipliers and Hi-Tech Surveillance equipments to reduce 
stress level of troops and enhance the surveillance of border. Constant efforts are 
being made to procure the latest surveillance equipments for further enhancing the 
border domination. 
 
e) Up-gradation of intelligence  network and coordination with sister agencies. 
 
f) Conduct of special operations along the border and in depth areas. 
 
g) Anti-Tunneling exercise is being conducted on regular basis in vulnerable areas. 
 
h) Use of technical solution/ force multipliers. 
 
In addition to various projects of construction of roads in border area being 
undertaken by CPWD, following requirement of Border Road has been projected with MHA: 
 
(i) Jammu: proposal for construction of 179 Kms Border roads is in process. Out of 179 Kms 
Border Roads, MHA has approved 33.10 Kms as a Pilot project, out of 33.10 Kms the work 
is in progress and the status is as under:- 
  
a) Manihari Sector – 16.50 Kms 
b) Abdulian Sector – 05.45 Kms 
c) Paragwal Sector – 04.20 Kms 
 

70 
 
For the balance 146 Kms road, Govt of Jammu and Kashmir has been requested to 
provide the details of land required to be acquired for this proposal and other details. 
 
(ii) Punjab: For construction of road bridge and culverts in Punjab approval has been 
accorded to an estimated expenditure of Rs. 8.2 crore for consultancy work and design of 
road, bridges, culverts etc. for initiation of tender on EPC mode for construction of lateral 
and Axial Road along India-Pakistan Border in Punjab State (610 Kms). 
 
(iii) Rajasthan: For construction of Lateral road along Border fencing and connecting Border  
roads from BOPs to lateral roads in Rajasthan Sector (1207.42 Kms) is under process of 
internal approvals. 
 
(iv) Gujarat: Out of 340 Kms sanctioned Border Road in Gujarat, 279.680 Kms Boarder road 
has been completed and remaining 60.320 Kms of Border roads work in Gujarat Boarder 
between BP No. 1012 to 1051 put on hold. 
 
(a) In order to have smooth coordination between Indian Coast Guard, Indian Navy (IN), 
Coastal Police and other stakeholders, various high level meetings are conducted to review 
the Coastal Security construct. Some of the meetings held to review the coastal security are 
as follows:- 
 
(i) On completion of every Coastal Security exercise, conducted biannually by ICG in each 
Coastal State, a meeting on Coastal Security chaired by the Chief Secretary of the respective 
Coastal State and attended by senior representatives of the stakeholders involved in Coastal 
Security is held. During the meeting, the observations of the coastal security exerci se are 
discussed and remedial measures are taken. 
 
In addition, Hon'ble Raksha Mantri holds regular meetings to assess the status of the Coastal 
Security activities. 
 
Further, Secretary Border Management/ MHA holds regular meetings to review the Coastal  
Security mechanism  which are attended by all the stake holders including ICG and the Indi an 
Navy. 
 
With a view to ensure timely implementation of various decisions taken by the Govern ment in 
respect of Coastal Security of the country, the Government has constituted a ͚National 
Committee on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against threats from the Sea ͛ with 
Cabinet Secretary as the Chairman. The Committee meets twice a year and monitors the activities 
of Coastal Security. Till date, 14 such meetings have been held. 
 

71 
 
(b) The joint efforts of the various stakeholders viz. IN, ICG, Coastal Police and various state 
authorities have positively contributed towards strengthening the Coastal Security apparatus. 
Post 26/11, following significant measures have been undertaken by the Indian Coast Guard  
for enhanced security mechanism against seaward threats:- 
 
(i) Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for Coastal Security in all Coastal States/UTs 
have been promulgated for coordination between all stake holders. 
 
(ii) The deployment of ships/ Interceptor Boats/Air Cushion Vehicles have increased 
from 10-11 ships in 2009 to 30-35 in 2016. 
 
(iii) On an average, 8-10 aircraft  are deployed daily for maritime and coastal aerial 
surveillance. 
 
(iv) Number of Boarding Operations have increased significantly i.e. from 2274 
boardings in 2009 to 1,39,541 boardings in July 2017. 
 
(v) A total of 158 Coastal Security Exercises  and 265 Coastal Security Operations  have 
been conducted since Jan 2009 for revalidating the Coastal Security SOPs and Coastal 
Security mechanism. 
 
(vi) Community Interaction Programmes (CIPs) for the fishermen have been conducted to 
bring awareness amongst fisher folk for strengthening coastal security mechanism. Since 
2009, a total of 5673 CIPs have been conducted. During the CIP, the fishermen are also 
apprised about the need to alert security agencies regarding any suspicious/foreign boats 
sighted by them at sea. 
 
(vii) The ab-initio training of Marine Police personnel by Coast Guard is undertaken to 
strengthen the coastal security construct and achieve enhanced surveillance along the 
coastal areas. This training consists of three weeks orientation module and one week of 
OJT module. So far, more than 4000 police personnel have been trained by the Indian 
Coast Guard. 
 
(c) For strengthening Coastal security System and augmenting electronic surveillance 
mechanism, an electronic/ radar chain called Coastal Surveillance Network (CSN), having 
radars, AIS, day/night cameras and met sensors is being established in two phases. In the  
CSN Phase-I, 46 remote radar stations  have been established to provide electronic and 
optical surveillance of areas of high sensitivity and high traffic density along the Indian coast 
up to a range of 25 nautical miles and 15 nautical miles respectively. 
 

72 
 
(d) In order to provide near gap free surveillance in CSN Phase-II, 38 Radar Stations, 04 Mobile 
Surveillance Systems and integration of 13 Radar Stations of VTMS Gulf of Kutch and VATMS Gulf of 
Khambhat are proposed. The RFP for the Project has been issued and the same is likely to be 
implemented by 2019. 
 
(e) ICG and IN are two maritime services operating in same domain, hence have 
overlapping responsibilities with regard to maritime security. Although, the primary duties of 
the two services are different, there are many commonalities in operations and administrative 
setup of these services. In order to have a close coordination between the two maritime 
services, various systems have been put into place. The various activities undertaken for 
ensuring coordination are enumerated as follows. 
 
(f) Meetings and Conferences. Various instruments have been formalized for close 
coordination between the two services at all levels.  Following are some of the forums of 
interactions between the two services:- 
 
(i)  The annual NAVGUARD meeting at Headquarters level (NHQ and CGHQ) 
ensures that inter-service relations are maintained.   
(ii) The meeting of IN-CG Operations Working group is held annually for close 
coordination on operations issues. Similar working group meetings are held for 
close interaction between the teams of Technical, Training, Human Resources 
and Plans level working groups. 
(iii) At Command level, meetings on similar lines (COM NAVGUARD) are 
conducted for addressing local issues and for improving field level coordination. 
 
(g)  Cross Training and Cross Deputation between IN and ICG. Further to conducting of 
regular meetings and interactions, the following training and deputations are undertaken 
between the two services:- 
(i) The ab-initio training of Coast Guard Officers, Subordinate Officers (SOs) 
and Enrolled Personnel (EPs) are undertaken at Naval training establishments. Also, 
specialist training courses for Officers and EPs are undertaken at the various training 
centres across the country. The common training between the two services helps to 
shape in inter-personnel relationships amongst the rank and file. Coast Guard Officers 
and men deputed to Naval Training establishments for undertaking training of Naval 
and Coast Guard personnel. Also, Naval personnel visit Coast Guard Training Centre, 
Kochi for short courses.  Such types of short courses are undertaken to familiarize the 
Naval fraternity about the Coast Guard charter of duties.    
 

73 
 
(ii) In addition to common training programmes, cross deputation of Officers and 
men are undertaken between both the services which in turn improve synergy and 
coordination between the two services. 
 
(h) Exercises and Operations. In order to improve the inter-service issues at the 
tactical level in the field, various joint and coordinated operations/ exercises are conducted. 
ICG units participate in yearly Naval exercises such as DGX, SPRINGEX, SUMMEREX, 
TROPEX etc. The Naval units also participate in various Coast Guard exercises like SAREX, 
NATPOLREX, etc. 
 
(j) Miscellaneous.    The coordination between IN and ICG on offshore security is 
achieved through Offshore Security Coordination Committee (OSCC) and Regional 
Contingency Committee (RCC).   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
The Committee are well aware that terrorism remains a core concern in relationship 
with Pakistan. The Committee know that Pakistan ’s policy of abetting and aiding terrorism 
against India is not new but it has assumed challenging proportions over the last two decades. 
Mumbai, Pathankot, Uri, Nagrota and other attacks emanating from Pakistani soil, 
underscore the continued threat of cross border terrorism, to our overall security. However, 
the Pakistani Government, instead of acting upon the evidences provided by India, has 
adopted a dual strategy of denial and portrayal of itself as a victim of terrorism. The 
Committee feel that both these postures of Pakistan on terrorism are misplaced. The 
existence of ample evidence against the Mumbai attacks, masterminded by Laskar-e-
Taiba/Jamat-ud-Dawa Chief Hafiz Saeed and Zakir-ur-Rehman Lakhvi and the Pathankot 
attackers speak volumes about Pakistani hand in these terrorist attacks. Further, Pakistan‟s 
inaction against these perpetrators of terrorism makes its intentions questionable, especially 
following the access provided to Pakistan by the Government of India at Pathankot. India and 
Pakistan are not equal victims of terrorism in the sense that, terrorism in India is inflicted by 
Pakistan while terrorist attacks in Pakistan are self inflicted. 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should continue to 
constructively counter Pakistan ’s misplaced and ominous strategy of deniability and 
equivalence at bilateral, regional as well as international levels and corner Pakistan for not 
acting on its 2004 commitment of not allowing its territory to be used for acts of terrorism 
against India. Moreover, the Government should continue its efforts to mount pressure on 
Pakistan to expedite the Mumbai attack trials. The Government of India ought to also spell 

74 
 
out well considered policy options-military as well as non-military, including diplomatic to 
deter and deal with Pakistani sponsored terrorism that has been going on for decades. 
 
The Committee also observe that following the recent terrorist attacks on our security 
establishments, the Government has taken numerous follow-up measures to fill the critical 
gaps. The Committee are also happy to learn about the enhanced international recognition of 
the dangers posed by terrorist networks and organizations operating from Pakistan. The 
Committee, however, would urge the Government to ensure a thorough security review of its 
various establishments on a regular basis with an objective for greater synergy between 
security agencies and intelligence agencies and also apprise the Committee about outcomes 
of such exercises. Prioritizing our national security considerations, the Committee further 
recommend the Government to enhance its military capabilities by modernization of its 
armed forces and use of advanced technology.
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government continues to consistently raise the issue of Pakistan sponsored terrorism 
in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora.  
 
During the 71 st session of the UNGA in September 2017, External Affairs Minister 
made a strong statement about the dangers posed by terrorism emanating from Pakistan. 
These have been further amplified through our Rights to Reply at UNGA. 
 
Due to consistent efforts of the Government, there is international recognition of the 
dangers posed by terrorism emanating from Pakistan and reflected in various joint statements 
issued during bilateral visits and multilateral summits. 
 
For instance, the Joint Statement issued on 14 September 2017 during the visit of the 
Prime Minister of Japan to India, inter alia urged that “all countries to ensure that their 
territory is not used to launch terrorist attacks on other countries.... The two Prime Minister 
called for Pakistan to bring to justice the perpetrators of terrorist attacks including those of 
the November 2008 terrorist attack in Mumbai and the 2016 terrorist attack in Pathankot.” 
 
The BRICS Statement issued on 4 September 2017 also expressed concern at the 
threat posed by the terrorist organisations, including Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammad and 
Lashkar-e- Taiba, to the regional and the world.  
 
The US, in its new Strategy on Afghanistan and South Asia that was announced on 21 
August 2017, inter alia called upon Pakistan to take decisive actions against safe havens and 
sanctuaries within the territory under its control.  
 

75 
 
The India-EU Joint Statement on Cooperation in Combating Terrorism issued as part 
of the annual Summit, on 6 October 2017, mentioned designated Pakistan-based terror 
groups and individuals including Hafeez Saeed,  Zaki- ur-Rehman  Lakhvi,  Dawood  
Ibrahim,  Lashkar-e-Tayibba,  Jaish-e-Mohammad, Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, Haqqani Network 
and their affiliates and “agreed  to  strengthen  cooperation  to  take  decisive  and  concerted 
actions against them. ” While condemning  the  recent  terror  attacks  in  Pathankot,  Uri,  
Nagrota,  Anantnag  (Amarnath  Yatra),  Srinagar  and  recalling  the  November 2008 terror 
attacks in Mumbai, “the leaders also called for the perpetrators of  these  attacks  to  be  
brought  to  justice.”  
 
International bodies like the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have expressed 
concerns at the continuing activities of the UN proscribed terrorist organisations like 
Lashkar-e-Tayyaba, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, Falah-i-Insaniyat in Pakistan and the ease with which 
they continue to access funds. In recognition of these concerns, the FATF, at its Plenary 
meeting on 2 November 2017 in Argentina, asked Pakistan to continue to report on the 
actions taken to curb terror financing for the proscribed individuals and entities and also 
asked the State Bank of Pakistan to report on the effectiveness of the measures taken to curb 
terror financing in Pakistan.  
 
The Committee is further informed that the Government undertakes a regular review 
of the security of its establishments and ensure synergy between security agencies and 
intelligence agencies. Specific inputs with regard to the outcome of such reviews has been 
requested from the concerned Ministries/ authorities.  
The Government also takes note of the Committees recommendation to enhance 
India’s military capabilities by modernization of its armed forces and use of advanced 
technology. This is an ongoing process which is undertaken by the Ministry of Defence in 
order to ensure requisite defence preparedness. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
The Committee are aware that being nuclear armed states, any conflict situation 
between India and Pakistan attracts considerable attention at regional as well as international 
levels. The Committee observe that the nuclear doctrines of the two countries are quite 
contradictory. While the Indian nuclear doctrine is well articulated and specific, Pakistan has 
deliberately pursued an opaque and ambiguous doctrinal position, refusing to abjure “first 
use” of nuclear weapons. Additionally, India intends to use nuclear weapons for establishing 
deterrence while Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal is meant to compensate for conventional weapons 
asymmetry with India. The Committee note the growing China Pakistan cooperation, 
especially in missile and nuclear programmes. The Committee are, however, also aware that 
serious doubts have been raised about Pakistan ’s nuclear infrastructure and installations, for 

76 
 
reasons enumerated in the preceding narrative. As things stand today, the Committee are in 
agreement with the Government ’s assessment of the Pakistani nuclear threat and the 
possibility of inadvertent tactical nuclear weapons use, which would have serious 
implications not only on the region but across the globe. In light of the expanding Pakistani 
nuclear arsenals and its deliberately ambiguous doctrine, the Committee would strongly 
recommend the Government to aggregate its nuclear capability and enhance its deterrence 
capabilities. The Committee would also urge the Government to internationally publicize the 
challenges and implications of the Pakistani mix of terrorism and concerns about safety of it s 
current nuclear weapons and programme as a threat to regional and global security.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation has been forwarded to the NSCS for appropriate action. In 
coordination with PP&R Division, D&ISA Division of the Ministry of External Affairs will 
be holding an outreach with think-tanks in coming months to convey these aspects. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No 13) 
 
The Committee discern three trends in economic ties between India and Pakistan. 
First, the trade between the two countries albeit paltry, exhibits immense potential. Secondly, 
India has consistently maintained a substantial trade surplus with Pakistan over the years. 
Thirdly, even though bilateral trade is governed by preferential and non preferential routes, 
the SAPTA agreement is an important mechanism for preferred bilateral trade between the 
two countries. It is disconcerting to note that the mismatch between India and Pakistan both 
in intention and approach towards normalization of relationship extends to trade and 
economic ties. While India has proactively taken a host of initiatives to bolster economic ties, 
Pakistan has adopted a parochial approach. Moreover, the existing political relationship, 
Pakistan's narrow economic approach towards India as well as the region and Pakistan's 
continued support to terrorism have acted as serious impediments to normalization of 
economic ties. Since the Government of Pakistan has not adhered to its commitment of 
removing the trade restrictions on the land route as well as reciprocating the Most Favoured 
Nation (MFN) status to India, as agreed at the 7 th Commerce Secretary level talks in 
September, 2012 at Islamabad, further progress in improving the bilateral trade would now 
hinge on fulfilling the commitments made by Pakistan. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
all possible efforts should be made to persuade Pakistan for taking reciprocal steps of 
extending MFN status to India and removing trade restrictions on the land route as agreed in 
the 7th Commerce Secretaries talks. The engagement can be taken to a further level if 
Pakistan follows the preferential arrangements under South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) 

77 
 
and they allow transit of Indian exports to Afghanistan through its territory. The Committee 
would urge the Government of India to reach out to Pakistan to move out of its narrow 
approach and embrace the various positive steps taken by India as a responsible economic 
player in the region.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The ‘roadmap’ agreed with Pakistan in 2012 for further liberalization of bilateral 
trade remains unimplemented, owing to pending action from Pakistan side, including lifting 
of all restrictions on imports through Wagah. In addition, Pakistan is yet to fulfill its 
commitments under SAFTA process as well. Government takes note of the Committee ’s 
recommendations related to trade and commerce and these would be taken up for discussions 
as and when conducive environment is created by Pakistan for starting a structured 
Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No 14) 
 
 The Committee observe that with the opening of the Integrated Check Post (ICP) 
Attari in 2012, the handling of trade between India and Pakistan has improved significantly. 
The Committee, however, find that there is a further need to improve the efficiency of the 
ICP through better technological handling. The Committee would particularly desire that the 
Land Ports Authority of India (LPAI) should fulfill its mandate to provide world class 
infrastructure and improved mechanization and technological penetration at ICP Attari. The 
Committee desire that the infrastructural impediments at ICP like limited storage space, lack 
of mechanized loading/unloading, loose cargo holding area etc. should be done away with on 
priority basis. The Committee also observe that there is an increased turnaround time for 
trucks due to manual loading and unloading of goods, lack of containerization of cargo and 
inadequate infrastructure for handling cargo coming through railways and, as such, desire 
that necessary steps should be taken to remove these impediments also. The Committee 
further desire that steps should be taken for the removal of restrictions on the number of 
items that can be freely exported through ICP and for the rationalization of non-tariff barri ers 
like the plant quarantine, in consultation with Pakistan. So far as the facilities at ICP, Attari 
are concerned, the Committee express its dissatisfaction that despite earlier reminders, the 
procurement of full body truck scanners has been inordinately delayed and require that this 
be expedited. In addition, hand-held survey instruments, advance X-ray scanning machine for 
baggage and advanced pellet scanning equipment should be procured at the earliest because 
all these are essential for security purpose and to facilitate the smooth movement of goods 
across the border. The Committee had noted that such equipment is already deployed on the 
Pakistani side.
 

78 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee ’s recommendations have been taken up with the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry; and the Ministry of Home Affairs for taking action.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
(Recommendation No 15) 
 
India’s soft power capabilities are manifested globally in its rich cultural heritage, 
music, varied cuisines, traditional knowledge base and literature. The Committee are aware 
that India and Pakistan share mutually overlapping bonds of culture and tradition which has 
led to people to people contacts on a regular basis. The Committee further note that religious 
tourism between the two countries is regulated by a Protocol constituting an Agreement 
between India and Pakistan on Visit to Religious Shrines signed in 1974 and a significant 
number of pilgrims have been undertaking visits from both the sides. In this connection, the 
Committee urge the Government to explore the feasibility of a pilgrimage access to 
Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib, particularly in the light of the 550th Prakash Parab in 2019. 
 
The Committee feel that by building a robust bridge of mutual understanding and 
trust, people to people contacts can be a potent force in improving ties between the two 
countries in the long run. The role of ICCR and other relevant organizations can play a useful 
role in this regard. Further, such contacts would widen the peace constituency in both the 
countries. However, the Committee are disheartened to note that strained relations between 
the two countries have always cast a shadow on cultural exchanges. In the recent past, India 
has drastically reduced the number of visas issued to Pakistani nationals and strict limitations 
have been imposed in permitting visits of Indians. The Committee agree that the generous 
approach of the Indian Government in the past, permitting people to people contacts, has not 
yielded tangible gains in resolving the antagonism between the two neighbours. The 
Committee, however, feel that the Government should initiate fresh diplomatic measures at 
all relevant platforms with a view to make Pakistan aware of the follies of its present policy 
towards India and persuade it to make the necessary course correction at the earliest. This 
would ensure that people to people contacts are resumed expeditiously to create a favourable 
atmosphere for dialogue and peace process.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Protocol constituting an Agreement between India and Pakistan on Visit to 
Religious Shrines, signed in September 1974, provides for facilitating group tourism visa [up 
to 20 groups/ ‘parties’ per year] to visit a select list of religious places from each country. 

79 
 
Recently, in November 2017, a visit of a Sikh Jatha was facilitated to Nankana Sahib in 
Pakistan under the bilateral Protocol on the occasion of the Birthday of Guru Nankak Dev ji.   
 
While Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib is not part of the Protocol, visit of the Indian 
pilgrims to the Gurudwara has been facilitated in earlier instances. Government has taken 
note of the Committee’s recommendation in the context of the Prakash Parab in 2019. 
 
Government attaches importance to addressing humanitarian issues and promoting 
friendly exchanges. However, these issues cannot remain immune to developments in larger 
bilateral relations.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/81/2017] 
 
  
NEW DELHI  
3 January, 2018 
13 Pausha 1939 (Saka) 
                        DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
Chairperson, 
                     Committee on External Affairs 
 

80 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2017-18) HELD ON 3 JANUARY, 2018 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 3 January, 2018 from 1600 hrs. to 1755 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 3. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 5.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 6. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri P.R. Senthil Nathan 
 9. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 11. Shri Mohd. Salim 
 12. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 13. Smt. Supriya Sule  
 14. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
15. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
16. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy   
17. Dr. Karan Singh 
 Secretariat 
  
 1. Shri P.C Koul    -  Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  

81 
 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on :  
(i)  XXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  
(ii)        Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Sixteenth Report on the subject ‘Indo-Pak Relations’. 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. The 
Committee adopted the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports on Action 
Taken incorporating the suggestions made by the members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

82 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE NINETEENTH REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
                                        
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 4, 7, 10, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 21 
 
                                                                                                                              Total- 10   
Percentage: 45.45% 
 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 
Recommendations No. NIL 
                                                   
Total-0 
Percentage: 0 
 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:- 
 
Recommendation No. 2, 3, 6, 9, 20 and 22 
                       
Total- 6 
Percentage: 27.27% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  5, 8, 11, 13, 14 and 15 
                                                                                                                          
Total- 6 
Percentage: 27.27% 
 
 
 