 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND 
NINETEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014/      Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2014-2015) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    1 
 

 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
 
 
 
                             
            Presented to Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2014 
                 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014/    Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COEA NO. 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2014 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure  and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth 
Edition).  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-2015)…………………………………………….….  (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………………    (iii) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER  I  Introductory………………………………………………………………………..     1-4 
CHAPTER II    The Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013 ………        5-18 
     
APPENDICES 
I.   Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held on 7th October, 2014…………..     19-20 
II. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on 29th October, 2014……………    21-23 
III. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee held on 25th November, 2014…………     24-25 
   
ANNEXURES 
 
I.           Land Boundary Agreement, 1974….………………………………………………….    26-28 
II.          2011 Protocol to the Land Boundary Agreement……………………………………...     29-33 
III.             The Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013 ……………    34-41 
IV.             Details of the Enclaves….……………………………………………………………..    42-50 
V.               Details of the Adverse Possessions………………………………………….……......          51     
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
  

    COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-2015) 
 
Sl. No.                        Name of Members 
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
3. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
6. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
7. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
8. Shrimati Rakshatai Khadse 
9. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
10. Shri Jose K. Mani 
11. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi* 
12. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
13. Shri Magantti Venkateswara Rao (Babu) 
14. Md. Salim 
15. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
16. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
17. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
18. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
19. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
20. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Vacant# 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23. Shri H.K. Dua 
24. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
25. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
26. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
27. Dr. Karan Singh 
28. Shri D. P. Tripathi 
29. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
30. Vacant@ 
31. Vacant## 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Cyril John   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3. Smt Rita Jailkhani   -  Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh    -  Committee Officer 
 
*Shri Feroze Varun G andhi, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha has been nominated vice Dr. K.C. Patel, Member of 
Parliament, Lok Sabha who has been nominated to the Committee on Information Technology w.e.f.11.09.2014. 
# Shri Vijay Sampla ceased to be Member of the Committee cons equent upon his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
09.11.2014. 
@ Shri Y. S. Chowdary ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
09.11.2014. 
 # # Shri Murli Deora, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha had been nominated  vice Shri Anand Sharma, Member of 
Parliament, Rajya Sabha who had been nominated to the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 25.09.2014. 
Vacancy arose w.e.f. 24.11.2014 due to his sad demise. 
 
 (ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperso n, Standing Committee on External Affairs (2014 -2015) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this First Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on 'The Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013'. 
 
2. The Bill wa s introduced in Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2013 and was initially referred to 
the Standing Committee on External Affairs on 31 st December, 2013 for examination and Report.  The 
examination could not be completed in view of announcement of General Electio ns, 2014 and the 
dissolution of 15th Lok Sabha. The Bill was again referred to the Committee on 16th September, 2014. 
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, t he Committee were briefed by the representatives of 
the Ministry of External Affairs on 7th October, 2014. The Committee also  took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Aff airs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources) and the State Government of West Bengal on 29th 
October, 2014. The Committee also sought written information on various aspects relating to the Bill 
from the Ministry of External Affairs.  
 
 
4. The    Committee  considered   and   adopted   this  Report  at  their  sitting  held  on 25th  
November, 2014. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the representatives of th e Ministry of 
External Affairs who appeared before the Committee and  placed their considered views and also f or 
furnishing background information and written replies  to the points raised by the Committee  in 
connection with the examination of the Amendment Bill.  The Committee would also like to thank the 
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Ru ral Development (Department of Land 
Resources) and the State Government of West Bengal who also deposed before the Committee. 
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                             DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
28th November, 2014                                                               Chairperson,                  
7 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on External Affairs. 
(iii) 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTORY 
 India and Bangladesh have a common land boundary of approximately 4096.7 kms. The 
India-East Pakistan land boundary was determined as per the Radcliffe Award of 1947.  Disputes 
arose out of some provisions in the Radcliffe Award, which was sought to be resolved th rough 
the Bagge Award of 1950. Another effort was made to settle these disputes by the Nehru -Noon 
Agreement of 1958. However, the issue relating to division of Berubari Union addressed in the 
Nehru-Noon Agreement, 1958 was referred to the Supreme Court for an advisory opinion by the 
President under Article 143(1) of the Constitution.  To comply with the opinion rendered by 
Supreme Court, the Ninth Constitutional Amendment Act was introduced in 1960. Due to the 
continuous litigation and other political developments at that time, the Ninth Constitutional 
Amendment Act could not be notified in respect of territories in former East Pakistan.   
I.  THE LAND BOUNDARY AGREEMENT, 1974  
1.2 The Land Boundary Agreement , 1974 (1974 LBA) was signed on May 16, 1974, soon 
after the independence of Bangladesh to find a solution to the complex nature of border 
demarcation. This Agreement was ratified by the Bangladesh Government in 1974. However, 
though the Cabinet had granted appro val in 1974, this Agreement was not ratified by India as it 
involved cession of territory. Since  this required a Constitutional amendment before ratification, 
it was essential to indicate precise areas on the ground, which had to be ceded.  Bangladesh had 
earlier insisted that ratification should precede the actual demarcation on the ground.  However, 
Bangladesh later on agreed to resolve the demarcation and dropped their ins istence on prior 
ratification. The Land Boundary Agreement is given in Annexure I.                  
1.3 The 1974 LBA provided that India would retain half of Berubari Union No. 12 and in 
exchange Bangladesh would retain the Dahagram and Angarpota enclaves.  The Agreement 
further provided that India would lease in perpetuity to Bangladesh  a small area n ear Dahagram 
and Angarpota (the„Tin Bigha‟ corridor) for the purpose of connecting Dahagram and Angarpota 
with Bangladesh.  This part of 1974 Agreement was implemented on 26 June 1992.  This was 
done through exchange of letters on 26 March 1 992. The implementation relating to exchange of 
letters is already complete.  Therefore, these letters do not require any further action and hence 
are not reflected in the proposed Bill.         

2 
 
1.4 The agreement was implemented in its entirety with the ex ception of three issues 
pertaining to (i) un -demarcated land boundary of approximately 6.1km in three sectors, viz. 
Daikhata-56 (West Bengal), Muhuri River -Belonia (Tripura) and Lathitila -Dumabari (Assam); 
(ii) exchange of enclaves; and (iii) adverse possessions. 
A. Enclaves         
1.5 The hasty partition of the subcontinent was flawed in several respects which left 
unresolved the fate of hundreds of 'enclaves' of both the countries. There are 111 Indian enclaves 
in Bangladesh (17,160.63 acres) and 51 Bang ladesh enclaves in India (7,110.02 acres). The 
inhabitants in the enclaves could not enjoy full legal rights as citizens of either country and 
infrastructure facilities such as electricity, schools and health services were deficient. Further, 
due to lack o f access to these areas by the law and order enforcing agencies and weak property 
rights, certain enclaves became the hot bed of criminal activities.     
1.6 A joint headcount conducted from 14-17 July, 2011 determined the total population in the 
enclaves to b e around 51, 549 (37,334 in Indian en claves within Bangladesh and 14, 215 in 
Bangladesh enclaves within India). In respect of enclaves, the 1974 LBA states that the people in 
these areas shall be given the right of staying where they are as nationals of the State to which 
the areas  are transferred. Feedback from a visit jointly undertaken by an India -Bangladesh 
delegation to some of the enclaves and adverse possessions in May 2007 revealed that the people 
residing in Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and Bangladesh enclaves in India did not want to leave 
their land and would rather be in the country where they had lived all their lives. Movement of 
people, if any, is therefore expected to be at a minimum level.   
1.7 The details of enclaves have been jointly c ompared and reconciled with records held by 
India and Bangladesh and signed in April, 1997. Areas in respect of enclaves that would be 
acquired by India are placed at the Third Schedule of the Bill.  
B. Adverse Possessions 
1.8 An adverse possession is a po rtion of territory that is contiguous to India's border and 
within Indian control, but which is legally part of Bangladesh. Residents of these adverse 
possessions are Indian citizens. The same applies to Bangladeshi adverse possessions. 
1.9 The Ministry has informed that i n respect of adverse possessions, India will receive 
2777.038 acres of land and will transfer 2267.682 acres of land to Bangladesh.  As in the case of 

3 
 
enclaves, however, the reality is t hat the area to be transferred is  already in the possession of 
Bangladesh and the handing over of this area to Bangladesh is merely a procedural acceptance of 
the de facto situation on the ground.  Similarly, areas in adverse possession of India will now be 
formally transferred to India with the implementation of the 2011 Protocol.               
      
II.  2011 PROTOCOL TO THE LAND BOUNDARY AGREEMENT 
1.10 After extensive consultations, both India and Bangladesh have resolved the 
aforementioned outstanding issues by signing the 2011 Protoco l. This Protocol, which was 
signed by the two countries on September 6, 2011 during the visit of the then Prime Minister to 
Bangladesh after obtaining approval of the Cabinet, forms an integral part of the Land Boundary 
Agreement, 1974 and paves the way fo r a settlement of the long pending Land Boundary issues 
between the two countries.  The concerned State G overnments were integrally involved in 
conducting the joint survey of finalization of adverse possessions and demarcation of pending 
segments. The written concurrence of the concerned State Governments to the draft Protocol was 
obtained. In implementation of the agreement people living in the border areas will not be 
dislocated.                                                 
1.11 The Ministry has informed that the 1974 Land Boundary Agreement was approved by the 
Indian Cabinet prior to its signature in 197 4; however, the Agreement was not ratified as it 
required a Constitutional amendment for which it was necessary to indicate the precise areas on 
the ground which had to be ceded on both sides. The exact details of these areas were finalized 
through detailed negotiations, joint visits to the concerned areas and land surveys and these were 
formalized in the form of the 2011 Protocol. The Protocol forms an integral part of the LBA 
1974 and serves the purpose of addressing only the unresolved issues of the 1974  LBA. It does 
not depart from the 1974 LBA on any point other than the maintenance of status quo on adverse 
possessions and only adds details on some other aspects of the 1974 LBA. Details of the 2011 
Protocol are given in Annexure II.             
1.12  Regarding adverse possessions of Pallathal and Nayagaon i n Assam the interests of tea 
and betel -leaf planters have been protected while finalizing the border between India and 
Bangladesh in this sector. With regard to demarcation of the Lathitilla and Duma bari sector, the 
line drawn by Radcliff and actual position on the ground has been followed.    
   

4 
 
1.13 The Ministry has  further informed that as per Article 2 of the LBA 1974, the two 
countries are expected to exchange territories in adverse possession in  already demarcated areas. 
The 2011 Protocol provides for redrawing of boundaries so that the adverse possessions do not 
have to be exchanged; it has dealt with them on an 'as is where is' basis by converting de facto 
control into de jure recognition. People living in territories in adverse possession are technically 
in occupation and possession of land beyond the boundary pillars, but they are administered by 
the laws of the country of which they are citizens and where they enjoy all legal rights, includin g 
the right to vote. They have deep -rooted ties to their land, which go back decades and are 
categorically unwilling to be uprooted. Many local communities have sentimental or religious 
attachments to the land in which they live. Over time, it became extre mely difficult to implement 
the terms of 1974 LBA as it meant uprooting people living in the adverse possessions from the 
land in which they had lived all their lives and to which they had developed sentimental and 
religious attachments. Both India and Bangladesh, therefore, agreed to maintain the status quo in 
addressing the issue of adverse possessions instead of exchanging them as was earlier required 
for in the LBA, 1974.                                                        
1.14 The Committee are aware that the non-implementation of the 1974 Land Boundary 
Agreement between India and Bangladesh has led to the perpetuation of the land boundary 
dispute between the two countries and has also led to the continuation of the miserable 
plight of the people liv ing in the enclaves on both the sides. The Committee would like to 
express their happiness, that ultimately the Protocol agreement has been signed and it will 
usher a new beginning in the Indo -Bangladesh relationship while addressing the 
humanitarian implications of the actual implementation of the Accord.  
 
  

5 
 
      CHAPTER II 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
In order to implement the 1974 LBA and the 2011 P rotocol to the LBA, the Government 
has proposed that the 1974 LBA as well as 2011 Protocol are ratified. Since the exchange of 
enclaves as well as retaining the status quo  on adverse possessions involves acquisition and 
cessation of territory, a Constitutional amendment is required to implement the same.  
2.2 The Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013 is to implement 
the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the 
People‟s Republic of Banglades h concerning the Demarcation of the Land Boundary between 
India and Bangladesh and Related Matters  and the Protocol to the Agreement between the 
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the P eople‟s Republic of 
Bangladesh. The Bill is given in Annexure III.    
I. AMENDMENTS 
2.3 The Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013  seeks to further 
amend the Constitution of India to give effect to the acquiring of territories by India and transfer 
of certain terr itories to Bangladesh in pursuance of the Agreement and its P rotocol entered into 
between the Governments of India and Bangladesh. 
2.4 The provisions in the Amendment Bill  seek to incorporate modification s in territories of 
the State of Assam, West Bengal, Meghalaya and Tripura by making the following additions in 
the First Schedule of the Constitution: 
a) Assam: In the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Assam, the words, brackets 
and figures “and the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the 
Constitution (One hundred and Nineteenth  Amendment) Act, 2013, notwithstanding 
anything contained in clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) 
Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part I of the Second 
Schedule to the Constitution (One hundred and Nineteenth  Amendment) Act, 2013”,  
shall be added at the end. 
b) West Bengal: In the paragraph relating to the territories of the Sta te of West Bengal, the 
words, brackets and figures “and also the territories referred to in Part III of the First 
Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to 
the Constitution (One hundred and Nineteenth  Amendme nt) Act, 2013, 
notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of section 3 of the Constitution 
(Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part 
III of the First Schedule and the territories referred to in Part III of the Second 

6 
 
Schedule to the Constitution (One hundred and N ineteenth Amendment) Act, 2013 
shall be added at the end. 
c) Meghalaya: In the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Meghalaya, the words, 
brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in Part I of the First Schedule but 
excluding the territories referred to in Part II of the Second Schedule to the 
Constitution (One hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 2013”, shall be added at 
the end. 
d) Tripura: In the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Tripura, the words, brackets 
and figures “and the territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the 
Constitution (One hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 2013, notwithstanding 
anything contained in clause (d) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) 
Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part II of the First 
Schedule to the Constitution (One hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 2013”, 
shall be added at the end. 
2.5 The Committee deliberated on the various provisions of the Bill and commend the 
Bill for enactment with the modifications/suggestions as given  in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  
II.  OTHER ISSUES 
A.  Role of the State Governments  
2.6. The Ministry in their written reply has stated that the Protocol has been prepared with full 
support and concurrence of the concerned State Governments  (Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and 
West Bengal ). All Bangladeshi enclaves are located in the district of Cooch Behar in West 
Bengal and all Indian Enclaves are located in four Bangladeshi districts of - Panchagarh, 
Lalmonirhat, Kurigram and Nilphamari - which are close to the border with West Bengal .  By 
exchange of Enclaves,  only the State of West Bengal is expected to be affected.      
2.7. The Ministry has further informed the Committee that  the concerned State Governments 
were closely associated with the process of determination of Adverse Possessions and Enclaves. 
Land records were scrutinized, the wishes of th e people in possession of the lands were 
ascertained and land survey and index maps of the adversely held areas prepared by State 
Government surveyors. Joint surveys of the adverse possessions were carried out by the State 
Survey Departments in their respe ctive areas of the boundary with Bangladesh. There was close 
coordination between the Central and State authorities. 
2.8 The Committee have been convinced by the Ministry  that all the concerned S tate 
Governments were consulted at various stages of reaching a settlement on the boundary 

7 
 
dispute with Bangladesh . Closer consultations at the highe st political level between the 
Central Government and State Governments would have been desirable . The Committee 
while appreciating the efforts to keep  the State Governments on board  would, therefore, 
suggest the Government to effectively coordinate with them on all matters and resolve the 
lacuna (if any) related to actual implementation of the Accord  on the ground. Such a close 
working and synergy would be indispensible when the actual territory is exchanged and the 
demographic situation might be  affected. The Committee are of the opinion that such 
consultations should be carried out as an integral part of the process leading to the 
exchange of the i nstruments of ratification between India and Bangladesh and the 
notification of the agreement. Such a consultation  process would go a long way in ensuring 
the smooth implementation of the Accord. 
B.  Benefits of the Bill   
2.9 The outstanding border issues contributed to tension and instability along the border and 
adversely impacted on the lives of people in the areas involved. Those living in the enclaves 
could not enjoy full legal rights as citizens of either count ry and infrastructure facilities such as 
electricity, schools and health services were deficient. For those in adverse possessions, it meant 
an unsettled existence between two countries without the certainty of being able to cultivate their 
lands or lead n ormal lives.  The need for the settlement of the outstanding land boundary issues 
between India and Bangladesh was, therefore, acutely felt and articulated by the people involved, 
the concerned State Governments and others.          
2.10 While elucidating the likely benefits of the accord, the Foreign Secretary during the 
briefing held on 7th October, 2014 informed the Committee as under: 
"…We are convinced that implementation of the Agreement and its 
Protocol will ensure that the India -Bangladesh boundary is permanently settled 
with no more differences in interpretation. It will reduce potential for friction 
between border guarding forces and address security issues.  It will thus allow 
both countries to focus on beneficial bilateral cooperation through enh anced 

8 
 
security, trade, transit and development.  It is in our national interest to move 
ahead on this matter and settle the boundary once and for all...." 
 
2.11 The Foreign Secretary further added that: 
"....Apart from these benefits highlighted, there is another issue to be 
considered.  The support extended by Bangladesh regarding security and 
connectivity issues despite the impact on local infrastructure, the support in 
restoring old rail links and connectiv ity are repeatedly highlighted by 
Bangladesh especially in the media there.  This is contrasted with the delay on 
our part in ratifying the Land Boundary Agreement, which is being perceived 
as the touchstone of our sincerity in dealing with it.  It is our belief that 
progress on the Land Boundary Agreement will help deepen cooperation with 
India in a number of other areas, including investment and joint ventures, and 
the very important issue of connectivity for North East of India...." 
2.12 While advocating  an early settlement of the boundary issue, Foreign Secretary made 
following submission before the Committee during the briefing to the Committee:  
''....Now, there were some very important questions raised and the 
humanitarian problem. Permit me to submit  that the situation of our people and 
their people in the enclaves is already so bad because they do not have access to 
civic services, and they do not have access to police services. The best thing that 
we can do to help them is to pass the Land Boundary Agreement Bill as quickly 
as possible so that they are no longer Stateless persons in effect, but are nationals 
of a particular country and can avail of the services that each country can offer to 
its citizens. This is the ground reality.....''  
2.13 On being asked about the likely benefits of the implementation of 1974 LBA and the 
2011 Protocol, the Ministry has stated in a written reply as under:  
"There are no negative fallouts anticipated from the implementation of the 1974 
LBA and its 2011 Protocol.  Rather, the following benefits are expected to accrue 
from the implementation of the Agreement and protocol: 
- A fixed demarcated boundary  will be finalized in all un -demarcated 
segments. This represents a permanent solution to a decades -old issue  as it is 
based on mutual agreement. 
- The exchange of enclaves denotes only a notional exchange of land. The 
actual situation on the ground is that the enclaves are located deep inside the 
territory of both countries and there has been no physical access to them from 
either country. Thus the exchange will legalize a situation which already exists de 
facto.   

9 
 
- It will allow India and Bangladesh to focus on unlocking the full potential 
for mutually beneficial bilateral cooperation through enhanced security, trade, 
transit and development. 
- The exch ange of enclaves will mitigate major humanitarian problems as 
the residents in the enclaves and others on their behalf had often complained of 
the absence of basic amenities and facilities. 
- The settlement of Adverse Possessions will contribute to tranquili ty and peace 
along the border. 
- A settled boundary is an essential prerequisite for effective cross -border 
cooperation. It reduces friction, helps neighbors consolidate mutually beneficial 
exchanges and promotes confidence in building better relations.  
- This will also help address issues of security concern, including illegal 
migration, smuggling and other crimes and denial of sanctuary to elements 
inimical to India."       
          
2.14 During the briefing held on 07.10.2014, Foreign Secretary elaborated as under:- 
"....Sir, permit me to observe that this is indeed one of the rare cases where it 
is a win -win situation.  Each of us stands to gain something, each of us stand to 
lose something.  But in the process, we get a settled boundary which means a 
boundary that is mor e amenable to effective policing by our Border Security 
Forces where smuggling will go down, illegal migration will go down and where 
people along the border whether they are in India or in Bangladesh will be more 
settled and will be more secure. Most impo rtant of all hon. Members, Bangladesh 
will feel more inclined to give us what we have been requesting it for several 
years now in terms of better connectivity for our eight States in the North 
East......."     
2.15 The Committee are of the strong opinion t hat the Constitution (One  Hundred and 
Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013 is in the overall national inter est as it would pave the 
way for broa der bilateral ties with one of our closest neighbour s, Bangladesh. The 
Committee are of a considered opinion that delays in the passage of the Bill have needlessly 
contributed to the perpetuation of a huge humanitarian crisis. However, the Committee are 
also sure that the difficulties of the people living in the enclaves of both the countries would 
come to an end after the Act is passed by the Parliament. The Committee would , therefore, 
urge the Government to take urgent steps for presenting the Bill to Parliament without any 
further delay. 

10 
 
C.  Implications of the Bill   
2.16 As per the submission made by the Mini stry, in the exchange of enclaves, the de facto 
reality gets converted to  a de jure situation. 111 Indian enclaves with a total area of 17,160.63 
acres in Bangladesh are to be transferred to Bangladesh; 51 Bangladesh Enclaves with an area of 
7,110.02 acres in India are to be transferred to India. The details of these enclaves are given in 
Annexure IV. While on paper, the exchange of enclaves between India and Bangladesh may 
seem like a loss of Indian land to Bangladesh, the actual scenario on the ground is quite different. 
These enclaves are located deep inside Bangladesh and there has hardly been any direct access to 
them from India since 1947.  Similarly, Bangladesh has had minimal access to its enclaves 
located deep inside India. In effect, the exchange of enclaves denotes only a notional exchange 
of land with no substantial change in the nation's external boundaries.                                                 
2.17 The 2011 Protocol provides for redrawing of boundaries to maintain the status quo of 
adverse possessions and has dealt with them on an 'as is where is basis' by converting de facto 
control into de jure recognition. Adverse possession areas that would be acquired by India and 
transferred to Bangladesh are placed at Annexure V. 
2.18 The Ministry has provided following justification for maintaining the status quo on 
adverse possessions:  
''People living in the Adverse Possessions are technically in occupation 
and possession of land beyond the boundary pillars, but are administered 
by the laws of the country of which they are citizens and where they 
enjoy all legal rights, including the righ t to vote. They have deep -rooted 
ties to their land which goes back decades and are categorically 
unwilling to be uprooted. Many local communities have sentimental or 
religious attachments to the land in which they live. Over time, it 
became extremely diff icult to implement the terms of 1974 LBA as it 
meant uprooting people living in the adverse possessions from the land 
in which they had lived all their lives and to which they had developed 
sentimental and religious attachments. A joint visit by an India -
Bangladesh delegation to some of the enclaves and adverse possessions 
undertaken in May 2007 revealed that the people residing in the areas 
involved did not want to leave their land and would rather be in the 
country where they had lived all their lives. So me of the concerned State 
Governments also had views on the issue. These and other inputs from 
the people involved made it evident to both sides that retention of status 
quo of adverse possessions seemed the only option. In any democracy, 

11 
 
the will of the people must remain significant, and the 2011 Protocol has 
accorded highest priority to it – every effort has been made to preserve 
all areas of economic activity relevant to the homestead and to prevent 
dislocation of people living in the border areas. Both  India and 
Bangladesh agreed to maintain the status quo in addressing the issue of 
adverse possessions instead of exchanging them as called for in the 
LBA, 1974.''                                      
2.19 The Committee fully endorse the decision taken by the Government to maintain the 
status quo  on adverse possessions. The literal adherence to the provisions of the Land 
Boundary Agreement, 1974 would have created another chain of displacement  and 
sufferings. Similarly, the exchange o f enclaves is a logical step in bringing these areas 
within the ambit of governance. The Committee understand that much like Indian 
enclaves, the Bangladeshi enclaves being acquired by India would be deficient in 
infrastructure and amenities . Therefore, th e Committee strongly recommend that a 
blueprint should be kept ready  for development of these areas after due  consultations with 
the concerned State Governments, so that the developmental work can be initiated 
immediately after this Bill is made an Act and Agreement is ratified. 
 2.20 As per the Ministry, the implications pertaining to the concerned State Governments with 
regard to adverse possessions and demarcation of boundary are as under: 
(i) West Bengal: South Berubari, with a population of 15,000, is a sensitive 
area because of a temple regarded as one of 51 Shakti Peeths in the Indian 
Subcontinent and an important pilgrimage spot for Hindus. The boundary in this 
sector has been drawn keeping in mind this sentiment and the agreement reached in 
the joint demarcation conducted in 1998 as a result of which South Berubari, will be 
retained in India. In other areas too, such as Bousmari, old records, actual position 
on the ground and the people's w ishes were kept in mind while determining the 
extent of adverse possessions. With regard to demarcation of Daikhata 56, 
natural/geographical boundary in this region has been made the international 
boundary between the two countries, which is a normal pract ice in the demarcation 
of international boundary. 
(ii) Meghalaya: The S tate Government's views on adverse possessions were 
accommodated through verification of actual position on the ground and wishes of 

12 
 
the people. As a result of the joint survey in Pyrdi wah, the Adverse Possession has 
been recognized on the Indian side by Bangladesh. In Muktapur/Dibir Ha wor area, 
the Protocol facilitates the visit of Indian nationals to Kali Mandir, drawing of water 
and exercise of fishing rights from the water body of Mu ktapur has been accepted. 
In other areas too, the homesteads and economic activities of Indian citizens has 
been protected.  
(iii) Tripura: As agreed in the Protocol, the boundary shall be drawn along the 
course of Sonaraichhera River as per ground realiti es. With regard to demarcation 
of the Muhuri River/Belonia Sector, keeping in mind the ground realities as well as 
wishes of the people, the boundary in this sector has been finalized according to the 
local demand; the cremation ground area has been allott ed to the Indian side and 
boundary has become a fixed boundary. Further, the Protocol has provisions of 
raising embankments by both the sides to stabilize the course of the river. Fencing 
on zero line has also been agreed. Government of Tripura, while agre eing to the 
demarcation in this sector, has conveyed that compensation for the loss of private 
land may be provided on account of demarcation.  
(iv) Assam: The interests of tea and pan planters have been protected while 
finalizing the border between India and Bangladesh in this sector. With regard to 
demarcation of the Lathitilla and Dumabari sector, the line drawn by Radcliff e and 
actual position on the ground has been followed.              
2.21 The Ministry has  further clarified that the Protocol shall be subject to ratification by the 
Government of the two countries and shall enter into force on the date of exchange of 
Instruments of Ratification. The adoption of the Constitution Amendment Bill is expected to lead 
to the ratification o f the Protocol and  exchange of I nstruments of R atification followed 
immediately by implementation of the Protocol.             
2.22 On being asked by the Committee about the next steps to be taken after the Bill is passed 
by the Parliament, Foreign Secretary elucidated as u nder during the evidence of the Ministry  
held on 29.10.2014:- 
 
"I would like to inform you that once the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 
is passed, we will seek approval of the Cabinet for ratification of the agreement 
and its protocol following which the in struments of ratification will be 
exchanged by India and Bangladesh.  Simultaneously an inter -Ministerial team 
comprising representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Ministry of Rural Development will work with the  
representatives of the Government of West Bengal to finalise the compensation 
package for the expected returnees from the Indian enclaves in Bangladesh.  The 
execution of compensation package by the concerned departments of the State 

13 
 
Government and Centra l Government will commence after ratification of the 
agreement.  This would include the process of inclusion of enclave residents into 
the electoral rolls and other government welfare schemes and action by the 
district administration to provide services li ke schools, health care, roads, 
electricity, etc. in Indian enclaves.  Simultaneously, the Joint Boundary Working 
Group between India and Bangladesh will hold its meeting to finalise the un -
demarcated segments of the boundary and the maps.  Border guarding forces will 
be re-deployed along the finalised boundary......"             
D. Compensation and Rehabilitation 
2.23  As per the Ministry, the issue of compensation to returnees from Indian enclaves in 
Bangladesh that may arise upon implementation of the Land Boundary Agreement has been 
discussed and dealt with appropriately in consultation with the State Governments con cerned. 
2.24 The Ministry has furnished the following information with regard to the compensation 
package and rehabilitation facilities to be provided to the people shifting from one place to 
another in these areas:  
''For augmenting the infrastructure and  other facilities in those localities 
and also for rehabilitation of the people shifting from one place to another,  a 
suitable compensation package for residents of Indian enclaves was discussed 
during External Affairs Minister‟s meeting with Chief Minister of West Bengal in 
New Delhi on May 3, 2012. Subsequently, an inter -Ministerial delegation 
consisting of representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs 
and Rural Development held consultations with the Gov ernment of West Bengal 
in Kolkata on 11 June 2012. They reached an “in principle” understanding/ 
arrangement on the compensation issue and a central government assistance 
package in this regard. Based on the maximum expected figure provided by the 
Government of West Bengal of those who may choose to return to India upon the 
implementation of the Protocol to LBA of 3,500 persons (700 families @ 5 
persons per family), a package of Central Government financial assistance to 
include inter alia immediate relief on arrival and services to Bangladeshi enclaves 
in India was proposed. Government of West Bengal is yet to confirm the approval 
of this proposed package by the Chief Minister. Once such confirmation is 
received, this Ministry will move for formal approval for the overall package.'' 
 
 
                      
2.25 The Ministry has further submitted that: 
 
''The issue of suitable compensation for the residents of Indian Enclaves 
choosing to return to India upon implementation of the 1974 LBA was discussed 
during EAM‟s meeting with Chief Minister of West Bengal and subsequently this 
matter was discussed in deta il by an inter -Ministerial team (comprising of officers 
from MEA, Ministry of Home Affairs (Border Management Division, Freedom 

14 
 
Fighters & Rehabilitation Division and Office of the Registrar  General and 
Census Commissioner), Rural Development Ministry wit h the Government of 
West Bengal in June 2012. The discussions centered around the numbers of those 
expected to avail of the option of relocating to India from Indian Enclaves in 
Bangladesh, the means of accurately verifying bonafide residents of Indian 
Enclaves, their entry into India (West Bengal) and the means of their resettlement 
and rehabilitation. MEA has offered a compensation package to West Bengal to 
cover immediate relief on arrival of returnees from the enclaves in Bangladesh and 
provision of civic services to Bangladeshi enclaves in India to which Government 
of West Bengal has not yet responded.''  
 
2.26 When asked about the role of the State Government of West Bengal in providing 
rehabilitation to the returning Indian citizens, Foreign Secretary submitted as under: 
'' To my understanding, it is a State Government‟s decision because they 
are the ones who have to approve what they will finally give to the p eople who 
choose to come back. The Central Government would probably assist them with 
financial package, but ultimately it would be the State Government that would 
deliver on the ground.....''              
2.27    The Committee understand that the execution of a compensation package by the 
concerned departments of the State Government of West Bengal and the Central 
Government will comm ence after ratification of the Agreement and exchange thereof 
between India and Bangladesh. Although the issue of providing suitable rehabilitation and 
compensation to the people who will be returning fro m Indian enclaves in Bangladesh  is 
not related to the main body of the Constitution Amendment Bill,  the Committee are of the 
opinion that the same should  also be addressed immediately by the Government. The 
Committee expect that the C entral Government and the State Government of West Bengal 
will arrive at a consensus on the issue related to rehabilitation package. All the 
humanitarian issues should be resolved in advance, including assistance from the Central 
Government in this regard.  The Committee also recommend that the Government should 
institute a suitable monitoring mechanism for coordinating with the West Bengal 
Government over all issues related to rehabilitation. 

15 
 
The Committee also desire that a  status report on rehabilitation of  the returning 
Indian citizens should  also be presented to the Parliament/Committee within  six months 
after the agreement comes into force.  
E. Citizenship 
2.28  As per the Ministry, the inhabitants of the Bangladeshi Enclaves in India, which will be 
transferred to India under the Protocol, can be granted Indian citizenship under Section  7 of the 
Indian Citizenship Act, 1955 (by incorporation of t erritory).  As per this provision, if any 
territory becomes part of India, the Central Government may by order notified in the Official 
Gazette, specify the persons who shall be citizens of India with effect from the date to be 
specified in the order.                         
2.29 On being specifically asked by the Committee about the security dimensions of the 
Bangladeshi residents being given the Indian citizenship after exchange of enclaves, the Ministry 
submitted the following through a written reply: 
''The Bangladeshi Enclaves are deep within Indian territory with no 
fencing or any other means to physically demarcate them.  It is only by means of 
land records that the fact that they are enclaves is known to the local 
administration and residents.  As suc h, the population there is practically free to 
mingle with the rest of the Indian population. However, the law enforcement 
authorities are not able to carry out their duties in the enclaves since, technically, 
they are not Indian territory.  Due to this la ck of access to these areas by the law 
and order enforcing agencies and weak property rights, certain enclaves have 
become hot beds of criminal activities. This anomalous situation will be 
corrected once the LBA and its Protocol are ratified and implemented.'' 
 
2.30 The Home Secretary had further added during the course of the evidence held on 29th 
October, 2014: 
"......Now as far as the Indian population living in Bangladesh is 
concerned, they are our citizens and they have every right to come back.  How 
many of them decide to exercise this right, we will find out once a decision is 
taken.  But when they come back, we intend to take the biometric details of all of 
them and carry out the entire exercise to ensure that we know who all are 
coming.  Then in close cooperation and consultation with the Government of 
West Bengal, they will be taken to the respective places where  they are proposed 
to be settled and there we will keep a close watch for some time.  We will also 
set up our Police Stations/Police Posts and generally keep a close watch on what 
is going on.  Since they are Indian citizens returning to India, there reall y should 

16 
 
not be a very serious security problem but as a matter of abundant caution, we 
will take all measures that are required to be done.''               
2.31 On being asked whether Government of India has assessed the impact of implementation 
of LBA wi th Bangladesh on the Internal Security scenario on India in terms of demands from 
secessionist groups, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted in a written reply as under: 
 
''Yes. A settled boundary is an essential prerequisite for effective cross-
border cooperation . The settlement of the border is expected to reduce friction. 
This will also help address issues of security concern, smuggling and other crimes 
and denial of sanctuary to elements inimical to India . The completion of border 
demarcation would help our border guarding forces in better management of the 
border. Further, due to lack of access to the Enclave areas by the law and order 
enforcing agencies and weak property rights, certain enclaves have become hot 
beds of criminal activiti es. The inhabitants of the enclaves have not been able to 
enjoy full legal rights as citizens of either India or Bangladesh and proper 
facilities with regard to electricity, schools, health services and land rights etc 
since 1947. These basic facilities will accrue to them once the issue of enclaves is 
resolved with the ratification of the Protocol and its implementation. As such, 
implementation of the Protocol by way of the exchange of enclaves is expected to 
have fulfilled a major humanitarian need to mit igate the hardships that the 
residents of the enclaves have had to endure for over six decades. This will help in 
improving the socio -political and law and order situation in these areas. It is 
therefore expected that the internal security situation would improve as a result of 
the implementation of the Protocol.'' 
    
2.32 A modest demographic change in both countries is expected to take place after this 
Agreement comes into force. Not only would some Indian citizens return to the mainland 
from the previously held enclaves, but a number of currently Bangladeshi nationals would 
also be given Indian citizenship after the area is ceded to India. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the security dimen sions of this  influx of population should be considered 
seriously by the Government. The Committee , therefore, desire  that the law and order 
machinery in the affected area should be suitably augmented in consultation with the S tate 
Government of West Benga l and an appropriate  method should be arrived at in order to  
check the bonafides of the Bangladeshi resident s who shall be extended  Indian citizenship 
upon incorporation of the territory.  

17 
 
2.33 When specifically asked whether the safeguards for Indian citizens staying back in the 
Indian Enclaves which will be transferred to Bangladesh after coming into force of this Accord 
have been discussed with the Bangladesh Government, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted in a written reply as under: 
''Yes, this has been discussed. Indeed such an understanding is the basis of 
the 2011 Protocol and the fundamental premise on which exchange of enclaves 
would take place. As per the LBA,  citizens of Indian Enclaves in Bangladesh are 
given the right of staying where they are as nationals of the State to which the 
areas are transferred. If they choose to exercise this right, they would voluntarily 
acquire Bangladeshi citizenship and all rights of Bangladeshi citizens woul d 
accrue to them.''   
2.34 In response to a pointed query  whether there is any possibility of arriving at an 
arrangement with the Bangladeshi Government, wherein the Indian citizens in our enclaves 
inside the Bangladesh territory can have the option of ret aining their Indian Passport s and 
continue to live as foreigners on their own land in Bangladesh with the work permit ? The 
Ministry of External Affairs furnished the following reply:  
''No, there is no such possibility. As per Article 3 of the 1974 LBA, 
regarding the residents of Enclaves, the people in these areas shall be given the 
right of staying where they are as nationals of the State to which the areas are 
transferred. Those residents of Indian Enclaves within Bangladesh who choose to 
exercise this  right to stay can stay as Bangladeshi citizens. It would not be 
possible for such residents to retain their Indian nationality and continue to live as 
foreigners on their own land in Bangladesh with a work permit. A visit jointly 
undertaken by an India –Bangladesh delegation revealed that the people residing 
in Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and Bangladesh enclaves in India did not want 
to leave their land and would rather remain in the country where they had lived all 
their lives. Movement of people, if any, is therefore expected to be minimal.''         
2.35 The Committee understand that a number of Indian nationals who are living in the 
Indian enclaves in Bangladesh territory are going to be adversely affected by the terms of 
the A greement in that they wou ld lose their claim to Indian citizenship. This is likely  to 
lead to some displacement of population. The Committee are  of the firm opinion that it is 
the bounden duty of the Governments of India and Bangladesh to minimize the 
humanitarian costs of this Ac cord. The Committee would , therefore, like the Government 
of India to  discuss with the Government of Bangladesh the steps that would be taken to 
ensure adequate safeguards for the Indian nationals who would be staying back so that 

18 
 
they are not discriminate d against in any way after having acquired Bangladeshi 
citizenship.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                      DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
    , 2014                                                                                         Chairperson,                                    
   Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on External Affairs 
  

19 
 
APPENDIX – I  
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 07th OCTOBER, 2014 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 07 th October, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
     Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
3. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
6. Shri Magantti V. Rao (Babu) 
7. Md. Salim 
8.  Shri Vijay Sampla 
9. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
10. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
11. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
     Rajya Sabha 
 12.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 13. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
 14. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
15. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
16. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
17. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma  
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani   -  Additional Director 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
1. Smt.Sujatha Singh -  Foreign Secretary 
2. 2. Shri T. Darlong - Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
3. 3. Shrimati Sripriya Ranaganathan - Joint Secretary (BM) 
4. 4. Shrimati Pratibha Parkar - Director (BM) 
 

20 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee to have a 
briefing on the Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary explained the background and rationale of the 
Amendment Bill and dwelt in detail upon the issues related to land boundary demarcation 
between India and Bangladesh. She further delineated the salient features of the 1974 La nd 
Boundary Agreement, 1974 and the 2011 Protocol signed between the two countries in this 
regard.  
4. The Members of the Committee raised various queries relating to the exchange of 
territories and expressed their concern about the problems of citizens wh o would be returning to 
the Indian territory from the respective enclaves. The main issues which attracted the attention of 
the Committee included the security dimensions, provisions for compensation, humanitarian 
impact viz civic services and police servi ces etc., rehabilitation and effective policing of the 
boundary. 
5. The Foreign Secretary replied to various quires raised by the Members of the Committee. 
In view of participation of other agencies in the rehabilitation of returning citizens the 
Committee decided to invite the representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and 
Home Affairs as well as the Government of West Bengal also for an extensive discussion on the 
issue. The Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs directed the Ministry to f urnish written 
replies on the points raised by the Committee during the discussion and other points arising out 
of that.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.   

21 
 
   APPENDIX II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 29th OCTOBER, 2014 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 29 th October, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in 
Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
     Lok Sabha 
 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
5. Shrimati Rakshatai Khadse 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri Magantti V. Rao (Babu) 
8. Md. Salim 
9.  Shri Vijay Sampla 
10. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
11. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
12. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
13. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
 14.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 15. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
 16. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
 17. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 18. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 19. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 20. Shri Murli Deora 
 21. Dr. Karan Singh  
 22. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
 23. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma  
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -   Director 
  

22 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1.    Smt. Sujatha Singh -                   Foreign Secretary 
2.     Smt. Sripriya Ranganathan -                     JS (BM) 
3.    Smt. Nutan Kapur Mahawar -                     JS (Parl.) 
4.    Smt. Pratibha Parkar -                     Dir.(BM) 
   
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1.    Shri Anil Goswami -                    Home Secretary  
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
1. Smt. Vandana Kumari Jena -                      Secretary 
2.  Shri K. Unnikrishnan -                       Director 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL  
1.    Shri R.D. Meena -       Principal Resident Commissioner  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Rural 
Development and the State Government of West Bengal to the sitting of the Committe e to take 
evidence on the subject 'The Constitution (One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 
2013'.  
3. Thereafter, Foreign Secretary, Home Secretary and Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development and the State Government of Bengal, presented their views on the issues relating to 
their respective Ministries and informed the Committee about the efforts made by them in 
resolving the issues involved in the Agreement and also about the steps that they propose to take 
after the Constitutional Amendment Bill is  passed, ratified and exchanged between both the 
countries. It was also discussed about the manner in which the Government of India would 
handle the issue of compensation to Indian enclave dwellers who choose to return to India. 
Members expressed their concern about the rehabilitation of returnees and stressed upon the need 
of advance preparedness for providing a relief in a time bound manner. The representatives of 

23 
 
the Ministries and State Government of Bengal replied to all the queries raised by the Membe rs 
in this regard. The Committee also expressed their hope that all the issues regarding 
compensation package and rehabilitation schedule etc. between the Central Government and the 
State Government of West Bengal would be resolved amicably well in advance . All the 
Members of the Committee desired an early passage of the Bill. 
The committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
  

24 
 
APPENDIX III 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 25th NOVEMBER, 2014 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 25 th November, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
            Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
4. Shrimati Rakshatai Khadse 
5. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
7. Shri Magantti V. Rao (Babu) 
8. Md. Salim 
9. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
10. P.R. Senthilnathan 
11. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
12. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
           Rajya Sabha 
 13. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
 14. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 15. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 16. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 17.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 18.  Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
   
           Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Cyril John   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani   - Additional Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson informed the Committee about sad demise of  
Shri Murli Deo ra, MP, Rajya Sabha and Members of the Committee and adopted Condolence 
Resolution followed by silence. 

25 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on „The Constitution 
(One Hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Bill, 2013‟. The Chairperson invited the Members to 
offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report.  The Members suggested 
some minor modifications.  The Committee adopted the draft Report with minor modification. 
5. **************** 
6.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
ANNEXURE I 
LAND BOUNDARY AGREEMENT, 1974 
 
The Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the People's Republic 
of Bangladesh,  
Bearing in mind the friendly relations existing between the two countries,  
Desiring to define more accurately at certain points and to complete the demarca tion of 
the land boundary between India and Bangladesh,  
Have agreed as follows: - 
Article 1  
  The land boundary between India and Bangladesh in the areas mentioned below shall be 
demarcated in the following manner: 
1. Mizoram-Bangladesh Sector : Demarcation should be completed on the basis of the latest 
pre-partition notifications and records.  
2. Tripura-Sylhet Sector : Demarcation which is already in progress in this area on the 
agreed basis, should be completed as early as possible.  
3. Bhagalpur Railway Line: The boundary should be demarcated at a distance of 75 feet 
parallel to the toe of the railway embankment towards the east.  
4.  Sibpur-Gaurangala Sector  The boundary should be demarcated in continuation of the 
process started in 1951-52 on the basis of the District Settlement Maps of 1915-1918.  
5.  Muhuri River (Belonia) Sector  : The boundary in this area should be demarcated along 
the mid-stream of the course of Muhuri River at the time of demarcation. This boundary will be a 
fixed boundary. The two Governments should raise embankments on their respective sides with a 
view to stabilising the river in its present course.  
6.  Remaining portion of the Tripura -Noakhali/Comilla Sector: The demarcation in this 
sector should be completed on the basis of Cha kla-Roshanabad Estate Maps of 1892 -1894 and 
the District Settlement Maps of 1915 -1918 for areas not covered by the Ckakla - Roshanabad 
Maps.  
7.  Fenny River: The boundary should be demarcated along the mid -stream of the course at 
the time of demarcation of th at branch of the Fenny River indicated as the Fenny River on 
Survey of India Map Sheet No. 79 M/15, Ist Edition 1935, till it joins the stream shown as 
Asalong C on the said Map. From that point on, downstream, the boundary should be demarcated 
along the m id-stream of the course of the Fenny River at the time of demarcation of the 
boundary. The boundary in this sector will be a fixed boundary.  

27 
 
8.  Rest of Tripura-Chittagong Hill Tracts Sector : The boundary will follow the mid -stream 
of that branch of the Fen ny River, referred to in para 7 above, upto Grid reference 009779 (map 
sheet as in para 7 above) from where the boundary will follow the mid -stream of the eastern -
most tributary. From the source of this tributary, the boundary will run along the shortest distance 
to the mid-stream of the stream marked Bayan Asalong, on the map referred to above, and thence 
will run generally northwards along the mid -stream of this river till it reaches its source on the 
ridge (indicated by grid reference 046810 on the map r eferred to above). From there it will run 
along the crest of this ridge upto Boghoban Trig Station. From Boghoban Trig Station upto the 
tri-junction of the Bangladesh - Assam-Tripura boundary (Khan Talang Trig Station), the 
boundary will run along the water shed of the river systems of the two countries. In case of any 
difference between the map and the ground, the ground shall prevail. The boundary will be a 
fixed boundary in this sector.  
9.  Beanibazar-Karimganj Sector : The undemarcated portion of the boundar y west of 
Umapati village should be demarcated in accordance with the agreed basis of demarcation, 
leaving Umapati village in India.  
10. Hakar Khal : The boundary should be demarcated in accordance with the Nehru -Noon 
Agreement of September, 1958, treating Ha kar Khal as a geographical feature distinct from the 
Ichhamati River. The boundary will be a fixed boundary.  
11. Baikari Khal  : In the Baikari Khal, the boundary should be demarcated on the agreed 
basis and principles, namely, that the ground shall prevail, i .e. as per the agreement reached 
between the Directors of Land Records and Surveys of West Bengal and erstwhile East Pakistan 
in 1949. The boundary will be a fixed boundary.  
12. Enclaves: The Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and the Bangladesh enclaves in India 
should be exchanged expeditiously, excepting the enclaves mentioned in paragraph 14 without 
claim to compensation for the additional area going to Bangladesh.  
13. Hilli : The area will be demarcated in accordance with Radcliffe Award and the line 
drawn by him on the map.  
14. Berubari : India will retain the southern half of South Berubari Union No.12 and the 
adjacent enclaves, measuring an area of 2.64 square miles approximately, and in exchange 
Bangladesh will retain the Dahagram and Angarpota enclaves. India wi ll lease in perpetuity to 
Bangladesh an area of 178 metres x 85 metres near 'Tin Bigha' to connect Dahagram with 
Panbari Mouza (P.S. Patgram) of Bangladesh.  
15. Lathitilla-Dumabari: From point Y (the last demarcated boundary pillar position), the 
boundary sha ll run southwards along the Patharia Hills RF boundary upto the point where it 
meets the western boundary of Dumabari Mouza. Thence along the same Mouza boundary upto 
the tri-junction of Mouzas Dumabari, Lathitilla and Bara Putnigaon through the junction o f the 
two Mouzas Dumabari and Lathitilla. From this point it shall run along the shortest distance to 
meet the mid -stream of Putni Chara. Thence it shall run generally southwards along the 
midstream of the course of Putni Chara at the time of demarcation, till it meets the boundary 
between Sylhet (Bangladesh) and Tripura (India).  
Article 2 The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that territories in adverse possession 

28 
 
in areas already demarcated in respect of which boundary strip maps are already prepared, shall 
be exchanged within six months of the signing of the boundary strip maps by the 
plenipotentiaries. They may sign the relevant maps as early as possible and in a ny case not later 
than the 31st December, 1974. Early measures may be taken to print maps in respect of other 
areas where demarcation has already taken place. These should be printed by 31st May 1975 and 
signed by the plenipotentiaries thereafter in order that the exchange of adversely held 
possessions in these areas may take place by the 31st December, 1975. In sectors still to be 
demarcated, transfer of territorial jurisdiction may take place within six months of the signature 
by plenipotentiaries on the concerned boundary strip maps.  
Article 3 The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that when areas are transferred, the 
people in these areas shall be given the right of staying on where they are, as nationals of the 
State to which the areas are trans ferred. Pending demarcation of the boundary and exchange of 
territory by mutual agreement, there should be no disturbance of the status quo and peaceful 
conditions shall be maintained in the border regions. Necessary instructions in this regard shall 
be issued to the local authorities on the border by the two countries. 
Article 4 The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that any dispute concerning the 
interpretation or implementation of this Agreement shall be settled peacefully through mutual 
consultations.  
Article 5 This Agreement shall be subject to ratification by the Governments of India and 
Bangladesh and Instruments of Ratification shall be exchanged as early as possible. The 
Agreement shall take effect from the date of the exchange of the Instruments of Ratification.  
Signed in New Delhi on May 16, 1974, in two originals each of which is equally 
authentic.  
 
For the Government of 
 the Republic of India  
 
For the Government of the  
People's Republic of Bangladesh  
         Sd/-             Sd/-  
(INDIRA GANDHI ) 
Prime Minister of India 
(SHEIKH MUJIBUR RAHMAN) 
Prime Minister of Bangladesh. 
 
 
  

29 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
2011 PROTOCOL TO THE LAND BOUNDARY AGREEMENT 
 
 The Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the People‟s Republic 
of Bangladesh, 
 Bearing in mind the friendly relations existing between the two countries, 
 
 Desiring to define more accurately at certain points and to complete the demarcation of 
the land boundary between India and Bangladesh, 
 
 Having regard to the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and 
the Government of the People‟s Republic of Bangladesh concerning the demarcation of the land 
boundary between India and Bangladesh and related matters, May 16, 1974 and Exchange of 
Letters dated  December 26, 1974; December 30, 1974; October 7, 1982; and March 26, 1992 
(hereinafter referred to as the 1974 Agreement), 
 
Have agreed as follows: 
 
ARTICLE 1 
 
The provisions of this Protocol shall form an integral part of the 1974 Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 2 
 
(I) Article 1 Clause 5 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows: 
Muhuri River (Belonia) sector  
Boundary in this segment shall be drawn westwards from the existing Boundary Pillar No. 
2159/48-S along the agreed line as depicted in the index ma p prepared jointly till it meets the 
southern limit of the Burning Ghat as shown in jointly surveyed map of Muhuri river area in 
1977-78. Thereafter it shall follow the external limit of the Burning Ghat in South-West direction 
and then turn northwards alo ng the external limit of the Burning Ghat till it meets the centre of 
the existing Muhuri River. Thereafter it shall run along the mid stream of the existing Muhuri 
River upto Boundary Pillar No. 2159/3 -S. This boundary shall be the  fixed boundary. The two  
Governments should raise embankments on their respective sides with a view to stabilising the 
river in its present course as stipulated in the 1974 Agreement.  The Parties agree to fencing on 
„zero line‟ in this area. 
 
 
 
 
(II) Article 1 Clause 12 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows: 

30 
 
Enclaves 
111 Indian Enclaves in Bangladesh and 51 Bangladesh Enclaves in India as per the jointly 
verified cadastral enclave maps and signed at the level of DGLR&S, Bangladesh and DLR& S, 
West Bengal (India) in April 1997, shall be exchanged without claim to compensation for the 
additional areas going to Bangladesh.  
 
(III) Article 1 Clause 15 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows: 
Lathitilla and Dumabari 
Line drawn by Radcliffe from Boundary Pillar 1397(point Y) i.e. the last demarcated boundary 
pillar position, straight southward to the tri -junction of Mouzas Dumabari, Lathitilla and Bara 
Putnigaon i.e upto iron bridge, and thence it shall run generally s outhwards along the midstream 
of the course of Putni Chara as already demarcated on the ground, till it meets the boundary 
between Sylhet (Bangladesh) and Tripura (India) i.e. Boundary Pillar No. 1800.  
 
(IV) The land boundary in the area mentioned below s hall be demarcated in the 
following manner: 
Daikhata 56 (West Bengal-Jalpaiguri) / Panchagarh 
Boundary in this segment shall be drawn as fixed boundary from existing Boundary Pillar 
774/32-S in the strip sheet 444/6 along the mouza boundary of Daikhata -56 as surveyed in 1997-
98 and thereafter will follow the southern boundary of Daikhata -56 (from east to west) upto 
Point No 18 and therefrom it will follow the western boundary of Daikhata -56 (from south to 
north) till it meets the center of River Sui at Poin t No 15 and thereafter, will run along the center 
of the River Sui upto Point No 1, the points as depicted in the sketch map jointly prepared and 
mutually agreed on August 3, 2011. Thereafter the International Boundary shall follow the 
already delineated boundary through Main Pillar (MP) 775.  
 
ARTICLE 3 
(I)   Article 2 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows: 
The Government of India and the Government of Bangladesh agree that the boundary 
shall be drawn as a fixed boundary for territories held in Adverse Possession as determined 
through joint survey and fully depicted in the respective adversely possessed land area index map 
(APL map) finalized by the Land Records and Survey Departments of both the countries 
between December 2010 and August 2011, which are fully described in clause (a) to (d) below.   
 
The relevant strip maps shall be printed and signed by the P lenipotentiaries and transfer 
of territorial jurisdiction shall be completed simultaneously with the exchange of the enclaves. 
The demarcation of the boundary, as depicted in the above -mentioned Index Maps, shall be as 
under:- 
 
 
 
(a) West Bengal Sector 

31 
 
 
(i)   Bousmari – Madhugari (Kushtia-Nadia) area 
The boundary shall be drawn from the existing Boundary Pillar Nos. 154/5 -S to 157/1 -S to 
follow the centre of old course of river Mathabanga, as depicted in consolidation map of 1962, 
as surveyed jointly and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(ii) Andharkota (Kushtia-Nadia) area  
     The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 152/5 -S to Boundary Pillar No 
153/1-S to follow the edge of existing River Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed in June 
2011. 
 
(iii)  Pakuria (Kushtia-Nadia) area  
 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 151/1 -S to Boundary Pillar No 
152/2-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(iv) Char Mahishkundi (Kushtia-Nadia) area  
 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 153/1 -S to Boundary Pillar No 
153/9-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(v) Haripal/ Khutadah/ Battoli/ Sapameri/ LNpur (Patari) (Naogaon- Malda) area  
 
The boundary shall be drawn as line joining from existing Boundary Pillar No 242/S/13, to 
Boundary Pillar No 243/7-S/5 and as jointly surveyed and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(vi) Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri area) 
 
The boundary in the area Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri) adversely held by Bangladesh, and 
Berubari and Singhapara-Khudipara (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri), adversely held by India shall be 
drawn as jointly demarcated during 1996-1998. 
 
(b) Meghalaya Sector 
 
(i) Lobachera-Nuncherra 
  
The boundary from existing Boundary Pillar No 1315/4-S to Boundary Pillar No 1315/15-S in 
Lailong - Balichera, Boundary Pillar No 1316/1 -S to Boundary Pillar No 1316/11 -S in 
Lailong- Noonchera, Boundary Pillar No 1317 to Boundary Pillar No 1317/13 -S in Lailong - 
Lahiling and  Boundary Pillar No 1318/1 -S to Boundary Pillar No 1318/2 -S in Lailong - 
Lubhachera shall be drawn to follow the edge of tea gardens as jointly surveyed  and agreed in 
Dec 2010. 
 
(ii) Pyrdiwah/ Padua Area  

32 
 
 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pill ar No 1270/1 -S as per jointly 
surveyed and mutually agreed line till Boundary Pillar No 1271/1-T. The Parties agree that the 
Indian Nationals from Pyrdiwah village shall be allowed to draw water from Piyang River 
near point No 6 of the agreed Map. 
 
(iii) Lyngkhat Area  
 
(aa)     Lyngkhat-I / Kulumcherra & Lyngkhat-II/ Kulumcherra  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1264/4 -S to Boundary 
Pillar No 1265 and BP No 1265/6 -S to 1265/9 -S as per jointly surveyed and mutually 
agreed line.  
 
(ab)  Lyngkhat-III/ Sonarhat  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Bou ndary Pillar No 1266/13 -S along the 
nallah southwards till it meets another nallah in the east -west direction, thereafter it shall 
run along the northern edge of the nallah in east till it meets the existing International 
Boundary north of Reference Pillar Nos.1267/4-R-B and 1267/3-R-I. 
 
(iv) Dawki/ Tamabil area 
  
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line joining existing Boundary Pillar Nos 
1275/1-S to Boundary Pillar Nos 1275/7 -S. The Parties agree to fencing on „zero line‟ in 
this area. 
 
(v) Naljuri/ Sreepur Area  
 
    (aa)   Naljuri I 
The boundary shall be a line from the existing Boundary Pillar No 1277/2 -S in southern 
direction upto three plots as depicted in the strip Map No 166 till it meets the nallah flowing 
from Boundary Pillar No 1277/5 -T, thereafter it will run along the western edge of the nallah 
in the southern direction upto 2 plots on the Bangladesh side, thereafter it shall run eastwards 
till it meets a line drawn in southern direction from Boundary Pillar No 1277/4-S.  
 
     (ab)      Naljuri III 
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line from existing Boundary Pillar No 1278/2 -S to 
Boundary Pillar No 1279/ 3-S. 
 
(vi) Muktapur/ Dibir Hawor Area   
The Parties agree that the  Indian Nationals shall be allowed to visit Kali Mandir and shall 
also be allowed to draw water and exercise fishing rights in the water body in the Muktapur / 
Dibir Hawor area from the bank of Muktapur side. 
 

33 
 
(c)  Tripura Sector 
 
(i) Chandannagar-Champarai Tea Garden area in Tripura/ Moulvi Bazar sector 
  
The boundary shall be drawn along Sonaraichhera river from existing Boundary Pillar No 
1904 to Boundary Pillar No 1905 as surveyed jointly and agreed in July 2011. 
 
(d)  Assam Sector 
 
(i) Kalabari (Boroibari) area in Assam sector 
  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 1066/24-T to Boundary Pillar 
No 1067/16-T as surveyed jointly and agreed in August  2011. 
 
(ii) Pallathal area in Assam sector 
  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1370 /3-S to 1371/6 -S to 
follow the outer edge of the tea garden and from Boundary Pillar No. 1372 to 1373/2 -S along 
outer edge of the pan plantation. 
 
ARTICLE 4 
 
 This Protocol shall be subject to ratification by the Government of the Republic of India 
and the Government of the People‟s Republic of Bangladesh and shall enter into force on the 
date of exchange of Instruments of Ratification. 
 
 Signed at Dhaka on the Sixth day of September, 2011, in two originals in the English 
language. 
For the Government of the  
     Republic of India 
 
-sd- 
( S.M. Krishna) 
External Affairs Minister 
       For the Government of the 
People‟s Republic of Bangladesh 
 
(-sd-) 
(Dipu Moni) 
Minister for Foreign Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
ANNEXURE III 
  
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND 
NINETEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013 
 
  
A BILL 
 
 further to amend the Constitution of India to give 
effect to the acquiring of territories by India and 
transfer of certain territories to Bangladesh in 
pursuance of the agreement and its protocol entered 
into between the Governments of India and 
Bangladesh. 
 
 
  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -third Year of 
the Republic of India as follows:- 
 
 
 1. This Act may be called the Constitution (One 
hundred and Nineteenth  Amendment) Act,  2013 
 
Short title. 
 2. In this Act,- 
 
Definitions. 
 (a) “acquired territory” means so much of the 
territories comprised in the India -Bangladesh 
agreement and its protocol and referred to in 
the First Schedule as are demarcated for the 
purpose of being acquired by India from 
Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreem ent and 
its protocol referred to in clause (c);  
 
 
 (b) “appointed day” means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint as the date for 
acquisition of territories from Bangladesh and 
transfer of the  territories  to Bangladesh in 
pursuance of the India -Bangladesh agreement 
and its protocol, after causing the territories to 
be so acquired and transferred as referred to in 
the First Schedule and Second Schedule and 
demarcated for the purpose; 
 
 
 (c) “India-Bangladesh agreement” means the 
agreement between the Government of the 
Republic of India and the Government of the 
 

35 
 
People‟s Republic of Bangladesh concerning 
the Demarcation of the Land Boundary 
between India and Bangladesh and Related 
Matters date d the 16 th day of May, 1974, 
Exchange of Letters dated the 26 th day of 
December, 1974, the 30 th day of December, 
1974, the 7 th day of October, 1982, the 26 th  
day of March, 1992 and protocol to the said 
agreement dated the 6 th day of September, 
2011, entered into between the Governments of 
India and Bangladesh, the relevant extracts of 
which are set out in the Third Schedule;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 (d) “transferred territory”, means so much of the 
territories comprised in the India -Bangladesh 
agreement and its protocol and referred to in 
the Second Schedule as are demarcated for the 
purpose of being  transferred by India to 
Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and 
its protocol referred to in clause (c). 
 
 
 3. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule 
to the Constitution,- 
Amendment of   
First Schedule 
to the 
Constitution. 
 (a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the 
State of Assam, the words, brackets and figures 
“and the territories referred to in Part I of the 
Second Schedule to the Constitution (One 
hundred and Nineteenth  Amendment) Act, 
2013, notwithstanding any thing contained in 
clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution 
(Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it 
relates to the territories referred to in Part I of 
the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One 
hundred and Nineteenth  Amendment) Act, 
2013”,  shall be added at the end;  
 
 (b) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the 
State of West Bengal, the words, brackets and 
figures “and also the territories referred to in 
Part III of the First Schedule but excluding the 
territories referred to in Part III of the Second 
Schedule to the Constitution (One hundred and 
Nineteenth  Amendment) Act, 2013, 
notwithstanding anything contained in clause 
(c) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth 
Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to 
the territories referred to in Part III of the Firs t 
 

36 
 
Schedule and the territories referred to in Part 
III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution 
(One hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) 
Act, 2013”, shall be added at the end; 
 
 (c) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the 
State of Meghalaya, the words, brackets and 
figures “and the territories referred to in Part I 
of the First Schedule but excluding the 
territories referred to in Part II of the Second 
Schedule to the Constitution (One hundred and 
Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 2013”, shall be 
added at the end; 
 
 
 (d) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the 
State of Tripura, the words, brackets and 
figures “and the territories referred to in Part II 
of the First Schedule to the Constitution (One 
hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 
2013, notwithstanding anything contained in 
clause (d) of section 3 of the Constitution 
(Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it 
relates to the territories referred to in Part II of 
the First Schedule to the Constitution (One 
hundred and Nineteenth Amendment) A ct, 
2013”, shall be added at the end. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 (a), 2(b) and 3] 
 
PART I 
 
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 16 th day of May, 
1974 and Article 3 (I) (b) (ii) (iii) (iv)  (v) of the protocol dated the 6 th day of September, 
2011. 
 
PART II 
 
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 16 th day of May, 
1974 and Article 3(I) (c) (i) of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011. 
 
PART III 
 
The acquired territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the agreement dated the 16 th day 
of May, 1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) of the protocol dated the 6 th day of 
September, 2011. 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2(b), 2 (d), and 3] 
 
PART I 
 
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated 16 th day of May, 1974 
and Article 3 (I) (d) (i)(ii) of the protocol dated 6th day of  September, 2011. 
 
PART II 
 
The transferred territory in relation to Articl e 2 of the agreement dated the 16 th day of May, 
1974 and Article 3(I) (b) (i) of the protocol dated 6th day of September, 2011. 
PART III 
 
The transferred territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the agreement dated the 16 th 
day of May, 1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3(I) (a) (i) (ii) (vi) of the protocol dated the 6 th day of 
September, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(c)] 
 
I.  EXTRACT FROM THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF 
THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNME NT OF THE PEOPLE’s 
REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF THE LAND 
BOUNDARY BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND RELATED MATTERS, 
DATED 16 MAY 1974 
 
Article 1: 
12.   ENCLAVES  
 
The Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and the Bangladesh enclaves in India should be exchanged 
expeditiously, excepting the enclaves mentioned in paragraph 14 without claim to compensation 
for the additional area going to Bangladesh.  
Article 2: 
The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that territories in adverse possession in areas 
already demarcated in respect of which boundary strip maps are already prepared, shall be 
exchanged within six months of the signing of the boundary strip maps by the plenipote ntiaries. 
They may sign the relevant maps as early as possible and in any case not later than the 31st 
December, 1974. Early measures may be taken to print maps in respect of other areas where 
demarcation has already taken place. These should be printed by  31st May 1975 and signed by 
the plenipotentiaries thereafter in order that the exchange of adversely held possessions in these 
areas may take place by the 31st December, 1975. In sectors still to be demarcated, transfer of 
territorial jurisdiction may tak e place within six months of the signature by plenipotentiaries on 
the concerned boundary strip maps.  
 
II.   EXTRACT FROM THE PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE 
GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE 
PEOPLE’s REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF 
THE LAND BOUNDARY BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND RELATED 
MATTERS, DATED 06 SEPTEMBER 2011 
 
Article 2: 
(II) Article 1 Clause 12 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows: 
Enclaves 
111 Indian Enclaves in  Bangladesh and 51 Bangladesh Enclaves in India as per the jointly 
verified cadastral enclave maps and signed at the level of DGLR&S, Bangladesh and DLR&S, 
West Bengal (India) in April 1997, shall be exchanged without claim to compensation for the 
additional areas going to Bangladesh.  

39 
 
 
Article 3: 
(I)   Article 2 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows: 
 
The Government of India and the Government of Bangladesh agree that the boundary 
shall be drawn as a fixed boundary for territories held in A dverse Possession as determined 
through joint survey and fully depicted in the respective adversely possessed land area index map 
(APL map) finalized by the Land Records and Survey Departments of both the countries 
between December 2010 and August 2011, which are fully described in clause (a) to (d) below.   
 
The relevant strip maps shall be printed and signed by the Plenipotentiaries and transfer 
of territorial jurisdiction shall be completed simultaneously with the exchange of the enclaves. 
The demarcation of the boundary, as depicted in the above -mentioned Index Maps, shall be as 
under:- 
(a) West Bengal Sector 
(i) Bousmari – Madhugari (Kushtia-Nadia) area 
    The boundary shall be drawn from the existing Boundary Pillar Nos. 154/5 -S to 157/1 -S 
to follow the centre of old course of river Mathabanga, as depicted in consolidation map 
of 1962, as surveyed jointly and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(ii) Andharkota (Kushtia-Nadia) area  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 152/5 -S to Boundary 
Pillar No 153/1 -S to follow the edge of existing River Mathabanga as jointly surveyed 
and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(iii) Pakuria (Kushtia-Nadia) area  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 151/1 -S to Boundary 
Pillar No 152/2-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed 
in June 2011. 
 
(iv)     Char Mahishkundi (Kushtia-Nadia) area  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 153/1 -S to Boundary 
Pillar No 153/9-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed 
in June 2011. 
 
(v) Haripal/Khutadah/Battoli/Sapameri/LNpur (Patari) (Naogaon- Malda) area  
The boundary shall be drawn as line joining from ex isting Boundary Pillar No 242/S/13, 
to Boundary Pillar No 243/7-S/5 and as jointly surveyed and agreed in June 2011. 
 
(vi) Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri area) 
The boundary in the area Berubari (Panchagarh -Jalpaiguri) adversely held by 
Bangladesh, and Berubari  and Singhapara-Khudipara (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri), adversely 
held by India shall be drawn as jointly demarcated during 1996-1998. 

40 
 
  
(b) Meghalaya Sector 
 
(i)        Lobachera-Nuncherra 
           The boundary from existing Boundary Pillar No 1315/4 -S to Boundary Pillar No 
1315/15-S in Lailong - Balichera, Boundary Pillar No 1316/1 -S to Boundary Pillar No 
1316/11-S in Lailong - Noonchera, Boundary Pillar No 1317 to Boundary Pillar No 
1317/13-S in Lailong- Lahiling and Boundary Pillar No 1318/1 -S to Boundary Pillar No 
1318/2-S in Lailong - Lubhachera shall be drawn to follow the edge of tea gardens as 
jointly surveyed  and agreed in Dec 2010. 
 
(ii) Pyrdiwah/ Padua Area  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 1270/1 -S as per jointly 
surveyed and mutually agreed line till Boundary Pillar No 1271/1 -T. The Parties agree 
that th e Indian Nationals from Pyrdiwah village shall be allowed to draw water from 
Piyang River near point No 6 of the agreed Map. 
 
(i) Lyngkhat Area  
  (aa)  Lyngkhat-I / Kulumcherra & Lyngkhat-II/ Kulumcherra  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1264/4 -S to Boundary 
Pillar No 1265 and BP No 1265/6 -S to 1265/9 -S as per jointly surveyed a nd mutually 
agreed line.  
 
  (ab)  Lyngkhat-III/Sonarhat  
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 1266/13 -S along the 
nallah southwards till it meets another nallah in the east-west direction, thereafter it shall 
run along the northern  edge of the nallah in east till it meets the existing International 
Boundary north of Reference Pillar Nos.1267/4-R-B and 1267/3-R-I. 
 
(ii) Dawki/Tamabil area 
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line joining existing Boundary Pillar Nos 
1275/1-S to Boundary Pillar Nos 1275/7-S. The Parties agree to fencing on „zero line‟ in 
this area. 
 
(iii) Naljuri/Sreepur Area  
(aa) Naljuri I 
 
The boundary shall be a line from the existing Boundary Pillar No 1277/2 -S in southern 
direction upto three plots as depicted in the strip Map No 166 till it meets the nallah 
flowing from Boundary Pillar No 1277/5 -T, thereafter it will run along the wester n edge 
of the nallah in the southern direction upto 2 plots on the Bangladesh side, thereafter it 
shall run eastwards till it meets a line drawn in southern direction from Boundary Pillar 
No 1277/4-S.  

41 
 
 
(ab) Naljuri III 
The boundary shall be drawn by a str aight line from existing Boundary Pillar No 1278/2 -
S to Boundary Pillar No 1279/ 3-S.  
 
(iv)     Muktapur/ Dibir Hawor Area   
The Parties agree that the Indian Nationals shall be allowed to visit Kali Mandir and shall 
also be allowed to draw water and exer cise fishing rights in the water body in the 
Muktapur / Dibir Hawor area from the bank of Muktapur side. 
 
(c)  Tripura Sector 
 
(i) Chandannagar-Champarai Tea Garden area in Tripura/ Moulvi Bazar sector 
The boundary shall be drawn along Sonaraichhera river from existing Boundary Pillar No 
1904 to Boundary Pillar No 1905 as surveyed jointly and agreed in July 2011. 
 
(d)  Assam Sector 
 
(i) Kalabari (Boroibari) area in Assam sector 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No 1066/24 -T to Boundary 
Pillar No 1067/16-T as surveyed jointly and agreed in August  2011. 
 
(ii) Pallathal area in Assam sector 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1370/3 -S to 1371/6-S to 
follow the outer edge of the tea garden and from Boundary Pillar No. 1372 to 1373/2 -S 
along outer edge of the pan plantation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
ANNEXURE IV 
DETAILS OF THE ENCLAVES 
 
I. EXCHANGEABLE INDIAN ENCLAVES IN BANGLADESH WITH AREA 
A.  Enclaves with independent chhits 
Sl. 
No. Name of Chhits Chhit No. 
Lying within Police Station           
Bangladesh/ W.Bengal 
Area in 
acres 
1 Garati 75 Pochagar Haldibari 58.23 
2 Garati 76 Pochagar Haldibari 0.79 
3 Garati 77 Pochagar Haldibari 18.00 
4 Garati 78 Pochagar Haldibari 958.66 
5 Garati 79 Pochagar Haldibari 1.74 
6 Garati 80 Pochagar Haldibari 73.75 
7 Singimari Part-I 73 Pochagar Haldibari 6.07 
8 Nazirganja 41 Boda Haldibari 58.32 
9 Nazirganja 42 Boda Haldibari 434.29 
10 Nazirganja 44 Boda Haldibari 53.47 
11 Nazirganja 45 Boda Haldibari 1.07 
12 Nazirganja 46 Boda Haldibari 17.95 
13 Nazirganja 47 Boda Haldibari 3.89 
14 Nazirganja 48 Boda Haldibari 73.27 
15 Nazirganja 49 Boda Haldibari 49.05 
16 Nazirganja 50 Boda Haldibari 5.05 
17 Nazirganja 51 Boda Haldibari 0.77 
18 Nazirganja 52 Boda Haldibari 1.04 
19 Nazirganja 53 Boda Haldibari 1.02 
20 Nazirganja 54 Boda Haldibari 3.87 
21 Nazirganja 55 Boda Haldibari 12.18 
22 Nazirganja 56 Boda Haldibari 54.04 
23 Nazirganja 57 Boda Haldibari 8.27 
24 Nazirganja 58 Boda Haldibari 14.22 
25 Nazirganja 60 Boda Haldibari 0.52 
26 Putimari 59 Boda Haldibari 122.80 
27 Daikhata Chhat 38 Boda Haldibari 499.21 
28 Salbari 37 Boda Haldibari 1188.93 
29 Kajal Dighi 36 Boda Haldibari 771.44 

43 
 
30 Nataktoka 32 Boda Haldibari 162.26 
31 Nataktoka 33 Boda Haldibari 0.26 
32 Beuladanga Chhat 35 Boda Haldibari 0.83 
33 Balapara Khagrabari 3 Debiganj Haldibari 1752.44 
34 
Bara Khankikharija 
Gitaldaha 30 Dimla Haldibari 7.71 
35 
Bara Khankikharija 
Gitaldaha 29 Dimla Haldibari 36.83 
36 Barakhangir 28 Dimla Haldibari 30.53 
37 Nagarjikabari 31 Dimla Haldibari 33.41 
38 Kuchlibari 26 Patgram Mekliganj 5.78 
39 Kuchlibari 27 Patgram Mekliganj 2.04 
40 Bara Kuchlibari 
Fragment 
of J.L.107 
of P.S 
Mekliganj Patgram Mekliganj 4.35 
41 Jamaldaha-Belapukhari 6 Patgram Mekliganj 5.24 
42 Uponchowki Kuchlibari 115/2 Patgram Mekliganj 0.32 
43 Uponchowki Kuchlibari 7 Patgram Mekliganj 44.04 
44 Bhotbari 8 Patgram Mekliganj 36.83 
45 Balapukhari 5 Patgram Mekliganj 55.91 
46 Bara Khangir 4 Patgram Mekliganj 50.51 
47 Bara Khangir 9 Patgram Mekliganj 87.42 
48 Chhat Bagdokra 10 Patgram Mekliganj 41.70 
49 Ratanpur 11 Patgram Mekliganj 58.91 
50 Bagdokra 12 Patgram Mekliganj 25.49 
51 Pulkar Dabri 
Fragment 
of J.L.101 
of P.S 
Mekliganj Patgram Mekliganj 0.88 
52 Kharkharia 15 Patgram Mekliganj 60.74 
53 Kharkharia 13 Patgram Mekliganj 51.62 
54 Lotamari 14 Patgram Mekliganj 110.92 

44 
 
55 Bhotbari 16 Patgram Mekliganj 205.46 
56 Kamat Changrabandha 16 A Patgram Mekliganj 42.80 
57 Kamat Changrabandha 17 A Patgram Mekliganj 16.01 
58 Panisala 17 Patgram Mekliganj 137.66 
59 Dwarikamari Khasbash 18 Patgram Mekliganj 36.50 
60 Panisala 153/P Patgram Mekliganj 0.27 
61 Panisala 153/O Patgram Mekliganj 18.01 
62 Panisala 19 Patgram Mekliganj 64.63 
63 Panisala 21 Patgram Mekliganj 51.40 
64 Lotamari 20 Patgram Mekliganj 283.53 
65 Lotamari 22 Patgram Mekliganj 98.85 
66 Dwarikamari 23 Patgram Mekliganj 39.52 
67 Dwarikamari 25 Patgram Mekliganj 45.73 
68 Chhat Bhothat 24 Patgram Mekliganj 56.11 
69 Baskata 131 Patgram Mathabhanga 22.35 
70 Baskata 132 Patgram Mathabhanga 11.96 
71 Baskata 130 Patgram Mathabhanga 20.48 
72 Bhogramguri 133 Patgram Mathabhanga 1.44 
73 Chenakata 134 Patgram Mekliganj 7.81 
74 Banskata 119 Patgram Mathabhanga 413.81 
75 Banskata 120 Patgram Mathabhanga 30.75 
76 Banskata 121 Patgram Mathabhanga 12.15 
77 Banskata 113 Patgram Mathabhanga 57.86 
78 Banskata 112 Patgram Mathabhanga 315.04 
79 Banskata 114 Patgram Mathabhanga 0.77 
80 Banskata 115 Patgram Mathabhanga 29.20 
81 Banskata 122 Patgram Mathabhanga 33.22 
82 Banskata 127 Patgram Mathabhanga 12.72 
83 Banskata 128 Patgram Mathabhanga 2.33 
84 Banskata 117 Patgram Mathabhanga 2.55 
85 Banskata 118 Patgram Mathabhanga 30.98 
86 Banskata 125 Patgram Mathabhanga 0.64 

45 
 
87 Banskata 126 Patgram Mathabhanga 1.39 
88 Banskata 129 Patgram Mathabhanga 1.37 
89 Banskata 116 Patgram Mathabhanga 16.96 
90 Banskata 123 Patgram Mathabhanga 24.37 
91 Banskata 124 Patgram Mathabhanga 0.28 
92 Gotamari Chhit 135 Hatibandha Sitalkuchi 126.59 
93 Gotamari Chhit 136 Hatibandha Sitalkuchi 20.02 
94 Banspachai 151 Lalmonirhat Dinhata 217.29 
95 Banspachai Bhitarkuthi 152 Lalmonirhat Dinhata 81.71 
96 Dasiar Chhara 150 Fulbari Dinhata 1643.44 
97 Dakurhat- Dakinirkuthi  156 Kurigram Dinhata 14.27 
98 Kalamati 141 
Bhurungamari 
 Dinhata 21.21 
99 Shahebganj 153 Bhurungamari Dinhata 31.58 
100 Seotikursa 142 Bhurungamari Dinhata 45.63 
101 Bara Goachulka 143 Bhurungamari Dinhata 39.99 
102 Gaochulka II 147 Bhurungamari Dinhata 0.90 
103 Gaochulka I 146 Bhurungamari Dinhata 8.92 
104 Dighaltari II 145 Bhurungamari Dinhata 8.81 
105 Dighaltari I 144 Bhurungamari Dinhata 12.31 
106 Chhoto Garaljhora II 149 Bhurungamari Dinhata 17.85 
107 Chhoto Garaljhora I 148 Bhurungamari Dinhata 35.74 
108 
 
1 chhit without name & 
JL No at the southern end 
of JL no 38 & 
northwestern end of JL 
no 39 (Asokbari) 
157 Patgram Mathabhanga 3.50 
B.        Enclaves with fragmented chhits 
109 
(i)  Bewladanga 
 34 Haldibari Boda 
862.46 
 (ii) Bewladanga 
 
 
Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
110 (i)  Kotbhajni 2 Haldibari Debiganj 2012.27 

46 
 
 
The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and reconciled with  records 
held by India and Bangladesh during the Indo-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at Calcutta 
during 9 th -12th  Oct 96 as well as during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) 
Panchagarh (Bangladesh) sector during 21-24 Nov.96. 
Note: Name of enclave in Sl.No. 108 above has been identified as “Ashokabari” by joint 
ground verification during field season 1996-97. 
  
Sd/-9.4.97       Sd/-9.4.97 
  Brig. J R Peter              Md. Shafi Uddin 
Director Land Records & Survey                                 Director General, Land Records  
(Ex-Officio) West Bengal, India                                and Surveys, Bangladesh  
& Director, Eastern Circle,   
   Survey of India, Calcutta. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Kotbhajni Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
(iii) Kotbhajni Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
(iv) Kotbhajni Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
111 
(i)  Dahala Khagrabari 1 Haldibari Debiganj 
2650.35 
(ii)  Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
(iii) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
(iv) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
(v)  Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
(vi) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj 
 
Total Area  :                                                                     17160.63 

47 
 
II.  EXCHANGEABLE BANGLADESH ENCLAVES IN INDIA WITH AREA 
A. Enclaves with independent chhits 
Sl.No. Name of Chhits 
Lying within Police Station           
W.Bengal/ Bangladesh 
J.L. 
No. 
Area in 
acres 
1 Chhit Kuchlibari Mekliganj Patgram 22 370.64 
2 Chhit Land of Kuchlibari Mekliganj Patgram 24 1.83 
3 Balapukhari Mekliganj Patgram 21 331.64 
4 
Chhit Land of Panbari 
No.2 Mekliganj Patgram 20 1.13 
5 Chhit  Panbari Mekliganj Patgram 18 108.59 
6 Dhabalsati Mirgipur Mekliganj Patgram 15 173.88 
7 Bamandal Mekliganj Patgram 11 2.24 
8 Chhit Dhabalsati Mekliganj Patgram 14 66.58 
9 Dhabalsati Mekliganj Patgram 13 60.45 
10 Srirampur Mekliganj Patgram 8 1.05 
11 Jote Nijjama Mekliganj Patgram 3 87.54 
12 
Chhit Land of Jagatber 
No.3 Mathabanga Patgram 37 69.84 
13 
Chhit Land of Jagatber 
No.1 Mathabanga Patgram 35 30.66 
14 
Chhit Land of Jagatber 
No.2 Mathabanga Patgram 36 27.09 
15 Chhit Kokoabari Mathabanga Patgram 47 29.49 
16 Chhit Bhandardaha Mathabanga Patgram 67 39.96 
17 Dhabalguri Mathabanga Patgram 52 12.50 
18 Chhit  Dhabalguri Mathabanga Patgram 53 22.31 
19 
Chhit  Land of Dhabalguri 
No.3 Mathabanga Patgram 70 1.33 
20 
Chhit  Land of 
Dhabalguri No.4 Mathabanga Patgram 71 4.55 
21 
Chhit  Land of 
Dhabalguri No.5 Mathabanga Patgram 72 4.12 
22 
Chhit  Land of 
Dhabalguri No.1 Mathabanga Patgram 68 26.83 
23 
Chhit  Land of 
Dhabalguri No.2 Mathabanga Patgram 69 13.95 
24 Mahishmari Sitalkuchi Patgram 54 122.77 

48 
 
25 Bura Saradubi Sitalkuchi Hatibandha 13 34.96 
26 Palnapur Sitalkuchi Patgram 64 506.56 
27 Amjhol Sitalkuchi Hatibandha 57 1.25 
28 Kismat Batrigachh Dinhata Kaliganj 82 209.95 
29 Durgapur Dinhata Kaliganj 83 20.96 
30 
Bansua Khamar 
Gitaldaha Dinhata Lalmonirhat 1 24.54 
31 Paoturkuthi Dinhata Lalmonirhat 37 589.94 
32 Paschim  Bakalir Chhara Dinhata Bhurungamari 38 151.98 
33 Madhya  Bakalir Chhara Dinhata Bhurungamari 39 32.72 
34 Purba  Bakalir Chhara Dinhata Bhurungamari 40 12.23 
35 Madhya Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 3 136.66 
36 
Madhya Chhit 
Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 8 11.87 
37 
Paschim Chhit 
Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 7 7.60 
38 Uttar  Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 2 27.29 
39 Kachua Dinhata Bhurungamari 5 119.74 
40 Uttar  Bansjani Tufanganj Bhurungamari 1 47.17 
41 Chhat Tilai Tufanganj Bhurungamari 17 81.56 
 
B.         Enclaves With Fragmented Chhits 
42 
(i) Nalgram Sitalkuchi Patgram 65 
1397.34 
 
(ii) Nalgram (Fragment) Sitalkuchi Patgram 65 
 
(iii) Nalgram (Fragment) Sitalkuchi Patgram 65 
43 
(i) Chhit Nalgram Sitalkuchi Patgram 66 
49.50 
(ii) Chhit Nalgram 
(Fragment) Sitalkuchi Patgram 66 
44 
 
(i) Batrigachh Dinhata Kaliganj 81 
577.37 
(ii) Batrigachh 
(Fragment) Dinhata Kaliganj 81 
45 
(i) Karala Dinhata Phulbari 9 
269.91 
 
(ii)  Karala (Fragment) Dinhata Phulbari 9 
(iii)  Karala (Fragment) Dinhata Phulbari 9 

49 
 
 
 
46 
(i) Sibprasad Mustafi Dinhata Phulbari 8 
373.20 
(ii)  Sibprasad Mustafi 
(Fragment) Dinhata Phulbari 8 
47 
(i) Dakshin Masaldanga  Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 
571.38 
(ii)  Dakshin Masaldanga 
(Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 
(iii)  Dakshin 
Masaldanga (Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 
(iv)   Dakshin 
Masaldanga (Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 
(v)   Dakshin Masaldanga 
(Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 
(vi)  Dakshin Masaldanga 
(Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 
48 
(i) Paschim Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 4 
29.49 
(ii) Paschim Masaldanga 
(Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 4 
49 
 
(i) Purba Chhit 
Masaldanga  Dinhata Bhurungamari 10 
35.01 
(ii) Purba Chhit 
Masaldanga  (Fragment) Dinhata Bhurungamari 10 
50 
 
(i) Purba  Masaldanga  Dinhata Bhurungamari 11 
153.89 
 
(ii)  Purba  Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 11 
51 
 
(i) Uttar  Dhaldanga  Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14 
24.98 
(ii)   Uttar  Dhaldanga 
(Fragment) Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14 
(iii)  Uttar  Dhaldanga 
(Fragment) Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14 

50 
 
The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and reconciled with records held 
by India and Bangladesh during the Indo -Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at Calcutta 
during 9 th -12th Oct 96 as well as during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) - 
Panchagarh (Bangladesh) sector during 21-24 Nov. 96. 
Sd/- 9.4.97 
Brig. J R Peter 
Director Land Records & Survey 
(Ex-Officio) West Bengal. India 
& 
Director, Eastern Circle 
Survey of India, Calcutta 
Sd/- 9.4.97 
        Md. Shafi Uddin 
           Director General, Land Records 
        and Surveys. Bangladesh 
 
             
          
  

51 
 
ANNEXURE V 
DETAILS OF THE ADVERSE POSSESSIONS 
Adverse Possession areas to be acquired by India 
 
West Bengal 
 
Areas in Acres 
Berubari and Singhpara-Khudipara (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri) 1374.99 
Pakuria (Khustia-Nadia) 576.36 
Char Mahishkundi 393.33 
Haripal/LNpur (Patari) 53.37 
Sub Total 2398.05 
 
Meghalaya 
Pyrdiwah 193.516 
Lyngkhat I 4.793 
Lyngkhat II 0.758 
Lyngkhat III 6.94 
Dawki/Tamabil 1.557 
Naljuri I 6.156 
Naljuri II 26.858 
Sub Total 240.578 
 
Tripura 
Chandannagar (moulvi Bazar-Uttar Tripura) 138.41 
Sub Total 138.41 
Total 2777.038 
 
Adverse Possession areas to be transferred to Bangladesh 
 
 
West Bengal 
 
Area in Acres 
Bousmari-Madhugari (Khustia-Nadia) 1358.25 
Andharkota 338.79 
Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri) 260.55 
Sub Total 1957.59 
 
Meghalaya 
Lobachera-Nuncherra 41.702 
Sub Total 41.702 
 
Assam 
Thakurani Bari-Kalabari (Baroibari) (Kurigram-Dubri) 193.85 
Pallathal (Maulvi Bazar – Karimganj) 74.54 
Sub Total 268.39 
Total 2267.682 