 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2014-15] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2015/KARTIKA, 1937 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
07 
 

 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2014-15] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18th November, 2015 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30th November, 2015 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd December, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2015/KARTIKA, 1937 (Saka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-2016)……                                   (ii)        
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..       (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………….         1                                                                        
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………......            26 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…           36 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……..………..          37     
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………..                       39           
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee                                 
held on 20.10.2015 …………………………………………..             45   
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government  
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (16th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….          47       
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-16) 
 
Sl. No.   Name of Members 
  
 1.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6.  Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.   Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 9.  Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 10.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11.  Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 12.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14.  Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17.  Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18.  Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20.  Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21.  Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 23.  Shri H.K. Dua 
 24.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 25.  Smt. Kanimozhi 
 26.  Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 27.  Shri C.M. Ramesh  
 28.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 29.  Shri D. P. Tripathi 
 30.  Shri Pavan Kumar Varma  
 31.  Vacant 
                           
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cyril John  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Committee Officer 
(ii) 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on External Affairs (201 5-16) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report                
(16th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Third Report (1 6th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2014-15. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented  to the Parliament  on 22nd December, 2014. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report were received on 7th August, 2015. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Acti on Taken Report at th eir sitting held on 
20th October, 2015. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix -I 
to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Third Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (1 6th Lok Sabha) is given at  
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                               DR. SHASHI THAROOR,           
6th November, , 2015                                                                Chairperson,                                           
15 Kartika, 1937 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)                                                

1 
 
CHAPTER –I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Third Report on Demands 
for Grants (2014 -15) of the Ministry of Overseas Indi an Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2014. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 
all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These h ave been categorized as 
follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,6,7,8 and 10 
 Total-08 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government replies. 
 
NIL 
Total- 00 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which repl ies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No.11 and 12  
 
Total- 02 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect o f which final replies of Government 
are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos 5,9, 13 and 14 
Total-04 
 

2 
 
 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I and 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be furnished 
within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Utilization of funds by the Ministry 
 
5. The Committee had observed that the allocation made to the Ministry at BE stage for the year 
2013-14 was Rs. 115.79 crore which was reduced to Rs.97.22 crore at RE state and the final 
utilization was only Rs. 84.78 crore. This show ed that the Ministry o f Overseas Indian Affairs ha d 
once again failed in containing the trend of shortfall in utilization of allocation  during 2013-14. The 
Committee were not convinced by the justification given by the Ministry that revision and reduction 
of Budget towards lowe r side at RE stage ha d been on account of the fact the expenditure on mass 
events like Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) and Regional Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (RPBD) were 
incurred only in the second half of the year and the actual utilization on the first two qua rters had 
been less. Surprisingly, the Committee  had noted that the fund was not deducted under these heads 
during all these years but reduction was being done under other heads. Similarly, the Committee had 
also noted that the actual expenditure was also less than the Revised Estimates. The Committee  had, 
however, found that after their continuous persuasion, the Ministry ha d taken some initiatives like 
timely release of Scholarship amount and money for Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK) and quarterly 
payment o f rent etc. with a view to improve their quarterly expenditure. The Committee  had, 
therefore, earnestly desire d that the Ministry should regularly review and ensure timely release of 
funds for different purposes during 2014 -15. The Committee had also reiterated that Ministry should 
resort to judicious internal allocation of funds quarterly and strictly monitor expenditure accordingly 
during each quarter, particularly when its funds were being reduced at RE stage on the basis of lower 
expenditure in the firs t two quarters of the financial year. The Committ ee we re also of a strong 
opinion that without improving their current utilization pattern at each stage, the Ministry m ight not 
be able to obtain more funds at RE stage as per their requirements for various schemes/ programmes. 
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 

3 
 
 "The recommendation is related to expenditure pattern under various heads in the MOIA. 
As regards various major schemes like PBD, the flag ship event of the Ministry is held 
during 7-9 January every year, two editions of Know India Programmes (KIPs) and one 
edition of Study India Programme (SIP) coinciding with PBD are undertaken during the 
last quarter of the financial year and accordingly t he expenditures are booked in the last 
quarter.  The Committee‟s direction regarding monitoring of expenditure on a quarterly 
basis are noted for future guidance." 
 
7. While observing the reduction of allocation at RE stage and failure in spending even the  
reduced allocation by the Ministry during 2013 -14, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry should improve this trend and ensure a timely release of funds for different purposes 
during 2014 -15.  The Committee had also reiterated that Ministry shoul d resort to judicious 
internal allocation of funds quarterly and strictly monitor the expenditure.  However, it is 
perplexing to note that the Ministry has once again submitted a stereotyped reply repeating the 
same excuses it had given in the past and men tioning that the Committee's directions have been 
noted for future guidance without giving the details of any concrete action taken on  the 
Committee's recommendation. The Committee have reasons to believe that the Ministry would 
certainly be in a position to furnish the necessary data related to the utilization of funds during 
2014-15 in a reply submitted in August, 2015.   In absence of any such details, the Committee 
find it impossible to ascertain whether any credible steps have actually been taken by the  
Ministry in this regard or not.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should not give incomplete information using such phrases showing no commitment to 
improve the trend and it should take earnest efforts to utilize the  allocated funds more evenly 

4 
 
by instituting quarter-wise monitoring mechanism.  The Committee also desire to be informed 
about the outcome of the same. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
e-Migrate Project 
8. The Committee we re surprised to note that the e -Migrate Project ha d been considerably 
delayed due to lack of coordination/integration with the other related agencies and delay in data 
transfer. The Ministry was not even able to spend the allocation made for this project at BE stage. 
The project could not reach the „Go live‟  level and the Ministry could only spend Rs. 0.43 crore 
during 2013-14. During 2014-15 under the IT he ad, a sum of Rs. 12.83 crore had  been allocated and 
out of th at approximately Rs. 8.00 crore were to be spent on the project which was sufficient for 
making payments to the implementing agency. The Committee  had felt relieved to learn that after a 
long delay the project had come to a threshold level and all 10 PoE offices were providing emigration 
clearance through online e -Migrate system. The Committee had realized that since the e -Migrate 
rollout was at pilot stage, a large number of changes m ight be required on the basis of feedback 
received from recruiting agencies and PoE Offices. All th ose changes should be attended to without 
any delay and the program me should be made operational also for Indian Mission to allow foreign 
employers to apply to the Indian Missions for attestation on priority basis.  
 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 "The Ministry has noted the concern of the Standing Committee regarding implementation of the e -
Migrate project.  The Ministry had considered various suggestions from the various stake holders of 
the process and evolved the project accordingly to make the process use r friendly. The project was 
rolled out on 26.05.2014 in Delhi PoE. It was rolled out in all the PoEs in phases by 25/09/2014. 
During 26/05/2014 to 30/04/2015, 1,79,253 demand requests were cleared on e-Migrate system."  
 
10. The Committee had noted that af ter a long delay the e -Migrate project had come to a 
threshold level and emigration clearance was being done online by all the PoE Offices.  The 
Committee, however, had recommended that necessary changes should be incorporated on 
priority in the newly intr oduced e -Migrate system in the light of suggestions and feedback 

5 
 
received from various stakeholders.  The Committee had also recommended to make the e -
Migrate Project operational for Indian Missions also to allow foreign employers to apply to the 
Indian Missions for attestation on priority basis.  The Committee are constrained to note that 
the Ministry has not furnished any information about the problems that have arisen, the  
suggestions received from the stakeholders and the changes introduced so far in th e system and 
also about the progress made to integrate the e - Migrate system with the Missions/Posts. In the 
absence of such a provision in the e -Migrate project, important data related to the migrants is 
not readily available with the Missions/Posts and i t further hinders incorporation of foreign 
employers with the e -Migrate Project.  The Committee would, therefore, emphatically demand 
that the e -Migrate Project should be perfected by incorporating the suggestions based on 
feedback from the stakeholders an d it should be made operational in all the Missions/Posts at 
the earliest. The status in this regard should be furnished to the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 
International Conferences/Meetings 
 
11. The Committee had observed that the amount of Rs. 1. 00 crore was allocated to the Ministry 
during the year 2013 -14 under the sub -head „International Conference/ Meetings‟,  but only an 
amount Rs. 60.00 lakhs was spent by the Ministry in organizing only one conference during the year 
2013-14 and Rs . 11.00 la khs for entertainment /hospitality  purposes. The Committee we re also 
surprised to note that the Ministry did not feel the need for advance planning of Conference/Meetings 
or for analyzing the outcome by conducting any specific study to justify the amount s pent vis-à-vis 
the objectives achieved by organizing such programmes. This showed that there is a lack of foresight 
and sensitivity on the part of the Ministry in understanding the dynamics of migration with a view to 
facilitating policy formulation in thi s regard. The Committee  had, therefore, strongly recommend ed 
that the Ministry should draw up a full schedule of all the Seminars/ Conference to be organized 
during a financial year along with the proposed expenditure well in advance, keeping in view the 

6 
 
defined objectives and the international situation. The Committee  had also desired that the Ministry 
should regularly review follow ups of such deliberations to ensure that the expenditure on each 
Seminar/ Conference is justified.  
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
"This recommendation is related to the International Seminars/Conferences and planning 
the proposed expenditure well in advance. The only international conference i.e. the 
Regional PBD was managed under the PBD head and not from the Budget head mentioned 
above. However, the Committees recommendation regarding drawing up a schedule of 
seminars/conferences to be organised during the financial year are noted for future 
guidance, alongwith the need to ensure that the expenditure on such Seminars/ Conferences 
is justified." 
 
13. The Committee are constrained to note that despite repeated recommendations by the 
Committee in the past the Ministry has not moved an inch in the direction of making an 
advance planning for various Conferences/ Seminars with specific objectives to be organized 
during a particular year  beyond stating that the recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted for future guidance. The Committee are further displeased to note that the Ministry 
could not organize even a single Conference/ Seminar under this head during last year. Such a 
lackadaisical approach on the part of the Ministry is not justified in light of the huge mandate it 
is called upon to serve.   The Committee woul d, therefore, strongly reinforce their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should draw up a detailed yearly schedule of 
Conferences/Seminars to be organized on various issues of concern and get the funds allocated 
and used accordingly. 
 
 

7 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra 
 
14. The Committee had observed that the project for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra in 
New Delhi had been delayed inordinately and was still running behind the last announced target date 
of completion in all resp ects before the celebration of PBD 2015. The Committee ha d been informed 
that the paucity of funds is the main reason for the project not being completed and it may be 
completed within 3 -4 months after release of funds of Rs. 26.27 crore by the Finance Min istry. The 
Committee had, however, note d that after announcement by the former Hon‟ble Prime Minister 
during PBD 2014 on January 8 th 2014, that the PBK would be completed and become functional 
during 2015, the Ministry had made a proposal to the Ministry o f Finance for Rs. 25.00 crore during 
2013-14 but it was not agreed to. The Committee  had, however, ha d a serious doubt about the 
sincerity with which the Ministry pursued the project because they f ound that the Ministry‟s demand 
for the Project at BE 2014 -15 was Rs. 4 crore only against which the Ministry of Finance had made 
an allocation of Rs.15 crore at BE 2014-15. It was only at RE stage, the Ministry intended to submit a 
Demand of Rs. 21.27 crore. The Committee  had, therefore, strongly urge d that the M inistry should 
make sincere efforts for obtaining the requisite funds and completing the project timely as per the 
commitment made by Hon‟ble Prime Minister before NRIs. The Committee had desired that they 
should be apprised of the efforts made by the Mini stry in th at regard and the outcome thereof. The 
Committee had also hope d that the Government would come out with a time -bound programme 
regarding setting up of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans in the States on the lines of PBK in New Delhi. 
They had however, desi red that the project should be attractive to the States with a scope for 
continuous coordination with the Centre and not merely in the form of one time grant only.   
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
"It is clarified that the Ministry had sought Rs. 15.00 crore for BE 2014 -15 and an amount 
of Rs. 15.00 crore was allocated by Ministry of Finance in the BE for 2014 -15. However, 
the Ministry had requested for allocation of Rs. 4.00 crore in the BE f or 2015 -16 for 
construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK), New Delhi anticipating that Ministry of 
Finance would allocate Rs. 21.27 crore demanded by the Ministry in the RE for 2014 -15. 
The Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs. 5.00 crore only in the RE  for 2014-15 and Rs. 
12.00 crore in the BE for 2015-16 for PBK.  
 
As recommended by the Standing Committee, the proposal for further allocation of funds 
will be followed vigorously with Ministry of Finance so that the project is completed 
during 2015. 

8 
 
  
The recommendation of Standing Committee on setting up of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans 
(PBBs) in the States has been noted and will be considered while finalizing the scheme of 
setting up of PBBs." 
 
16. The Committee had noted that on the one side, the paucity o f funds was being quoted by 
the Ministry as the main reason for delay in completion of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra project in 
Delhi and on the other, the Ministry had informed in a written reply to supplementary list of 
points in clear terms that they had soug ht Rs. 4 c rore for BE 2014 -15 against which Rs.  15 
crore was allocated in the Budget.  Figures matched in individual , Total as well as Grand  
Total and this created a doubt in the mind of the Committee regarding Ministry's seriousness in 
completion of the  PBK project.  Now, the Ministry ha s clarified that they had sought Rs. 15 
crore and the same was allocated.  The Ministry should, therefore, be more careful in providing 
the facts and figures to the Committee in future because the Committee always base the ir 
recommendations on the inputs and figures provided by the Ministry.  
  The Ministry in its reply has now submitted that it will pursue the matter of allocation 
of funds with the Ministry of Finance more vigorously so that the project of Pravasi Bhartiya  
Kendra is completed in 2015.  The Ministry, however, has failed to furnish the details of the 
progress in the project and  the exact remaining financial requirements after allocation of Rs. 5 
crore at RE 2014 -15 and Rs. 12 crore in BE 2015 -16 through which they may be able to 
complete the project during 2015.  The Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should formulate a realistic projection for requirement of funds for the completion of Pravasi 

9 
 
Bhartiya Kendra during 2015 and the same should b e cogently presented to the Finance 
Ministry.  The Committee may be informed about the outcome of the efforts and the progress 
of the project.  
 The Committee are also constrained to note that the Ministry has only noted the 
suggestions of the Committee fo r setting up of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBBs) in the States 
on the lines of PBK in Delhi but has not taken any steps as yet to finalize the scheme and chalk 
out the modalities.  The Committee would, therefore, reiterate that the scheme for setting up of 
PBBs in various States should be finalized without any further delay in the light of suggestions 
made by the Committee for making the project attractive to the States with a scope for 
continuous coordination with the Centre and not in the form of one time grant only.  The 
Committee should be apprised about the progress made in this direction. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 
Land/Building for PoE Offices 
 
17. The Committee had noted that in the name of making efforts, the Ministry had  been writing 
letters to the St ate Governments or Ministry of Urban Development requesting them to provide 
suitable space for setting up of new Protector of Emigrants ( PoE) Office at Rae Bareilly and 
Guwahati or for shifting of PoE offices at Cochin and Hyderaba d, but with no results. T hey had only 
been able to shift the PoE Office, Thiruvananthpuram to a State Government Building and some work 
had been undertaken to modernize the PoE Offices at Mumbai and Kolkata. Therefore, under th ose 
circumstance the Committee did not approve the rea soning given by the Ministry wherein they ha d 
argued that in view of no positive response from the State Governments, no allocation has been made 
at BE stage for PoE Offices and if the need arose then the funds would be obtained through 
submission of Revis ed Estimates. In the Committee‟s view, such an approach by the Ministry 
defeated the very purpose of the budgetary exercise. If the proposals of establishment and shifting of 
PoE Offices were in progress, they c ould materialize at any point of time and the n it might not be 

10 
 
feasible for funds to be arranged immediately. In case the necessary building or land could not be 
arranged, the allocated funds could be surrendered. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that 
the Ministry should take more concerted efforts to obtain space for the PoE Offices by taking it at the 
highest levels and simultaneously obtain requisite allocation at RE stage, which m ight be spent in 
remaining months of the financial year. Moreover, they should also make provision for suffici ent 
funds in the Budgetary exercise for the next financial year for that purpose and apprise the Committee 
about the progress made in that regard.  
 
18. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 
"It may be stated that the PoE Offices of Delhi, Kolkata and Chandigarh are in 
Central Govt. buildings. PoEs Hyderabad, Chennai, Trivandrum and Jaipur are in 
State Govt. buildings and PoEs Cochin, Mumbai and Rae Bareli are in private 
buildings. 
 
The Ministry has take n up the issue of allotment of land for the PoE Offices in 
Mumbai, Cochin, Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Rai Bareli with the Ministry 
of Urban Development, Govt. of India and concerned State Governments.  
Ministry of Urban Development has replied that th e requirement of office space 
for POEs had been noted and would be considered along with other pending 
requests for GPOA as and when GPOA become available at these locations.  
Further response is awaited from the Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
Ministry of Urban Development was requested to accede to approve the allotment 
of Govt. accommodation to the POE office, Cochin, in the premises where 
Regional Passport Office (RPO), Cochin is located.  The Directorate of Estates, 
has informed that they had sought so me clarification from Executive Engineer -
cum-Estate Manager, Cochin Central Division, CPWD about the details of the 
space to be spared by RPO.  POE(Kochi) has also reminded the Executive 
Engineer, CPWD Cochin for finalization of the proposal.   
 
The matter  of getting office space for the office of POE in Hyderabad at the 
premises of RPO, Hyderabad is being pursued. 
 
Regarding opening of PoE Office at Guwahati, accommodation/space is yet to be 
made available by the State Government despite sending requests t o Govt. of 
Assam a number of times.   

11 
 
It may be seen that the Ministry has constantly been making efforts for getting 
office space for the POE Offices in Govt. owned building with minimum rental 
outgo.  The matter will be followed up earnestly. 
 
Regarding allocation of funds, it may be stated that it is not known how much 
budgetary provision would be required if land/building is made available for 
establishment/shifting of new/existing PoE offices.  Moreover, if any amount of  
funds are kept in BE and are s urrendered at the end of the year due to non -
availability of land/building, the Ministry have to provide clarification as to why 
the funds had been asked. The surrendering of funds may be seen as lack of proper 
planning on the part of the Ministry.  Therefore, to avoid the surrendering of funds, 
funds are not being kept in BE.  If at any time during the year, the land/buildings 
are made available, funds would be arranged by way of re-appropriation or seeking 
additional funds." 
 
19. The Committee had inter-alia recommended that the Ministry should make more 
concerted efforts to obtain space for the Protector of Emigrants (PoE) Offices and to make 
provision for sufficient funds in the Budget for the same.  But the persuasion with the State 
Governments/Ministry of Urban Development has not produced any results. The Committee 
are, not convinced at all with the Ministry's reasoning that it is not procuring funds under the 
head in order to avoid the surrender of funds at a later stage.  The Ministry has further add ed 
that surrendering of funds may be seen as lack of proper planning on the part of the Ministry.  
The arguments of the Ministry in this case sound unjustified in light of the fact that the 
Ministry has been consistently surrendering funds under various he ads in the past. The 
Ministry on its own should not assume that it will not be in a position to procure the space and 
hence not to seek any funds under the head.  Such a stand betrays a total lack of planning on 
the part of the Ministry.  The Committee wou ld, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should redouble its efforts to obtain land for PoE Offices in Mumbai, Cochin, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Rae Bareli, allotment of Government accommodation to 
the PoE Cochin and Hyderabad Office in the premise s of RPO, Cochin and RPO, Hyderabad, 
respectively and to obtain space for opening of PoE Office in Guwahati.  The Ministry should 

12 
 
also ensure availability of sufficient budgetary allocation for the same so that the action starts 
immediately without any delay due to non-availability of funds.  
 (Recommendation No. 7) 
Mahatma Gandhi  Pravasi Suraksha Yojana 
 
20. The Committee had noted that the Mahatma Gandhi Suraksha Yojna (MGPSY) was launched 
in May 2012 and was already available for workers to subscribe ac ross India and UAE.  But the 
Ministry had not been able to achieve the targets despite making several efforts and only 383 workers 
against a target of 10,000 could be registered under the Scheme during 2013-14. The Ministry seemed 
to had lost hope and had reduced the allocation for the scheme from 7 crore during 2013-14 to 4 crore 
for 2014-15. The Committee, however, did not find any valid reason for failure of th e scheme which 
was specially designed for welfare of Indian workers.  
 The Committee we re convi nced about the noble objectives of Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi 
Surkasha Yojna (MGPSY), a social security scheme for the unskilled and semi -skilled Overseas 
Indian Workers with ECR Passports, in order to help them to save for their return and resettlement in 
India, save for their pension and obtain complementary life insurance cover during the period of 
Overseas employment. The Committee had assumed that before launching the scheme, the Ministry 
must had studied the likely legal hurdles, particularly in the Gulf countries and that it was unlikely 
that the situation ha d changed significantly thereafter. In the Committee‟s view, th e failure of the 
Scheme must had  been on account of lack of adequate publicity amongst workers to convince them 
about the benefits, particularly in the uncertain conditions in the Gulf countries. 
 The Committee had, therefore, desired that before considering winding up of th e scheme, the 
Ministry should conduct a publicity campaign vigorously in all Indian languages and organize more 
camps to educate and convince the workers to associate themselves with the scheme. It was also 
suggested that to overcome the strict laws in some ECR countries, they should adopt alternative ways 
to reach the workers, including through the e -Migrate project. In the Committee‟s view any 
consideration of closing such an important and welfare oriented scheme should be concluded only 
after exhausting all possible ways of making the scheme successful.   
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
"The Ministry has taken note of the concern of the Standing Committee.  It may be stated that 
to evince the interest of the workers in the scheme, the Ministry had carried out the following 
publicity campaigns during 2014-15: 

13 
 
1. One News Paper advertisement was released on 9th January 2014 during PBD 2014 
2. A 2 -week publicity campaign was launched on the Television Media for the first time 
from 15th Aug 2014 till 28th Aug 2014. The advertisements were released on all major 
channels in Hindi, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Bengali and Punjabi languages.  
 
The Ministry has already started the process to integrate the scheme with e -Migrate project. 
This will also help in reaching out to workers who are planning to go abroad and applying for 
emigration clearance through e -Migrate system.   Various options to make the scheme 
successful would be examined before the option to close down the scheme is exercised." 
 
22. While noting the failure of Ministry in achieving the targets for registration o f Overseas 
Indian workers under the Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Suraksha Yojana (MGPSY), the 
Committee had recommended the Ministry to undertake a vigorous publicity campaign to 
educate  and convince the workers to associate themselves with the scheme and also to adopt 
alternative ways to reach the workers including through e -Migrate project.  However, the 
Committee find that in the name of publicity campaigns, only one newspaper advertisement was 
released during Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) and a two week telev ision media campaign was 
organized in Hindi and some other regional languages.  In the Committee's view, such a casual 
approach can never popularize  the scheme among the emigrants.  The Committee would, 
therefore, reiterate that an extensive publicity campaign in various regional languages extending 
throughout the year and special camps to educate and convince the workers to associate 
themselves with the scheme should be organized.   Further, the Committee are informed that the 
Ministry has started the proc ess to integrate the scheme with the e -Migrate project.  However, 
no mention has been made about the results achieved so far and the time -frame fixed in this 
regard.  Therefore, the Committee desire to be updated about the progress achieved in the 

14 
 
integration process and the success achieved in reaching out to migrants and the workers who 
are applying for emigration clearance. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Know India Programme (KIP) 
 
23. The Committee had observed that the Ministry ha d started an internship progra mme for 
diaspora youth with the objective of bringing the young Overseas Indians closer and to bond them 
with contemporary India. During the year 2013-14, four editions of the Know India Programme (KIP) 
were held, in which 127 participants took part. The M inistry propose d to organize 4 more 
programmes during the year 2014 -15 for which a Budget of Rs. 4.5 crore ha d been allocated. The 
Committee had, however, observed that no separate allocation had been made for another programme 
called the Study Indian Programme (SIP) which was started with academic focus including academic 
contents, cultural contents and visits. The Ministry ha d not clarified whether the contents of SIP ha d 
been merged with KIP or not. The Committee  had, therefore, desired that the programme mmight be 
further reviewed and modified as necessary to make it comprehensive, more attractive and broad 
based by incorporat ing the contents of Study India  Programme also so that more and more 
participants from all parts of the world and of diverse backg rounds were attracted to participate in the 
Know India programme. The Committee  had also desire d that all recommendation of CII in this 
regard should be considered and implemented and a status report should be submitted to the 
Committee.   
 
24. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
"The Know India Programme (KIP), initially known as Internship Programme for Diaspora 
Youth (IPDY) was started from 20 th December 2003 in Ministry of External Affairs. The 
IPDY was renamed as “Know India Programme” from December, 2006 when Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs was formed as an independent Ministry.  
 
The objective of the Ministry's Know India Programme is to help familiarize Indian Diaspora 
youth, in the age group  of 18 -26 years, with developments and achievements made by the 
country and bringing them closer to the land of their ancestors. KIP provides a unique forum 
for students and young professionals of Indian origin to visit India, share their views, 
expectations and experiences and to bond closely with contemporary India. For each Know 
India Programme(KIP), upto 40 overseas youth participants are invited for the programme.  
 

15 
 
The Ministry has conducted 32 editions of KIPs so far and a total of 983 overseas India n 
youth have participated in these programmes including 152 overseas participants in 5 (28 th -
32nd KIP) editions of KIPs during 2014 -15. The 30 th, 31st KIP and KIP 32 nd were conducted 
during PBD -2015 to provide a much needed exposure to Diaspora matters fo r the KIP 
participants. In every KIP the number of applications being received from overseas youths for 
KIPs are increasing. 
 
Based on the feedback of the participants of KIP,  CII had made recommendations on KIP 
regarding pre -arrival, registration, arriva l and departure assistance, programme scheduling, 
infrastructure and services, programme contents etc. These recommendations of CII have been 
taken into consideration by the Ministry resulting in increased number of applications for 
every succeeding KIPs f rom willing overseas youths. The approved guidelines/ contents of 
each KIP consisting of details of programme schedule and various conditions are sent to all 
the Indian Missions/Posts well in advance and uploaded in the website of the Ministry to keep 
the willing participants about those and for their preparation accordingly.  
 
The SIP enables Overseas Indian youth to undergo short term course in an Indian University 
to familiarize them with the history, heritage, art, culture, socio -political, economic 
developments etc. of India. The focus of the programme is on academic orientation and 
research.  
 
So far three editions of SIPs have been conducted where a total of 41 overseas youth 
participated including 18 overseas Indian youths of 3 rd SIP from 3 rd January, 2015 to 3 rd 
February, 2015 at the Symbiosis University, Pune, Maharashtra.  
 
The expenditure for KIP and SIP is made from the Budget Head 2061 - External Affairs 
(Major Head) Details Head 03.05 other Charges 03.05.50(OH),  though these programmes are 
different in the content and duration. 
 
The Ministry has so far not merged the KIP and SIP programme. The pros & cons of merging 
the two schemes are being examined and a final view, as to whether the two schemes shall be 
continued in their existing from, or should be merged shall soon be taken.  
 
It may also be kindly noted that the Ministry has decided to increase the number of KIPs up to 
18 programmes per year. The duration of each KIP will also be 25 days, as compared to 21 
days for previous KIPs. The KIP sch edule will also include interactions with university 
students, where the participants do the state leg of their visit." 
 

16 
 
25. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has decided to increase the number 
of Know Indian Programmes (KIPs) to 18 progr ammes per year and duration of each 
programme from 21 days to 25 days, and the programme has been revised considering 
recommendations of Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) based on feedback from 
participants.  The Committee believe that it would certai nly pave the way to make this flagship 
programme more attractive and broad based and would be instrumental in creating a more 
enduring image of India in the hearts and minds of the Diaspora youth.  The Committee were 
made to understand that the Know India Programme (KIP) and the Study India Programme 
(SIP) are two different programmes of the Ministry with different content and duration though 
the expenditure for both is made from the common Budget Head.  Now the Ministry has started 
to examine the pros & co ns of merging the two schemes but a final view is yet to be taken.  The 
Committee are of a considered opinion that  a broad based unified programme like KIP 
organized for more and more  Diaspora youth focusing on culture, academics, heritage, tourism 
and a ctual visits may produce better results.  The Committee would, therefore, desire that a 
final decision should be taken by the Ministry in this regard at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) 
 
26. The Commit tee on the one hand had noted that under the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC) the Ministry in principle ha d decided to increase the number of 
scholarships from 100 to 200 and scholarship amount from $ 4000 to $ 5000 but on the other hand 
there was a steady decline in the number of applications from the Diaspora children since 2009 -10. 
For 2014-15 only 190 applications ha d been received from the Diaspora children. Moreover, it also 

17 
 
created doubts about the seriousness of the Ministry as the  Ministry had not enhanced the budget for 
the Scheme, rather only Rs. 8.56 crore ha d been allocated for 2014 -15 as against the RE of Rs.8.83 
crore for 2013-14. The Committee were, therefore, of the opinion the first of all it should analyze the 
reasons for  the steady decline in the number of applications for scholarships offered under this 
scheme, including the standing and accreditation of the institutions and the type of courses offered to 
the students under the scheme. The Committee had once again urged the Ministry to expand the reach 
of the programme and include only the best institutions for admissions under the Scheme if it really 
intended that the students se lected for such scholarship beca me brand ambassadors for India and its 
educational institutio ns and represent India globally as a sought -after educational hub. The 
Committee had also recommend ed that the Ministry should also seek enhanced allocation for the 
increased number and amount of scholarship at the Revised Estimates stage.   
 
27. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 
"The Ministry has examined the reasons for the decline in the number of applications under 
the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) and the decline in applicat ion 
could be attributed to a number of factors which are outlined below: 
 
(i)  Amount of Scholarship: 
 
         Presently, the Institutional Economic Cost (IEC) with regards to NITs range from US$ 
7500- US$8500 per year and the maximum scholarship allowed is US$ 4000 only which is 
nearly half the IEC. This difference in scholarship amount and actual fees paid to Institutes 
may pose a financial overload on students opting to study in India, especially in NITs.  
 
(ii)  Number of Scholarship seats: 
 
         Since the number of scholarship seats is only 100, many students particularly those 
without high marks may not wish to apply presuming lesser chances of being shortlisted.  
 
 EdCIL were requested to incorporate institutions of national repute like JNU, DU, IITs 
and various IIMs under the scheme to accommodate the increased number of aspirants for 
undergraduate courses in Engineering, Science, Law, Management etc. It came to light that 
Institutions like Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi University, IITs and various IIMs have 
different criteria for admission, such as the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE) for IIT, Common 
Aptitude Test (CAT) for IIMs and also tests which university/institutions conduct on their 
own for admission at the entry level for undergraduate cour ses. Whereas, in the SPDC 

18 
 
scheme the merit list is prepared based on the scores obtained by the students in their 
qualifying examination, i.e., 12th class.  
Hence, the placement of the NRI/PIO students in the above institutions through the SPDC 
Scheme woul d materialize only if the students qualify the respective entrance exams for 
admission to those institutes.    
(iii) The matter regarding increase in the amount of scholarship from US$ 4000 to US$ 
5000 per year and number of seats from 100 to 200 had been examined in MOIA. Order of 
the then HMOIA was taken for increasing the scholarship to US$5000 per annum(subject to 
75% of IEC cost or less) and the number of scholarships to 200 per year. Comments of 
MHRD were taken and comments of MEA & ICCR are awaited. 
 However, the Ministry is now considering modifying the SPDC Scheme to ensure that 
NRI/ PIOs scholars are admitted to universities / colleges that are of a prescribed standard 
only, to ensure the quality of education being imparted.  Scholarship in such ca ses could be 
given only to those NRI/PIO students who are able to get admission into these institutions.  
The modified Scheme would be given due publicity. Pending these changes to be made, fresh 
applications have not been invited for the current year.  
The budgetary provision would be made based on the actual expenditure that is likely to be 
incurred once the changes as above have been implemented." 
 
28. The Committee in their recommendation had inter-alia asked the Ministry to analyze the 
reasons for the steady decline in the number of applications for scholarships offered under the 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC).  The reasoning put forth by the 
Ministry includes the financial overload on students opting to study in India due to difference in 
scholarship amount and actual fees paid to institutes and availability of small number of 
scholarship seats.  This calls for an expeditious decision to enhance the amount of scholarship.  
The Committee hope that a decision will be taken after obtain ing comments from Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA) and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). 
 The Committee, however, note that the Ministry is now considering to modify the SPDC 
scheme itself so that the scholarship is disbursed to those NRI/PIO  students only who are able 
to get admission into various institutions of a prescribed standard so as to ensure the quality of 

19 
 
education.  The Committee are concerned that such a move would defeat the purpose of the 
scholarship programme and may not expand  the reach of programme; rather, a very few 
Diaspora children would be able to get admission on the basis of competitive examinations  of 
prime institutions and the outreach of the programme would be further reduced.  Therefore, 
the Committee opine that ap art from enhancing the scholarship amount, the Ministry should 
further keep the window open for reserving seats for NRI/PIO students in various educational 
institutions of national repute.  This matter may be discussed with the Ministry of Human 
Resource D evelopment (MHRD) because facilitating NRI children getting education  in such 
institutions will be mutually beneficial for them and for the country. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
India Centre for Migration 
29. The Committee had taken note that the Indian Centre for Migration (ICM), New Delhi is the 
think tank of the Ministry regarding emerging opportunities in the international labour markets and 
for projecting India as a supplier of skilled, trained and qualified wor kers. The Committee had, 
however, found that t he skill development project for potential migrants from North Eastern States 
was launched in 2011 with an objective of providing vocational training to 10,200 youth in 
hospitality, healthcare and education sectors. But only 1,443 youths ha d been trained so far under the 
project. They had  also failed to spend the funds alloca ted for the ICM. The Committee we re of an 
opinion that in the current scenario of emerging trends in labour migration, the Centre is positioned to 
play a pivotal role in shaping and def ining India‟s migration flows. The need of the hour is to 
sufficiently augment the capacity of the Centre and therefore the Committee had desired that all the 
ongoing studies should be completed and expedited in a time bound manner along with the planning 
and implementation of the recommendations made in these reports. The Committee had wished to be 
informed accordingly about the initiatives taken to achieve the targets set for training the youth under 
the programmes launched by the Centre.  
30. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 
“Skill Development Initiative for Potential Migrants from the North -Eastern States of India”, 
is a pilot project implemented by International Organization for Migration (IOM) under an 
agreement between ICM and IOM. 
 

20 
 
1. A total of 3,400 youth were to be trained with either complete or partial funding 
support from the project. Other targets were: development of three International Vocational 
Qualifications (IVQs), establishment of S kills Training and Certification Resource Centre 
(STCRC), drafting of National Roll -out Plan, Vision Documents for Overseas Employment. 
1,443 youth were trained and certified as per the IVQs developed exclusively for the purpose of 
the pilot project in the  North-East. A total of 6,800 persons were to be trained in vocational 
model on self -financing basis without any financial support from the project. No progress was 
reported by International Organization for Migration (IOM) to ICM in this regard. 
 
2. In February 2015, International Organization for Migration (IOM), the implementing 
agency of the project, was informed the project may be brought to a logical conclusion 
immediately in light of delay in achieving its deliverables.  
 
3. ICM completed a labour market a ssessment of six EU countries and studied trends in 
international labour markets. In its 5 th meeting on 22 May 2015 in New Delhi the Governing 
Council approved ICM‟s road map for 2015 -16, which includes updating of information on 
labour market trends perio dically and examining standard labour agreements with destination 
countries." 
 
31. The Committee in their recommendation had inter-alia argued that Indian Centre for 
Migration (ICM), a think tank of the Ministry regarding emerging opportunities in the 
international labour markets and for projecting India as a supplier of skilled, trained and 
qualified workers  should sufficiently  augment its capacity by expeditiously implementing the 
recommendations contained in the ongoing studies . But t he Ministry has not mentioned 
anything about the road map prepared by them for training of the youth  beyond a cursory 
mention of the outcome of the fifth meeting of the Centre's Governing Council.  The Committee 
would, therefore, desire a status report on the functioning of I CM and reiterate that a road 
map for the expansion and upgradation of the Centre should be charted out at the earliest with 
a defined target and road map for training of youth and the Committee should be apprised 
about the progress at the action taken stage. 

21 
 
 Further, the Committee are displeased to note that the Pilot Project on 'Skill 
Development Initiative for Potential Migrants from the North-Eastern States of India' has come 
to an unceremonious end due to want of proper progress by the International Or ganization for 
Migration (the implementing agency).  It is disquieting for the Committee to note that the 
project had been allowed to come to an end without the Ministry even analyzing the causes of 
its failures and suggesting remedial measures to the impl ementing agency.  The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should analyze the reasons for the failure of the 
pilot project and should put them up before the Committee for scrutiny and further 
suggestions. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
The Swarnapravas Yojna 
 
 
32. The Committee had observed that the Ministry has been given an outlay of Rs. 20 crore by the 
Planning Commission for the ambitious Swarnapravas Yojna for skill development of Indian youth. 
The Outlay for this scheme for 12 th Five Year Plan is Rs. 137 crore and during the 5 years 2.08 lakh 
youth are to be trained under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, had impressed upon the Ministry 
to take up the project with required seriousness, spend the allocation every year in a prudent way b e 
setting desired targets and achieve those targets so that there was no underutilization of the allocated 
funds or failure in achieving the targets under the scheme. 
 
 The Committee had also recommend ed that the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) should be 
suitably empowered to look into various aspects of implementation of this Project. The Committee 
would further like to be apprised about the specific projects undertaken, the targets set for the youths 
to be trained during the year 2014 -15 and the initiatives  taken to achieve the targets under the 
Scheme. The Committee had also desire d that there should be a mechanism for regular review to 
assess the effectiveness of the skills in fulfilling identified needs of the labour importing countries. 
The Committee  had further desire d that while identifying the centres for imparting such training, 

22 
 
preference should be given to the economically backward districts in various States across the 
Country. 
 
33. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 
"All the recommendations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. The Ministry is 
taking urgent steps to implement the Scheme expeditiously." 
 
34. The Committee are aware that the Swarnapravas Yojana is the only scheme of th e 
Ministry which is within the plan budget and it is an ambitious scheme during the 12 th Five 
Year Plan to train 2.08 lakh youth.  However, the Committee are distressed to note that no real 
efforts have been undertaken by the Ministry to implement it and a s on date it appears that the 
Scheme remains on paper only.  The Committee had inter-alia recommended to the Ministry to 
set annual targets in order to ensure that there is no underuti lization of the allocated funds. 
With the reply given by the Ministry, i t is quite clear that the scheme has so far not moved 
beyond the drawing board of the Ministry.  The Swarnapravas Yojana was envisaged to be a 
viable option to fill the gap in skill training in India.  Such a poor performance does not go 
down well with the  emphasis being accorded by the Government to the issue of providing skill 
training to the youth.  The Committee also wish to be informed about the exact relationship of 
this scheme with the National Skill Development Programme.  Now, the Committee are una ble 
to guess what real progress can be made in implementation of the scheme when barely one and 
a half years remain during the current Five Year Plan?  It is quite distressing for the 
Committee to note that such an ambitious scheme of the Government had be en allowed to go 
waste due to want of proper implementation. 

23 
 
 The Committee would recommend that the Ministry should analyze the reasons for this 
and should fix the accountability in this regard.  As the Ministry has not furnished any 
information about the  specific projects undertaken or the targets set for the youths to be 
trained during 2014 -15, the Committee have no other choice but to assume that no projects 
have been undertaken and no specific targets have been set for training of youth.  The 
Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Ministry furnish the details of the remedial 
measures undertaken, at the action taken stage. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Emigration Management Bill 
 
35. The Committee had welcomed the initiative taken by the Ministry to overhaul  the basic 
architecture of emigration in the country by bringing a new legislation in the form of Draft 
Emigration Management Bill. The Committee we re of the opinion that such a change was long 
overdue as there have been significant transformations in the processes and dynamics of emigration 
in the recent past. The Committee had hoped that the new legislation would encapsulate these 
positive trends in emigration and would simultaneously cover up various loopholes in the existing 
regulatory framework. The Committee had, therefore, urged the Ministry to expedite the consultation 
process related to the proposed Bill in the overall interest of the potential migrants and to introduce it 
in Parliament for consideration at the earliest.  
 
36. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
 
"The Ministry has already initiated the consultation process with stakeholder Ministries and 
Departments to expedite the process of introduction of the pr oposed Bill in the Parliament. 
Various rounds of internal meetings and two rounds of inter -Ministerial meeting have already 
taken place in the process. In these meetings, efforts have also been made to identify the 
loopholes in the existing system and plug them in the new Bill in the int erest of the potential 
migrations.  
In parallel, State Government organizations are being encouraged to become Recruiting 
Agents under the Emigration Act, 1983." 

24 
 
37. The  Committee while appreciating the efforts undertaken by the Ministry to evolve a 
consensus on the Draft Emigration Management Bill, would like that the consultation process is 
expedited in a time bound manner.  In view of the fact that this legislative overhaul was long 
overdue, any further delay in the matter is not warranted.  The Committ ee would, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should introduce the Emigration Management Bill in the 
Parliament at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Human Resources Mobility Partnerships (HRMPs) 
 
38. The Committee had understood that the Ministry as  part of its mandate has taken up Labour 
Mobility Partnership Agreements with various prominent labour -importing countries in a phased 
manner. The Ministry is also taking steps to build the Human Resources Mobility Partnership 
(HRMPs) with key countries of  destination in the European Union.  Such a mobility partnership ha d 
already been signed with Denmark, whereas negotiation with the Netherlands is complete. Besides, 
negotiation with France and E uropean Union is going on. The Committee, however, we re not 
satisfied with the pace of negotiations and progress made in this regard and are concerned about the 
delays in inter-Ministerial consultations. The Committee  had, therefore, desired that the negotiations 
with countries concerned should be initiated afresh at the highest level in order to facilitate their early 
conclusion. Inter-Ministerial discussions should also be expedited and all the concerned Ministries 
should be taken into confidence before entering into agreement with each country.  
 
39. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has stated as under:- 
"Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for initiating negotiations at 
highest level with the concerned countries and also for conclusion of the negotiation 
with European Union and France expeditiously."  
 
40. The Committee had recommended that negotiations related to the Human Resource 
Mobility Partnership Agreements with various countries should be expedited and Inter -

25 
 
Ministerial discussions be concluded in this regard.  The Committee are constrained to note 
that no Human Resource Mobility Partnership Agreement has been signed with any other 
country except Denmark.  The Ministry has also failed to furnish the progress made in 
negotiations held with various countries in th is matter and the difficulties which are being 
faced thereon. The Committee are of a view that the negotiations with some of the European 
countries were in process for a long time now and it is high time they should start producing 
results.  The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry has not furnished any 
information on the progress of Inter -Ministerial discussions held in this regard except, a one 
line routine nature of reply ".....noted for initiating negotiations at highest level...."  The 
Committee do not approve of such a casual reply by the Ministry and it would like the 
Ministry to desist from giving incomplete/vague replies in future.  The Committee are also 
dismayed at the slow pace of negotiations on Labour Mobility Partnerships with va rious 
labour importing countries and would recommend that they should be concluded at the 
earliest by according highest priority to the matter, under intimation to them.   

26 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
 The Committee had observed that the allocation made to the Ministry at BE stage for the year 
2013-14 was Rs. 115.79 crore which was reduced to Rs.97.22 crore at RE state and the final 
utilization was only Rs. 84.78 crore. This shows that the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has once 
again failed in containing the trend of shortfall in utilization of allocation  during 2013 -14. The 
Committee were not convinced by the justification given by the Ministry that revision and red uction 
of Budget towards lower side at RE stage has been on account of the fact the expenditure on mass 
events like Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) and Regional Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (RPBD) are incurred 
only in the second half of the year and the actual util ization on the first two quarters has been less. 
Surprisingly, the Committee had noted that the fund in not deducted under these heads during all 
these years but reduction is being done under other heads. Similarly, the Committee had also noted 
that the ac tual expenditure is also less than the Revised Estimates. The Committee  had, however, 
found that after their continu ous persuasion, the Ministry had  taken some initiatives like timely 
release of Scholarship amount and money for Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra (PBK ) and quarterly payment 
of rent etc. with a view to improve their quarterly expenditure. The Committee  had, therefore, 
earnestly desire d that the Ministry should regularly review and ensure timely release of funds for 
different purposes during 2014 -15. The Committee had also reiterated that Ministry should resort to 
judicious internal allocation of funds quarterly and strictly monitor expenditure accordingly during 
each quarter, particularly when its funds are being reduced at RE stage on the basis of lower  
expenditure in the first two quarters of the  financial year. The Committee we re also of a strong 
opinion that without improving their current utilization pattern at each stage, the Ministry may not be 
able to obtain more funds at RE stage as per their requirements for various schemes/ programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation is related to expenditure pattern under various heads in the MOIA. As regards 
various major schemes like PBD, the flagship event of the Ministry is held during 7 -9 January every 

27 
 
year, two editions of Know India Programmes (KIPs) and one edition of Study India Programme 
(SIP) coinciding with PBD are undertaken during the last quarter of the financial year and 
accordingly the expenditures are booked in the last quarter.  T he Committee‟s direction regarding 
monitoring of expenditure on a quarterly basis are noted for future guidance. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
 The Committee we re surprised to note that the e -Migrate Project has been considerably 
delayed due to lack of coordination/integration with the other related agencies and delay in data 
transfer. The Ministry was not even able to spend the allocation made for this project at BE stage. 
The project could not reach the „Go live‟ level and the Minis try could only spend Rs. 0.43 crore 
during 2013-14. During 2014-15 under the IT head, a sum of Rs. 12.83 crore has been allocated and 
out of this approximately Rs. 8.00 crore are to be spent on the project which is sufficient for making 
payments to the imp lementing agency. The Committee had felt  relieved to learn that after a long 
delay the project has come to a threshold level and all 10 PoE offices are providing emigration 
clearance through online e -Migrate system. The Committee had realized that since th e e -Migrate 
rollout is at pilot stage, a large number of changes may be required on the basis of feedback received 
from recruiting agencies and PoE Offices. All these changes should be attended to without any delay 
and the programme should be made operational also for Indian Mission to allow foreign employers to 
apply to the Indian Missions for attestation on priority basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has noted the concern of the Standing Committee regarding implementation of 
the e -Migrate proje ct.  The Ministry had considered various suggestions from the various stake 
holders of the process and evolved the project accordingly to make the process user friendly. The 
project was rolled out on 26.05.2014 in Delhi PoE. It was rolled out in all the Po Es in phases by 
25/09/2014. During 26/05/2014 to 30/04/2015, 1,79,253 demand requests wer e cleared on e -Migrate 
system. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 
 The Committee had observed that the amount of Rs. 1.00 crore was allocated to the Ministry 
during the year 2013 -14 under the sub -head „International Conference/ Meetings‟,  but only an 
amount Rs. 60.00 lakhs was spent by the Ministry in organizing only one conference during the year 
2013-14 and Rs. 11.00 lakhs for entertainment /hos pitality  purposes. The Committee we re also 
surprised to note that the Ministry does not feel the need for advance planning of 
Conference/Meetings or for analyzing the outcome by conducting any specific study to justify the 
amount spent vis-à-vis the objectives achieved by organizing such programmes. This shows that there 
is a lack of foresight and sensitivity on the part of the Ministry in understanding the dynamics of 
migration with a view to facilitating policy formulation in this regard. The Committee  had, therefore, 
strongly recommend ed that the Ministry should draw up a full schedule of all the Seminars/ 
Conference to be organized during a financial year along with the proposed expenditure well in 
advance, keeping in view the defined objectives and the  international situation. The Committee had 
also desired that the Ministry should regularly review follow ups of such deliberations to ensure that 
the expenditure on each Seminar/ Conference is justified.  
Reply of the Government 
 This recommendation is re lated to the International Seminars/Conferences and planning the 
proposed expenditure well in advance. The only international conference i.e. the Regional PBD was 
managed under the PBD head and not from the Budget head mentioned above. However, the 
Committees recommendation regarding drawing up a schedule of seminars/conferences to be 
organised during the financial year are noted for future guidance, alongwith the need to ensure that 
the expenditure on such Seminars/ Conferences is justified. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 
14. The Committee had observed that the project for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra in 
New Delhi has been delayed inordinately and is still running behind the last announced target date of 
completion in all r espects before the celebration of PBD 2015. The Committee have been informed 
that the paucity of funds is the main reason for the project not being completed and it may be 
completed within 3 -4 months after release of funds of Rs. 26.27 crore by the Finance  Ministry. The 
Committee had, however, note d that after announcement by the former Hon‟ble Prime Minister 

29 
 
during PBD 2014 on January 8 th 2014, that the PBK would be completed and become functional 
during 2015, the Ministry had made a proposal to the Minist ry of Finance for Rs. 25.00 crore during 
2013-14 but it was not agreed to. The Committee  had, however, had  a serious doubt about the 
sincerity with which the Ministry pursued the project because they find that the Ministry‟s demand 
for the Project at BE 20 14-15 was Rs. 4 crore only against which the Ministry of Finance had made 
an allocation of Rs.15 crore at BE 2014 -15. It is only at RE stage, the Ministry intends to submit a 
Demand of Rs. 21.27 crore. The Committee  had, therefore, strongly urge d that the Ministry should 
make sincere efforts for obtaining the requisite funds and completing the project timely as per the 
commitment made by Hon‟ble Prime Minister before NRIs. The Committee should be apprised of the 
efforts made by the Ministry in this regard a nd the outcome thereof. The Committee  had also hoped 
that the Government would come out with a time -bound programme regarding setting up of Pravasi 
Bhartiya Bhawans in the States on the lines of PBK in New Delhi. They had however, desired that the 
project should be attractive to the States with a scope for continuous coordination with the Centre and 
not merely in the form of one time grant only.   
Reply of the Government 
 It is clarified that the Ministry had sought Rs. 15.00 crore for BE 2014 -15 and an amo unt of 
Rs. 15.00 crore was allocated by Ministry of Finance in the BE for 2014 -15. However, the Ministry 
had requested for allocation of Rs. 4.00 crore in the BE for 2015 -16 for construction of Pravasi 
Bhartiya Kendra (PBK), New Delhi anticipating that Min istry of Finance would allocate Rs. 21.27 
crore demanded by the Ministry in the RE for 2014 -15. The Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs. 
5.00 crore only in the RE for 2014-15 and Rs. 12.00 crore in the BE for 2015-16 for PBK.  
 
As recommended by the Stand ing Committee, the proposal for further allocation of funds will be 
followed vigorously with Ministry of Finance so that the project is completed during 2015. 
  
The recommendation of Standing Committee on setting up of Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawans (PBBs) in 
the States has been noted and will be considered while finalizing the scheme of setting up of PBBs. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee had noted the initiative being taken by the Government to merge the Overseas 
Citizen of India (OCI) and Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) cards as they are of the view that it will 
lead to simplification of procedures and avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts and resources. The 
Committee had trusted that the Bill for making the necessary am endments in the Citizenship Act 
would be introduced in the Parliament without any further loss of time. 
 Further, the Committee were of the opinion that any commendable intervention and planning 
from the side of the Government for the welfare of Overseas I ndians could only begin with the 
availability of a credible database containing information regarding their numbers, profiles and status 
across various countries. The Committee had, therefore, once again urge d the Ministry to take all 
possible initiatives in a planned way to collate all statistical data concerning Overseas Indians, in 
close tandem with Indian Missions/Embassies in all countries hosting an Indian population, through a 
similar or modified methodology to that being applied by other countries h aving a large Diaspora. In 
the Committee‟s view, collecting the database is essential and the issues related to political and other 
sensitivities involved in some countries should be dealt with through diplomatic channels.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The OC I Scheme and PIO Scheme have been merged by MHA through issue of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, which has since been replaced with an Act of Parliament. 
As regards compilation of data base of overseas Indians, an exercise has been initiated a nd the 
existing data base of May, 2012 has been revised as on 01.01.2015 by taking inputs from Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad. The Missions/Posts have reported that as per their estimates there are 
1,13,79,746 NRIs and 1,70,75,280 PIOs living in various countries abroad.   
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 The Committee had noted that the Mahatma Gandhi Suraksha Yojna (MGPSY) was launched 
in May 2012 and is already available for workers to subscribe across India and UAE.  But the 
Ministry has not been able to achieve the targets despite making several efforts and only 383 workers 
against a target of 10,000 could be registered under the Scheme during 2013 -14. The Ministry seems 
to have lost hope and to have reduced the allocation for this sc heme from 7 crore during 2013-14 to 4 

31 
 
crore for 2014-15. The Committee, however, did not find any valid reason for failure of this scheme 
which was specially designed for welfare of Indian workers.  
 The Committee we re convinced about the noble objectives of Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi 
Surkasha Yojna (MGPSY), a social security scheme for the unskilled and semi -skilled Overseas 
Indian Workers with ECR Passports, in order to help them to save for their return and resettlement in 
India, save for their pension and o btain complementary life insurance cover during the period of 
Overseas employment. The Committee had assumed that before launching the scheme, the Ministry 
must have studied the likely legal hurdles, particularly in the Gulf countries and that it is unlike ly that 
the situation has changed significantly therefore. In the Committee‟s view, the failure of the Scheme 
must have been on account of lack of adequate publicity amongst workers to convince them about the 
benefits, particularly in the uncertain conditions in the Gulf countries. 
 The Committee had, therefore, desired that before considering winding up of this scheme, the 
Ministry should conduct a publicity campaign vigorously in all Indian languages and organize more 
camps to educate and convince the wor kers to associate themselves with the scheme. To overcome 
the strict laws in some ECR countries, they should adopt alternative ways to reach the workers, 
including through the e -Migrate project. In the Committee‟s view any consideration of closing such 
an important and welfare oriented scheme should be concluded only after exhausting all possible 
ways of making the scheme successful.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Ministry has taken note of the concern of the Standing Committee.  It may be stated that 
to evince the interest of the workers in the scheme, the Ministry had carried out the following publicity 
campaigns during 2014-15: 
 
1. One News Paper advertisement was released on 9th January 2014 during PBD 2014 
2. A 2-week publicity campaign was launched on the  Television Media for the first time from 15th 
Aug 2014 till 28th Aug 2014. The advertisements were released on all major channels in Hindi, 
Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Bengali and Punjabi languages.  
 
The Ministry has already started the process to integrat e the scheme with e -Migrate project. This 
will also help in reaching out to workers who are planning to go abroad and applying for 

32 
 
emigration clearance through e-Migrate system.   Various options to make the scheme successful 
would be examined before the option to close down the scheme is exercised." 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 The Committee had observed that the Ministry has started an internship programme for 
diaspora youth with the objective of bringing the young Overseas Indians closer and to bond them 
with contemporary India. During the year 2013 -14, four editions of the Know India Programme 
(KIP) were held, in which 127 participants took part. The Ministry proposes to organize 4 more 
programmes during the year 2014-15 for which a Budget of Rs. 4.5 crore has been allocated. The 
Committee had, however, observe d that no separate allocation has been made for another 
programme called the Study Indian Programme (SIP) which was started with academic focus 
including academic contents, cultural contents and visits. The Ministry has not clarified whether 
the contents of SIP have been merged with KIP or not. The Committee had, therefore, desired that 
the programme may be further reviewed and modified as necessary to make it comprehensive, 
more attractive and broad based by incorporating the contents of Study Indian Programme also so 
that more and more participants from all parts of the world and of diverse backgrounds are 
attracted to participate in the Know India programme. The Committee  had also desired that all 
recommendation of CII in this regard should be considered and implemented and a status report 
should be submitted to the Committee.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Know India Programme (KIP), initially known as Internship Program me for 
Diaspora Youth (IPDY) was started from 20 th December 2003 in Ministry of External Affairs. 
The IPDY was renamed as “Know India Programme” from December, 2006 when Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs was formed as an independent Ministry.  
 
The objec tive of the Ministry's Know India Programme is to help familiarize Indian Diaspora 
youth, in the age group of 18-26 years, with developments and achievements made by the country 
and bringing them closer to the land of their ancestors. KIP provides a unique  forum for students 
and young professionals of Indian origin to visit India, share their views, expectations and 

33 
 
experiences and to bond closely with contemporary India. For each Know India Programme(KIP), 
upto 40 overseas youth participants are invited for the programme.  
 
The Ministry has conducted 32 editions of KIPs so far and a total of 983 overseas Indian youth 
have participated in these programmes including 152 overseas participants in 5 (28 th -32nd KIP) 
editions of KIPs during 2014 -15. The 30 th, 31 st KIP and KIP 32 nd were conducted during PBD -
2015 to provide a much needed exposure to Diaspora matters for the KIP participants. In every 
KIP the number of applications being received from overseas youths for KIPs are increasing. 
 
Based on the feedback of  the participants of KIP,  CII had made recommendations on KIP 
regarding pre -arrival, registration, arrival and departure assistance, programme scheduling, 
infrastructure and services, programme contents etc. These recommendations of CII have been 
taken into consideration by the Ministry resulting in increased number of applications for every 
succeeding KIPs from willing overseas youths. The approved guidelines/ contents of each KIP 
consisting of details of programme schedule and various conditions are sent  to all the Indian 
Missions/Posts well in advance and uploaded in the website of the Ministry to keep the willing 
participants about those and for their preparation accordingly.  
 
The SIP enables Overseas Indian youth to undergo short term course in an Ind ian University to 
familiarize them with the history, heritage, art, culture, socio -political, economic developments 
etc. of India. The focus of the programme is on academic orientation and research.  
 
So far three editions of SIPs have been conducted where  a total of 41 overseas youth participated 
including 18 overseas Indian youths of 3 rd SIP from 3rd January, 2015 to 3rd February, 2015 at the 
Symbiosis University, Pune, Maharashtra.  
 
The expenditure for KIP and SIP is made from the Budget Head 2061 - External Affairs (Major 
Head) Details Head 03.05 other Charges 03.05.50(OH),  though these programmes are different in 
the content and duration. 
 
The Ministry has so far not merged the KIP and SIP programme. The pros & cons of merging the 
two schemes are being examined and a final view, as to whether the two schemes shall be 
continued in their existing from, or should be merged shall soon be taken.  

34 
 
 
It may also be kindly noted that the Ministry has decided to increase the number of KIPs up to 18 
programmes per year. The duration of each KIP will also be 25 days, as compared to 21 days for 
previous KIPs. The KIP schedule will also include interactions with university students, where the 
participants do the state leg of their visit. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee we re aware that the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), a public 
private partnership of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), has been established at Gurgaon with  the objective of facilitating and connecting 
India with the Indian Diaspora by promoting overseas Indian investment in India and facilitating 
business-to-business partnership between Indian business and Indians residing overseas. The 
Committee also find t hat OIFC has also taken steps to identify the expectations of Overseas 
Indians and their difficulties in understanding policy guidelines, taxation rules and repatriation 
formalities and their increased demand for information based services, handholding and grievance 
forum. 
The Committee had, however, felt that a lot has to be done to fulfill their expectations and that the 
Ministry should dedicatedly work towards the deficit areas as pointed out in the findings of the 
study made in this regard. The Committe e had desired to be apprised about the impact and 
outcome of the efforts made by OIFC in the matter.    
Reply of the Government 
1. OIFC takes note of the findings of the survey and the expectations of Overseas Indians, from 
OIFC. OIFC will reach out proactively to the Diaspora, in a process of sustained engagement with 
overseas Indians. OIFC will enhance its business engagement in 2015 – 16 by inviting more 
NRI/PIO led business delegations to India and connecting them to State Governments and Indian 
industry. To achieve this, OIFC will be an integral part of MOIA‟s outreach programmes in 
foreign countries. OIFC will also enhance its engagement with the States which are critical 
partners. OIFC will direct potential investors to these Partner States.  OIFC sta rted its webinar 
series which provide a real time engagement platform between Overseas Indians and domain 
experts in India. 
2. In 2015 -16, OIFC plans to expand its activities and launch programmes to target young 
diaspora entrepreneurs, small to mid size b usiness owners, organize visits of business delegations 

35 
 
led by Overseas Indians, conduct closed - door meetings of high net individuals among overseas 
Indians and connect overseas Indians with Indian Social Entrepreneurs for impact investing. 
 3. As a result of its Diapsora Engagement Meets in Bahrain & UK, OIFC received three business 
delegations during the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) 2015 & Vibrant Gujarat (VG) 2015, from 
Bahrain (14 members), UK (15 members) and The  Netherlands (11 members). 
4. At its „Market Place‟ during PBD 2015 & VG 2015, OIFC facilitated 176 B2B & 08 B2G 
meetings for visiting delegations. OIFC, pro-actively reached out to Indian industry who were not 
registered PBD delegates and invited them to meet the visiting delegations. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
  
 

36 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

37 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee had taken note that the Indian Centre for Migration (ICM), New Delhi is the 
think tank of the Ministry regarding emerging opportunities in the international labou r markets and 
for projecting India as a supplier of skilled, trained and qualified wor kers. The Committee had, 
however, found that the skill development project for potential migrants from North Eastern States 
was launched in 2011 with an objective of prov iding vocational training to 10,200 youth in 
hospitality, healthcare and education sectors. But only 1,443 youths have been trained so far under 
the project. They had also failed to spend the funds allocated for the ICM. The Committee were of an 
opinion that in the current scenario of emerging trends in labour migration, the Centre is positioned to 
play a pivotal role in shaping and defining India‟s migration flows. The need of the hour is to 
sufficiently augment the capacity of the Centre and therefore the  Committee had desired that all the 
ongoing studies should be completed and expedited in a time bound manner along with the planning 
and implementation of the recommendations made in these reports. The Committee may accordingly 
be informed about the initia tives taken to achieve the targets set for training the youth under the 
programmes launched by the Centre.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Skill Development Initiative for Potential Migrants from the North -Eastern States of India”, is 
a pilot project implemente d by International Organization for Migration (IOM) under an agreement 
between ICM and IOM. 
4. A total of 3,400 youth were to be trained with either complete or partial funding support from 
the project. Other targets were: development of three International V ocational Qualifications (IVQs), 
establishment of Skills Training and Certification Resource Centre (STCRC), drafting of National 
Roll-out Plan, Vision Documents for Overseas Employment. 1,443 youth were trained and certified 
as per the IVQs developed exclusively for the purpose of the pilot project in the North-East. A total of 
6,800 persons were to be trained in vocational model on self -financing basis without any financial 
support from the project. No progress was reported by International Organization f or Migration 
(IOM) to ICM in this regard. 
 

38 
 
5. In February 2015, International Organization for Migration (IOM), the implementing agency 
of the project, was informed the project may be brought to a logical conclusion immediately in light 
of delay in achieving its deliverables.  
6. ICM completed a labour market assessment of six EU countries and studied trends in 
international labour markets. In its 5 th meeting on 22 May 2015 in New Delhi the Governing Council 
approved ICM‟s road map for 2015 -16, which includes upd ating of information on labour market 
trends periodically and examining standard labour agreements with destination countries." 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
 
 The Committee had observed that the Ministry has been given an outlay of Rs. 20 crore by the 
Planning Commission for the ambitious Swarnapravas Yojna for skill development of Indian youth. 
The Outlay for this scheme for 12 th Five Year Plan is Rs. 137 crore and during the 5 years 2.08 lakh 
youth are to be trained under the schem e. The Committee, therefore, would impress upon the 
Ministry to take up the project with required seriousness, spend the allocation every year in a prudent 
way be setting desired targets and achieve those targets so that there is no underutilization of the  
allocated funds or failure in achieving the targets under the scheme. 
 The Committee had also recommend ed that the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) should be 
suitably empowered to look into various aspects of implementation of this Project. The Committee 
had further wanted to be apprised about the specific projects undertaken, the targets set for the youths 
to be trained during the year 2014 -15 and the initiatives taken to achieve the targets under the 
Scheme. The Committee had also desire d that there should be a mechanism for regular review to 
assess the effectiveness of the skills in fulfilling identified needs of the labour importing countries. 
The Committee had further desire d that while identifying the centres for imparting such training, 
preference shoul d be given to the economically backward districts in various States across the 
Country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All the recommendations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. The Ministry is 
taking urgent steps to implement the Scheme expeditiously. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 

39 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The Committee had noted that in the name of making efforts, the Ministry has be en writing 
letters to the State Governments or Ministry of Urban Development requesting them to provide 
suitable space for setting up of new PoEs Office at Rae Bareilly and Guwahati or for shifting of PoE 
offices at Cochin and Hyderabad, but with no result s. They have only been able to shift the PoE 
Office, Thiruvananthpuram to a State Government Building and some work has been undertaken to 
modernize the PoE Offices at Mumbai and Kolkata. Therefore, under these circumstance the 
Committee do not approve the  reasoning given by the Ministry wherein they have argued that, in 
view of no positive response from the State Governments, no allocation has been made at BE stage 
for PoE Offices and if the need arose then the funds would be obtained through submission of  
Revised Estimates. In the Committee‟s view, such an approach by the Ministry defeats the very 
purpose of the budgetary exercise. If the proposals of establishment and shifting of PoE Offices are in 
progress, they can materialize at any point of time and t hen it might not be feasible for funds to be 
arranged immediately. In case the necessary building or land could not be arranged, the allocated 
funds could be surrendered. The Committee had, therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry should 
take more concerted efforts to obtain space for the PoE Offices by taking it at the highest levels and 
simultaneously obtain requisite allocation at RE stage, which may be spent in remaining months of 
the financial year. Moreover, they should also make provision for suffici ent funds in the Budgetary 
exercise for the next financial year for this purpose and apprise the Committee about the progress 
made in this regard.  
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
 It may be stated that the PoE Offices of Delhi, Kolkata and Chandigarh are in Ce ntral Govt. 
buildings. PoEs Hyderabad, Chennai, Trivandrum and Jaipur are in State Govt. buildings and PoEs 
Cochin, Mumbai and Rae Bareli are in private buildings. 

40 
 
 
The Ministry has taken up the issue of allotment of land for the PoE Offices in Mumbai, Coc hin, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Rai Bareli with the Ministry of Urban Development, Govt. of 
India and concerned State Governments.  Ministry of Urban Development has replied that the 
requirement of office space for POEs had been noted and would be con sidered along with other 
pending requests for GPOA as and when GPOA become available at these locations.  Further 
response is awaited from the Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
Ministry of Urban Development was requested to accede to approve the allotment of  Govt. 
accommodation to the POE office, Cochin, in the premises where Regional Passport Office (RPO), 
Cochin is located.  The Directorate of Estates, has informed that they had sought some clarification 
from Executive Engineer-cum-Estate Manager, Cochin Ce ntral Division, CPWD about the details of 
the space to be spared by RPO.  POE(Kochi) has also reminded the Executive Engineer, CPWD 
Cochin for finalization of the proposal.   
 
The matter of getting office space for the office of POE in Hyderabad at the pre mises of RPO, 
Hyderabad is being pursued. 
 
Regarding opening of PoE Office at Guwahati, accommodation/space is yet to be made available by 
the State Government despite sending requests to Govt. of Assam a number of times.   
It may be seen that the Ministry  has constantly been making efforts for getting office space for the 
POE Offices in Govt. owned building with minimum rental outgo.  The matter will be followed up 
earnestly. 
 
Regarding allocation of funds, it may be stated that it is not known how much bu dgetary provision 
would be required if land/building is made available for establishment/shifting of new/existing PoE 
offices.  Moreover, if any amount of  funds are kept in BE and are surrendered at the end of the year 
due to non-availability of land/building, the Ministry have to provide clarification as to why the funds 
had been asked. The surrendering of funds may be seen as lack of proper planning on the part of the 
Ministry.  Therefore, to avoid the surrendering of funds, funds are not being kept in B E.  If at any 
time during the year, the land/buildings are made available, funds would be arranged by way of re -
appropriation or seeking additional funds. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 

41 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
 The Committee had on the one hand note d that un der the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC) the Ministry in principle has decided to increase the number of 
scholarships from 100 to 200 and scholarship amount from $ 4000 to $ 5000 but on the other hand 
there is a steady decline in the numb er of applications from the Diaspora children since 2009 -10. For 
2014-15 only 190 applications have been received from the Diaspora children. Moreover, it also 
creates doubts about the seriousness of the Ministry as the Ministry has not enhanced the budget  for 
the Scheme, rather only Rs. 8.56 crore has been allocated for 2014 -15 as against the RE of Rs.8.83 
crore for 2013-14. The Committee were, therefore, of the opinion the first of all it should analyze the 
reasons for the steady decline in the number of applications for scholarships offered under this 
scheme, including the standing and accreditation of the institutions and the type of courses offered to 
the students under the scheme. The Committee had once again urged the Ministry to expand the reach 
of the programme and include only the best institutions for admissions under the Scheme if it really 
intends that the students selected for such scholarship become brand ambassadors for India and its 
educational institutions and represent India globally as a s ought-after educational hub. The 
Committee had also recommend ed that the Ministry should also seek enhanced allocation for the 
increased number and amount of scholarship at the Revised Estimates stage.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The Ministry has examined  the reasons for the decline in the number of applications under the 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) and the decline in application could be 
attributed to a number of factors which are outlined below: 
 
(i)  Amount of Scholarship: 
 
         Presently, the Institutional Economic Cost (IEC) with regards to NITs range from US$ 7500 - 
US$8500 per year and the maximum scholarship allowed is US$ 4000 only which is nearly half the 
IEC. This difference in scholarship amount and actual fees paid to Institutes may pose a financial 
overload on students opting to study in India, especially in NITs.  
 
(ii)  Number of Scholarship seats: 

42 
 
 
         Since the number of scholarship seats is only 100, many students particularly those without high 
marks may not wish to apply presuming lesser chances of being shortlisted.  
 
 EdCIL were requested to incorporate institutions of national repute like JNU, DU, IITs and 
various IIMs under the scheme to accommodate the increased number of aspirants for undergraduate 
courses in Engineering, Science, Law, Management etc. It came to light that Institutions like 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi University, IITs and various IIMs have different criteria for 
admission, such as the Joint Entrance Exam (JEE) for IIT, Common Apt itude Test (CAT) for IIMs 
and also tests which university/institutions conduct on their own for admission at the entry level for 
undergraduate courses. Whereas, in the SPDC scheme the merit list is prepared based on the scores 
obtained by the students in their qualifying examination, i.e., 12th class.  
Hence, the placement of the NRI/PIO students in the above institutions through the SPDC Scheme 
would materialize only if the students qualify the respective entrance exams for admission to those 
institutes.    
(iii) The matter regarding increase in the amount of scholarship from US$ 4000 to US$ 5000 per 
year and number of seats from 100 to 200 had been examined in MOIA. Order of the then HMOIA 
was taken for increasing the scholarship to US$5000 per annum(subje ct to 75% of IEC cost or less) 
and the number of scholarships to 200 per year. Comments of MHRD were taken and comments of 
MEA & ICCR are awaited. 
 However, the Ministry is now considering modifying the SPDC Scheme to ensure that NRI/ 
PIOs scholars are adm itted to universities / colleges that are of a prescribed standard only, to ensure 
the quality of education being imparted.  Scholarship in such cases could be given only to those 
NRI/PIO students who are able to get admission into these institutions.  The  modified Scheme would 
be given due publicity. Pending these changes to be made, fresh applications have not been invited 
for the current year.  
 
The budgetary provision would be made based on the actual expenditure that is likely to be incurred 
once the changes as above have been implemented. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Committee had welcomed the initiative taken by the Ministry to overhaul the basic 
architecture of emigration in the country by bringing a new legislation in  the form of Draft 
Emigration Management Bill. The Committee we re of the opinion that such a change was long 
overdue as there have been significant transformations in the processes and dynamics of emigration 
in the recent past. The Committee  had hoped that the new legislation would encapsulate these 
positive trends in emigration and would simultaneously cover up various loopholes in the existing 
regulatory framework. The Committee had, therefore, urged the Ministry to expedite the consultation 
process related to the proposed Bill in the overall interest of the potential migrants and to introduce it 
in Parliament for consideration at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has already initiated the consultation process with stakeholder Ministri es and 
Departments to expedite the process of introduction of the proposed Bill in the Parliament. 
 Various rounds of internal meetings and two rounds of inter -Ministerial meeting have already 
taken place in the process. In these meetings, efforts have als o been made to identify the loopholes in 
the existing system and plug them in the new Bill in the interest of the potential migrations.  
In parallel, State Government organizations are being encouraged to become Recruiting Agents under 
the Emigration Act, 1983. 
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 The Committee had understoo d that the Ministry as part of its mandate has taken up Labour 
Mobility Partnership Agreements with various prominent labour -importing countries in a phased 
manner. The  Ministry is also taking steps to build the Human Resources Mobility Partnership 
(HRMPs) with key countries of destination in the European Union.  Such a mobility partnership has 
already been signed with Denmark, whereas negotiation with the Netherlands is  complete. Besides, 
negotiation with France and European Union is going on. The committee, however, were not satisfied 
with the pace of negotiations and progress made in this regard and are concerned about the delays in 
inter-Ministerial consultations. The  Committee had, therefore, desire d that the negotiations with 

44 
 
countries concerned should be initiated afresh at the highest level in order to facilitate their early 
conclusion. Inter-Ministerial discussions should also be expedited and all the concerned Mi nistries 
should be taken into confidence before entering into agreement with each country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for initiating negotiations at highest level 
with the concerned countries and also for conc lusion of the negotiation with European Union and 
France expeditiously.  
(F.No. H-11021/24/2014-P&C) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                      DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
6th Novemebr,2015                                                                                                               Chairperson,  
15 Kartika, 1937 (Saka))                                                        Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 

45 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 20th  OCTOBER, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20 th October, 2015 from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
3. Prof (Dr) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
6. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
9. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
10. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
13. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
14.  Dr. Karan Singh 
15. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
16. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on: (i) Action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2014 -15. (ii) XXXXXXXXX                                             
(iii)           XXXXXXXX XX. 

46 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to off er their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in 
the draft Reports. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted the 
draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chair person to finalize the A ction Taken Report s 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members .  It was also decided that since Parliament is not 
in session the Chairperson may present the reports to the Hon'ble Speaker under Rule 71A of the 
Directions by the Speaker with a reques t to permit the printing, publication and circulation of the 
Reports under Rule 280 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  and 
subsequently, these Reports will be presented to both the Houses of the Parliament after 
commencement of the next session.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
  

47 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                         14 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 10. 
 Total-08 
 
Percentage:  57.14% 
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government replies. 
 
NIL 
Total-00 
  
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply  of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 and 12. 
Total- 02 
 
 Percentage: 14.28% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 5, 9, 13 and 14. 
Total-04 
 
Percentage: 28.57% 
 
 
 
 
 