 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations contained in the Fourth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2014-15] 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2015/ KARTIKA, 1937 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
08 
 

 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-2016) 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  
External Affairs for the year 2014-15] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18th November, 2015 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30th November, 2015 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd December, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2015/ KARTIKA, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2015 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2015-2016………………………           (ii)      
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………       (iii)    
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….           1                        
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...            23                           
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…          45               
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            46                      
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………               48             
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee                                 
held on 20.10.2015 …………………………………………..            55  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government  
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (16th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….           57   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-16) 
 
Sl. No.   Name of Members 
  
 1.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6.  Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.   Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 9.  Smt. Raksha Khadse 
 10.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11.  Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 12.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14.  Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17.  Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18.  Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20.  Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21.  Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 23.  Shri H.K. Dua 
 24.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 25.  Smt. Kanimozhi 
 26.  Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 27.  Shri C.M. Ramesh  
 28.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 29.  Shri D. P. Tripathi 
 30.  Shri Pavan Kumar Varma  
 31.  Vacant 
                           
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cyril John  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Kiran Bhargava  - Sr. Executive Assistant  
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on External Affairs (20 15-16) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth Report         
(16th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the  observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2014-15. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Parliament on 22nd December, 2014. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 21st May, 2015. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their second sitting 
held on 20th October, 2015. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on 
External Affairs (16th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
 6th November,  2015                                                                             Chairperson,                           
15 Kartika, 1937 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iii)                                             

 
1   
 
        CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken 
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2014-15 which was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2014. 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 
30 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 7,  8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 
27, 28 and 29.  
 Total-20 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government replies. 
Recommendation No.  NIL. 
Total-00 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
Recommendation Nos.2 and 3 
Total- 02 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation Nos. 5, 6, 9, 13, 16, 17, 25, and 30 
Total-08 
3. The Committee desire that  specific replies to the comme nts of the Committee in 
Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations/observations for which only interim 
replies have been given by the Government as mentioned in Chapter-V of this report should 
be furnished within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will n ow deal with some of the replies received from the Government, 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 

 
2   
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 5. The Committee had observed that the Ministry of External Affairs during Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2014-15 had sought an allocation of Rs.26,111 .23 crore.  The Committee, 
however, were distressed to note that the actual Budget allocation made at BE Stage was 
Rs.14,730.39 crore with a „Plan‟ Budget of Rs.5,100 crore and „Non-Plan‟ Budget of Rs.9,630.39 
crore.  The Committee were concerned to observe that there was a vast gap between the allocation 
sought by the Ministry and the actual allocation made to the tune of 43.5 percent.  The Committee 
were of the view that the budgetary allocation was grossly inadequate considering the size and 
aspirations of the country.  The Committee  had opined that if India intended to be a major power 
in the region and play an important role in world affairs, the intentions should be duly 
accompanied and complimented by appropriate budgetary support.  The Committee, therefore, 
had strongly recommended that on that strong ground, the Ministry of External Affairs should 
vigorously pursue the matter so that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry would be  
substantially enhanced at the RE 2014 -15 stage. The Committee further had recommended that 
the Ministry should also present their case strongly at the highest level in the Ministry of Finance 
and Planning Commission for the desired enhancement in budgetary allocation for the financial 
year 2015-16 from the very beginning. 
6. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry acknowledges the concern expressed by the Committee in appreciating the 
deficit faced by the Ministry and the vast gap existing between the resources available and 
the requirements. It would certainly give the necessary fillip to the Ministry‟ s efforts in 
getting additional allocations. The Ministry, on its part, had undertaken detailed 
consultation with all the stakeholders, particularly the Development Partnership 
Administration, to ensure that there is optimum allocation of funds within the overall 
budget.  As regards augmentation of funds at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage of 2014 -
15, the Ministry of Finance was addressed at Ministerial and Secretary levels, but the 
efforts of the Ministry have not yielded results.    
The allocation in BE 2 015-16 (Non Plan) as communicated by the Ministry of Finance is 
also well below the Ministry‟s requirements. Consequently, the next financial year is also 
foreseen to be challenging from the budgetary perspective. 
It is also respectfully submitted that the  demand of Rs 20 ,161.07 crore was under Non 
Plan, and not under Plan." 
 

 
3   
 
7. The Committee note that at BE 2014 -15 stage , the Ministry had sought an 
allocation of Rs. 26,111.23  crore (Both Plan and Non -Plan), against which only Rs. 
14730.39 crore was allocated. Keeping in view the vast gap between the allocation 
sought by the Ministry and the actual allocation  made during the year 2014 -15, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry vigorously pursue the matter at  the 
highest level for a substantia l enhancement of the allocation s at RE stage.  But the 
Committee note with concern that the efforts made at the Ministerial and Secretary 
level, did not yield result. Rather, the Committee are aware that t he allocation was 
further reduced  to Rs . 12,620.00 crore at the RE stage. But the Ministry have not 
found it necessary to inform the Committee about the facts and figures in this regard 
and the reasons for such reduction at RE stage.   The Committee are further 
dismayed to note that t he allocations at BE 2015-16 (Non-Plan) are also much below 
the requirements of the Ministry, consequently the financial year 2015 -16 is also 
going to be challenging.  The Committee wish to express their displeasure at this  
approach of the Ministry of Finance to reduce the allocations at the RE stage instead 
of suitably increasing it.  The Committee strongly feel that with such reduced 
allocations, India’s role in world affairs and at the regional level will be 
compromised. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Minis try of Finance to take 
into account the broader national interest before imposing such crippling cuts in the 
budget of the Ministry of External Affairs. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
8. The Committee had specifically noted a peculiar situation created during 201 3-14, when 
against the demand of Rs.16585.18 crore at RE Stage, the Ministry of Finance had initially 
reduced the allocation from Rs.11719.00 crore (BE allocation) to Rs.11693.65 crore and 
subsequently an additional Rs.100 crore was provided taking the RE figure to Rs.11793.65 crore. 
But surprisingly, that allocation was not supported by cash and was managed within the 
Ministry‟s Budget by way of token supplementary. The Committee  had expressed their dismay at 

 
4   
 
such a state of affairs regarding allocation of the resources to the Ministry having mandate to 
implement India‟s foreign policy and pursue its interests globally. Similarly, the Committee had 
been  informed that due to non-availability of funds in the last two months of the financial year 
2013-14, the pace of various important project s in neighbouring countries had slowed down and 
execution of projects had almost come to a standstill as payments to various executing agencies 
could not be released in time with enormous pending schedules and cost implications.  The 
Committee were concerned to note that due to  the limited working season in several countries, a 
two-month delay could result into a one year delay with consequent overruns.  The Committee 
were of the strong view that such practice should be averted because that could lead to a situation 
wherein a tool meant to provide leverage and advantage could become  counter-productive, 
leading to adverse media attention and resultant public and political reaction in the beneficiary 
country. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs  
should take necessary precautionary action to avert stalling of projects midway with a more 
vigilant monitoring mechanism which would anticipate shortage of funds well in advance and 
take adequate steps.  
9. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry, as rightly observed by the Committee, has been functioning under severe 
financial constraints, and has not been able to discharge some of its important 
commitments owing to lack of funds. The commitments made at the highest levels, if not 
honoured in time, adversely impact the image of the country, which is why adequate 
budgetary allocation is important.  
 It may be mentioned that the progress of projects is being monitored at various 
levels, and scrutiny has improved significantly, particularly with the creation of 
Development Partnership Administration (DPA). However, it is also to be noted that 
without adequate funds, delays in projects may be inevitable, even though the Ministry 
tries to anticipate shortages and take precautionary action."  
10. The Committee are not satisfied with the routine nature of the reply furnished by the 
Ministry stating that the Ministry has taken steps to monitor the progress of projects and 
with the creation of Development Partnership Administration (DPA), scrutiny has improved 
significantly.  The reply of the Ministry is silent with regard to the exact measures taken in 
this direction . In view of the problem of shortage of funds leading to stalling of the 
international projects midway over the years, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry should take necessary precautionary action to avert such a situation, including the 
establishment of a vigilant monitoring mechanism which would anticipate shortage of funds 

 
5   
 
well in advance and take adequate steps.   The Committee, therefore, would like to be 
apprised of the mechanism developed by them to anticipate the shortage of funds in 
advance, along with the role played by Developme nt Partnership Administration .  The 
Committee, further desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should convey to the 
Ministry of F inance that the credibility of the nation is at stake and  pursue vigorously for 
getting additional funds in a timely manner. 
 (Recommendation No. 3) 
11. The Committee had noted that due to budgetary constraints, the Ministry had to constantly 
resort to  internal allocati on and shifting of funds from one head to other head owing to the 
urgency or the strategic or political importance of the expenditure. The Committee understood 
that some degree of flexibility was required owing to the nature of Ministry's  international 
engagement and immediate requirement of fund s for strategic and political commitments at the 
highest level. The Committee, however, were not appreciative of the practice of shifting of funds 
mid-year based upon exigency. The Committee, there fore, were of the view that rather than 
making it a permanent feature, the provision for flexibility should be kept to the minimum and 
continuing projects/already committed project s should not suffer on account of other immediate 
needs. The Committee had recommended that if international commitments were made after the 
budgetary allocation at the BE stage, the Ministry must come to an arrangement with the Ministry 
of Finance so that the entire amount committed internationally was provided at the RE stage or at 
the supplementary stage as per the time -frame of such declaration rather than arranging such 
funds from the internal resources of the Ministry. 
 
12. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry has  been sensitizing Ministry of Finance about the commitments made at 
highest levels and details of these commitments are also shared with them. The details of 
the various projects and activities are also given in the „Detailed Notes‟ sent to Ministry of 
Finance along with the Revised Estimates/Budget Estimates demands.   This is followed 
by the pre -budget discussions with the Ministry of Finance where the Financial Advisor 
also seeks additional funds on behalf of the Ministry.  Often, this is also followed u p by 
way of letters from Foreign Secretary and/or Hon‟ble Minister. 
 
 However, that Ministry would receive an augmentation at the RE/supplementary 
demands stage is extremely uncertain.  The budgetary management exercise becomes 
extremely precarious particu larly when Revised Estimates are fixed at a level lower than 
Budget Estimates. Under the circumstances, the Ministry is left with no choice, but to 
resort to prioritization within available resources, and carry out re -appropriation of funds 

 
6   
 
in order to hon our most important high level commitments.  Ministry‟s demands for 
additional funds at RE stage or through supplementaries, to meet commitments made 
through the year have not been met by the Ministry of Finance.  
 However, Ministry continues to liaise with  the Ministry of Finance for additional 
funds as desired by the Hon‟ble Committee." 
 
13. The Committee take note of the reply furnished by the Ministry stating the normal 
procedure followed by them for approval of Budget and difficulties being faced by them in 
the augmentation of their Budget.  The Committee  reiterate that the Ministry should 
engage with the Ministry of Finance on the issue and apprise the Committee within three 
months about the steps taken in this regard as well as its outcome along with the views of 
Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
14. The Committee had been continuously expressing their concern over serious under -
resourcing of the Ministry in terms of both budget as well as staff. The Committee had also 
deliberated upon the incongruously small size of the Indian Foreign Services considering the 
enormous tasks and challenges faced by the Ministry. The Committee had also recognize d the 
plan in place to increase the annual intake over the period of ten year s and initiative has taken by 
the Ministry for lateral entry at various levels and that the problems were being faced by the 
Ministry in retaining the deputationists and in their p ostings overseas. The Committee , however, 
were of the view that the challeng es were imminent and urgent and the Ministry was short of 
diplomats to address them.  Staggered recruitment means that staff recruited today would need 
years to be trained to m eet the acute needs of today. The Committee, therefore, had suggested to 
the Ministry to engage in a de novo  exercise of assessing its existing available manpower and 
actual requirements and find a way to speed up the process of intake through the lateral entry of 
qualified and experienced individuals without compromising o n the quality of recruits. The 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry must engage with the Department of Personnel 
and Training (DoPT) and impress upon them about the urgency of providing more staff, including 
through recruitment from other cadres and the academic and private sector, as per the specialized 
needs of the Ministry. The Committee had further recommended to the Ministry to take up the 
issue of altering the fixed cadre ratio and  retention of deputationists from other cadres in view of 
their experience within the Ministry and the expertise achieved over the yea rs. The Committee 
had also suggested for  the inclusion of officials of other services like Parliamentary and Legal 
services along with All India Services working on equivalent posts for the purpose of deputation 

 
7   
 
with a view to expanding the base of expertise/experience in the Ministry.  The Committee had 
also urged that r ecruitment on cont ract basis from individuals with academic o r private sector 
experience that was directly relevant to urgent needs should be permitted. 
 
15. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry of External Affairs is aware of the issues pointed out  by the Committee and 
is currently undertaking comprehensive assessment of the situation. It proposes to 
undertake a review based on its assessment." 
16. While assessing the position of manpower in the Ministry of External Affairs, the 
Committee ha d suggested several measures to be taken by the Ministry as well as in 
consultation with DoPT.  But the Committee desire updates on measures taken by the 
Ministry in this regard including relating to the ongoing recruitment being done on contract 
basis or th rough lateral entry .  The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised  of the 
ongoing exercise of comprehensive assessment being carried out by the Ministry as well as 
the review, along with the outcome thereof, within three months.  They would also like to be 
apprised of the steps taken in regard to the de novo exercise, engaging with the Department 
of Personnel and Training for  providing more staff , altering the fixed cadre ratio and 
retention of deputationists, as well as inclusion of the officers from other services along with 
the outcome thereof.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
17. The Committee had noted that over the last three years, inspite of higher projections under 
the head 'Training', the budget allocation at BE stage ha d been kept at constant level of Rs.8.53 
crore. The Committee were dismayed to note that during the same period the allocation was 
revised downwards at the RE stage  and the Ministry was even not able to utili ze the reduced 
allocation. The Committee had also take n note of the Ministry's initiative of using modern 
mediums in imparting training in order to maximize the outcomes from the available resources. 
The Committee , however,  were not convinced at all with the Ministry's justification for 
continuous underutilization of allocated resources for training , particularly when the Committee 
had been regularly stressing upon the importance of regular orientation programme s for the 
personnel of the Ministry of External Affairs and for building in-house capacity in view of the 
evolving strategic and dynamic diplomatic and technological scenario.   The lack of adequate 
language training  for officers assigned to posts other than those using their preferr ed foreign 
languages could also be remedied by use of these funds.  The Committee , therefore, had once 
again strongly recommended that Ministry should impart periodic training to its officers  at all 
levels both in India and abroad taking the help of latest training modules. 

 
8   
 
  
18. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"FSI would continue to strive to use the funds effectively and judiciously.  
 FSI would continue to regularly update its training programs and content to 
ensure that the skill upgradation needs of various ranks and cadres of the Ministry are 
adequately covered. 
 The Ministry is currently working on a review of its language policy, whic h 
would address issues such as this." 
 
19. While observing the  continuous under-utilization of allocated resources for training  
of the Personnel of the Ministry of External Affairs , the Committee had felt the need for 
regular orientation programmes and the development of an in-house capacity in view of the 
evolving strategic and dynamic diplomatic and technological scenario. In response, the 
Ministry has simply convey ed that FSI would continue to regularly update its training 
programs and c ontent to ensu re that the skill -upgradation needs of various ranks and 
cadres of the Ministry are adequately covered  and would strive to use the f unds effectively 
and judiciously .  They have not mentioned about the targets set in  this regard.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to apprise them about the impact of their efforts.  The 
Committee further note that the Ministry is working on a review of its language policy 
which would also address the issues  of adequate language training for the offic ers.  The 
Committee may be apprised about the steps taken by them to address the issue of language 
training for Foreign Service Officers within three months of the presentation of this report.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
20. The Committee had deliberated upon the lack of infrastructure related to Hindi language 
and non-adherence to official language norms and lapses in Missions/ Posts in its implementation. 
The Committee had noted that some  new initiatives have been taken recently by the Minist ry 
regarding the development of infrastructure and capacity building in Hindi language  in the offices 
of MEA. The Ministry, however, had not mentioned any time -frame for implementation of these 
initiatives and there was no mention o f steps being taken to strengthen the interpretation facility 
from Hindi to foreign languages and vice versa.  The Committee in their 14 th Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) had pointed out about non -availability of such interpretation facility in Indian 
Missions/Posts and had suggested the development of a separate cadre pool of interpreters for that 
purpose. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that adequate steps should be taken in a 
time bound manner for development of infrastructure and capacity building in Hi ndi language in 

 
9   
 
the office s of MEA and also for formation of a pool of interpreters from Hindi to foreign 
languages and vice versa and make such facility available in Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
21. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"Ministry is giving due importance to the progressive use of official language Hindi in 
official business. All the Divisions/ Section of the Ministry are now equipped with Hindi 
infrastructure in the form of software to enable the officers to work both in Hindi and 
English Languages. Missions/Posts Abroad have also been provided with similar software. 
A majority of the Missions have confirmed that the computers in their offices are now 
equipped with software. 
 In addition, Hindi has become an integral element in all the training modules being 
imparted by the Foreign Services Institute to the officers and staff. This training is also 
relayed over online platform of webinar to our Missions/Posts abroad updating all with the 
latest tools in use of Hindi language. With an objective to increase the progressive use of 
Hindi in the Ministry, workshops are being organized at Headquarter s regularly. Officers 
from the official language departments are also invited as guest speakers in these 
workshops. 
 As per Rule 10 (4) of Official Language Rules, 1976, if more than 80% of the 
officers/employees of an office acquire working knowledge of Hindi, then the said o ffice 
is notified. In line with this, Ministry of External Affairs is notified since April 1987. 
Several of Ministries' subordinate offices  including the Regional Passport Offices have 
also been notified.  Recent additions to this list include Regional Pas sport Offices in 
Raipur and Dehradun. 
 Many Indian Foreign Service officers posted in various Missions/Posts acquire 
knowledge of the local language and are able to interpret from local language to Hindi and 
vice versa. Their services are being utilized during VVIP visits." 
 
22. The Committee had recommended the development of infrastructure and 
capacity building in the Hindi language  in all the offices of Ministry of External 
Affairs including Missions/Posts abroad, as well as the formation of a  separate pool 
of interpreters from Hindi to foreign language and vice -versa, and making such 
facility available in Indian Missions/Posts. The Committee note that all the Divisions/ 
Sections of the Ministry are now equipped with Hindi infrastructure in the form of 
software to enable the officers to work both in Hindi and English languages and 
Missions/Posts Abroad have also been provided with similar software. As per Rule 10 
(4) of Official Language Rules, 1976, if more than 80% of the officers/employees of 

 
10   
 
an office acquire, a working knowledge of Hindi, then the said office is notified. In 
line with this, Ministry of External Affairs is notified since April 1987. The Ministry 
and several of the Ministry's subordinate offices including the Regional Passport 
Offices h ave been notified.  But there is no mention about the efforts made in the 
Missions/Posts for capacity building in the Hindi language including in the internal 
working of the Ministry. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry has 
not taken any step for strengthening the Hindi interpretation facility and the 
creation of separate pool of interpreters from Hindi  to foreign language s and vice-
versa.  It appears to have made only stop gap arrangements. The Committee are of 
the strong view  that the present arrangement where IFS office rs play the role of 
interpreters is compromising the quality of the actual performance of IFS officers as 
well as the job of interpretation.  The Committee, therefore, are of the view that in 
light of the emphasis on use of Hindi in international arena by the current 
Government, it is all the more pertinent for the Ministry to strengthen the 
infrastructure in Hindi  in Missions/Posts  and build capacity within the Ministry , 
including the creation of a separate pool of interpreters.  
(Recommendation No. 8) 
23. Indian Embassies/Missions/Posts represent India in the respective countries. The delivery 
of services by them to Indian Citizens and other service seekers has been an issue of concern. 
Though the Committee took note that a mechanism for supervision across various Divisions  
including a Directorate-General of Inspection (DGI) existed, they were dismayed to find that there 
was no specific/separate Division to oversee the services delivered by the Missions/Posts to the 
general public and there was no separate allocation to cater to the need for improving services in 
this area. The Committee had specifically noted that the Directorate-General of Inspection (DGI), 
which was set up in 2004 with the main objective of evaluating the activities/services and 
functioning of Indian Missions/Posts abroad and for evolving a comprehensive model and 
coordinated approach for such inspection , has not conducted any inspection since 2011. The 
Ministry ha d also accepted that there are lacunae in the existing system of inspection and the 
Committee had been informed that a comprehensive review of the functioning of DGI ha d been 
done and new system of inspection was in the process of being put into place.  The Committee, 
therefore,  had  desired that the new system of inspection should be evolved at the earliest and 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) be defined incorporating the new roles of Missions/Posts 
in the context of emerging contour of economic, commercial and cultural aspects of diplomacy.  
 

 
11   
 
 Further, the Committee had also noted that there was lack of  any feedback mechanism 
from public especially regarding consular and commercial service s. The Committee, therefore, 
had suggested that various channels of obtaining feedback should also be created at the level of 
Missions/Posts and this should be duly reflected in the reports sent by these Missions/Posts to the 
Ministry alongwith grievance redressal  status. The Committee had also recommend ed that 
centralized monitoring mechanism at the Headquarters must be strengthened to keep check and 
ensure efficient and fast delivery of services at all the Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The 
Committee had stressed that the Ministry should make a separate provision for improvement of 
services in the Missions/Posts abroad under one of the existing budget heads.  
 
24. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry of External Affairs is cognizant of the importance of strengthening the 
centralized monitoring mechanism at Headquarters to keep a  check and ensure efficient 
and fast delivery of services by Indian Missions and Posts abroad. In this regard, and also 
in keeping with the Ministry‟s tradition of adopting and evolving best practices for good 
governance, work is in progress on MEA e -Samiksha, a real time online system of 
monitoring follow up action taken by the Missions and Posts on the decisions taken by the 
Ministry. It provides a mechanism whereby the Missions and Posts abroad have to update 
the status of action taken by them on these, and many other, issues/measures whenever it 
changes or at least once a month. This is expected to bring in greater transparency, 
improve communication between the Ministry and the Missions, enhance efficiency and 
responsiveness of the Missions and Posts an d ensure efficient and fast delivery of services 
at tall Indian Missions and Posts abroad.  
 A new system of inspection has been evolved and has been put in place.  Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for undertaking the inspection of Missions/ Posts abro ad by 
the DGI have also been defined.  The Inspection Team will inter alia also examine 
whether the concerned Mission/ Post under inspection has been able to deliver the 
requisite services to the nationals of that country and, to the Persons of Indian Orig in and 
Non-Resident Indians residing in that country.  
 The DGI has commenced inspection of Missions/ Posts abroa d on the basis of the 
new SOPs.  
 The allocation for the purpose could be made under “Office Expenses” head of the 
respective Missions/Posts. T he amount will need to be earmarked for the purpose and 
utilized for the purpose of „improvement of services‟.  

 
12   
 
 In pursuance of “Good Governance” initiatives, Government has launched a web 
portal (online Consular Grievances Monitoring System, named MADAD for easy 
branding) to extend a helping hand to Indians abroad requiring consular assistance. It is a 
collaborative effort of the Ministry of External Affairs and MOIA. All our Missions and 
Posts abroad and the MEA‟s Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad and 
Kolkata, are being associated with this portal for consular grievance tracking and follow -
up. The  portal has been official launched on 21 st February, 2015. The MADAD online 
portal represents a qualitative improvement over existing procedures for handling of 
consular until their eventual resolution. It allows direct registration of the grievances by 
the members of the public and effective tracking of the entire grievance handling process 
thereafter. MADAD incorporates several innovative features such as flexible architecture 
to handle a variety of grievances, online filing and linking of similar grievan ces for easier 
retrieval and reference, automatic escalation and enhancement of priority, colour -coded 
dash boards for easy assessment and monitoring, and allows connection with a call centre 
to help illiterate grievants, by linking with MOIA‟s existing facility."  
 
25. The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of External Affairs is cognizant of 
the importance of strengthening the centralized monitoring mechanism at Headquarters to 
keep a check and ensure efficient and fast delivery of services by Indi an Missions and Posts 
abroad and are in the process of a real time online system of monitoring follow up action 
taken by the Missions/Posts on the decision taken by the Ministry.  Simultaneously, a web 
portal for online Consular Grievances Monitoring Syste m named MADAD  has also been 
created. Director General of Inspection (DGI) has also started inspection of Missions/Posts 
on the basis of new SoPs.  But it is not clear whether either of these system is capable to 
centrally monitor and resolve and improve th e services at Missions/Posts on the basis of 
feedback from public and ensure efficient and fast delivery in a time bound manner. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry must ensure a feedback mechanism 
particularly for the portal so as to resol ve the concerns as well technical and procedural 
bottlenecks, if any, at the very beginning and also popularize the portal amongst the target 
seekers.   The Committee  also desire that the family members of Indians abroad may be 
able to register their grievances on the web portal in case of any advers ity/death of their 
family members . The Committee would  also desire that there should be a link  for th is 
purpose and particularly in case of loss of communication with Indian s in zones of conflict , 
in case of missing persons, for claiming mortal remains of deceased persons, pension, etc.  

 
13   
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
26. The Committee had noted that the Ministry had embarked upon 'Digitization Project' for 
creation of image set retrievable database for passport, visa, OCI and PIO applications. The 
Committee, however, are not satisfied with the pace of implementation of the project. The Committee 
had observed that out of 183 Indian Missions/Posts, this project covers only  39 Missions/ Posts and 
the digitization was expected to be completed in these Missions/ Posts by May 2015 depending upon 
the desired approvals and timely a nd adequate release of funds. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended that the Ministry should complete the project in all the 39 Missions/ Posts within the 
time schedule fixed in this regard and it should further be expanded to include all the Indian 
Missions/Posts by formulating a time bound plan for digit ization of existing data in all these 
establishments. 
 
27. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The project was conceptualized for only those Missions/Posts with regular inflow of 
sizeable amount of consular documents and also where these were available in sizeable 
numbers in their record room. Based on the figures received, these Missions/Posts were 
selected. After approval from competent authorities for extension of contract by one year 
i.e. till May 2015, the work order for the rest of 7 Missions/Posts would be issued. In a 
nutshell, extension of contract by one year is required for completion of this project in  the 
selected  Missions/Posts."  
 
28. The Committee note that the reply furnished by the Ministry is vague and does not 
clarify the status of 'Digitization Project'  for creation of image set retrievable database for 
passport, visa, OCI and PIO applications in selected Missions/Posts.  From the reply it is not 
clear whether the work in all selected 39 Missions/Posts has been completed even after the 
extended time schedule i.e May, 2015 or it is still to start in 7 Missions/Posts .  The 
Committee wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation with regard to expansion of  the 
digitization project in all the Indian Missions/Posts in a time-bound manner. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
29. The Committee had taken note of financial contribution made by various countries in 
supporting the functioning of South Asian University as well as the pending amount of their 
share. The Committee had noted that there was an instance wherein no contribution ha d been 
received from one of the member-states so far. The Committee had desired that the Ministry must 
pursue the matter at the SAARC forum and emphasize the need for timely contribution by each of 

 
14   
 
the member states. The Committee had further taken note of the delay in construction schedule of 
South Asian University and had suggested to the Ministry to enhance the pace of construction as 
per newly fixed timeline and furnish a status report to the Committee in three months. 
 
30. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry took up the issue of Pakistan not making timely contribution to the 
Operational Budget of SAU at the SAARC Standing Committee meeting on 24 th 
November, 2014. Similarly, at the Governing Board Meeting on 9 th March, 2015, we took 
up the issue of contributions with the Member from Pakistan on the Governing Board. We 
were assured by the Pakistani Member that the Government of Pakistan was processing 
the contributions to SAU. 
 Ministry has acquired a plot of la nd measuring 90.96 acres at Maidan Garhi, New 
Delhi from DDA which has since been handed over to SAU for construction of its 
permanent campus. The construction of the building has not yet started since statutory 
clearances from local authorities on tree cu tting, ridge land etc. have not been received by 
the University so far. These are being facilitated and the building project is to commence 
in the next financial year. 
 A status report on the construction project will be furnished to the Committee in 
three months." 
 
31. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has taken up with Pakistan the 
issue of not making timely contribution to the operational budget of the South Asian  
University (SAU) and they have been  assured by the Pakistani Member that their 
Government was processing the contributions to South Asian University (SAU).   The 
Committee hope that the Pakistan Government will fulfill its assurance. 
 The Committee note that the construction of permanent campus of SAU has not yet 
started as statutory clearances are still awaited.  The Committee hope that no more delays 
would occur in commencement of the construction project and as assured by the Ministr y, 
the project will commence during the current financial year  in full swing .  Further, the 
Committee desire to be furnished with a status report on the construction project on a 
quarterly basis. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
32. The Committee had noted that bulk of the 'Plan' and 'Non Plan' outlay of the Ministry was 
spent on the developmental engagement with various countries. The Committee had understood 

 
15   
 
that the aim behind giving the aid was to increase India's goodwill.  The Committee , however, 
were of the view that uncertainty about availability of funds leading to non -timely release of 
funds, instead had created a counter -effect, leading to questions about India's credibility and 
commitments. In view of  Ministry's inability in providing funds for the projects committed by 
Head of State/Government/Minister of External Affairs, during strategically important visits to 
foreign countries, the Committee in their 20 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) had desired that a separate 
head may be created for such intern ational commitments, wherein allocation of requisite funds 
should be mandatory. The Ministry in its reply had stated that all voted expenditure is subject to 
reduction. The Committee are aware of constitutional provisions in this regard and, therefore, had  
to suggest ed that the Ministry in consultation with the Ministry of Finance must explore the 
possibility of creating a separate head with the specific mandate of fulfilling the commitments and 
agreements made for projects/aid signed at the highest level. 
 Moreover, the Committee had strongly believed that the commitments made at the highest 
political level with cabinet approval are a integral part of India's Foreign policy and it should be 
mandatory for the Ministry of Finance honour such decisions and provide funds for such 
commitments. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry must ensure correlation 
between such announcement and availability of funds within the required time-frame.   
33. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The suggestion of the Committee for creation of a separate head of account will be taken 
up with the Ministry of Finance again. The recommendation of the Committee to ensure 
correlation between announcements from highest levels and av ailability of funds is well 
taken. All efforts are being taken to ensure that funds are available for fulfilling the 
commitments within the overall ceilings intimated by Ministry of Finance. This aspect will 
be taken up with Ministry of Finance as suggested by the Committee."  
 
34. The Committee are dismayed that this important matter that has a potential to 
adversely affect the achievement of the foreign policy objectives of India particularly  in the 
backdrop of a trend of lack of desired budgetary allocat ion at BE and RE stage resulting in 
stalling and delay in various international projects.  The Committee, therefore, would like to 
reiterate that the Ministry must engage with the Ministry of Finance to ensure the creation 
of a separate head with the specific mandate of fulfilling the requirement of international 
projects/aid commitments made at the highest level.  The Committee believe that through 
the creation of a separate Head for this purpose , the Ministry may be able to ensure 
correlation between announcements and availability of funds  even before announcement of 

 
16   
 
aid commitments/projects at the highest level and avoid questions about India's credibility 
and commitments. 
(Recommendation No.  17) 
35. The Committee had noted that with the establishment of the Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA), implementation of the projects was supposed to be dealt with through a 
more focused approach. The Committee, however, had noted that even more than two and a half 
years after its establishment, the resource structure in DPA is still in the stage of development and 
augmentation. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the Ministry provide required 
financial and human resources to the DPA. 
 The Committee had also obs erved that the provision of signing of the p re-contract 
Integrity Pact was stalled due to non -appointment of Independent External Monito rs.  The 
Committee had suggested that in view of the fact that the number of applications from the retired 
civil servants was low, the Ministry should pursue the matter with the Department of Personnel 
and Training and explore other alternatives. 
36. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The process of further strengthening DPA‟s technical capacity to fulfill its mandate by 
availing the services of experts in various areas relevant to the projects being implemented 
under GoI‟s assistance is continuing. The ongoing efforts are aimed at crea ting in-house, 
specialized technical, legal and financial skills to fast -track various stages of project 
implementation. DPA is utilizing the services of officers on deputation from the Indian 
Telecom Service, Indian Audit and Accounts Service, Indian Econ omic Service and 
Central Public Works Department (CPWD) in the implementation of GoI‟s development 
partnership programmes. Officers from the Indian Forest Service, Indian Revenue Service 
and Central Water Commission have been deployed by the Ministry in ou r High 
Commission/Embassies in Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Nepal to assist in the implementation 
of projects. A team of CPWD engineers is stationed in Kabul to assist in the 
implementation of GOI assisted projects in Afghanistan, including the construction of t he 
Afghanistan Parliament building. Officials from the Controller of Accounts have been 
deployed in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka to provide their financial expertise in accounting. 
In addition, DPA is seeking the assistance regularly of the concerned GoI 
Ministries/Departments in identifying the project parameters, such as the scope of work, 
preparation of feasibility report, site visit for preparation of tender documents and for 
appointment of consultants to prepare DPR and project management, and vetting of 
feasibility study/DPR from financial and technical angles.  Wherever necessary, a 

 
17   
 
representative of the concerned Ministry/Department is included in the Tender Evaluation 
Committee. At the project implementation stage, a representative of the concerned GoI  
Ministry/Department is appropriately included in the bilateral project monitoring 
committee, comprising all stakeholders from the concerned partner country, project 
management consultant, implementing agency, Ministry, including representatives of our 
Mission/High Commission.  
Efforts are ongoing through the Administration Division of the Ministry to address the 
financial and manpower constraints faced by DPA in the implementation of Development 
Partnership Programmes. 
 It has been decided that from 1 st January, 2013 onwards, a Pre -contract Integrity 
Pact would be signed between the Ministry of External Affairs and the prospective 
bidders/ sellers for all procurements/ projects of the value of Rs. 50 crores and above. As 
per the records available with the V igilance Unit, the Ministry has not signed any contract 
of the value of Rs. 50 crore and above after 1 st January, 2013. No Pre -contract Integrity 
Pact has, therefore, been signed by the Ministry so far. Non -appointment of Independent 
External Monitors (IEM) has not stalled the signing of pre-contract Integrity Pacts.  
  The Ministry received twenty applications in response to advertisements for 
appointment as IEM. Out of these, eight names were shortlisted with the approval of the 
Foreign Secretary and sent  to the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) on 2 nd January, 
2015 for the appointment of two IEM of this Ministry. In response, the CVC has recently 
sought some information/ clarification from the Ministry. The proposal will be 
resubmitted to the CVC for the ir approval along with the information/ clarification sought 
by them." 
 
37. The Committee note that the Ministry has only mentioned about  the efforts that 
have been made to build  the technical capacity of the Development P artnership 
Administration (DPA); however, not much has been mentioned about the efforts made  by 
the Ministry to address the issue of financial and manpower constraints being faced by DPA 
and the outcomes thereof as well as the constraints being faced in building technical 
capacity.   
 The Committee are surprised to note that no pre-contract Integrity Pact has been 
signed between the Ministry and the prospective bidders/sellers during a period of two and 
a half years  inspite of ongoing large infrastructure Projects abroad,  although it is  

 
18   
 
compulsory for procurement/projects of the value of Rs. 50.00 crore and above.  Moreover, 
Independent External Monitors (IEMs) for such agreements have also not been appointed 
so far.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should proceed for appointment of 
Independent External Monitors (IEMs) after due examination of whether there is any need 
for appointment of such monitor, if no agreement has been signed since long. 
 (Recommendation No. 25) 
38. The Committee in their 14 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) had expressed their concern over the 
tardy implementation of the decisions taken during India Africa Forum Summit -I (IAFS-I). The 
Committee had noted that one of the reasons for delay in projects was that the selected host 
countries had not sho wn any interest in hosting the selected institutions. The Committee, 
therefore, had suggested that in view of the lacklustre response of the beneficiary countries, the 
Ministry should review its strategy and if required, the Ministry must redefine its poli cy and 
strategy of multilateral developmental engagement with countries in Africa. The Committee  had 
recommended that the Ministry must engage with the African Union Commission and explore 
alternate ways for identification of beneficiary state, wherein the  institutions/projects were not 
forced upon the countries and it must be ascertained before allocation of the project that the 
beneficiary country is interested in hosting the institution.  
 Further, the Committee had opined that dropping of the project in  the host country would 
adversely impact India's stature. The Committee, therefore, had suggested that the Ministry must 
hold a consultative process with the African Union Commission alongwith individual countries 
before making announcement/commitment of s uch projects/institutions. The Committee had 
further recommend ed that the projects under implementation should be expedited and the 
Ministry should strive for their completion before IAFS-III. 
 
39. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
"The Ministry is engaged with the African Union Commission. The issues of lack of 
response from the host country as well as selection of unsuitable locations by the African 
Union Commission have been discussed with the concerne d authorities of the African 
Union Commission. It is proposed that some modifications would be made during the Plan 
of Action after the Third India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS-III). 
 Further, the Ministry is also engaged bilaterally with Member States to asc ertain 
their interest in hosting various institutions. 
 It may also be mentioned that lack of adequate resources has also been a reason for 
slow progress on a number of projects. Ministry will, therefore, continue efforts to ensure 

 
19   
 
allocation of more resources so that the projects decided under IAFS mechanism are 
implemented at a faster pace. In this connection, it may be stated that reduction of the 
Ministry‟s budget at RE stage 2014 -15 has resulted in significant delays in action on a 
number of projects during the current financial year." 
 
40. The Committee had recommended that the projects under  the India-Africa Forum 
Summit (IAFS) I and II which were  under implementation should be expedited and the 
Ministry should strive for their completion before the India-Africa Forum Summit-III.  The 
Committee note that the Ministry has simply stated  that the reduction of the Ministry's 
budget at RE stage 2014 -15 has resulted in significant delays in action on number of 
projects during the current financial year.   The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised 
of the exact status of implementation of these projects  and hope that the Ministry will at 
least ensure completion of some projects before the commencement of IAFS-III.  
 The Committee also note that some modifications are proposed to be made during 
the Plan of Action after the IAFS -III,  but it is not clear whether the same have been 
discussed with the African Union and the concerned beneficiary countries individually  or 
not and what would be the  fate of the already announced projects .  The Committee , 
therefore, would like to reiterate that before new announcements for any project/institution, 
the Government must consult all the stakeholders and ascertain its feasibility and 
acceptability in the b eneficiary country and also ensure availability of adequate budgetary 
resources within the Ministry. 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
41. The Committee had observed that India had substantially contributed to the establishment 
of the SAARC Telemedicine E-Network Project and the SAARC Tele-Education Project in 2008 
through its monetary contribution as well as expertise. The Committee, however,  had noted that 
both the networks were not operational in any of the SAARC nations. The Committ ee had failed 
to understand that after so much of investments in these projects, the Ministry had made no efforts 
to ensure their continuity. The Committee, therefore, had recommend the Ministry to examine the 
issues related to their non-operationalisation and engage with concerned departments in India and 
the Governments abroad and take appropriate measures to ensure that both the networks were 
operationalised.  
42. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 

 
20   
 
"The SAARC Telemedicine e -Network and Tele -Education Network are unilateral offers 
made by India to the SAARC Member States. However, they have not been exploited to 
their fullest potential due to lukewarm response from the Member States. 
 The Telemedicine Network in Bhutan was inaugurated in 2008 but was 
discontinued later as Bhutan did not want its continued operation.The Nepal Project was 
inaugurated in 2011. Currently, the network is being renewed and views of Ministry of 
Telecommunications have been sou ght on updating sanctions. The project, however, is 
currently operational in Afghanistan. 
 Tele-Education Network was commissioned in March, 2012. Only Nepal 
expressed interest in the project. However, it is not operational now as there has been little 
interest from the student community in Nepal. The two projects are likely to be discussed 
and further refined to make them more relevant to the needs of the recipient countries at 
the 4th SAARC Working Group Meeting on Telecommunications/ICTs on 26 -27th March, 
2015 in New Delhi." 
43. The Committee are dismayed to note the lukewarm response from SAARC Members 
to the SAARC Tele Medicine E -Network Project and the SAARC Tele -Education Project  
offered by India .  The Committee, however, are not satis fied with the efforts made by the 
Ministry for making both the networks operational in the concerned Member countries.  
The Committee , therefore, desire  that the Ministry should analyze the reasons for such 
lukewarm response and ascertain whether the delay in i mplementation of the project has 
contributed to such response .  The Ministry should also do a cost benefit analysis of the 
project in view of substantial monetary and technical contribution made by India in these 
projects. The Committee also desire that in the future Government should consult and 
engage with the beneficiary country/countries and ascertain the acceptability and the utility 
of the projects/initiatives offered by them before announcing  them unilaterally  and 
executing them. 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
44. The Committee had expressed their concern over the incidents of Indian nationals being 
held hostage by various groups internationally. The Committee had taken note of efforts being 
made by the Government in the concerned region/c ountry and congratulate the authorities for the 
successful evacuation s that have occurred. The Committee, had however, wondered whether 
widespread and repeated hostage taking indicates failure of Government of India's policy to deal 

 
21   
 
with various actors in the re gion. The Committee were particularly concerned about the plight of 
41 Indian nationals being held hostage in Iraq. The Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry must strategically and diplomatically engage with the International Community and 
major acto rs in the region to ensure their safe release. The Committee had also note d that 
thousands of Indians are struck in areas of violent conflict and they are willing to  return to India. 
The Committee  had, therefore, recommended to the Government to equip its establishments in 
such zones and arrange for the expeditious evacuation of Indians. 
45. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
(i) "Some Indians were trapped in the conflict areas following sudden attacks and 
capturing of  several cities in northern and central Iraq by the Islamic State of 
Iraq and Sham beginning 8 June 2014. A group of 41 Indian nationals working in a 
construction company in Mosul  in Iraq were taken captive and still remain so. 
(ii) Safety and security of Indian nationals in Iraq is a matter of foremost concern and 
preoccupation for the Government. The Government is making every effort and 
taking all steps to secure their release and has been in regular touch with the 
countries in the region  in this regard. 
(iii) In addition, there is a n Inter-Ministerial Standing Group in place for safe 
evacuation of  Indian nationals from Gulf countries in case of conflict or 
emergency situations. 
(iv) Contingency evacuation plans by our Missions in the Gulf  countries are being 
regularly updated and appropriate mechanism are already in  place to respond to 
emergency situations. 
 
 MEA has been engaging in the evacuation of Indian nationals abroad whenever a 
crisis situation has emerged and the Ministry has been directed to undertake this task in 
close coordination with all other relevant Ministries/Departments. A Standing Group (SG)  
has been set up with the approval of the former Prime Minister to address all issues 
relating to the repatriation of Indian nationals abroad in cases of emergency/other local 
developments. This Group is chaired by Foreign Secretary (or the Secretary conce rned in 
MEA). The other Members of this Group are the Finance Secretary, Defence Secretary, 
Secretary Shipping, Home Secretary, Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs; and 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation. There are specific Terms of Reference  of the SG. 
The SG would decide on the modalities to be followed for repatriation of Indian nationals 

 
22   
 
from abroad in the event of the outbreak of a crisis, delineating responsibilities of each 
Ministry/Department, the Mission/Post and other concerned entities. 
 The recommendation primarily relates to Iraq. However, with regards to Libya , it 
is stated that from the time of the intensification of the conflict in June 2014, 3414 Indian 
nationals have been evacuated through GoI assistance.   There are estimated to be around 
2500 Indians still remaining in Libya, who continue to stay on their own volition, based on 
job considerations – despite regular Embassy advisories." 
46. The Committee note with concern that the group of 41 Indian nationals working in 
the construction company in Mosul  in Iraq were captured and  still their fate is uncertain .  
The efforts made by the Government have not given any clue about them.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like to reiterate that the Government must strategically and diplomat ically 
engage with the international community and major actors in the region to ensure the safe 
release of these 41 Indian nationals and that the Committee  be kept apprised about the 
developments in this regard. 
  

 
23   
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of External Affairs during Budget Estimates 
(BE) 2014-15 had sought an allocation of Rs.26,111.23 crore including the „Plan‟ component of 
Rs.20,161.07 crore.  The Committee, however, are distressed to note that the actual Budget 
allocation made at BE Stage is Rs.14,730.39 crore with a „Plan‟ Budget of Rs.5,100 crore and 
„Non-Plan‟ Budget of Rs.9,630.39 crore.  The Committ ee are concerned to observe that there is a 
vast gap between the allocation sought by the Ministry and the actual allocation made to the tune 
of 43.5 percent.  The Committee are of the view that the budgetary allocation is grossly 
inadequate considering the size and aspirations of the country.  The Committee opine that if India 
intends to be a major power in the region and play an important role in world affairs, the 
intentions should be duly accompanied and complimented by appropriate budgetary support.  T he 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that on this strong ground, the Ministry of External 
Affairs should vigorously pursue the matter so that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry is 
substantially enhanced at the RE 2014 -15 stage. The Committee f urther recommend that the 
Ministry should also present their case strongly at the highest level in the Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission for the desired enhancement in budgetary allocation for the financial year 
2015-16 from the very beginning. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry acknowledges the concern expressed by the Committee in appreciating the 
deficit faced by the Ministry and the vast gap existing between the resources available and the 
requirements. It would certainly give the necessar y fillip to the Ministry‟s efforts in getting 
additional allocations. The Ministry, on its part, had undertaken detailed consultation with all the 
stakeholders, particularly the Development Partnership Administration, to ensure that there is 
optimum allocation of funds within the overall budget.  As regards augmentation of funds at the 
Revised Estimates (RE) stage of 2014 -15, the Ministry of Finance was addressed at Ministerial 
and Secretary levels, but the efforts of the Ministry have not yielded results.    
  
 The allocation in BE 2015 -16 (Non Plan) as communicated by the Ministry of Finance is 
also well below the Ministry‟s requirements. Consequently, the next financial year is also 
foreseen to be challenging from the budgetary perspective. 
  
 It is also respectfully submitted that the demand of Rs 20,161.07 crore was under Non 
Plan, and not under Plan. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 

 
24   
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 The Committee have once again found several discrepancies and omissions in the various 
Budget documents prepared during the current financial year. The Committee, therefore, would 
like to reiterate that the Ministry must ascertain the correctness of information and that there are 
no omissions.  It is also essential that complete information is invar iably submitted to the 
Committee. Moreover, the Committee note that often there are revised timelines and escalation in 
the cost of many projects but the details like the original timeline or the cost at the time of 
inception are nowhere reflected in the B udget documents.  The Committee were informed that 
there is no such 'column' in the Outcome Budget documents. The Committee, however, note that 
in the Statement 'Review of past performance in terms of targets fixed in (the previous year)' in 
the Outcome Bu dget, there is a column for original and anticipated dates of completion. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of furnishing revised date of completion in this 
column, the Ministry must furnish the original time -frame and cost as well as at com pletion. The 
Committee further suggest that in the column 'Factor wise analysis of cost escalation, impact of 
cost over run and viability of project etc', the Ministry could incorporate the original cost of the 
project at the time of inception and mention about the cost escalation, if any, and the revised 
estimates alongwith the reasons therefor. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry acknowledges the concern expressed by the Committee regarding 
discrepancies and omissions in the Outcome Budget 2014 -15 prepared by this Ministry. The 
Ministry, on its part, has undertaken detailed consultation with all the stakeholders i.e., the 
concerned Divisions and Autonomous Bodies, attached to this Ministry, to ensure that the details 
like original timeline, cost at the time of inception, cost escalation and revised estimates are 
incorporated in columns outlined in Outcome Budget documents, in future. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 The Committee deliberated upon the lack of infrastructure re lated to Hindi language and 
non-adherence to official language norms and lapses in Missions/ Posts in its implementation. 
The Committee note that some new initiatives have been taken recently by the Ministry regarding 
the development of infrastructure and capacity building in Hindi language in the offices of MEA. 
The Ministry, however, has not mentioned any time -frame for implementation of these initiatives 
and there is no mention of steps being taken to strengthen the interpretation facility from Hindi to 
foreign languages and vice versa. The Committee in their 14 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) had 
pointed out about non-availability of such interpretation facility in Indian Missions/Posts and had 
suggested the development of a separate cadre pool of interpreters  for that purpose. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate steps should be taken in a time bound manner for 
development of infrastructure and capacity building in Hindi language in the offices of MEA and 
also for formation of a pool of interprete rs from Hindi to foreign languages and vice versa and 
make such facility available in Indian Missions/Posts abroad.   

 
25   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry is giving due importance to the progressive use of official language Hindi in 
official business. All the Divisions/ Section of the Ministry are now equipped with Hindi 
infrastructure in the form of software to enable the officers to work both in Hindi and English 
Languages. Missions/Posts Abroad have also been provided with similar software. A majority of  
the Missions have confirmed that the computers in their offices are now equipped with software. 
 
 In addition, Hindi has become an integral element in all the training modules being 
imparted by the Foreign Services Institute to the officers and staff. Thi s training is also relayed 
over online platform of webinar to our Missions/Posts abroad updating all with the latest tools in 
use of Hindi language. With an objective to increase the progressive use of Hindi in the Ministry, 
workshops are being organized a t Headquarters regularly. Officers from the official language 
departments are also invited as guest speakers in these workshops. 
  
 As per Rule 10 (4) of Official Language Rules, 1976, if more than 80% of the 
officers/employees of an office acquire working  knowledge of Hindi, then the said office is 
notified. In line with this, Ministry of External Affairs is notified since April 1987. Several of 
Ministries' subordinate offices,  including the Regional Passport Offices have also been notified.  
Recent additions to this list include Regional Passport Offices in Raipur and Dehradun. 
  
 Many Indian Foreign Service officers posted in various Missions/Posts acquire knowledge 
of the local language and are able to interpret from local language to Hindi and vice ver sa. Their 
services are being utilized during VVIP visits. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 Indian Embassies/Missions/Posts represent India in the respective countries. The delivery 
of services by them to Indian Citizens and other service seekers has been an issue of concern. 
Though the Committee take note that a mechanism for supervision across various Divisions 
including a Directorate-General of Inspection (DGI) exists, they are dismayed to find that there is 
no specific/separate Division to oversee the services delivered by the Missions/Posts to the 
general public and there is no separate alloc ation to cater to the need for improving services in 
this area. The Committee specifically note that the Directorate -General of Inspection (DGI), 
which was set up in 2004 with the main objective of evaluating the activities/services and 
functioning of Indi an Missions/Posts abroad and for evolving a comprehensive model and 
coordinated approach for such inspection, has not conducted any inspection since 2011. The 
Ministry has also accepted that there are lacunae in the existing system of inspection and the 
Committee have been informed that a comprehensive review of the functioning of DGI has been 
done and new system of inspection is in the process of being put into place. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the new system of inspection should be evolved at t he earliest and Standard 

 
26   
 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) be defined incorporating the new roles of Missions/Posts in the 
context of emerging contour of economic, commercial and cultural aspects of diplomacy.  
  
Further, the Committee also note that there is la ck of any feedback mechanism from 
public especially regarding consular and commercial services. The Committee, therefore, suggest 
that various channels of obtaining feedback should also be created at the level of Missions/Posts 
and this should be duly refl ected in the reports sent by these Missions/Posts to the Ministry 
alongwith grievance redressal status. The Committee, also recommend that centralized 
monitoring mechanism at the Headquarters must be strengthened to keep check and ensure 
efficient and fast  delivery of services at all the Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee 
stress that the Ministry should make a separate provision for improvement of services in the 
Missions/Posts abroad under one of the existing budget heads.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs is cognizant of the importance of strengthening the 
centralized monitoring mechanism at Headquarters to keep a check and ensure efficient and fast 
delivery of services by Indian Missions and Posts abroad. In thi s regard, and also in keeping with 
the Ministry‟s tradition of adopting and evolving best practices for good governance, work is in 
progress on MEA e-Samiksha, a real time online system of monitoring follow up action taken by 
the Missions and Posts on the decisions taken by the Ministry. It provides a mechanism whereby 
the Missions and Posts abroad have to update the status of action taken by them on these, and 
many other, issues/measures whenever it changes or at least once a month. This is expected to 
bring in greater transparency, improve communication between the Ministry and the Missions, 
enhance efficiency and responsiveness of the Missions and Posts and ensure efficient and fast 
delivery of services at tall Indian Missions and Posts abroad.  
 A new sy stem of inspection has been evolved and has been put in place.  Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for undertaking the inspection of Missions/ Posts abroad by the 
DGI have also been defined.  The Inspection Team will inter alia also examine whether the 
concerned Mission/ Post under inspection has been able to deliver the requisite services to the 
nationals of that country and, to the Persons of Indian Origin and Non -Resident Indians residing 
in that country.  
 The DGI has commenced inspection of Missions/  Posts abroad on the basis of the new 
SOPs.  
4. The allocation for the purpose could be made under “Office Expenses” head of the 
respective Missions/Posts. The amount will need to be earmarked for the purpose and utilized for 
the purpose of „improvement of services‟.  
 
 In pursuance of “Good Governance” initiatives, Government has launched a web portal 
(online Consular Grievances Monitoring System, named MADAD for easy branding) to extend a 
helping hand to Indians abroad requiring consular assistance. It is  a collaborative effort of the 
Ministry of External Affairs and MOIA. All our Missions and Posts abroad and the MEA‟s 
Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad and Kolkata, are being associated with this 
portal for consular grievance tracking and follow-up. The portal has been official launched on 21st 

 
27   
 
February, 2015. The MADAD online portal represents a qualitative improvement over existing 
procedures for handling of consular until their eventual resolution. It allows direct registration of 
the g rievances by the members of the public and effective tracking of the entire grievance 
handling process thereafter. MADAD incorporates several innovative features such as flexible 
architecture to handle a variety of grievances, online filing and linking of similar grievances for 
easier retrieval and reference, automatic escalation and enhancement of priority, colour -coded 
dash boards for easy assessment and monitoring, and allows connection with a call centre to help 
illiterate grievants, by linking with MOIA‟s existing facility.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
 The Committee note that an increase in allocation was sought in BE 2014 -15 under the 
head 'Passport and Emigration' to meet the shortfall of Rs.149.5 crore in 2013-14 for the increased 
expenditure on procurement of passport booklets. At the same time, the Committee also observe 
that the Ministry is able to generate revenue to the tune of 35% of its current overall budg etary 
allocation from this head. The Committee, therefore, strongly believe that there is a compelling 
case for increased allocation at least under this Head. The Committee further recommend that 
sufficient allocation should be made under this head so as t o ensure timely payment to ISP, Nasik 
in order to maintain regular flow of passport booklets and also for the purpose of rental liabilities 
for establishment of nine co -located PSKs.  The printing of sufficient reserve stock of passports, 
so as to avoid a recurrence of the shortages, must also be provided for.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestion of the Committee for allocation of additional funds for Passport Offices, 
particularly for procurement of passport booklets, is well taken. In spite of the fa ct that the BE 
2015-16 allocation under Non Plan has practically remained stagnant as compared to BE 2014-15, 
the Ministry, recognizing the importance of the issue, has made a conscious effort to propose 9% 
additional funds over BE  2014 -15 under this head  (Rs 591.72 crore vs Rs 542.83 crore).  
However, allocation for Procurement of Travel documents (i.e., Publications head) has been 
retained at same levels as last year. Allocation of additional funds can be considered only if 
Ministry of Finance augments t he Ministry‟s budget through Supplementary Demands for 
Grants/RE ceilings.  Ministry will continue its efforts in liaising with Ministry of Finance for 
additional allocations. 
 
 For manufacturing of sufficient number of passport booklets including strategi c reserves, 
monitoring is done on daily basis. The matter is also being taken up with ISP, Nashik on regular 
basis to keep the production of passport booklets as per schedule and in keeping with Ministry‟s 
requirement. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 
 

 
28   
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that two international universities i.e. South Asian University and 
Nalanda University are established in India under the aegis of the Ministry. The Committee are of 
the view that these Universities should not become mere symbols and ser ve the purpose of 
tokenism. The Committee suggest that management and academic activities including curriculum 
should incorporate the vision behind the establishment of these Universities. The Committee also 
suggest that the Ministry should ponder upon the  desirability of exclusive involvement of 
Ministry of External Affairs in the management of Universities and see if a more appropriate 
Ministry or agency related to administration of University and academics should be involved or 
even take over the academic supervision of these institutions.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The South Asian University is an international organization established under the SAARC 
charter and is functioning independently of the control of the Ministry of External Affairs. The 
University is governed under the rules and bylaws framed by its Governing Board, Executive and 
Academic Councils. The Governing Board consists of two members each from the 8 Member 
Countries. The Indian representatives are nominees of the Ministry of External Af fairs and 
Ministry of Human Resources Development. 
 The Government is keen to ensure proper management of Nalanda University. At present, 
the Nalanda Mentor Group is exercising the powers and discharging the functions of University's 
Governing Board. The constitution of the Governing Board as per the provisions of Nalanda Act 
2010 is necessary. This process is expected to be completed soon. 
 The vision behind the establishment of Nalanda University is being incorporated in its 
academic activities, including the curriculum for the courses offered, and its faculty and students, 
as well as its international profile, which is facilitated by the Ministry. The first two schools, viz. 
the School of Historical Studies, and the School of Ecology and Environment Stud ies, have 
commenced classes in September 2014 from temporary premises in Bihar. The future academic 
activities will also be planned accordingly. 
 Nalanda University‟s establishment is linked to the decisions taken at the East Asia 
Summits and the Ministry continues to maintain regular contact with EAS on the progress of this 
project. MEA has a coordinating role in view of its international dimension. The Ministry of 
Human Resource Development is currently involved in the Nalanda University's Finance 
Committee and they will also be part of the Governing Body being constituted as per the Act. The 
Government of Bihar plays a key role in view of the location of the University in the State and the 
Governing Board has administrative and academic supervision of Nalanda University.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the allocation for Nalanda University during BE 
2013-14 was Rs.125 crore which was reduced to Rs.50 crore at RE stage while the actual 
utilization was as dismally low as Rs.9.15 crore. Similarly, for 2014 -15 an allocation of Rs.100 

 
29   
 
crore has been made but only 17 crore has been released and allocation is being reduced at the RE 
stage in view of slow progress in construction and other expendit ure. In view of the continuous 
trend of inappropriately higher projections and dismally low utilization, the Committee in their 
20th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) had strongly recommended that University must streamline its 
budgetary projection process. In view of further delay in the project and highly inappropriate 
projections, the Committee desire that actual ground reality should be kept in mind while making 
projections and responsibility should also be fixed for slow pace of the execution of the project. 
The Committee further recommend that the existing arrangement must be reviewed and necessary 
changes made, if required, in order to streamline the decision -making process in the Ministry as 
well as in Nalanda University administration. The Committee are of th e opinion that there is an 
urgent need to begin the construction activity as the academic activity has already started and the 
Government of India has also received funds from some other countries for the project. Further, 
the Committee urge the Government to consider and address the issues in the Nalanda University 
(Amendment) Bill, which was examined and reported by the Committee in 2013. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry shares the Committee‟s concerns at the slow progress in construction and the 
low utilization of allocations made over the years. The situation has, however, improved 
considerably in the last year with the shifting of the Vice -Chancellor and ot her staff to Rajgir in 
August 2014 and commencement of teaching in two Schools in September 2014. The Architect‟s 
contract was signed in May 2014 after which preliminary approvals have been processed, 
finalisation of the detailed scope of work to be done d uring the first phase of construction of 
University‟ own campus and residences has been completed, tender for some preliminary and 
immediate work has been issued in February and a full -fledged tender for phase I of the 
construction is planned for April 201 5. The Ministry has conveyed that construction related 
activity must begin at the earliest and close monitoring of implementation will be followed. The 
University has also appointed a Project Management Consultant to oversee the construction 
process.  
 The financial projections for the F.Y. 2015 -16 have been made keeping the ground 
realities in mind. Once the construction commences in full swing after the monsoons, other 
governments, who have made contributions, will be consulted on the utilization of funds  provided 
by them. 
 The Government is also in the process of strengthening the University‟s governance. It is 
hoped that a regular Governing Board, to be appointed soon, would institute arrangements for 
time bound execution of the project and review the ex isting processes with a view to streamline 
decision making. The Ministry on its part will seek feedback from the University on progress in 
the execution of the project.  
 As regards further action on the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill pending in the 
Rajya Sabha, the Government will take a fresh decision and pursue it accordingly. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 

 
30   
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 While considering the status of acquisition of Chanceries and residential properties 
abroad, the Committee note that there is a delay in three ongoing construction projects whereas 
several construction projects that were conceived are yet to be implemented  for various reasons. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that each case be closely examined and factors leading to 
delay be addressed. The Committee desire that a status note relating to this be furnished to the 
Committee within three months.  
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry has a five year Action Plan for the acquisition of 
buildup properties/ plot of land for chancelleries and residences abroad and have made certain 
changes to improve contract management in view of adverse comments by C&AG in th eir report 
about property management of the Ministry of External Affairs.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Project Division must ascertain that at the proposal stage itself the concerned Mission 
must ensure that the property/plot which is to be a cquired conforms to the local laws/regulations 
before proceeding further. The Committee further suggest that accessibility to public as well as 
security considerations must be given due priority while considering the location. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PARA I 
 
The Ministry has taken note of PACs directions and is closely monitoring the progress of 
various construction projects with objective of ensuring their timely completion. The status of the 
projects referred to by the PAC in this observation above is given as under: 
 
Sl No. Name of project Present Status 
1. High Commission of 
India, Dhaka 
By the end of January 2015, around 75% of the work has 
been completed at Dhaka. Staff Housing Block of the 
project has been handed over by the Contractor and 
occupied by the Mission‟s staff. Works is progressing at 
Chancery and High Commissioner‟s residence. Tenders for 
Interior works of 9.40Crs. for Furniture for Chancery and 
ER have been approved. 
2. Consulate General of 
India, Shanghai 
Selection of the Architects a nd for the Construction of 
Design Brief has been finalized. The Post has been advised 
to circulate the Design Brief to the selected Architects for 
Design Competition.  
Given the present status of the project, Ministry has 
prioritized this construction proj ect to be commenced 
around April 2016 and completed by October 2017 as per 
its five year action plan (2014-19). 

 
31   
 
3. High Commission of 
India, Port of Spain 
Draft for the Tender Documents in respect of the project 
have been finalized. Detailed estimates for  the project have 
been submitted for approval of the competent Authority. 
After approval of detailed estimates, tender will be floated. 
Ministry has prioritized this construction project to be 
commenced around June 2015 and completed by December 
2016 in its five year action plan (2014-19). 
4. High Commission of 
India, Port Louis, 
Mauritius 
Local Body‟s approvals for construction of the buildings 
have been obtained. Detailed Estimates and Tender 
Documents for the project have been finalized. Tender 
drawings are awaited from the Mission.  Given the present 
status of the project, Ministry has prioritized this 
construction project to be commenced around June 2015 
and completed by December 2016 in its five year action 
plan (2014-19). 
5. High Commission of 
India, Dar -Es-
Salaam, Tanzania 
Work has commenced w. e. f. 01 December 2014 with 
stipulated completion period of 24 months. 
6. Embassy of India, 
Kathmandu 
Around 65.00% of the construction work completed. 
Target date for completion of the Project is 31 st December 
2015. All apartments and bungalows completed in 
September 2014. 
7. Embassy of India, 
Tashkent 
It was decided in the Ministry to float tender for the project 
in two bid system. Prequalification bids from the interested 
construction companies were called and received in 
December 2014. In view of the Post‟s response it has been 
decided to re -invite th e bids in single stag Two Bids 
system.  
8. Embassy of India, 
Kyiv, Ukraine 
• Govt. of India, purchased a built -up property at Zabily 
Street, Kyiv, Ukraine at cost of US$ 800,000 in September 1995. 
Ministry also approved some essential renovations of US$ 
400,000 based on visual findings in the built -up structure in 
1995. However Land registration could not be done until August 
1999 because of complex local regulations in Kyiv, Ukraine. 
• Mission appointed a consultant for renovations works in 
February 1996 a nd initiated the proposal for renovations. 
However, after land registrations in March 1999 when the  
Mission approached for construction permit for renovations 
works, local authorities desired that Mission may get the 
structural investigations of the proper ty and renovations 
shall be based on such investigations only. Subsequently 
the consultant proposed structural reinforcement of about 

 
32   
 
US$150,000 apart from renovations cost of US$ 400,000. 
In view of this additional cost, the Consultant also 
demanded revis ion in the consultancy agreement with 
increase in consultation fee.  
• The Committee on Non -plan Expenditure (CNE) in 
its meeting held on November 3, 1999, during deliberations 
on the proposed renovations, suggested to the Ministry to 
explore option of disposing of the property. However as the 
re-sale value of the property was found to be less than 1/4 
(US$ 200,000 against US$ 800,000) of the purchase value, 
the options was not pursued further. 
• In March 2000, A Technical team of Senior 
Architect and Structural Engineer from the Ministry visited 
Kyiv to assess the Structural Report viz -a-viz structural 
reinforcement proposal by the consultant. The team 
however, advised demolition of the existing structure in 
place of proposed renovations and recommended to 
construct a new building in the plot which the Ministry 
approved on January, 2001.      
• Ministry in December, 2003 appointed M/s Arcom, 
Architect-Consultant for Construction of Chancery 
Residences in Kyiv, Ukraine following EOI and design 
competition of short -listed firms. Ministry also approved 
engaging of M/s GDIP, a local Govt. Agency to facilitate 
the Mission in obtaining the approval of design proposal 
from the local authorities. However, as the Ministry had 
purchased a built-up property, new construction on this plot 
necessitated signing of the Revised Lease agreement with 
the Kyiv authorities. This whole process took almost 4 
years and finally in March 2007, with Ministry's approval 
the Land Lease Agreement was signed for 49 years 
permitting the Ministry for construction of Chancery 
Residences on the plot. 
• In the meantime, looking at the potential of the plot, 
Ministry decided to construct the Chancery, a Multi -
purpose hall for cultural activities along with Chancery 
Residences on this plot. However, as pe r prevailing local 
regulations, Mission had to obtain permission for change of 
land use from Residential to Mix -use (Chancery & 
residences). This change in Landuse required City Planning 
Argumentation (CPA), i.e. an Urban Feasibility Study 
based on the des ign concept of the project before the same 
is accepted for approval by the local authorities.  Mission 
in September, 2010 engaged a specialize consultant for the 
Urban studies which completed this by end of 2011 and 

 
33   
 
therefore change in Landuse was received  only in 
September 2012. Action was simultaneously initiated by 
the Ministry / Mission for preparation of a concept design 
for construction of the proposed Chancery -cum-residential 
complex  
• Ministry in February 2011, revised the Space area 
norms for the Mi ssions abroad hence, the Concept design 
was also required to be revised and Ministry approved the 
Concept design of Chancery -cum-residential complex in 
April 2011. This also necessitated signing of 
supplementary agreement with the Architect -consultant in 
May 2011.  
• The consultant in September 2012, submitted the 
preliminary design with a building deign based on 
sustainable design parameters in anticipation of proposed 
changes in the local regulation in this regard. However 
these local laws have still not been enacted  and therefore 
Ministry advised the architect -consultant to stick to 
conventional design only.  
• Reasons for delay relate to the Kyiv city authorities 
and the Ukrainian Ministry of Regional Construction and 
Development which made changes in legislation and 
brought a new requirement regarding construction norms. 
After the change in construction norms which came into 
effect in October, 2009, the Ukrainian Parliament on 
September 22, 2011 adopted the 'Law of Ukraine on 
Amendments to Article 28 on Land'. Some of  the major 
changes in Ukraine construction legislation for the period 
from 2010 to 2013 which according to the Architect -
consultant have resulted in delay in obtaining local body 
approvals are as under; 
• General terms and features of planning legislation - 
Three basic laws of planning legislation 
• The land issue in passing the licensing procedures 
in the construction 
• Territory planning 
• Design and construction of the object category of 
complexity. 
• Licensing procedures in the construction 
• Ecology 
• Such frequent changes in the local land laws 
necessitated fresh/additional approvals. The Mission is 
working in close cooperation with state agency GDIP and 
the local Consultant has been making efforts to get the 
necessary approval from the Government of Ukraine. 

 
34   
 
• Senior Architect from the Ministry visited Kyiv in 
May, 2013 and had detailed consultations with the local 
Architect and with GDIP. After making the necessary 
changes in the design and layout plan, etc. the local 
Architect submitted updated functional layouts an d space 
optimization configuration. Ministry has finalized the 
Preliminary Design for the project. However no progress 
has been made in the last one year because of political 
instability in the country. The Mission has also been 
engaged in evacuation & wel fare of Indian nationals in the 
disturbed areas. 
Given the present status of the project, Ministry has 
prioritized this construction project to be commenced 
around September 2016 and completed by September 2018 
in the five year action plan (2014 -19). However, we need 
to be conscious of the ongoing hostile situation in Ukraine 
and economy on the verge of default. 
9. Embassy of India, 
Brasilia, Brazil 
The buildings have been completed in November 2013 and 
are being utilized by the Mission since December 2013. 
10 Embassy of India, 
Doha, Qatar 
Ministry has kept this project pending since Mission is 
pursuing the larger plot of land with the Government of 
Qatar. 
11. High Commission of 
India, Nicosia, 
Cyprus 
Detailed cost Estimates and Tender Documents for t he 
project are under finalization. Given the present status of 
the project, Ministry has prioritized this construction 
project to be commenced around June 2015 and completed 
by December 2016 in the five year action plan (2014-19). 
 
PARA II 
 
Ministry has issued revised guidelines to Missions/Posts to take due care before making 
any purchase proposal on 21.01.2015. ..... These guidelines cover the following:-  
 
i)  Detailed proposals be prepared with a brief background (location plan w. r. t. Foreign Office, 
information on neighbourhood, plot area, floor plans, Floor Area Ratio (FAR) permitted as per 
local laws and potential for further development of the property, transport connections etc.) on 
each property and the physical condition of each property with Mission‟s recommendations. 
 
ii) While preparing a short-list of suitable properties, Missions should ascertain basic aspects such 
as clear title and the ownership.  As far as possible, short -listed properties should satisfy the 
prescribed space norms and functional requirements. 
 

 
35   
 
iii) While indicating the asking price for each short -listed property, the indicative cost of 
repairs/renovation to be undertaken should also be provided by the Mission. 
 
iv) “Economic cost” as per the formula be worked out for each property under consideration.  
 
v) To ascertain reasonableness of asking price, Missions should provide inputs on the prevalent 
real estate price in that locality by gathering information about the recent sales of properties in the 
neighbourhood. 
 
vi) Missions should check about local laws relating to sale/purchase of property. Any specific 
regulations by local government regarding purchase of a property by diplomatic missions should 
be ascertained. 
 
vii) Details of local developmental norms  may also be provided in case any 
redevelopment/expansion is visualized.  A confirmation should be given whether the building 
falls under the heritage category. 
 
viii) A clear indication of the usage of the property as per the local regulations i.e. whethe r the 
property will be allowed to be used as office / residence / Cultural Centre / mixed use as the case 
may be, as per local regulations. The need for clearance by Foreign Office should be checked. 
 
ix) Missions should ascertain the likely cost of registration, notary fee, agency charges, etc. 
 
 Suggestions of CAG have been noted for compliance. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
 The Committee observe that developmental cooperation has emerged as an important tool 
in conducting India's foreign policy through grant of aid/loan/advances and development projects 
in neighbouring countries and countries in our extended neighbourhood. The Committee, 
however, are of the opinion that there is imminent need for India to define its aid pol icy with clear 
and unambiguous aims, objectives and targets. The Committee over the years have observed that 
the Ministry is unable to fulfill its commitments to several countries and its international projects 
have suffered due to inadequate funding. Asid e from delayed release of funds by the Finance 
Ministry, the main reason for such failure is that each division prioritizes the expenditure 
differently. The Committee note that there is an imminent need for the Ministry to review its 
policy and resort to p rioritization of its aid/loan/advances to other countries. The Committee 
recommend that rather than merely routine continuation of aid/project, there must be a direct co -
relation between the aid provided and a continuing assessment of India's political relationship with 
the beneficiary country. Furthermore, the Committee observe that in view of the involvement of 
external agencies and NGOs in execution of its project, the Ministry should develop SOPs for 
each.  Moreover, the provision for their regular and objective assessment should be duly 
incorporated, along with penal provisions in cases of non-fulfillment of objectives. 
 

 
36   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A policy framework based on a mutually beneficial exchange of developmental 
experiences and resources, a demand driven approach acknowledging the developmental priorities 
of partner countries and an understanding of their sensitivities in pursuing their own nation 
building priorities, has been the underlying principles in pursuing various Development 
cooperation initiatives.  The establishment of Development Partnership Administration [DPA] as 
an umbrella arrangement within MEA has provided a more focused approach to the 
implementation of development cooperation programmes, including an analysis of our past 
programmes and their impact with a view to prioritize our future engagement with partner 
countries.  Consultations with other stake holders for further calibration of existing terms and 
conditions and modality of development assistance to meet the expectations o f our partner 
countries and our own national objectives  is an integral and ongoing aspect of the efforts being 
made by the Ministry to enhance the impact of the development cooperation programmes. 
 There is a process of regular and continuous assessment o f our development assistance 
programmes. As these programmes are demand -driven, feedbacks from partner countries are 
regularly analyzed and reviewed, independently as well as during the discussions with partner 
countries in bilateral mechanisms such as For eign Office Consultations, Joint Commission 
Meetings and VVIP visits. The lack of predictability and adequacy of budgetary allocation for 
development cooperation programmes remain a major constraint; efforts are ongoing to address 
this constraint. 
 
 The Standard Operating Procedures for engagement of external agencies in execution of 
projects funded by India are based on existing GoI guidelines which, inter-alia, include provisions 
for structured and objective assessment of their performance, payments linke d to completion of 
set targets and penal provisions for time and cost overruns. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 The Committee take note of the various projects in Afghanistan. Though the Committee 
acknowledge the difficulties in execution of projects in Afghanistan due to current security 
scenario, they feel concerned about the levels of expenditure and pace of the projects. The 
Committee observe that under the head 'Security Sector Cooperation' utilization of allocated funds 
has been low. The Committee suggest that necessary steps should be taken to enhance its pace 
and if needed, the Government may engage with the Government of Afghanistan. Furthermore, in 
the light of further delay in the construction of the Parliament building in Afghanistan due to the 
poor financial condition of the agencies engaged and the lack of response from agencies in India 
for the remaining packages of work, the Committee suggest that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility of engaging local agencies for execution of the projects. 
 The Committee further observe that the original cost of Salma Dam Project was Rs.351.87 
crore, which has been revised in January 2013 to Rs.1457.56 crore. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry must ensure that the proje ct is completed as per the revised schedule so as to 
avoid any further time and cost escalation. 

 
37   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Due to the lack of poor response from agencies in India for undertaking the remaining 
packages of work of the Parliament building in Afghanistan, a decision was taken to issue the 
tenders for the remaining packages in Afghanistan. After finalization of tenders, some local 
agencies have been selected for execution of the remaining packages.     
 Regular and continuous monitoring of the p rogress of Salma dam project is being 
undertaken by the Ministry. Regular meetings of the Review Committee are held to discuss and 
monitor progress of various components of the project. The Consultant for the project also 
undertakes regular review, which i s reported on a monthly basis. In addition, specific issues of 
concern that could impact project implementation are also taken up for resolution, as and when 
the need arises. The Consulate General of India in Herat and the Embassy of India in Kabul 
maintain close contact with agencies involved in the implementation of the project and undertake 
periodic visits to the project site and hold discussions with all concerned agencies to facilitate and 
coordinate on project related issues to expeditiously complete the project. Due to difficult security 
conditions in Afghanistan, infrastructure issues, delays in payments, non -availability of regular 
helicopter services to transport skilled manpower/experts from the site to the nearest airport in 
Herat in Afghanistan,  as movement through road from Herat to the site has been restricted due to 
various incidents of blasts on or along the road side in past, the Consultant, Ms. WAPCOS has 
requested the Ministry for extension of time for completion of the project up to June  2016. Ms. 
WAPCOS has also requested for revision in the cost estimate for completion of the project, which 
is currently being examined in the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
 The Committee observe that for the establishment of an Akhaura -Agartala Rail Link, the 
Memorandum of Understanding was signed in February 2013 but not much headway has been 
made. After the joint survey, the Land Acquisition Plan was handed over to Bangladesh side in 
July 2014. The Banglades h side is yet to finalize the Detailed Project Report (DPR). The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that the matter be taken up with the concerned authorities in 
Bangladesh so as to accelerate the pace of pre-construction activities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The DPR for the Akhaura-Agartala Rail link project was received from the Government of 
Bangladesh in February 2015. The project proposal was discussed in the Fourth Project Steering 
Committee meeting held in Dhaka on Feb. 22, 2015 wherein the Bangladesh si de was requested 
to provide details of estimated costs and make necessary arrangements for the Technical Adviser 
for the project to proceed with the Geo technical investigations on the Bangladesh side so as to 
complete the pre-construction activities and proceed to implementation phase of the project.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 

 
38   
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 
 The Committee observe that the original cost of Punatsagchhu-I Project at December 2006 
prices was Rs.3814.81 crore while approved Revised Costs Estimate of the project is Rs.9387.87 
crore and it is under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee also observe that in the past, 
there has been an instance of stalling of the project due to lack of availability of funds. The 
Committee, therefore, re commend that adequate funds be provided to the project authorities for 
timely execution of the project. 
 
 The Committee also note that during the last financial year higher budgetary allocation 
was sought for each of the five new Hydro Power Projects in Bh utan even when the Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) were awaited. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry should 
consider the exact stage of the projects while making budgetary projections. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Revised Cost Estimate (RCE) proposal for Punatsangchhu -1 (1200 MW) Hydro 
Electric Project (HEP) is being examined/vetted by Ministry of Power. In Financial Year 2013 -
14, Rs. 1054.27 crores was allocated to Punatsangchhu -1 HEP against the projected dema nd of 
Rs.1570 crores. In Financial Year 2014 -15, Ministry made an adequate allocation of Rs.1900 
crores to the project. The EFC/PIB meeting for consideration of the RCE proposal of Rs. 9387.87 
crores is being scheduled, after which it will be submitted for  consideration of the Union Cabinet. 
Requisite funds will continue to be provided subsequently.  
 
 Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of Bunakha, Wangchhu and Chamkharchhu HEPs are 
being examined/vetted by Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Authority (CEA ) and Central 
Water Commission (CWC). Notional allocation of Rs.1 crore each was made to these projects in 
earlier budgets as DPRs of these HEPs were yet to be approved by the above organizations. After 
receipt of approvals from technical agencies, the pro ject proposals will be submitted for 
consideration of the Union Cabinet. Actual budgetary allocations to these projects will be made 
only after receiving approvals from the Union Cabinet.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No.  21) 
 
 The Committee take note of slow pace of implementation of projects in the Maldives. The 
Committee observe that in regard to setting up of a Police Academy in the Maldives, a 
Memorandum of Understanding between the Governments of India and the Maldives was sign ed 
in September 2012 but not much progress has been made due to change in location of the project 
twice. The revised layout plan has been forwarded to High Commission of the Maldives. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry must engage with the  concerned authorities in 
order to finally decide upon the location as well as for approval of the layout plan so that the pre -
construction modalities and activities are completed and the construction could start in a time -
bound manner. 
 

 
39   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The final location for the project has been identified by the Maldivian side in October 
2014 as being Addu City (Seenu Atoll) in Maldives. The proposed land has been acquired by the 
Maldives Police Service (MPS). NBCC, the Consultant for the pr oject, has submitted a revised 
layout for the project as the area of the land acquired by MPS is smaller than the land originally 
identified for the project. The Government of Maldives has agreed to the revised layout and their 
official confirmation in this regard is awaited. In view of revision in the layout of the project and 
its possible impact on the cost of the project, NBCC is finalizing a revised proposal for approval 
of the competent authority. Tendering for implementation of the project would be un dertaken by 
NBCC subsequent to this approval. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
 The Committee observe that various initiatives have been taken by the Government of 
India to engage with Cambodia, Lao PDR and Vietnam for the extension  of Trilateral Highway 
Projects in these countries. The Committee note that India had asked Cambodia and Lao PDR to 
provide coordinated route alignments for extension since 2011 and in September 2014, the 
Governments of Cambodia, Lao PDR and Vietnam have submitted individual routes for extension 
of the Trilateral Highway and the ASEAN -India centre is currently examining the feasibility of 
these routes. Meanwhile, the Committee would like to suggest that the Ministry must consult the 
Ministry of Road Transpo rt and Highways as well as the concerned State Governments to assess 
the impact of Highway and to ensure preparedness in India for establishing connectivity with the 
already identified Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo (TKK) route. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs is in consultation with the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways and the concerned State Governments to assess the impact of the Trilateral 
Highway and to ensure preparedness in India for establishing connectivity with the a lready 
identified Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo (TKK) route.  
 
  The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been providing technical assistance to 
MEA for Trilateral Highway project from the initial stages of the project.  The Ministry of Road 
Transport and Hig hways has conveyed that they have taken up several initiatives to boost cross 
border activities and regional connectivity along the Trilateral Highway as detailed below: 
 
i. India and Myanmar have agreed to start a bus service between Imphal and Mandalay. A 
joint delegation from India and Myanmar conducted the technical survey of Imphal -
Mandalay route on 11-15 January 2015 and recommended a tentative target for flagging off 
the bus service on the agreed route of Imphal – Mandalay (via Gangaw/ Yagyi). 
 
ii. Under Asian Development Bank (ADB)‟s South Asia Sub -Regional Economic 
Cooperation (SASEC) Programme, ADB has taken up for funding of Imphal - Moreh 

 
40   
 
(India-Myanmar Border) road stre tches of126 km on Indian side. Up -gradation of Imphal-
Moreh Road which serves as connectivity to Myanmar for the North East, will be taken up 
for implementation shortly with ADB loan assistance. 
 
iii. Two Asian Highways, viz., AH1 (from Japan to the border of B angladesh) and the AH 
2(from Indonesia to Iran) are passing through India.  AH 1 connects India with Pakistan, 
Bangladesh and Myanmar and AH 2 connects India with Nepal and Bangladesh. Three 
sub-routes of these highways have connections with Nepal, Sri Lan ka and Bhutan. Out of 
11,690 km Asian Highway routes in India, about 6,901 km has been developed to 4 -lane 
standards under National Highway Development Project (NHDP) and 4 -laning of about 
2,254 km length is under implementation under NHDP and Special Acce lerated Road 
Development Programme in the North East States (SARDP-NE). 
 
iv. BIMSTEC Corridor i.e. Kolkata -Dhaka-Silchar-Imphal-Moreh-Mandalay-Bago-Mae Sot-
Tang-Bangkok-Laem Chabang will become functional once Sub -regional Agreement 
among Bangladesh, Bhutan, I ndia and Nepal (BBIN) and Tri -lateral Agreement with 
Myanmar & Thailand for cross border Motor Vehicles movement is in place.  
 
v. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is implementing a Special Accelerated Road 
Development Programme -NE (SARDP -NE) to streng then regional connectivity. The 
Ministry has also set up National Highways Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited (NHIDCL) to undertake construction and maintenance of National Highways and 
strategic routes, including inter -connected routes in Nort h-Eastern region and border 
areas.  
  [File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
(Recommendation No.  23) 
 
 The Committee observe that there is undue delay in the execution of the Terai Road 
Project in Nepal and two contractors have approached the Dispute Review Committee. The 
Committee note that in view of the problems in acquisition of land and other delays, the Ministry 
is considering an alternate course by providing funds to the Government of Nepal for the 
execution of projects. The Committee, however, would l ike to suggest that the proposed change 
should be examined in depth and the opinion of the Government of Nepal should also be sought 
on the issue before adopting this model in all its projects in Nepal. Similarly, the Committee take 
note of the delay in Rail Link Project. The Committee desire that the process of acquisition of land 
should be expedited so that the work can start on Indian side as per schedule. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government of Nepal is being closely consulted on any revised modality on the 
implementation of the Terai Roads Phase -I project. Mechanisms including Joint Project 
Monitoring Committee, due quality control checks, and release of funds based on duly verified 
physical progress, will continue even under the revised modality.  
 

 
41   
 
 Pursuant to the decision taken at the meeting convened by the Chief Secretary of Bihar in 
Patna on June 4, 2014 to expedite land acquisition in Bihar for the two Rail Link projects, t he 
Government of Bihar has completed the land acquisition  for laying of r ailway tracks for the 
Jogbani-Biratnagar Rail link and handed over the land on December 5, 2014. The contract for 
Earth work and Bridges has been awarded. The tendering for the construction of Indian Custom 
Yard is in process and work is likely to be awarded by end February/ early March 2015. The work 
in the Indian portion is likely to be completed by March 2016. 
 For the Jaynagar-Bijalpura-Bardibas Rail link, it was decided that land will be acquired by 
the Government of Bihar as per the Right to Fair Comp ensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.  
 To expedite land acquisition in Nepal, d uring the 3rd Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
meeting held on October 20, 2014 at New Delhi, the Nepalese side assured to h and over 
encumbrance free stretches of land in a stage-wise manner. The Nepalese side has started handing 
over encumbrance free stretches of land for Jayanagar -Bijalpura rail link in a phased manner. 
Work on the available stretches of land has started in full swing. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No.  24) 
 
 The Committee welcome the developments in context of the Pancheshwar Development 
Authority. The Committee, however, are concerned over the pace of embankment construction on 
Lal Bakaya, Bagmati, Kamla and Khando River, which is aimed at mitigation of flood s in India 
and Nepal. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry should engage with the 
Government of Nepal for an early completion of the projects.  
 
 Further, the Committee take note of the cooperation between India and Nepal on the issue 
of sharing of information regarding landslides in Sunkoshi River which could have triggered 
floods. The Committee, however, would like to recommend the further strengthening of the 
institutional mechanism for sharing the data and putting in place an early war ning system in India 
and Nepal. 
       
Reply of the Government 
 
We are closely engaged with the Government of Nepal in the field of water resources. 
There is a three -tier bilateral mechanism in place, comprising the Joint Ministerial Level 
Commission on Wa ter Resources (JMCWR); the Secretary level Joint Committee on Water 
Resources (JCWR); and the Technical level Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC) to 
oversee the entire gamut of cooperation on water related issues.  
 
 For flood mitigation, the Joint C ommittee on Inundation and Flood Management (JCIFM) 
monitors the ongoing and proposed works for construction of embankments along the rivers 
Kamala, Bagmati and Lalbakeya, including on -site inspection visits of completed and ongoing 
works. In its latest (9 th) meeting held from 8-12 February 2015, the Committee has recommended 
32 new work packages (15 on Kamala, 6 on Bagmati, and 11 on Lalbakeya) with a funds 

 
42   
 
requirement of Rs. 48.28 crores in the Financial Year 2015 -16. So far, the total grant assistance 
already disbursed for embankment construction along these rivers stands at around Rs.205 crores. 
A notable outcome of the 9 th JCIFM meeting with regard to flood forecasting was that both sides 
agreed to form groups tasked to monitor the preparedness of hydro -meteorological stations in 
Nepal before the onset of the monsoon. This would enhance the reliability of the flood forecasting 
data received from Nepal. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
 The Committee take note of various projects in the Latin America and Caribbean Region. 
The Committee observe that the project to supply buses to Cuba could not take off due to 
shipping difficulties originating from restrictions imposed by US sanctions. The Committee are of 
the view that the concerne d Mission should do appropriate ground work including identification 
and feasibility of the project before announcement of aid/project at the highest political level and 
the Ministry must ensure availability of funds before such announcement. The Committee  further 
note that in the past years under certain heads the expenditure was zero. The projects were not 
implemented due to lack of important information from the host countries. The Committee, 
therefore, suggest that the concerned embassy/mission/post sho uld maintain a channel of 
communication with the concerned authorities in order to expedite the process for execution of 
each project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The LAC Division has advised all the Missions in the Latin and Caribbean region that in 
future, before making recommendations/announcements of aid projects, proper ground work 
including identification and feasibility be conducted. Missions must also maintain regular channel 
of communication with the countries of accreditation for expeditious execution of the projects.  
 
 Division takes into account budgetary provisions while announcing projects.    
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
 The Committee observe that the then Prime Minister had committed to grant assistance of 
USD 10 Million to Palestine in 2012. The Committee are unhappy to note that during financial 
year 2013-14 first tranche of USD 1 Million was released and USD 4 Million was released during 
financial year 2014-15 and USD 5 Million is still pending. Furthermore, the reason for delay has 
been given as the financial constraints in 2013 -14. The Committee note that by Ministry's own 
admission, this has adversely affected India' s credibility in its bilateral relationship with the 
Palestine Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to pursue the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance in order to obtain the necessary allocation for this purpose and 
release the pending amount to fulfill the commitment made at the highest political level.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
43   
 
 The Ministry projected US $ 9 million for release of the committed Aid to Palestine in its 
RE 2014-15.  Due to budgetary constraints in the FY 2014 -15, Ministry was able to release USD 
4 million (out of the balance USD 9 million) in December 2014. Ministry proposes to release the 
balance USD 5 million in FY (2015 -16) by June/July 2015 for which the budget provision has 
been made. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 
 The Committee observe that India has substantially contributed to the establishment of the 
SAARC Telemedicine E -Network Project and the SAARC Tele -Education Project in 2008 
through its monetary contribution as well as exper tise. The Committee, however, are dismayed to 
note that both the networks are not operational in any of the SAARC nations. The Committee fail 
to understand that after so much of investments in these projects, the Ministry has made no efforts 
to ensure thei r continuity. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to examine the 
issues related to their non-operationalisation and engage with concerned departments in India and 
the Governments abroad and take appropriate measures to ensure that both the networks are 
operationalised.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The SAARC Telemedicine e -Network and Tele -Education Network are unilateral offers 
made by India to the SAARC Member States. However, they have not been exploited to their 
fullest potential due to lukewarm response from the Member States. 
 The Telemedicine Network in Bhutan was inaugurated in 2008 but was discontinued later 
as Bhutan did not want its continued operation.The Nepal Project was inaugurated in 2011. 
Currently, the network is being renewed and views of Ministry of Telecommunications have been 
sought on updating sanctions. The project, however, is currently operational in Afghanistan. 
 Tele-Education Network was commissioned in March, 2012. Only Nepal expressed 
interest in the project. How ever, it is not operational now as there has been little interest from the 
student community in Nepal. The two projects are likely to be discussed and further refined to 
make them more relevant to the needs of the recipient countries at the 4th SAARC Working Group 
Meeting on Telecommunications/ICTs on 26-27th March, 2015 in New Delhi. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No.   29) 
 
 The Committee consider ICCR to be the effective tool of India‟s cultural diplomacy and 
over the years have stressed  upon its importance and the need of enhanced allocations to ICCR. 
But allocation for ICCR for 2014-15 has been kept at Rs.176 crore against the BE of Rs.160 crore 
during the 2013 -14. Due to non -availability of funds ICCR has been facing difficulty in 
enhancing the number of scholarships and opening of Chairs and Centres abroad. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the allocation for ICCR should be enhanced as per its needs and proposals so 
that it may be able to work as valuable tool of India‟s cultural diplomacy and an instrument of our 
“soft power”.  

 
44   
 
 
The Committee also welcome the fact that ICCR is in the process of opening new Indian 
Cultural Centres. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that in the past such centres 
were opened without due approval. The Committee, therefore, would like to suggest to the 
Ministry to ensure that due procedures are followed and approvals are taken in the process of 
opening of new cultural centres abroad. The Committee further note that the C&AG report has 
highlighted that 25% slots of scholarship were allocated under Cultural Exchange Programme 
Scholarship Schemes to countries where no valid agreement of cultural exchange 
programme/education exchange programme existed. The Committee are not convinced with the 
Ministry's justification in this regard. The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend that 
the Ministry and ICCR must ensure that rules and norms are followed in execution of scholarship 
programmes and other programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Against the proposed demand of ICCR to the extent of Rs. 217.68 Cr, a sum of Rs. 176.00 
Cr was allocated for the FY 2014 -15 due to overall cut of MEA budget. The Council had 
restricted its activities in accordance with the funds allocated. However, AS&FA and Fore ign 
Secretary were apprised of the financial crises, giving full justifications, being faced by ICCR and 
requested for augmentation of funds, at least, up to Rs. 193 Cr i.e. additionality of Rs. 17 Cr only 
for the F/y 2014 -15 at RE stage. The Council's pro posed revised demands (RE 2014 -15) to the 
tune of Rs. 193.19 Cr were also submitted to IFD/MEA.  Due to overall reduction of the 
Ministry‟s budget at RE stage, the allocation of ICCR was reduced by 5% to Rs 167.20 cr in RE 
2014-15. 
  
 As regard opening of new cultural centres abroad, this would be done strictly in 
accordance with the stipulations as laid down by the Statutory Bodies of the Council, and due 
approvals  from MEA and M/o Finance including provision of budgetary support. It will be 
ensured that rules and norms are followed in execution of scholarship and other programmes.  
The ICCR has offered scholarships slots to various countries for the academic year 2015-16 under 
Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEPs)/ Educational Exchange Programmes (EEPs) on the basis 
of valid CEPs/EEPs provided by the Department of Culture/Education. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
45   
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
– NIL – 
  
 
  

 
46   
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
 The Committee specifically note a peculiar situation created during 2013-14, when against 
the demand of Rs.16585.18 crore at RE Stage, the Ministry of Finance had initially reduced the 
allocation from Rs.11719.00 crore (BE allocation) to Rs.11693.65 crore and subsequently an 
additional Rs.100 crore was provided taking the RE figure to Rs.11793.65 crore. But surprisingly, 
this allocation was not supported by cash and was managed within the Ministry‟s Budget by way 
of token supplementary. The Committee expres s their dismay at such a state of affairs regarding 
allocation of the resources to the Ministry which has a mandate to implement India‟s foreign 
policy and pursue its interests globally. Similarly, the Committee were informed that due to non -
availability o f funds in the last two months of the financial year 2013 -14, the pace of various 
important projects in neighbouring countries had slowed down and execution of projects had 
almost come to a standstill as payments to various executing agencies could not be released in 
time with enormous pending schedules and cost implications.  The Committee are concerned to 
note that due to the limited working season in several countries, a two -month delay results in a 
one year delay with consequent overruns.  The Committee  are of the strong view that such 
practice should be averted because this leads to a situation wherein a tool meant to provide 
leverage and advantage becomes counter -productive, leading to adverse media attention and 
resultant public and political reaction  in the beneficiary country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should take necessary precautionary action to 
avert stalling of projects midway with a more vigilant monitoring mechanism which would 
anticipate shortage of funds well in advance and take adequate steps.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry, as rightly observed by the Committee, has been functioning under severe 
financial constraints, and has not been able to discharge some of its important commitments 
owing to lack of funds. The commitments made at the highest levels, if not honoured in time, 
adversely impact the image of the country, which is why adequate budgetary allocation is 
important.  
  
 It may be mentioned that the progress of projects is being monitored at various levels, and 
scrutiny has improved significantly, particularly with the creation of Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA). However, it is also to be noted that without adequate funds, delays in 
projects may be inevitable, even th ough the Ministry tries to anticipate shortages and take 
precautionary action.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 

 
47   
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 By the Ministry's own admission, the Committee note that due to budgetary constraints, 
the Ministry has to constantly resort to internal allocation and shifting of funds from one head to 
other head owing to the urgency or the strategic or political importance of the expenditure. The 
Committee understand that some degree of flexibility is required owing to the nature of Ministry's 
international engagement and immediate requirement of funds for strategic and political 
commitments at the highest level. The Committee, however, are not appreciative of this practice 
of shifting of funds mid-year based upon exigency. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that 
rather than making it a permanent feature, the provision for flexibility should be kept to the 
minimum and continuing projects/already committed projects should not suffer on account of 
other immediate needs. T he Committee recommend that if international commitments are made 
after the budgetary allocation at the BE stage, the Ministry must come to an arrangement with the 
Ministry of Finance so that the entire amount committed internationally is provided at the R E 
stage or at the supplementary stage as per the time-frame of such declaration rather than arranging 
such funds from the internal resources of the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has been sensitizing Ministry of Finance about the commitme nts made at 
highest levels and details of these commitments are also shared with them. The details of the 
various projects and activities are also given in the „Detailed Notes‟ sent to Ministry of Finance 
along with the Revised Estimates/Budget Estimates demands.   This is followed by the pre-budget 
discussions with the Ministry of Finance where the Financial Advisor also seeks additional funds 
on behalf of the Ministry.  Often, this is also followed up by way of letters from Foreign Secretary 
and/or Hon‟ble Minister. 
  
 However, that Ministry would receive an augmentation at the RE/supplementary demands 
stage is extremely uncertain.  The budgetary management exercise becomes extremely precarious 
particularly when Revised Estimates are fixed at a level lower  than Budget Estimates. Under the 
circumstances, the Ministry is left with no choice, but to resort to prioritization within available 
resources, and carry out re -appropriation of funds in order to honour most important high level 
commitments.  Ministry‟s demands for additional funds at RE stage or through supplementaries, 
to meet commitments made through the year have not been met by the Ministry of Finance.  
  
 However, Ministry continues to liaise with the Ministry of Finance for additional funds as 
desired by the Hon‟ble Committee. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 
  

 
48   
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 The Committee have been continuously expressing their concern over serious under -
resourcing of the Ministry in terms of both budget as well as staff. The Committee have also 
deliberated upon the incongruously small size of the Indian Foreign Services consi dering the 
enormous tasks and challenges faced by the Ministry. The Committee also recognize the plan in 
place to increase the annual intake over the period of ten years and initiative taken by the Ministry 
for lateral entry at various levels and the probl ems being faced by the Ministry in retaining the 
deputationists and in their postings overseas. The Committee, however, are of the view that the 
challenges are imminent and urgent and the Ministry is short of diplomats to address them.  
Staggered recruitment means that staff recruited today would need years to be trained to meet the 
acute needs of today. The Committee, therefore, suggest to the Ministry to engage in a de novo 
exercise of assessing its present available manpower and actual requirements and find a way to 
speed up the process of intake through the lateral entry of qualified and experienced individuals 
without compromising on the quality of recruits. The Committee  recommend that the Ministry 
must engage with the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) and impress upon them 
about the urgency of providing more staff, including through recruitment from other cadres and 
the academic and private sector, as per the s pecialized needs of the Ministry. The Committee 
further recommend to the Ministry to take up the issue of altering the fixed cadre ratio and 
retention of deputationists from other cadres in view of their experience within the Ministry and 
the expertise achieved over the years. The Committee would also like the inclusion of officials of 
other services like Parliamentary and Legal services alongwith All India Services working on 
equivalent posts for the purpose of deputation with a view to expanding the base of 
expertise/experience in the Ministry.  Recruitment on contract basis from individuals with 
academic or private sector experience that is directly relevant to urgent needs should be permitted. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs is  aware of the issues pointed out by the Committee and 
is currently undertaking comprehensive assessment of the situation. It proposes to undertake a 
review based on its assessment. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that over the last three years, inspite of higher projections under the 
head 'Training', the budget allocation at BE stage has been kept at constant level of Rs.8.53 crore. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that during the same period t he allocation was revised 
downwards at the RE stage and the Ministry was even not able to utilize the reduced allocation. 
The Committee also take note of the Ministry's initiative of using modern mediums in imparting 

 
49   
 
training in order to maximize the outco mes from the available resources. The Committee, 
however, are not convinced at all with the Ministry's justification for continuous underutilization 
of allocated resources for training, particularly when the Committee have been regularly stressing 
upon the  importance of regular orientation programmes for the personnel of the Ministry of 
External Affairs and for building in -house capacity in view of the evolving strategic and dynamic 
diplomatic and technological scenario.  The lack of adequate language train ing for officers 
assigned to posts other than those using their preferred foreign languages could also be remedied 
by use of these funds.  The Committee, therefore, once again strongly recommend that Ministry 
should impart periodic training to its officers  at all levels both in India and abroad taking the help 
of latest training modules.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
FSI would continue to strive to use the funds effectively and judiciously.  
 
 FSI would continue to regularly update its training programs and content to ensure that the 
skill upgradation needs of various ranks and cadres of the Ministry are adequately covered. 
 
 The Ministry is currently working on a review of its language policy, which would address 
issues such as this. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry had embarked upon 'Digitization Project' for creation of 
image set retrievable database for passport, visa, OCI and PIO applications. The Committee, 
however, are not satisfied with the pace of implementation of the project. The Committee observe 
that out of 183 Indian Missions/Posts, this project covers only 39 Missions/ Posts and the digitization 
is expected to be completed in these Missions/ Posts by May 2015 depending upon the desired  
approvals and timely and adequate release of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should complete the project in all the 39 Missions/Posts within the time schedule fixed in 
this regard and it should further be expanded to include a ll the Indian Missions/Posts by formulating 
a time bound plan for digitization of existing data in all these establishments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The project was conceptualized for only those Missions/Posts with regular inflow of 
sizeable amount of co nsular documents and also where these were available in sizeable numbers 
in their record room. Based on the figures received, these Missions/Posts were selected. After 
approval from competent authorities for extension of contract by one year i.e. till May 2015, the 
work order for the rest of 7 Missions/Posts would be issued. In a nutshell, extension of contract by 
one year is required for completion of this project in  the selected  Missions/Posts.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 
 

 
50   
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 The Committee take note of financial contribution made by various countries in 
supporting the functioning of South Asian University as well as the pending amount of their 
share. The Committee note that there is an instance wherein no contribution has  been received 
from one of the member -states so far. The Committee desire that the Ministry must pursue the 
matter at the SAARC forum and emphasize the need for timely contribution by each of the 
member states. The Committee further take note of the delay in construction schedule of South 
Asian University and suggest to the Ministry to enhance the pace of construction as per newly 
fixed timeline and furnish a status report to the Committee in three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry took up the issue of Pakistan not making timely contribution to the 
Operational Budget of SAU at the SAARC Standing Committee meeting on 24 th November, 
2014. Similarly, at the Governing Board Meeting on 9 th March, 2015, we took up the issue of 
contributions with the Member from Pakistan on the Governing Board. We were assured by the 
Pakistani Member that the Government of Pakistan was processing the contributions to SAU. 
 
 Ministry has acquired a plot of lan d measuring 90.96 acres at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi 
from DDA which has since been handed over to SAU for construction of its permanent campus. 
The construction of the building has not yet started since statutory clearances from local 
authorities on tree cut ting, ridge land etc. have not been received by the University so far. These 
are being facilitated and the building project is to commence in the next financial year. 
 
 A status report on the construction project will be furnished to the Committee in three  
months. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that bulk of the 'Plan' and 'Non Plan' outlay of the Ministry is spent on 
the developmental engagement with various countries. The Committee understand that the aim 
behind giving the aid is to increase India's goodwill.  The Committee,  however, are of the view 
that uncertainty about availability of funds leading to non-timely release of funds, instead creates a 
counter-effect, leading to questions about India's credibilit y and commitments. In view of  
Ministry's inability in providing funds for the projects committed by Head of 
State/Government/Minister of External Affairs, during strategically important visits to foreign 
countries, the Committee in their 20 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) had desired that a separate head 
may be created for such international commitments, wherein allocation of requisite funds should 
be mandatory. The Ministry in its reply had stated that all voted expenditure is subject to 
reduction. The Committe e are aware of constitutional provisions in this regard and, therefore, 
would like to suggest that the Ministry in consultation with the Ministry of Finance must explore 

 
51   
 
the possibility of creating a separate head with the specific mandate of fulfilling th e commitments 
and agreements made for projects/aid signed at the highest level. 
 
 Moreover, the Committee strongly believe that the commitments made at the highest 
political level with cabinet approval are a integral part of India's Foreign policy and it s hould be 
mandatory for the Ministry of Finance honour such decisions and provide funds for such 
commitments. The Committee recommend that the Ministry must ensure correlation between such 
announcement and availability of funds within the required time-frame.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestion of the Committee for creation of a separate head of account will be taken 
up with the Ministry of Finance again. The recommendation of the Committee to ensure 
correlation between announcements from highest levels and availability of funds is  well taken. All 
efforts are being taken to ensure that funds are available for fulfilling the commitments within the 
overall ceilings intimated by Ministry of Finance. This aspect will be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance as suggested by the Committee.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No.  17) 
 
 The Committee note that with the establishment of the Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA), implementation of the projects was supposed to be dealt with through a 
more focused approach. The Committee, however, note that even more than two and a half years 
after its establishment, the resource structure in DPA is still in the stage of development and 
augmentation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry provide required financial  
and human resources to the DPA. 
 
 The Committee also observe that the provision of signing of the pre-contract Integrity Pact 
is stalled due to non-appointment of Independent External Monitors.  The Committee suggest that 
in view of the fact that the numb er of applications from the retired civil servants is low, the 
Ministry should pursue the matter with the Department of Personnel and Training and explore 
other alternatives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The process of further strengthening DPA‟s technical ca pacity to fulfill its mandate by 
availing the services of experts in various areas relevant to the projects being implemented under 
GoI‟s assistance is continuing. The ongoing efforts are aimed at creating in -house, specialized 
technical, legal and financial skills to fast -track various stages of project implementation. DPA is 
utilizing the services of officers on deputation from the Indian Telecom Service, Indian Audit and 
Accounts Service, Indian Economic Service and Central Public Works Department (CPWD)  in 
the implementation of GoI‟s development partnership programmes. Officers from the Indian 
Forest Service, Indian Revenue Service and Central Water Commission have been deployed by 
the Ministry in our High Commission/Embassies in Sri Lanka, Myanmar and N epal to assist in 

 
52   
 
the implementation of projects. A team of CPWD engineers is stationed in Kabul to assist in the 
implementation of GOI assisted projects in Afghanistan, including the construction of the 
Afghanistan Parliament building. Officials from the Controller of Accounts have been deployed 
in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka to provide their financial expertise in accounting. In addition, DPA 
is seeking the assistance regularly of the concerned GoI Ministries/Departments in identifying the 
project parameter s, such as the scope of work, preparation of feasibility report, site visit for 
preparation of tender documents and for appointment of consultants to prepare DPR and project 
management, and vetting of feasibility study/DPR from financial and technical angl es.  Wherever 
necessary, a representative of the concerned Ministry/Department is included in the Tender 
Evaluation Committee. At the project implementation stage, a representative of the concerned GoI 
Ministry/Department is appropriately included in the b ilateral project monitoring committee, 
comprising all stakeholders from the concerned partner country, project management consultant, 
implementing agency, Ministry, including representatives of our Mission/High Commission.  
Efforts are ongoing through the Administration Division of the Ministry to address the financial 
and manpower constraints faced by DPA in the implementation of Development Partnership 
Programmes. 
 It has been decided that from 1 st January, 2013 onwards, a Pre -contract Integrity Pact 
would be signed between the Ministry of External Affairs and the prospective bidders/ sellers for 
all procurements/ projects of the value of Rs. 50 crores and above. As per the records available 
with the Vigilance Unit, the Ministry has not signed any contract of the value of Rs. 50 crore and 
above after 1 st January, 2013. No Pre -contract Integrity Pact has, therefore, been signed by the 
Ministry so far. Non -appointment of Independent External Monitors ( IEM) has not stalled the 
signing of pre-contract Integrity Pacts.  
   
 The Ministry received twenty applications in response to advertisements for appointment 
as IEM. Out of these, eight names were shortlisted with the approval of the Foreign Secretary and  
sent to the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) on 2 nd January, 2015 for the appointment of two 
IEM of this Ministry. In response, the CVC has recently sought some information/ clarification 
from the Ministry. The proposal will be resubmitted to the CVC fo r their approval along with the 
information/ clarification sought by them. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
 The Committee in their 14 th Report (15th Lok Sabha) had expressed their concern over the 
tardy implementation of the decisions taken during India Africa Forum Summit -I (IAFS-I). The 
Committee note that one of the reasons for delay in projects is that the selected host countries had 
not shown any  interest in hosting the selected institutions. The Committee, therefore,  had 
suggested that in view of the lacklustre response of the beneficiary countries, the Ministry should 
review its strategy and if required, the Ministry must redefine its policy and  strategy of 
multilateral developmental engagement with countries in Africa. The Committee  had 
recommended that the Ministry must engage with the African Union Commission and explore 
alternate ways for identification of beneficiary state, wherein the institutions/projects were not 

 
53   
 
forced upon the countries and it must be ascertained before allocation of the pr oject that the 
beneficiary country is interested in hosting the institution.  
  
Further, the Committee had opined that dropping of the project in the host country would 
adversely impact India's stature. The Committee, therefore, had suggested that the Ministry must 
hold a consultative process with the African Union Commission alongwith individual countries 
before making announcement/commitment of such projects/institutions. The Committee had 
further recommend ed that the projects under implementation should be expedited and the 
Ministry should strive for their completion before IAFS-III. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry is engaged with the African Union Commission. The issues of lack of 
response from the host country as well as selection of unsuitable locations by the African Union 
Commission have been discussed with the concerned authorities of the African Union 
Commission. It is proposed that some modifications would be made during the Plan of Action 
after the Third India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS-III). 
 
 Further, the Ministry is also engaged bilaterally with Member States to ascertain their 
interest in hosting various institutions. 
 
 It may also be mentioned that lack of adequate resources has also been a reason for slow 
progress on a number of projects. Ministry will, therefore, continue efforts to ensure allocation of 
more resources so that the projects decided under IAFS mechanism are implemented at a faster 
pace. In this connection, it may be stated that reduction of the Ministry‟s budget at RE stage 
2014-15 has resulted in significant delays in action on a number of projects during the current 
financial year. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
 
 The Committee had expressed their concern over the incidents of Indian nationals being 
held hostage by various groups internationally. The Committee  had taken note of efforts being 
made by the Government in the concerned region/country and congratulate the authorities for the 
successful evacuations that have occurred. The Com mittee, however, wonder ed whether 
widespread and repeated hostage taking indicates failure of Government of India's policy to deal 
with various actors in the region. The Committee were particularly concerned about the plight of 
41 Indian nationals being he ld hostage in Iraq. The Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry must strategically and diplomatically engage with the International Community and 
major actors in the region to ensure their safe release. The Committee had also note d that 
thousands of Indians are struck in areas of violent conflict and they are willing to return to India. 
The Committee, had therefore, recommended to the Government to equip its establishments in 
such zones and arrange for the expeditious evacuation of Indians. 
 
 

 
54   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Some Indians were trapped in the conflict areas following sudden attacks and capturing of 
 several cities in northern and central Iraq by the Islamic State of Iraq and Sham beginning 
 8 June 2014. A group of 41 Indian nationals working in a construction company in Mosul 
 in Iraq  were taken captive and still remain so. 
(ii) Safety and security of Indian nationals in Iraq is a matter of foremost concern and 
 preoccupation for the Government. The Government is making every effort and takin g all 
 steps to secure their release and has been in regular touch with the countries in the region 
 in this regard. 
(iii) In addition, there is an Inter -Ministerial Standing Group in place for safe evacuation of 
 Indian  nationals from Gulf countries in case of conflict or emergency situations. 
(iv) Contingency evacuation plans by our Missions in the Gulf countries are being regularly 
 updated and appropriate mechanism are already in place to respond to emergency 
 situations. 
 
 MEA has been engaging in the  evacuation of Indian nationals abroad whenever a crisis 
situation has emerged and the Ministry has been directed to undertake this task in close 
coordination with all other relevant Ministries/Departments. A Standing Group (SG) has been set 
up with the approval of the former Prime Minister to address all issues relating to the repatriation 
of Indian nationals abroad in cases of emergency/other local developments. This Group is chaired 
by Foreign Secretary (or the Secretary concerned in MEA). The other Memb ers of this Group are 
the Finance Secretary, Defence Secretary, Secretary Shipping, Home Secretary, Secretary, 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs; and Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation. There are specific 
Terms of Reference of the SG. The SG would dec ide on the modalities to be followed for 
repatriation of Indian nationals from abroad in the event of the outbreak of a crisis, delineating 
responsibilities of each Ministry/Department, the Mission/Post and other concerned entities. 
 
 The recommendation primarily relates to Iraq. However, with regards to Libya, it is stated 
that from the time of the intensification of the conflict in June 2014, 3414 Indian nationals have 
been evacuated through GoI assistance.   There are estimated to be around 2500 Indians  still 
remaining in Libya, who continue to stay on their own volition, based on job considerations – 
despite regular Embassy advisories. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/06/2015] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
           November,  2015                                                                             Chairperson,                            
    Kartika,, 1937 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on External Affair.  

 
55   
 
Appendix I 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 20th  OCTOBER, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20 th October, 2015 from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
3. Prof (Dr) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
6. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
9. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
10. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
13. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
14.  Dr. Karan Singh 
15. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
16. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports on: (i) Action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observation s contained in the (i)   XXXXXXXX     
(ii) Fourth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs  for the year                  
2014-15.   (iii)           XXXXXXXX XX. 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Reports. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 

 
56   
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members.  It was also decided that since Parliament is 
not in session the Chairperson may present the reports to the Hon'ble Speaker under Rule 71A of 
the Directions by the Speaker with a request to permit the printing,  publication and circulation of 
the Reports under Rule 280 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and 
subsequently, these Reports will be presented to both the Houses of the Parliament after 
commencement of the next session.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 

 
57   
 
Appendix II 
 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                    30 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 
26, 27, 28 and 29.  
  
  
 Total-20 
Percentage:  66.66% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL. 
 
Total-00 
 Percentage: 00.00% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 3 
Total- 02 
 Percentage: 6.66 % 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos 5, 6, 9, 13, 16, 17, 25 and 30 
                             Total-08 
Percentage: 26.66% 
 
 
 
 