 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
INDO-PAK RELATIONS 
 
                  SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 AUGUST, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2016-17) 
 
                             SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
16 
 

 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
INDO-PAK RELATIONS 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 August, 2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
COEA NO. 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2017 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(__________Edition) and Printed by  

CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter 1:  Introductory            1-2 
           
Chapter 2: Indo-Pak Relations:  An Overview-       3-22 
I.      Historical Background 
II. Dialogue Process 
III. Approach and policy towards Pakistan 
 
Chapter 3 : Strategic Dimension of the Relationship      23-64 
I.      Border Management and Security  
II. Subversive Activities by Pakistan and Cross Border Terrorism   
III. The Issue of Jammu & Kashmir 
IV. Nuclear & Missile Programme 
V. Recent Surgical Strikes 
 
Chapter 4: Economic & Cultural Aspects        65-81 
I.     Economic Engagement/Cooperation 
II. Cultural Aspect 
 
Chapter 5: Reaction/Role of Global Actors and Institutions      82-93 
 
Chapter 6:   Miscellaneous           94-103 
I. Sharing of Water  
II. Humanitarian Exchanges 
III. TAPI  
 
Chapter 7: Roadmap For Future         104-109 
I.        Impediments to Normalization of ties 
II. Roadmap for Future 
 
Appendices 
I.         Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 18.10.2016    110-112        
II. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 12.1.2017        113-115 
III. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 30.3.2017       116-117 
IV. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 25.7.2017   118-119                     
V. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 10.8.2017     120       
 
Annexures 
I.       Instrument of Accession 1947        121-123 
II. Tashkent Agreement 1966        124-125 
III. Simla Agreement,1972         126-127 
IV. Parliamentary Resolution on Jammu & Kashmir, 1994     128 
V. Lahore Declaration 1999         129-133
         
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2016-17) 
 
 1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla* 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 7. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 11. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 12. Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 13. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 14. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Raj Babbar 
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 25. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 26. Smt. Kanimozhi 
 27. Shri C.M. Ramesh  
28. Shri Amar Singh   
29. Dr. Karan Singh 
 30. Shri R.K. Sinha 
 31. Shri D. P. Tripathi  
   
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C Koul  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Smita Singh  - Executive Assistant 
*Shri Cheddi Paswan, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha had resigned from the membership of the Committee  w.e.f. 22.11.2016. 
Vacancy arose w.e.f. 29.11.2016 due to his resignation and Shri Gurjit Singh Aujla has been nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
31.3.2017. 

INTRODUCTION 
 
          I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report of the Committee on External 
Affairs (2016-17) on the subject ‘Indo-Pak Relations’. 
 
2.             The Committee selected the subject ‘Indo -Pak Relations’  for detailed examination during the 
year 2016 -17. Th e Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs , 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Commerce (Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry) on 18.10.2016 and 12.01.2017. Further, the Committee sought views  of the experts namely, Shri 
K.S. Bajpai, Lt. Gen. Syed Ata Hasnain (Retired), Air Vice Marshal Kapil Kak (Retired), Shri Vivek Katju, 
Prof. Satish Kumar on the subject in accordance with Rule 331 (L) of the Rules of Procedure and Condut of 
Business in Lok  Sabha on 30.3.2017.  The Committee took further oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of External Affairs on this subject on 25.07.2017. 
  
3. The Committee received substantial inputs for the Report during their  study tour to Leh, Amritsar, 
Mumbai and Diu from 29.04.2017 to 4 .05.2017 wherein discussions were held with representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry.  
 
4.        The Report was considered and ado pted by the Committee at their sitting held on 10 August, 2017. 
The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.  
 
5.        The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of 
Home Affairs , Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Commerce and Industry along with the five experts for 
placing material information as well as tendering evidence and views before the Committee.  
 
6.         For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have been printed in 
bold letters in the Report.  
 
            DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
  
NEW DELHI 
10    August, 2017                                                   
19 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                                               
 
Chairperson,    
Committee on External Affairs 

1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
India‟s relationship with Pakistan has been a challenging aspect of our foreign policy.  
The relationship has witnessed four wars, recurrent hostility and multiple crises.  In the past, the 
Committee on various occasions has taken up the issue of India‟s relationship with Pakistan for 
briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and related Ministries. 
1.2 The Committee on External Affairs (2016 -17) selected the subject „Indo -Pak Relations‟ 
for detailed examination amidst rising concerns about deteriorating ties between the two 
neighbours.  Three points are worth mentioning to highlight the imperative of taking up this 
subject for detailed examination.  First, the relationship between the two countries has been 
severely damaged largely as a result of the Pakistani resort to terrorism, which poses a grave 
threat to our internal and externa l security.  Secondly, the strained relations between the two 
countries have significant economic, political, military and social costs for both the states as well 
as the region.  Thirdly, the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) has further complicated  
the security dynamics of India by overlooking her sovereignty and territorial integrity in Pakistan 
Occupied Kashmir (PoK). In light of these considerations, the Committee, therefore, decided to 
examine the various aspects of the relationship between the two neigbouring countries in a 
holistic manner.  
1.3 The Report examines the various facets that are germane to the relationship between the 
two sides such as political, strategic, economic, and cultural. For this purpose, the Report is 
divided into seven chapters. The first chapter gives an introduction to the subject. Chapter Two 
outlines a concise historical overview of Indo -Pak relations and the contentious issues that have 
impacted normalization of ties since independence. The third chapter delves upon  the strategic 
aspect of the relationship with primary focus on issues which have serious security implications. 
The fourth chapter explores the prospect and challenges of economic ties and cultural links 
between the two sides. By placing the issues of Ind ia-Pakistan in global and regional context, the 
fifth chapter examines the reaction/role of various regional and global actors (like USA, China, 
Russia, Japan) as well as institutions (particularly the United Nations) over the Indo -Pak 
question. The sixth chapter focuses on the issue of humanitarian exchanges (related to Fishermen 

2 
 
and Prisoners), disputes revolving around sharing of waters, Turkmenistan -Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline and others. The last chapter explores the possible roadmap for the 
future.  
  

3 
 
CHAPTER- 2 
INDO-PAK RELATIONS: AN OVERVIEW 
 India shares linguistic, cultural, geographic, economic and ethnic links with Pakistan, but 
our relationship has remained difficult on account of mutual differences, hostility and suspicion  
for the last seventy years .  The relationship between these two countries has been fraught with 
mistrust and antagonism, India has clearly asserted that it desires peaceful and cooperative 
engagement with Pakistan, free from violence and terror, and is committ ed to resolving all 
outstanding issues through peaceful bilateral dialogues along the lines of the Simla Agreement 
(1972) and Lahore Declaration (1999). However, for this agenda to progress, it is imperative for 
Pakistan to abide by its commitment of not a llowing its territory or territories under its control to 
be used for aiding and abetting terrorist activities in India. 
2.2 Since independence, our relationship with Pakistan has been the greatest challenge of 
India‟s foreign policy. Elaborating upon this  challenge, , the Foreign Secretary during the course 
of oral evidence stated:- 
“At the heart of the issue is whether we are prepared to accept, as normal, Pakistan‟s use of 
cross-border terrorism as an instrument of statecraft. Pakistan‟s strategy of aidi ng and 
abetting terrorism against India isn‟t new; indeed, it started in 1947 in Jammu and Kashmir.  
However, over the last three decades, it has assumed an extraordinary salience, especially 
as Pakistani sponsored attacks occur across the length and breadth of India.” 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
2.3 Every dispute is rooted in a historical milieu and India -Pakistan relation is no exception. 
In 1947, British India was partitioned into India and Pakistan, leading to one of the world's 
greatest and most tragic human migrations. While India adopted a secular, democratic and liberal 
vision, Pakistan on the other hand turned into a militaristic and theocratic society. This differing 
vision and political set up was reflected in their overall policy and behaviour.  
 
2.4 The Indian Independence Act 1947 provided the princely states with three options of 
either joining India or Pakistan or staying independent. Following aggression by Pakistan in the 
immediate aftermath of independence, the ruler of the pr incely state of Jam mu & Kashmir , 

4 
 
Maharaja Hari Singh acceded to India on 26 October 1947. Thus, the Instrument of Accession 
(Annexure I) forms the legal basis by which the whole of Jammu & Kashmir became an integral 
part of India, including the area which are under illegal a nd forcible occupation of Pakistan i.e. 
Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK). 
 
2.5 Following Jammu & Kashmir‟s accession to India, India made a reference to the United 
Nations on 1  January 1948 under Article 35 of the Charter, which permits any member state to 
bring any situation, whose continuance is likely to endanger international peace and security to 
the attention of the Security Council.  The intention behind this reference was to prevent a war 
between the two newly independent countries, which would have become increasingly likely,  if 
the tribal invaders assisted first indirectly and then actively by the Pakistan army had persisted 
with their actions against India in  Jammu & Kashmir. The Government of India requested the 
Security Council "to put an end immediately to the giving of such assistance which was an act of 
aggression against India." 
 
2.6. The relationship between the two countries has been marked by four wars (1947, 1965, 
1971 and 1999), numerous cross -border skirmishes and multiple crises.  On be ing asked about 
the causes and outcomes of the various wars fought between India and Pakistan since Partition, 
the Ministry of Defence enumerated the following details: 
 Wars Causes Outcome 
1. Operations in 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
1947-48  
 
The main cause of India-Pakistan 
War of 1947 -48 was Pakistan‟s 
conspiracy to annex Jammu & 
Kashmir forcefully 
On January 1, 1949, a UN 
sponsored ceasefire was agreed 
to.  It left one part of the state 
territory under Indian control 
and the other with Pakistan.  An 
uneasy peace has since prevailed 
along the ceasefire line now 
known as the Line of Control. 
The ceasefire left some vital 
positions under the occupation of 
Pakistan.  Kargil heights, which 
dominate the Srinagar -Leh road, 
have remained a permanent 
obstacle for Indian defenders. 

5 
 
2. India-Pakistan 
War 1965 
 
The factors which contributed to 
Indo-Pak War 1965 included the 
following: 
(i) Series of border skirmishes 
and ceasefire violations by 
Pakistan. 
 
(ii) Pakistan‟s belief that once 
infiltrators reached Kashmir, the 
local population would revolt 
against India; 
 
It was a limited war in the sense 
that East Pakistan remained 
almost uninvolved.  Further, the 
navies of both countries kept out 
of active war.   Pakistani 
territory occupied by India 
during the war totalled to 1,920  
sq. km. while Pakistan occupied 
540 sq. km. of Indian territory.   
 
3. India-Pakistan 
War 1971 
The two wings of Pakistan, 
separated by 1600 kms of Indian 
territory could not live in harmony 
despite religious homogeneity. East 
Pakistan always resented the  
domination of West Pakistan in all 
walks of life. 
 The Awami League under 
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman which 
fought the Pakistan National 
Assembly elections in 1970 on the 
issue of autonomy came out 
victorious with a large majority but 
the West Pakistan leaders denied it 
the right to form the government.   
 
(i) West Pakistani Forces in 
East Pakistan (Bangladesh) 
surrendered to India on 16 
December 1972. 
 
(ii) The Indian army made 
substantial territorial gains on 
the Western front.  A total of 
16,279 sq km territory was 
captured. 
 
(iii) Bangladesh emerged as a 
sovereign and independent 
nation. 
 
(iv) India emerged as the pre -
eminent power in the region. 
4. Kargil War, 
1999 
The Kargil conflict was precipitated 
by Pakistan by infiltrating Army 
soldiers and Mujahideens in early 
1998, into Indian territory to 
dominate the heights overlooking 
the NH1A, which connects Leh to 
Srinagar.   
 
The Indian Army turned the tide 
of the war by capturing critical 
heights and pushing the enemy 
back.  At the same time India 
was able to isolate Pakistan on 
the world stage.  Mounting 
international pressure and the 
Indian Army‟s successes forced 
Pakistan to withdraw its troops 
by mid -July.  A cease fire was 
declared and over the next 

6 
 
couple of weeks the intruders 
withdrew completely from 
Kargil. 
 
  
2.7. The first war between India and Pakistan ended with the UN ceasefire which established 
a ceasefire line, constituted a UN Peacekeeping force and cau sed for holding a plebiscite. It 
needs to be stated that owing to distortion of facts on  Jammu &  Kashmir, the historical 
perception on the Indian state of Jammu &  Kashmir requires to be put in the correct perspective. 
India had made it abundantly clear tha t full implementation of the UN resolution would be 
conditional upon Pakistan fulfilling their part of the UNCIP resolution of 13 August 1948, which 
inter alia required that all forces, regular and irregular, under the control of both sides shall cease 
fire; Pakistan would withdraw its troops, it would endeavour to secure withdrawal of tribesmen 
and Pakistan nationals, and India will progressively withdraw the b ulk of its forces once the 
UNCIP confirms that the tribesmen and Pakistan  nationals have withdrawn and Pakistan troops 
are being withdrawn. Contrary to what Pakistan propagates, it was Pakistan that wrecked the 
implementation of the resolutions at that time by not fulfilling the preconditions.   
 
2.8 In 1954, the Constituent Assembly of Jammu & Kashmir ratified the acce ssion of Jammu 
& Kashmir to India and, as per the provisions of the Indian Constitution a separate constitution 
for the state of Jammu & Ka shmir was approved in 1957. In 1963, Pakistan unilaterally ceded a 
part of the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir, which it illegally occupied, to China.  
 
2.9 Following the 1965 war, Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri and Pakistani 
President Ayub Khan signed the Tashkent Agreement in 1966. It was agreed that “both sides will 
exert all efforts to create good neighbourly relations in accordance with the Uni ted Nation 
Charter” and return to the status quo ante. In the aftermath of the third war between the two 
countries, attempts were again initiated to de -escalate tensions. Consequently, the Simla 
Agreement (Annexure II) was signed between the then Indian Pr ime Minister Indira Gandhi and 
Pakistani President Zulfikar Ali Bhutt o.  By this agreement, the countries resolved to settle their 
differences by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations or by any other peaceful means 
mutually agreed upon between them. 

7 
 
2.10 Lt. General Syed Ata Hasnain (Retd), while sharing his views on this subject before the 
Committee, stated that the only aspect of the background which needs reiteration as a reminder is 
the plan reportedly conceived by Pakistan in 1977 under the lea dership of Zia ul Haq. It was a 
diabolic plan to wreak retribution against India for the loss of East Pakistan (Bangladesh) in 
1971. Its ingredients were:-  
 Realization that Pakistan could never match India‟s conventional military strength. Thus 
it was necessary to overcome asymmetry through a nuclear weapons programme which it 
finally achieved. Nuclear weapons are considered strategic levellers. 
 Befriending a rich and leading Islamic country to support Pakistan‟s militarization and 
nuclearization. Saudi Arabia fitted the bill. 
 Maintaining strong relationships with big powers to make full use of the strategic nature 
of its territory that it has to offer. 
 Exploiting India‟s various fault lines and work towards creation of internal turbulence in 
India.   Pakis tan awaited its opportunity and launched a proxy war in 1989 in J&K after 
having gained tremendous experience in the handling of a hybrid war in Afghanistan over 
ten years and aiding the Khalistani insurgency in 1980‟s.  
 
2.11 The 1980‟s was marked by intense crises due to Pakistani interference in the Indian states 
of Punjab and Kashmir. Pakistan executed its much calibrated strategy of instigating unrest in the 
Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. 
2.12 Following increasing terrorist violence and Pakistan's attempt to highlight the issue of 
Jammu &  Kashmir, both houses of the Indian Parliament unanimously adopted a Resolution 
(Annexure III) on February 22, 1994, emphasizing that Jammu & Kashmir was an integral part 
of India and Pakistan must vacate parts of the state under its illegal occupation.  
2.13 In 1998, both India and Pakistan went for overt nuclearization facing a series of bilateral 
and multilateral sanctions. The open acquisition of nuclear capabilities by both the neighbours 
initiated debate betwee n nuclear optimists and nuclear pessimists about its implications on the 
South Asian region as a whole. A year after the tests, the fourth India -Pakistan conflict occurred 
in the Kargil region. The Pakistani incursions into Kargil happened after the Februa ry 1999 
Lahore Declaration (Annexure IV). Despite the breach of trust, the Indian government under 

8 
 
Prime Minister A.B. Vajpayee made another attempt to improve relations by inviting General 
President Parvez Musharraf to Agra. However, little substantive progress could be achieved.  
2.14 In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks in USA in September 2001, the international 
community recognized the menace of terrorism as a global problem. In the same year in October, 
a Pakistan based terrorist organization attacked the Jammu & Kashmir Legisl ative Assembly 
building in Srinagar. Pakistan‟s relentless waging of proxy war led to another attack on Indian 
Parliament on 13 December 2001 which brought the two sides to the brink of a war. On the 
Committee‟s query about Operation Parakram, the Ministry  of Defence stated that consequent to 
the Pak sponsored attack on the Indian Parliament on 13 December 2001, mobilization of the 
Armed forces was ordered by Government on 16 December 2001; which was completed by 13 
January 2002.  Consequent upon review of t he overall security scenario by Government, the 
strategic relocation of the Indian Army was carried out in the three phases commencing from 25 
October 2002 to 31 January 2003.          
2.15 In order to normalize ties, the two countries agreed to start a Composite Dialogue on the 
sidelines of the SAARC Summit in 2004 and later under the rubric of Resumed Dialogue (2011 -
2013). Various subsequent initiatives were taken towards normalization of ties. Significant 
among those were inviting the Pakistani Prime Min ister along with other SAARC leaders to 
attend the swearing in of the new Government in 2014, meetings on the sidelines of Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and COP 21 Summit at Paris in 2015, and another unscheduled 
visit to Lahore on the occasion o f visit of birthday of Pakistani Prime Minister. However, with 
the intensification of cross border terrorism, beginning with the Pathankot Airbase attack on 
January 2, 2016, the relationship between the two countries has worsened. 
2.16 Given the centrality of the terrorism challenge to the development of our bilateral ties, it 
was agreed in Ufa, on the sidelines of the SCO Summit, to have NSA level talks with Pakistan in 
New Delhi on terrorism. Since January 2016, there has been a series of incidents of terrorist 
attacks aided and abetted from across the Line of Control (LOC) or international border, starting 
with the Pathankot air base attack (January 2-4, 2016). 
 
 

9 
 
Major Irritants in Relationship 
2.17  The differences between the two countries revolve ar ound issues ranging from border 
disputes to water sharing. If there is one subject that has loomed large for years, it is Pakistan‟s 
waging of a proxy war against India through cross border terrorism.  When asked about the 
outstanding issues between India a nd Pakistan, the Ministry of External Affairs responded that 
various outstanding issues between India and Pakistan are broadly discussed under the following 
categories:  
 Peace and Security, including Confidence Building Measures [CBMs],  
 Jammu and Kashmir 
 Siachen 
 Sir Creek 
 Wullar barrage/ Tulbul Navigation Project 
 Economic and Commercial cooperation 
 Counter-Terrorism 
 Narcotics Control 
 Humanitarian Issues 
 People to People Exchanges and  
 Religious tourism.  
 
2.18 The Ministry of Home Affairs enlisted the issu es mentioned below as issues that have 
marred the relationship between the India and Pakistan and have affected our internal security. 
 (i) Pakistan‟s Support to Terror outfits operating against India from its territory. 
(ii) Cross-Border infiltration. 
(iii) Cross border firing/ceasefire violations. 
(iv) Sheltering and providing safe heaven to fugitives of India by Pakistan. 
(v) Terrorist Financing and FICN. 
(vi) Unsatisfactory progress in Mumbai Terror Attack case in Pakistan and release of 
mastermind viz. Lakhvi on bail by the Pakistan Court. 
(vii) No progress in Pathankot terror attack case in Pakistan and not providing the 
opportunity to the NIA to collect evidence from Pakistan. 
 
2.19. Further, the Committee asked the concerned Ministries to rank these contentious issues 
on basis of intractability. The Ministry of Home Affairs justified their ranking as under: 

10 
 
S. No. Issues Justification 
1. Pakistan‟s Support 
to Terror outfits 
operating against 
India from its 
territory. 
The problem of terrorism in India  is largely sponsored from 
across the border. The Pak ISI has close links with terroris t outfits 
like Lashker -e-Toiba ( LeT), Jaish -e-Mohammad (JeM), Hizbul  
Mujahideen (HM), Indian Mujahideen (IM), etc. and provide 
them safe haven, material support, finance  and other logistics to 
carry out terrorist activities in India. Interrogation of arrested 
terrorists by the investigation agencies has disclosed that Pakistan 
Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) is promoting terror activities in 
India by providing shelter, p atronage and funding to terrorists of 
all hues. 
2. Cross-Border 
Infiltration 
Most of the terror attacks in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir have 
been carried out by terrorists coming from Pakistan/ Pakistan 
occupied Kashmir (POK), which has been amply revealed in the 
investigation of even recent terror attacks at Gurdaspur, 
Pathankot, Uri Nagrota etc. 
3. Cross border 
firing/ceasefire 
violations 
The details of ceasefire violations in last four years is as follows:  
No. of Ceasefire violations 
Year Along the Line 
of Control 
(LoC) in the 
State of J&K 
under 
operational 
control of Army 
Along the 
International 
Border(IB) in 
the State of 
J&K under 
operational 
control of BSF 
Total (LoC + IB) 
2013 199 148 347 
2014 153 460 583 
2015 152 253 405 
2016 228 221 449 
 
4. Sheltering and 
providing safe 
haven to fugitives 
of India by Pakistan  
There are more than 40 terrorists/fugitives from India land who 
are reportedly residing in Pakistan, including Dawood Ibrahim. 
Red Corner Notices (RCNs) have been issued against most  of 
them. The dossiers of these fugitives have been given to Pakistan 
during the last round of HS Level Talks in May 2012. However, 
no action has been taken by Pakistan in this regard. 
5. Terrorist Financing 
and FICN 
The Pakistan‟s ISI has been providing financial support to terror 
outfits operating against India from its territory. 
The investigation in FICN cases has clearly revealed the 
involvement of Pakistan in production and circulation of the high 
quality FICNs to damage the monitory stability of India. 
6. Unsatisfactory No conviction has so far been reported in the cases registered in 

11 
 
progress in Mumbai 
Terror Attack case 
in Pakistan and 
release of 
mastermind viz. 
Lakhvi on bail by 
the Pakistan Court. 
Pakistan. The mastermind of attack has been allo wed to be 
released on bail by not prosecuting the case in right earnest. 
7. No progress in 
Pathankot terror 
Attack case in 
Pakistan and not 
providing the 
opportunity to NIA 
to collect evidence 
from Pakistan. 
The Joint Investigation Team (JIT) from Pakista n had been 
permitted to collect evidence for prosecuting the accused of 
Pathankot terror attack based in Pakistan. Pakistan was supposed 
to provide access to NIA to collect evidence against the accused 
of Pathankot terror attack. However, Pakistan is yet t o fulfill its 
commitment. There is no information about progress in the case 
registered in Pakistan relating to this attack. 
 
2.20. Territorially, India and Pakistan have been engulfed in conflict over three territorie s- the 
Indian state of Jammu &  Kashmir, Sir Creek and Siachen.   Over the past four decades, the 
greatest problem in the relationship has emerged out of Pakistan‟s use of terrorism against India 
as a tool of state policy. 
 
2.21 Although, basic facts pertaining to Jammu &  Kashmir being an integral and inalienable 
part of India have been well established. However, there has been a concerted disinformation 
campaign launched by Pakistan that presents a distorted historical account of Jammu & Kashmir. 
The accession of the Princely State of J&K to India, signed by the Maharaja (erstwhile ruler of 
the state) on 26th October 1947 was completely valid in terms of the Government of India Act 
1935, Indian Independence Act (1947).  However, Pakistan has continuously misled the world 
regarding its involvement in Jammu & Kashmir.  Over Seventy years after partition, the ground 
situation in the State to which the resolution referred to has considerably changed.  Pakistan 
unilaterally ceded a part of the state to China in 1963.  There has been a demographic change on 
the Pakistani side with generations of non-Kashmiri people allowed to take residence in the parts 
of J&K occupied by Pakistan.  Pakistan sponsored terrorism into J&K has also forced the 
minority Kashmiri Pandits and others to migrate out of the Kashmir valley to Jammu and to other 
parts of India. 

12 
 
2.22 On being asked, to explicate the territorial disputes between India & Pakistan in the 
Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir, the Ministry stated that Pakistan is in an illegal and forcible 
occupation of approximately 78,000 sq. kms of Indian territory of the state of Jammu & 
Kashmir. In addition, under the so -called Sino-Pakistan Boundary Agreement of 1963, Pakistan 
illegally ceded 5,180 sq. kms in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) to China.  
 
  
2.23 The region of Sir Creek remains a disputed territory between the two neighbours.    
The 96 Km stretch of Sir Creek which separates Pakistan Sindh from Indian Kutch remains 
one of the key territorial disputes between India and Pakistan. On the Committe e's query, 
the Ministry of External Affairs stated that  the International Land Boundary in the Sir 
Creek area and International Maritime Boundary Line [IMBL] between India and Pakistan 
have not been delineated and demarcated 


13 
 
 
2.24.      When asked about the basis of dispute between India and Pakistan on Siachen, Ministry 
of Defence answered that in J&K the Cease Fire Line (CFL) and the Line of Control (LC) were 
delineated by Karachi Agreement of 1949 and Simla agreement of 1972 respective ly up to NJ 
9842.  The area thereafter remained un -delineated from point NJ 9842 (though in the text of the 
Karachi Agreement, there is a mention of „thence North to the Glacier‟).  This has led to 
different perceptions / interpretations.  India interprets  that from NJ 9842 the line runs 
northwards along the watershed i.e. ridgeline of Saltoro Range, while Pak claims that the line 
joins NJ 9842 with Karakoram Pass. Pakistan had started surreptitiously sponsoring foreign 
mountaineering expeditions to peaks i n areas under our control in the area of Siachen to 
substantiate its claim.  
 
2.25 Queried further on the evaluation of Siachen issue, the Ministry of Defence informed the 
Committee in a written reply that in 1983 there were intelligence reports to indicat e Pakistan‟s 
intention to occupy areas in the vicinity of Siachin Glacier. To pre -exempt such a move, 
Operation Meghdoot was launched in April, 1984 by Indian Army to secure the entire Saltoro 
Ridge which dominates Siachen Glacier. As regards conflict reso lution in the area MoD 
informed the Committee that starting from 1986 after the vi sit of then Pakistan President J ia-ul-
Haq to India in 1985, a decision was taken to resolve the conflict. There have been thirteen 
rounds of talks between India and Pakistan to resolve the dispute. The Ministry further added 


14 
 
that the recent developments in infrastructure opposite Siachen Glacier, the growing Chinese 
assertiveness and the increased Chinese presence in Gilgit -Baltistan are other major ground 
realities which impinge on the resolution of the dispute.  
 
2.26  During the past four decades, the biggest issue in ties between India and Pakistan has 
been the latter's use of terrorism as a means to launch low intensity war against India. The onus 
for action has always bee n put on India to maintain restraint in the wake of continuous terrorist 
attacks by Pakistan. The point that is largely missed out is that a responsible country cannot be 
tested incessantly and now India has clearly stated that terror and talks cannot go hand in hand. A 
detailed analysis of this issue is done in the third chapter.  
 
2.27 The Committee further desired to know the contribution of Simla Agreement and Lahore 
Declaration in the resolution of these outstanding issues.  The Ministry submitted that  the spirit 
of addressing all outstanding issues peacefully and bilaterally is enshrined in the Simla 
Agreement and the Lahore Declaration. Under the Simla Agreement [July 02, 1972], India and 
Pakistan agreed to settle “their differences by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations.” 
Similarly, the Lahore Declaration [February 21, 1999] reiterated the understanding reached 
between the two countries in the Simla Agreement and provided for the principles of bilateral 
engagement between the two countries. The Government has, time and again, reiterated its 
commitment to resolve all outstanding issues between India and Pakistan peacefully and 
bilaterally on the basis of Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration. A meaningful and sustained 
dialogue, however, requires an atmosphere free from terror, hostility and violence. The onus for 
creating such an atmosphere lies with Pakistan. 
 
2.28 It is worth mentioning that understanding the past in terms of its course and consequences 
can be a useful starting point for guiding the present and future relations between India and 
Pakistan. However, it is clearly stated that the resolution of the outstanding issues between the 
two sides can be built upon bilateral dialogue based on Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration 
which can be a pertinent framework to build the peace talks upon. 
 

15 
 
2.29 The Committee recognize that India - Pakistan relations have witnessed recurrent 
periods of tensions and strains and are historically complicated. The Committee note that 
there are multifarious issues concerning India and Pakistan such as territorial dispu tes 
over Siachen and Sir Creek, Pakistan‟s support to terrorist outfits, cross border 
infiltration, fomenting unrest in Indian State of Jammu &Kashmir, economic & cultural 
cooperation, Confidence Building Measures (CBMs), religious tourism and other relate d 
humanitarian issues.  Recent developments have further complicated the relations. The 
Indian strategy of dealing with Pakistan has political, economic, cultural and military 
dimensions. The military dimension has been used only for defending the sovereignty of the 
country. Right from the time of attaining freedom, India has always worked relentlessly for 
a peaceful resolution of all contentious issues between the two countries. A peaceful and 
lasting solution to what is essentially a bilateral discord has  eluded over the past seven 
decades due to the intransigent attitude of Pakistan and its misconceived adversarial 
connect to the relations between the two neighbours. Moreover, the subcontinent has seen 
four debilitating wars which have exacted significant cost on both the warring sides. 
 Notwithstanding the continuing impasse of decades altogether, the Committee are of 
the considered opinion that the road to peace and economic prosperity in the region is 
possible only through dialogue and enforcement of th e Simla Agreement and Lahore 
Declaration in letter and spirit by the two nations. The Government of India has always 
followed this dictum, however, for various reasons there has not been the expected 
response from the other side. The Committee feel that th e present geo -political situation 
beckons Government of India to utilize its diplomatic finesse at all appropriate fora as also 
its economic clout in equal measures so that Pakistan is convinced that the continuing 
attrition is in nobody‟s interest and it is persuaded to join the process of dialogue at the 
earliest. The Committee, nonetheless, remain concerned that the preponderant role of the 
Pakistani military in that country, and its desire to maintain hostility on its borders in 
order to justify this preponderance, remains a long term obstacle to a peaceful resolution.  
  (Recommendation No.1) 
 
 

16 
 
II. DIALOGUE PROCESS 
2.30 Despite multiple crises, there have been numerous attempts to improve ties between India 
and Pakistan. At various points of time in history, India and Pakistan have agreed upon various 
agreements and declarations such as the Karachi Agreement (1949), Tashkent Declaration 
(1966), Simla Agreement (1972 ), Lahore Declaration (1999) to look at ways to resolve 
contentious disputes in a peaceful manner through a bilateral framework. Moreover, discussions 
have been held in the past on both military and non -military CBMs under the subject 'Peace and 
Security, including Confidence Building Measures [CBMs]' held at the Foreign Secretaries lev el 
during the Composite Dialogue (2004 -2008) and Resumed Dialogue (2011 -13). Separate Expert 
Level dialogues were also set up for discussions on conventional and nuclear CBMs. Besides, 
discussions have been held on the non -military CBMs under other subject s of the Composite 
Dialogue. 
 
2.31 To the Committee‟s query, the Ministry of External Affairs enlisted the various 
Confidence Building Measures (CBMs), both military and non -military, undertaken between 
India and Pakistan. On the conventional and nuclear a spects, some of the CBMs that have been 
agreed upon at different times are: 
 In 2003, an understanding was reached on observing ceasefire along the International 
Boundary and the Line of Control; 
 India and Pakistan on 1 January, every year, exchange, throug h diplomatic channels 
simultaneously at New Delhi and Islamabad, the list of nuclear installations and facilities 
covered under the Agreement on the Prohibition of Attack against Nuclear Installations 
between India and Pakistan. This agreement entered into force on 27 January 1991.  
 In 2007, Pakistan and India signed an agreement on reducing the risk of nuclear 
accidents. The agreement has been subsequently extended every 5 years, for the period 
2017-2022.  
 In 2005, India and Pakistan signed an agreement on  pre-notification of flight testing of 
Ballistic Missiles. 
 
2.32 On non-military CBMs, progress was made on a number of areas relating to enhancing 
people-to-people contacts as well as implementing cross -border and cross -LoC trade and travel 
measures, which were agreed upon in other streams of the Composite Dialogue [ viz., Commerce 
Secretary/Defence Secretary level talks]. These include: 

17 
 
 Opening of cross-LoC trade points at Chakothi-Uri &  Rawalkot-Poonch 
 First Bus service between Srinagar and Muzaffarabad started in 2005. 
 Upgrading the infrastructure for trade and travel at Attari/Wagah by the establishment of 
the Integrated Check Posts [ICPs]. 
 Resumption of the passenger train service between Amritsar -Lahore and Munnabao -
Khokhrapar. 
 Annual working/operational level  meetings between BSF and Pakistan Rangers; between 
DGs of Pakistan Maritime Security Agency and Indian Coast Guard; and, between DGs 
of Narcotics Bureau of  India and Anti-Narcotics Force of Pakistan. 
 Signing of a revised and update d Visa Agreement in September 2012 which updated the 
previous visa regime of 1972 and provided for Business Visa and Group Tourism Visas. 
 
2.33 On being asked about the major achievements of the CBMs over the years, the Ministry 
of External Affairs respond ed that inspite of heightened tensions and incidents of ceasefire 
violations by Pakistan, most of the CBMs have been functioning over the years. The cross LoC 
trade continues, although occasionally it is suspended for short durations by either side owing t o 
incidents of cross border infiltration, etc. Similarly, the bus and train services have been 
operating without much disruption. Following a suicide bomb attack at Wagah [about 300 meters 
from the zero line on Pakistan side] in November 2014, in which ove r 70 Pakistanis were killed, 
Pakistan has restricted the bus service from India till Wagah only [not to the designated bus 
station in Lahore city]. It has arranged shuttle transportation services from ICP Wagah to Lahore 
city for passengers travelling from  India on these buses. At the same time, both sides have been 
exchanging lists of nuclear installations annually and also adhering to the pre -notification of 
ballistic missile tests to each other.    
2.34 During a meeting between the External Affairs Minis ter Smt. Sushma Swaraj and her 
Pakistani counterpart Shri Sartaz Aziz in 2015 along the sidelines of the Heart of Asia 
Conference in Islamabaad in 2015, it was agreed that the two sides would begin a 
Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue on various outstanding bilateral issues. However in view of 
the strained ties following the Pathankot attacks  and subsequent developments , no substantive 
progress appears to be happening in that direction. 
2.35 With regard to this Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue (C BD), the Committee wanted to 
know whether its modalities have been finalized.  The Ministry answered that the decision to 

18 
 
finalise the modalities for starting the Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue could not be taken 
forward in the aftermath of the terrorist  attack on the Air Base in Pathankot in January 2016 
coupled with Pakistan‟s continued support to cross border terrorism against India. 
2.36 Besides, the government level interactions, a number of interactions between institutions 
and peoples of the two co untries have taken place outside the formal channels of diplomacy 
which is referred to as Track Two Diplomacy.  On the Committee‟s query, the Ministry of 
External Affairs furnished the following information about the engagements between the two 
sides. These include: 
 “Chaophraya Dialogue” involving the retired Ambassadors, retired Foreign Secretaries, 
and retired members of the Armed Forces of both two countries. The 18 th round of the 
Dialogue was held in March 2016. The Islamabad -based Jinnah Institute and the 
Melbourne-based Australia India Institute [AII] jointly organise this Dialogue.  
 Pakistan Institute of Legislative Development and Transparency [PILDAT], based in 
Islamabad, in collaboration with some prominent Indians/think-tanks organises “Pakistan 
India Legislators and Public Officials Dialogue”. The last such event was held in Dubai 
in March 2017.  
2.37 Even through structured dialogue  that has been embarked upon since 2004, peace 
remains elusive.  Former Ambassador Shri Vivek Katju while deposing b efore the Committee 
stated that there has been a cyclical pattern of dialogue between the two countries oscillating 
between dialogue and its break in the aftermath of a major Pakistani sponsored terrorism activity. 
While talking about the validity of struc tured track two diplomacy, Shri K.S.Bajpai made a 
distinction between track two dialogue and track two approach to Pakistan for resumption of 
dialogue. 
 
2.38 The Committee note that the dialogue process between India and Pakistan has gone 
through numerous highs and lows in their bilateral relations. It has remained susceptible to 
unforeseen incidents which have derailed the peace process several times. A struct ured 
dialogue process between the two sides has been functioning since 2004 under the rubric of 
Composite Dialogue Process (2004 -2008) and Resumed Dialogue Process (2011 -13).  Based 
on a compromise approach, the peace process had enabled the two countries to discuss all 

19 
 
issues including Jammu &Kashmir. The Dialogue led to a ceasefire along the LoC, 
encouraged the possibilities of bilateral trade, inspired better people to people contacts and 
helped create conditions conducive for mature negotiations. During  this process, a number 
of Track Two mechanisms outside the formal channels of diplomacy had also played an 
important role.  The Committee further discern that the dialogue process between the two 
countries has followed a cyclical process of dialogue -terrorist attacks-dialogue. As a result, 
the modalities for starting the Composite Bilateral Dialogue have not been finalized till 
date. Having dialogue in the wake of terrorist attacks emanating from Pakistani soil has 
been the most challenging issue with succ essive Indian Governments. The Mumbai terror 
attack in November, 2008 pushed the peace process close to the brink of failure but it was 
not scuttled. In between, several efforts were made to initiate the dialogue  process but it 
faced a big setback  in the a ftermath of the terrorist attack on the Air Force base in 
Pathankot in January, 2016.  
 The Committee are of the considered opinion that peace process should not be held 
hostage to the acts of terrorism and both the countries must keep the channels of 
communication open, even during the worst of crises and not let non -state actors and their 
state sponsors derail or dictate the foreign policy objectives of sovereign nations. They 
further believe that the engagement between neighbours cannot be stopped indefi nitely. 
Dialogue process encompasses three key ingredients ̶ building cooperative mechanisms , 
dispute redressal and a humanitarian aspect.  The Committee find the Government‟s 
policy of suspending formal level dialogue with Pakistan owing to national secur ity 
concerns as justified by compulsions.  However, as averred in the previous 
recommendation, the Committee strongly urge the Government of India to use its good 
offices with all appropriate players and agencies so that Pakistan is made to realize the 
futility of continued imbroglio and is duly persuaded to join the dialogue at the earliest.  In 
the meantime, the Committee would like the Government to work out a clear -cut policy 
with regard to do‟s and don‟ts in the bilateral relation as also the faultline ss that both sides 
would be expected to scrupulously follow as non-negotiable. 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 
 

20 
 
III. BROAD APPROACH AND POLICY TOWARDS PAKISTAN 
2.39 India's approach towards its relation with Pakistan in the present situation has been 
succinctly spelt out by the Ministry of External Affairs. India desires peaceful and cooperative 
relations with Pakistan in an environment free from violence and terror. India is also committed 
to resolving all outstanding issues with Pakistan through a peaceful bilateral dialogue on the 
basis of the Simla Agreement and Lahore declarations. However, for progress to be achieved, it 
is necessary that Pakistan abides by its commitment of not allowing its territory or areas under its 
control to be utilized for aiding and abetting terrorism directed against India, and take effective 
action to stop all such activities. 
 
2.40 On being asked, the Ministry of External Affairs spelt out the Government of India‟s 
broad approach towards Pakistan. The broad principles that the Government has consistently 
followed in its relations with Pakistan are as below: 
 In keeping with pursuit of „neighbourhood first‟ policy and vision of friendly and 
prosperous neighbourhood, the Government has advocated peaceful, friendly and 
cooperative relations with Pakistan, in an environment free from the shadow of 
terrorism, violence and hostility. In this context, the Government has reached out 
to Pakistan whenever the opportunity arose. This included the invitation to the 
Prime Minister of Pakistan for the swearing -in ceremony of the Government in 
May 2014; the visit of External Affairs Minister to Islamabad in December 2015 
for the Heart of Asia Ministerial Summit; and stop over by Prime Minister at 
Lahore in December 2015. 
 All outstanding issues between India and Pakistan should be resolved peacefully 
and bilaterally on  the bas is of the Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration. 
It is in keeping with this that when EAM had visited Islamabad in December 
2015, it was agreed to initiate a Comprehensive „Bilateral‟ Dialogue. However, it 
could not be taken forward in the aftermath of the terrorist attack on the Air Force 
base in Pathankot in January 2016 and Pakistan‟s continuing support to cross 
border terrorism.  
  Determination and resolve to not compromise on issues of national security and 
give a firm response to cross border terrorism. This resolve has been 
demonstrated through the counter terrorism operations by the Indian armed forces 
against various terrorist  launching pads across the Line of Control on September 
29, 2016 and a strong response to the unprovoked ceasefire violations by Pakistan 
along the Line of Control and the International Boundary. 

21 
 
2.41 When asked about the theoretical perspective, if any, t hat defines the Government‟s 
policy vis-a-vis Pakistan, the Ministry stated that  the broad contours of our policy towards 
Pakistan remains the same as with all our neighbouring countries i.e. a peaceful and prosperous 
South Asia would enhance development o pportunities for the people of the region; and securing 
security of the borders and internal security for creating an enabling climate for greater 
investment, economic growth and job creation remains the corner stone of our foreign policy, 
which also infor ms our approach to Pakistan. Government remains committed to resolve all 
outstanding issues with Pakistan bilaterally and peacefully in keeping with the spirit of Simla 
Agreement and Lahore Declaration.  However, the challenge of cross -border terrorism, ceasefire 
violations by Pakistan and support to anti -India organizations operating freely in Pakistan, 
continue to have a negative impact on our vision for a secure, prosperous and peaceful 
neighbourhood. The Government continues to meet this challenge with r esolve and 
determination.  
 
2.42 Despite being at the receiving end of Pakistani backed terrorism over the decades, India 
is yet to evolve a comprehensive and coherent national policy to deal with Pakistan. The 
Committee in their earlier Reports have also reiterated the need to frame a national security 
doctrine. When asked about the opinion of the Ministry of External affairs on the same, the 
Ministry replied that it would be inaccurate to say that the Government does not have a coherent 
policy towards Pak istan. The Government has followed a consistent policy guided by the 
following broad principles: 
 advocated peaceful, friendly and cooperative relations with Pakistan, in an 
environment free from the shadow of terrorism, violence and hostility;  
 all outstanding issues to be resolved bilaterally and peacefully in keeping with the 
Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration; and 
 to not compromise on issues related to national security and firmly respond to 
cross border terrorism.  
The Ministry further stated that the issue of a security doctrine is not the mandate of the Ministry 
of External Affairs. However, the Government is committed to taking all necessary steps to 
protect national security and promote our national interests. 
 

22 
 
2.43 During the oral evidence on 12  January 2017,  the Committee had raised the issue of 
creation of a National Security Doctrine. The Defence Secretary acknowledged:- 
 “there has to be some kind of a National Security Framework that we need to prepare 
and we have been discussing it. It is ultimately the work of the National Security Council. 
I am sure this will evolve into something more concrete in the days to come...” 
 
2.44 During their testimony before the Committee  on 30 March 2017 , some of the experts 
were of the opinion that India's policy towards Pakistan is reflective of strategic confusion. Air 
Vice Marshal Kapil Kak, for instance stated that 'Inconsistency on policy evolution during crises 
whether Parliament attack, Mumbai 26/11, Pathankot airbase and Uri has been palpable. There 
appears to be too many forward and backward movements and sharp U-turns. 
  
2.45  The Committee have noted that India‟s policy and approach towards Pakistan has 
been formulated on three broad principles, namely peaceful resolution of outstanding 
issues in keeping with the Simla Agreement and Lahore Declaration,  normalization of ties 
without compromising national security considerations and responding firmly to cross -
border terrorism. The Committee are, however, constrained to observe that the repeated 
existence of multiple crises resulting from militancy, insurgency, terrorist attacks, unsettled 
border disputes etc. clearly demonstrates the need for a National Security Framework and 
a coherent strategy towards Pakistan. 
 While the Government may say that a lot has been controlled, the goings -on, on the 
Western border have created a publ ic perception that anti -national activities through 
proxies are still being carried out with impunity.  Such a situation could have been avoided 
had the Government put in place a National Security Framework.  The Committee desire 
that a comprehensive Natio nal Security Framework be worked out after evolving 
consensus on its various aspects.   The Committee desire that the Ministry of External 
Affairs should play a rightful role in shaping such a Framework without any further loss of 
time. 
 (Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER-3 
STRATEGIC DIMENSION OF THE RELATIONSHP 
 In this chapter, the term strategic is used to refer to a holistic framework embracing 
diplomacy and security for achieving national interests. The strategic dimension of India 
Pakistan relationship encompasses major currents of continuity and change in security 
perspectives of the two countries.  Six major themes run through this chapter which inter alia 
includes border management and security, subversive activities including terr orism, the issue of 
Jammu & Kashmir, nuclear and missile programmes and recent surgical strikes. 
I. BORDER MANAGEMENT AND SECURITY 
3.2 India shares 3,323 Km of its International Border with Pakistan, running along the States 
of  Gujarat (508 km), Rajasthan (1037 km), Punjab (553 km) and Jammu & Kashmir (1225 km).  
Out of this 3323km Border, 2289.66 km is under control of MHA, 10.5 km under MoD and the 
balance is in POK.  
 
A.  Security Measures along Indo-Pakistan Border  
3.3 The Government of India in tandem with the State Government, has adopted a multi -
pronged approach to contain cross border infiltration from Pakistan, which inter -alia, includes 
strengthening of the border infrastructure, multi -tiered and multi -modal deployment  along 
International Border / Line of Control, and near the ever changing infiltration routes, 
construction of border fencing, improved technological surveillance, weapons and equipment for 
Security Forces [SFs], improved intelligence and operational coord ination; synergized 
intelligence flow and pro-active action against terrorists within the State.  
3.4 The India -Pakistan border has varied terrain and distinct geographical features. When 
asked about the security infrastructure along the Indo -Pak border, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
replied that t he Government has sanctioned construction of fences, floodlights, border roads & 
Border Out Posts [BOPs] along the Indo-Pakistan Border. Out 2289.6 km IB under the control of 
MHA, 88.87% border is covered with physical barrier, i.e., fence. The remaining border length is 
mostly not feasible for construction of physical barrier due to terrain conditions like 
swampy/marshy area, riverine area etc. Such stretches are proposed to be covered with 

24 
 
technological solutions. Further, out of 2020.844 km of sanctioned, floodlight in 1920.844 km 
has been completed and total of 656 BOPs are held by BSF along IPB. 
3.5 Further, this security infrastructure is aided by the induction of the latest surveillance 
equipment like Hand Held Thermal Imagers [HHTI], Long Range Recce Observation Systems 
[LORROS], Night vision Goggle/Devices, etc. Beside this, it has also been decided to deploy 
technological solutions in the form of integration of Radars, Sensors, Cameras, Communication 
Networks and Command and Control Solutions in various difficult/vulnerable areas along the 
border. 
3.6 It is pertinent to make reference to the Group of Minister‟s Report [2001] on „Reforming 
the National Security System‟ contained specific recommendations on issues related to Border 
Management. At present there are instances of more than one force working on the same border 
and questions on conflict in command and control have been raised frequently. Multiplicity of 
forces on the same border has also led to la ck of accountability on the part of the forces. To 
enforce their accountability, the principle of „one border one force‟ was recommended to be 
adopted while considering deployment of forces at the borders. In light of the recommendation, 
the Committee spec ifically wanted to be informed about the steps that have been taken to 
implement it. The Ministry of Home Affairs in a written reply submitted that  the principle of 
One Border, One Force has already been implemented. Accordingly, the Indo-Pakistan and Indo-
Bangladesh Border is being manned by Border Security Force, whereas the Indo-China Border is 
being guarded by Indo -Tibetan Border Police Force and Indo -Nepal & Indo -Bhutan Border is 
looked after by Shastra Seema Bal while the Myanmar border is manned by Assam Rifles. 
3.7 The Committee are  aware that the Border Security Force [BSF] has been guarding the 
Indo-Pak border since 1965.  The Ministry of Home Affairs have informed that the following 
measures have been adopted by BSF for security of Indo-Pak Border: 
a) Policing and Patrolling. 
b) Intelligence and close coordination with State/Central agencies. 
c) Surveillance through the latest equipments like Hand Held Thermal Imagers [HHTI], 
Laser Walls, Infrared Beams, Night Vision Devices, LORROS etc. 
d) Technological solutions in the form of integration of Radars, Sensors, Cameras, 
Communication networks and Command and Control Solutions in various difficult 
terrains. 

25 
 
e) Community interaction and civic action program of Border Guarding Forces. 
 
3.8 Despite such multi -pronged approach to check cross -border infiltration and smuggling 
these activities have continued unabated.  In this regard, when the Ministry of Home Affairs was 
asked to enumerate the challenges faced to contain such activities, they submitted that in the 
event of persistent cross border firing, various measures are taken by the State Government for 
the convenience of the people residing in the border districts.  The affected families are shifted to 
safer places temporarily in Government and private accommod ation where they are provided all 
the basic amenities like health care, drinking water, power, temporary toilet, sanitation and 
security, till restoration of normalcy on the borders, after which they return to their homes.   
Security measures are augmented in border areas and anti -infiltration grid is strengthened. 
 Police deployment is made for border villages during the night.   Adequate security is provided 
to the abandoned villages for protection of property.   Senior Police Officers camp round the 
clock in border areas.  Close coordination among BSF, Army, Police and Civil Administration is 
maintained.  Uninterrupted power supply is provided in Border villages during the night.   BP 
bunkers and ambulances are kept in ready at convenient locations for the ev acuation of persons 
in case of emergency. 
 
3.9 The Ministry of Home Affairs in a background note provided the following data on cross 
border firing on International Border in the State of Jammu & Kashmir. 
Year No. of Cross-Border 
Firing incidents on IB 
Casualties of BSF personnel during trans-border 
firing incidents 
International Border Line of Control 
Died Injured Died Injured 
2014 430 2 15 - 2 
2015 253 1 5 3 4 
2016 221 3 10 2 15 
 
3.10 At part of their study visit, the Committee visited the headquarters of XIV Corps in Leh.  
During discussions with the Representatives of Ministry of Defence, the Committee were 
informed that the prevailing situation on the Indo -Pak border is very volatile and is marked b y 
numerous ceasefire violations.  In fact, there had been a total of 63 ceasefire violations by 

26 
 
Pakistan during the last year.  The Committee were further informed that there have been a few 
sporadic incidents of attempted construction by Pakistan along th e LoC in this zone and all these 
activities are being calibrated by the Pakistani Army to strengthen their position on the border. 
3.11 The Committee were also briefed about the history of occupation of the Siachen Glacier 
and the various operational and n atural challenges that are being faced by the security forces 
while guarding the commanding mountainous heights.  A brief history of „Operation Meghdoot‟ 
was provided to the Committee.  The Committee were informed that the Indian Army is at an 
advantageous position vis-à-vis Pakistani forces in the Siachen Glacier. 
 
3.12 When asked about the specific circumstances leading to militarization of the Siachen, the 
Ministry of Defence answered that in 1983, there were intelligence reports to indicate Pak‟s 
intention to occupy areas in the vicinity of Siachen Glacier.  To pre-empt such a move, Operation 
Meghdoot was launched in April, 1984 by Indian Army to secure the entire Saltoro Ridge, which 
dominates Siachen Glacier.   
 
3.13 On being asked about the steps taken by the two sides for demilitarization of the Glacier, 
the Ministry of Defence elucidated that  starting from 1986 after the visit of General Zia -Ul-Haq 
to India in 1985; decision was taken to hold the Defence Secretary level Talks to resolve the 
conflict. There have been Thirteen Rounds of Talks between India and Pakistan to resolve the 
dispute.      
3.14  The Ministry of External Affairs additionally stated that we  have followed a consistent 
position that we finalize the authentication of the present positions as a first step, followed by 
delineation of the LoC beyond point NJ9842. Once this is achieved, demilitarization or 
relocation of troops to mutually agreed positions could follow.  
3.15 On the Committee's question about the manner in which  the Ch ina factor has further 
complicated the security vulnerabilities of India emanating from that part of the region, the 
Ministry stated that the recent developments in infrastructure opposite Siachen Glacier, the 
growing Chinese assertiveness and the increase d Chinese presence in Gilgit –Baltistan are other 
major ground realities which impinge on the resolution of the dispute.   

27 
 
3.16 During the study visit to Wagah border,  the Committee were informed that the BSF has 
divided the Western border along five frontiers namely Kashmir Frontier, Jammu Frontier, 
Punjab Frontier, Rajasthan Frontier and Gujarat Frontier.  The Punjab Frontier is all fenced 
except for 10 Kms.  Further, s ome of the peculiar challenges encountered in the Punjab Frontier 
are dense fog, uneven ground, elephant grass and smuggling of drugs and narcotics.  These 
factors complicate the task of border management in the Region. 
3.17 On the Committee‟s query about any assessment done on cross border smuggling trends, 
the Ministry of Home Affairs answered that BSF has made an assessment of cross border 
smuggling trends. There has been variation in trend of cross border smuggling, however, over 
the years there has been increase in interception.  
 The cases of smuggling/seizures increases in months of November to March. Reason 
being the weather remains foggy and it causes poor visibility. 
 Due to the cultivation, weeding and harvesting season, the frequency of movements o f 
local people increases in border area. 
 
3.18 During the year 2016 -17, the Ministry of Home Affairs had declared that the Indo -Pak 
border would be completely sealed by December, 2018. When asked to elaborate upon the 
manner/plan for sealing the border, th e Ministry of Home Affairs responded that the total border 
length along IPB is 2289.66 km, 2040.1 km of IPB has been covered by Physical barrier and 
remaining 249.61 km of border is planned to be covered by physical and/or non -physical barrier 
to cover the entire Indo-Pakistan Border. Most of the remaining border length is not feasible for 
construction of physical barrier due to terrain conditions like swampy/marshy area, riverine area 
etc. Such stretches are proposed to be covered with technological solutions. 
 
3.19 To expedite the process, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the BSF has already 
initiated a pilot project to test the sophisticated technologies available globally. After analyzing 
the outcome of the pilot study, specifications for different terrain will be formulated. The funding 
for the deployment of technologies will be arranged in consultation with Ministry of Finance. 
While giving testimony before the Committee  on 12 January 2017 , the Representatives of the 
Ministry further stated as under:- 

28 
 
 “Regarding the usage of satellite for border surveillance, we are already using 
satellites for various applications in the BSF and the other Central paramilitary forces.... I 
would feel that we will be achieving this particular target of real time surveillance say in 
two to three years‟ time when all the satellites are in place. You require powerful 
satellites and several of them. That is process and ISRO is working very ambitiously on 
that and funds are also available with them.” 
 
3.20 On the Committee‟s further query about mechanisms available for periodic monitoring of 
the border, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that many institutional mechanisms are already 
in place for periodic monitoring of the border security. These include, High Leve l Empowered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Home Secretary,  Steering Committee under the 
chairmanship of Secretary [Border Management], periodic monitoring by the DG, BSF and State 
Level Standing Committee under Chairmanship of Chief Secretary of each  State. Besides, 
periodic review of border security is also being held at the various levels in MHA including at 
the highest level. 
 
3.21 When asked about the various formal, informal/institutional and extra -institutional 
mechanisms in existence between th e security forces of the two countries, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated that b order issues with counterpart are resolved through meetings and tele 
conversation.  Meetings are of two types i.e. Scheduled and Unscheduled. 
(i) Scheduled meetings:- 
(a) At DG Level :This is the highest level meeting between two forces to be held bi -
annually once in Pakistan and once in India.  Due to unstable relations with Pakistan, 
Bi-annual meetings are not regular.  Last three years details are as under:- 
1. 2013 (December) Lahore 
2. 2015 (September) Delhi 
3. 2016 (July) Delhi 
 
(b) At Sector Level: This is a scheduled meeting to be held every three months.  
Meetings are held alternately on India and Pakistan side of the boundary at following 
places. 
1. JCP Attari/Wagha  – during last five years, no Sector Comdr level meeting was 
held.  Last meeting was held on 19.12.2012. 

29 
 
 2. JCP Munabao/Khokhrapar – Details of Sector Comdr level meeting held during 
last three years 
1. 16.6.2014 Khikrapar 
2. 26.8.2015 Munabao (India side) 
3. 28.1.2016 Khokhrapar (Pak side) 
(c) At Battalion Commander Level : The Bn Comdr level border meetings are the 
routine border meetings held between the Commandants of the BSF Bn and Wing 
Commanders of Pakistan Rangers.  These are held every month or on need basis except 
Jammu whereas these meetings are being held on Punjab and Rajasthan Ftr regularly. 
(ii) Unscheduled meetings: - Flag meetings are unscheduled meetings between operational 
level commanders who seek to meet their counterparts as and when it is felt that a violation or 
disputes need immediate dialogue and resolution.  These meetings are held at the boundary line 
or in its close vicinity and are attended by Coy Comdrs. 
 
(iii)  Tele-conversation with counterpart : Tele -conversation mechanism also exists between 
BSF and Pakistan Rangers.  Telephone numbers of Director Generals.  Senior Staff officers 
and Sector Commanders of Jammu have also been exchanged. However, Coy Commander, 
Comdt and Sector Commander level contacts/flag meetings are being conducted with 
counterpart to sort out the border issues.  Besides, strong written protests are also being lodged 
by BSF. 
 
3.22 The Ministry of Home has informed that in different incidents on 2016, 199 protest notes 
have been lodged with the counterpart by BSF whereas 215 counter protest notes have been 
lodged by Pak Rangers with BSF in Jammu region. In this context, the Committee wa nted to 
know the content as well as outcome of the above -mentioned protest notes. The Ministry of 
Home Affairs stated that Protest notes normally contain the issues related to: 
[a] Breach of norms on International Border 
[b] Illegal entry by persons of counterpart country 
[c] Trans-border crimes committed by criminals of opposite side 
[d] Construction of defence within 150 yards from International Border 
[e] Digging/Detection of tunnel 
[f] Flying of balloon/Helicopter/UAVs 
[g] Cross-border firing/shelling 

30 
 
[h] Clearing of sarkanda etc 
 
3.23 The Ministry further stated that on receipt of protest notes from counterpart, the note is 
studied in depth to ascertain basic issues, the facts are verified by visiting the site of incident and 
a suitable reply is sent to  the counterpart without jeopardizing the interest of the country and the 
force. The border meetings and flag meetings are conducted with the representative of the Border 
Guarding Forces who are equal in status. These meetings are conducted to resolve mino r irritants 
and these must be made use of to develop cordial working relationship without compromising 
own interest. Local issues are normally resolved. However, if issue needs intervention of higher 
HQ, matter is referred to Sector Commander Level meeting or Director General Level Talk. 
  
3.24 On the Committee‟s specific query on the utility of these protest notes, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs illustrated that  t hese meetings are conducted to resolve minor issues and these 
must be made use of to develop cordial working relationship without compromising own interest. 
Local issues are normally resolved. However, if issue needs the intervention of a higher HQ, the 
matter is referred to a Sector Commander Level meeting or Director General Level Talks. 
 
3.25 In the aftermath of the Pathankot attacks, Madhukar Gupta Committee was formed to 
review security of India -Pakistan border. The Committee has submitted its recommendation to 
the Home Minister. When asked about the major recommendations made by the Committee, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs stated the Committee has submitted its recommendations broadly on 
the issues of Border Protection, assessment of force level, deployment on the border, 
infrastructure and technology issues for protection of border and administrative issues. 
           
B. ICP, Attari and Wagah Border 
3.26 ICP, Attari on India -Pakistan border provides state of the art facilities for the smooth, 
safe and systematic movement of vehicles, cargo and passengers. On the Committee‟s query on 
the steps taken to upgrade the equipments at ICP, Attari since its operationalization in 2012, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs specified the following:-  

31 
 
[a] Installation of Digital CCTV: CCTV is a critical part of the security surveillance system. 
LPAI has replaced the existing analog system with a digital CCTV system. 
[b] Construction of shed for cargo and paving of open yard for loose cargo at ICP 
Attari:Members of the trade have raised the issue of augmentation of the infrastructure at 
ICP Attari relating to developme nt of open yard for storage of loose cargo and 
construction of covered shed inter -alia for handling hazardous cargo. LPAI has deputed 
the Executive Engineer, PWD, Amritsar Division to undertake the work. Proposal for 
Digital Survey and Soil Testing for construction of a covered shed and development of an 
open yard has been approved and work is in progress. 
[c] Construction of OP Towers:Border Security Force, which provides security at the ICP, 
has projected the requirement of Observation Towers for security  purpose. LPAI has 
approved the construction of 16 Observation Towers on the ICP boundary at a cost of Rs. 
52,87,968/-. The work is in progress. 
 
3.27 In the context of the apprehensions that Samjhauta Express is being used for gun running 
and drug trafficking business. Similar arrangements are also needed to ensure full proof security 
checks in respect of the bus service that running between India and Pakistan.  When asked about 
the corrective measures taken in this direction, the Ministry of Home Affairs s tated that with 
respect to the point raised, very recently, both at the Integrated Check Post [ICP], Attari from 
where the bus service operates as well as at the Land Customs Station [LCS], Attari Rail, two 
highly advanced machines have been procured for t he preventive purpose.The Video Boroscope 
assists in the detailed examination of various cavities in the Bus and the Railway wagons of the 
Samjhuata Express as well as of the Interchange.  Another technology intensive machine is that 
of Trace Detectors originally sourced from Israel and capable of detecting both narcotics and 
explosives which has auxillarised the process of through checking and ruling out any nefarious 
activity from smuggling point of view. Further, the staff has been trained for handlin g these 
machines effectively as well as sensitized to remain vigilant in their day to day duties. 
 
C. Maritime Security 
3.28 Following the Mumbai terror attacks, the security of maritime border with Pakistan has 
become a major area of concern. When asked t he steps taken by Government of India to ensure 
security of India -Pakistan maritime border, the Ministry of Defence stated that the Indian Navy 
has been designated as the agency responsible for overall maritime security, including coastal 
and offshore security. Initiatives to strengthen coastal security are being undertaken by a number 

32 
 
of agencies of Central and State Governments. Regular monitoring/review of the measures is 
undertaken at Ministry of Defence and National Committee on Strengthening Maritime and 
Coastal Security (NCSMCS). 
3.29 Elaborating the issue of maritime security the Ministry of Defence further informed that 
Naval and Coast Guard ships are deployed for patrolling along the Indo -Pak Maritime border. 
They are also supported by regular airc raft sorties. In addition to patrolling by surface and air 
assets, electronic surveillance of the region is being done by using chain of coastal/offshore 
radars, National Automatic Identification System (NAIS) chain and Long Range Identification 
and Tracking (LRIT) System. The fitment of transponders to track fishing vessels is also under 
process. Further, Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard conduct regular exercises in the Arabian 
Sea that bolster our defence preparedness. A new Coast Guard Regional Headqua rters (North 
West) was formed in December 2009 to monitor and coordinate maritime security activities of 
Gujarat coast. Three new Coast Guard stations were also set up at Veraval, Mundra and Pipavav 
for coordinating security issues with stake holders. Indi an Coast Guard also deploys hovercrafts 
and Interceptor boats in coordination with State Marine Police for coastal patrolling in areas 
close to Indo-Pak maritime border. 
3.30 During their study visit to the Coast Guard headquarters (Western region) in Mumbai, 
The Committee were briefed about various maritime security issues which included politically 
volatile and not so friendly neighbor, putative International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL), 
possibility of infiltration through sea routes for anti -national activities, transgression of Indian 
fishermen across IMBL, report on development of marine wing of terror groups, drugs, narcotics 
& contraband smuggling, arms trafficking, increasing Chinese assertions in Pakistani Maritime 
Affairs and employment of retired Pakistani naval personnel as armed guards on board merchant 
ships. 
3.31 The Committee were also informed that ICG is coordinating with the Pakistan Maritime 
Security Agency (PMSA) on a number of issues under the Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) signed in 2005. The MoU envisages establishment of communication link between ICG 
& PMSA, exchange of information on violation of each other‟s EEZ, exchange of information 
relating to smuggling and illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substan ces, 

33 
 
facilitation of Maritime Search & Rescue operations and exchanging information concerning 
Natural disasters/calamities. 
3.32  The Committee are aware that India shares 3,323 km of its international border 
with Pakistan.  These borders are shared by fo ur Indian Stat es and there are two 
Ministries − Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence − responsible for border 
management and security.  The Committee are happy to find that a multi -pronged 
approach ha s been adopted to contain cross -border infil tration and smuggling from 
Pakistan.  During their study visit to Leh, Attari and Wagah borders, the Committee were 
apprised about the prevailing situation along the border as well as the challenges of 
guarding the borders at difficult and varied terrains.   The Committee had also learnt that 
the Government has decided to seal the Eastern and Western Indo -Pak border by 2018 
through a Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS).  The 
Committee are also pleased to know about the existence of vari ous mechanisms between 
the two countries for periodic monitoring of the border and for dealing with minor border 
related issues. The Committee also observe that apart from patrolling by surface and air 
assets, electronic surveillance of the maritime border  between the two countries is also 
being done. By implementing the „One Border One Force‟ principle, the Government has 
taken a right step towards imparting greater coherence in border management and 
security.  
 (Recommendation No 4) 
3.33 The Committee appreciate the Border Security Force (BSF) for their commendable 
task of safeguarding India -Pakistan border. In view of the prevailing volatile situation 
along the border, the Committee would recommend that the Government should take 
tangible steps to strengthen and modernize border security. The Committee would 
particularly express their concern towards poor road conditions along the border and 
desire that along with fencing, the Government should take focussed steps to properly 
maintain the existing roads and construct good and well lit roads along the Indo -Pak 
border for proper vigilance. While appreciating the proposed decision of the Government 
to introduce Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System (CIBMS), the 

34 
 
Committee would suggest that it should be completed in a time -bound manner without any 
cost and time overruns.   
 The Committee note that modern technological means, including sophisticated 
electronic sensors and powerful satellites, are the need of the hour to ensure real -time 
surveillance on the borders.  The Committee are happy to note that ISRO is working very 
ambitiously on this project and adequate funds for the same are also available.  The 
Committee are hopeful that ISRO will complete the project in a time -bound manner and 
hand over the same to the Border Management Department for effective border 
surveillance.   The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this direction.  
The Committee are also concerned to observe that Punjab has become a hotbed for 
drugs and illegal smuggling through the border.  The Committee, therefore, would strongly 
suggest that BSF should sufficiently shore up defences against drug trafficking and there 
should be a greater synergy between various agencies to counter drug menace in the  State 
of Punjab. Coastal security being equally important, the Committee also recommend the 
Government to take measures to strengthen coastal security and surveillance and it should 
be made full proof by establishing a high level co -ordination mechanism b etween Indian 
Coast Guard and other agencies such as the Navy, Central Industrial Security Force, 
Customs, Ports, Fisheries, Marine Police etc. 
(Recommendation No 5) 
 
3.34 The Committee note that strategic considerations in the wake of Pakistani 
aggression had led to the occupation of the Siachen Glacier in 1983.  The Committee are 
cognizant of various operational and natural challenges faced by our security forces while 
guarding the commanding heights of the region.  It is further observed that 13 rounds o f 
official talks at the Defence Secretary level have been held so far to resolve the dispute.  
The Committee are satisfied to know that the Indian Army is at an advantageous position 
vis-à-vis Pakistani forces in the Siachen. The Committee are of the consi dered opinion that 
the deployment of Indian forces at Siachen under looming security threat from Pakistan, 
cannot be de -linked from the overall security of the Kashmir region.  In view of the fact 
that India is currently occupying strategic heights and adv antage at Siachen, it is 

35 
 
Pakistan‟s agenda to push for demilitarization of the glacier.  Moreover, the Committee 
observe that the present cooperation between China and Pakistan has assumed worrying 
proportions and therefore, the Committee would recommend t he Government of India to 
analyse the challenges clearly and accordingly persist with the right strategy.  
(Recommendation No 6) 
II. SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES  BY PAKISTAN AND CROSS BORDER  
TERRORISM  
3.35 Pakistan unfortunately has not been able to reconcile itself to India as a peaceful 
neighbour and has been indulging in following anti India actions such as:-  
(i) Infiltration of terrorist into India mainly through J&K from Pakistan is continuing 
unabated.  
(ii) Pakistan has not yet taken any effective action against the perpetrators of Mumbai 
terrorist attack, including Hafiz Mohammed Sayed and several other LeT 
Commanders, who are still roaming freely in Pakistan fomenting intense anti -
India hatred campaign.  
(iii) Despite ban, LeT and JeM continue to be reorganized and operate under different 
names and covers inside Pakistan with their terrorists infrastructures completely 
intact.   
(iv) Sikh extremist leaders of BKI, KCF, KZF and ISYF are still based in Pakistan 
and patronized by ISI to resurrect Sikh Militancy in India.  
(v) Smuggling of narcotics, FICN etc., from Pakistan through the Indo -Pak border as 
well as trains besides routed through various other countries is continuing 
unabated.   
(vi) There are several IM, JIAM and underworld operatives of Indian origin facing 
serious charges in India and presently taking shelter and patronized by ISI and 
non-state actors inside Pakistan. 
3.36 During cou rse of oral evidence  o 12 January 2017 , Director General of Intelligence 
Bureau made a representation and illuminated the Committee on the various subversive activities 
carried out by Pakistan as under:- 

36 
 
 “On the issue of subversion by Pakistan in India, s ubversion essentially would 
imply breaking down the loyalties of the other person to be able to make him do the 
things that the perpetrator wants.  So, in Jammu &  Kashmir this is manifested.  There are 
separatist groups who tend to follow the line that Pak istan wants them to follow.  Over 
the past few years, we have been witnessing that they play to the tune of Pakistan.  Other 
than that, which is more manifest, there are always subtler ways of Pakistan‟s sabotage.  
Drug trade is one; fake Indian currency n ote is another manifestation of subversion.  
Subverting some disaffected groups in India is another method; for instance, some of the 
leaders of Sikh groups are also based in Pakistan.  They get constant direction from there.  
Manjeet Singh, the leader of the Khalistan Zindabad Force is based in Pakistan while the 
organisation operators in South Jammu & Kashmir in Kathua region and Punjab.  So, that 
is another form of subversion.  More so, in other States of India, they have heard of 
Indian Mujahideen.  Our  understanding is that Indian Mujahideen is an organisation set 
up by Pakistan, but in such a manner that its control over the outfit is not visible.  It 
appears to be an indigenous terrorist organisation.” 
3.37 When asked about the various anti -India activities undertaken by Pakistan on the border 
as well as inside the country, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that J&K is facing Pak/POK 
sponsored terrorism, spearheaded by the Pak ISI, for more than twenty years. The terrorists have 
been undergoing arms/ explosives training and fundamentalist indoctrination across the border, 
where after they are pushed across the border into own side to indulge in acts of terrorism. They 
are provided all kind of assistance including money & material from across through th eir agents. 
At present, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, Hizb-ul Mujahideen and Jaish -e-Mohammad [JeM] are the main 
militant outfits operating in the State besides fringe elements of other outfits like Al Badr, 
Harkat-ul- Hehad-e-Islami etc. These militant organizations  also have a thriving OGW network 
in the Valley to assist them in their activities. 
3.38 Elucidating the activities of Int er-Services Intelligence (ISI), Ministry of Home Affairs 
stated that Pakistan has been engaged in low intensity warfare against India using its premier 
Intelligence Agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence [ISI], as a tool to sponsor terrorism in India. 
It keeps on working endlessly with its plans for mindless violence to cause escalation of the level 
of terror activities in Jammu & Kashm ir, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, the North -East, 

37 
 
Maharashtra, Gujarat and elsewhere in Indian hinterland. The ISI is the prime mover in this 
design. Besides other countries in the region including Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka also have 
the footprin ts of ISI, and are mainly used as launching pads for pan -Islamic outfits like Let, 
Harkat-ul-Ansar and Kashmiri militant groups like JK LF, HM and Lkhwan -ul-Muslimeen to 
carry out their anti -India activities. Concerted efforts are being made by the ISI and its resident 
agents and also through the systematic use of the Pak diplomatic channels to pursue the twin 
objectives of organizing and guiding anti -India activities and spreading anti -India feelings 
amongst the Muslim population located along the sensitive borders with Pakistan. 
 
3.39  Moreover, cadres of jehadi mindset have been observed to have joined militant outfits 
including LeT, JeM , HM, HUJI, AL Badr, ALUmar, IM, etc. which are handled by ISI 
operatives. Records in this connection show that such elements have not only exercised terror 
actions in J&K, but also have hit the parts of Indian hinterland on the ultimate directions of ISI.  
 
3.40 Indian hinterland also faces a serious and continuing challeng e to its internal security 
from Pak-ISI sponsored terrorist outfits including LeT, JeM, HM, HuM, and Indian Mujahideen 
[IM]. These outfits continue to receive shelter and assistance from the state sponsored actors and 
in turn persecute the latter‟s strateg ic objectives not only in India but also in the wider region. 
Under patronage, direction and control of Pak -ISI, Pak -based most wanted terrorist 
leaders/Indian fugitives including Hafiz Mohd Saeed, Chief of JuD/LeT, Zaki -ur-Rehman 
Lakhvi, LeT Commander, Sy ed Salahuddin, HM Supremo//UJC Chairman, Rasool Parthy, 
LeT/Underworld operative, Riyaz and Iqbal Bhatkal, both IM top leaders, etc. are working for 
anti-India activities. 
3.41 Interrogation of arrested terrorists by the investigation agencies has disclose d that 
Pakistan Inter -Service Intelligence [ISI] is promoting terror activities in India by providing 
shelter, patronage and funding to terrorists of all hues. The fugitives such as Dawood Ibrahim, 
Sikh radical elements etc. sheltered in Pakistan are engag ed in anti-India activities like providing 
financial support to terror activities, circulation of FICNs, revival of terror activities in Punjab, 
radicalization of youth etc. 
 

38 
 
3.42 On the Committee‟s further query about steps taken by the Government to chec k, curb or 
neutralize such anti -India activities, the Ministry of Home Affairs pointed out that the 
Government has raised the issue of Pakistan‟s support to various terror outfits in many ways like 
Home/Interior Minister/Secretary level talks, Foreign Secr etary level talks, etc. and handed over 
relevant material/dossiers to the Pakistan Authorities. At the same time, the Government takes all 
necessary measures to foil the nefarious activities of Pak -based/supported terror outfits in India. 
India has also ra ised the issue of Pakistan‟s support to terror outfits at other bilateral and multi -
lateral forums. India has also initiated the process of listing of terrorists/ terrorist organizations 
based in Pakistan in the UNSCR list to curb their activities. 
 
3.43 It further enumerated that the Government has also adopted various counter measures to 
neutralise the efforts and capabilities of militants to disturb peace in the State of J&K. The 
Government has also encouraged policies to mainstream the youth, including  providing 
employment opportunities to wean them away from militancy. Some of the visible area of focus 
includes: - 
 Proactively take suitable measures by all the Security Forces to safeguard the borders 
from cross-border terrorism and to contain militancy. 
 To ensure that the democratic process is sustained and primacy of civil administration 
is restored to effectively tackle the socio -economic problems facing the people on 
account of the effects of prolonged militancy in the State, and 
 To ensure sustained peace process and to provide adequate opportunities to all sections 
of the people in the State who eschew violence to effectively represent their view 
points and to redress their genuine grievances. 
3.44 On being asked about the response of Pakistani Govern ment towards such activities, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs responded that no response or cooperation has so far been received 
from Pakistan on the above-mentioned issues. 
3.45 Terrorism remains the core concern of India vis-a-vis Pakistan. During evidence before 
the Committee  on 12 January 2017 , the Foreign Secretary underscored the menace of cross -
border terrorism when he stated:- 
“...the fundamental issue in respect of Pakistan is how we respond to this continuous 
cross border terrorism.  It may wax or it  may wane but never really ceases.  An entire 
industry of terrorism has been created and while that is consuming Pakistan itself, that is 
of little consolation to us.” 

39 
 
3.46 Further, as a counter to Pakistan‟s wrongful depiction of itself as a victim of ter rorism, 
the Foreign Secretary suggested as under:- 
 “the first challenge in that regard is to break the equivalence between India and Pakistan 
that has been so carefully constructed by Pakistan and its supporters.  To do that, we must 
first be clear in our  own minds.  We are not both equal victims of terrorism.  Ours is 
inflicted by Pakistan and theirs is self -inflicted, consciously and as an acceptable 
collateral damage of an India strategy.  Sharpening this contrast has been a key element 
of our diplomacy , one where we have achieved a fair measure of success in recent 
months.  It is also necessary to reassure the world that India is willing to extend a hand of 
friendship to Pakistan if only it would give up its addiction to terrorism.  This also 
undermines Pakistan‟s strategy of depicting the region as a continuing flash point.  In that 
regard, the invitation to PM, Nawaz Sharif to attend the swearing in of the new 
Government in May, 2014 and PM‟s Lahore visit in December, 2015 have helped 
enormously in establishing our bonafides.” 
 
3.47 In view of the fact that recent terrorist attacks have taken place on our security 
establishments, the Ministries of Defence as well as Home Affairs was asked to spell out the 
efforts made to strengthen the Army Camps in Kas hmir. The Ministry of Home Affairs replied 
that Government and the Defence Services take the attacks on Defence establishments very 
seriously. In the wake of the terrorist attack on Pathankot Airbase in January, 2016, Government 
had constituted a four memb er committee under the chairmanship of Lt. Gen Philip Campose,  
inter alia to examine the existing Standing Operating Procedure for security of all Armed Forces 
establishments; to suggest a model format for security audit of armed forces establishments; to  
recommend short and long term measures including introduction of technological solutions and 
other reforms in the present system of security of armed forces establishments.  
 
3.48 Furthermore, based on the recommendations of the Committee and after consultation 
with Service headquarters, broad Guidelines for Security of Defence Installations were issued to 
Services Headquarters. In compliance of the above Guidelines, the Defence Services have taken 
a number of actions inter alia including risk catego risation of Military Bases; formulation of 
detailed SOPs; strengthening of response mechanism by better weapons and vehicles; 
augmenting of security infrastructure by induction of intrusion alarm system and surveillance 
cameras; security of family quarters ; Mutual Aid Schemes with other Services; periodic security 
audit of all military installations etc. 

40 
 
3.49 Against the background of increasing spate of cross -border terrorists attacks, the 
Committee desired to be informed about the international support fo r India and also regarding 
any international pressure on Pakistan to act against the India specific terrorist organizations 
operating from its soil.  The Ministry of External Affairs in a written reply submitted that the  
Government has, from time to time, at various levels brought to the attention of the international 
community Pakistan‟s continuing active support to cross border terrorism; its persistence in 
glorifying anti-India activities; the threat posed by the continuing activities of the regional and  
international terrorist groups like Lashkar -e-Taiba [LeT], Jaish -e-Mohammed [JeM] , Falah -i-
Insaniyat [FiF],  Jamaat -u-Dawwa [JuD], Haqqani Network, Al Qaeda to the regional and 
international peace and stability.  Recently, on June 2 7, 2017, the US has de signated Syed 
Salahudin, head of Hizb -ul Mujahideen as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist. Several 
countries issued statements supporting India‟s decisive counter terrorism action [of September 
29, 2016] and also specifically mentioned that Pakistan s hould take effective steps to stop the 
activities of terrorist groups in its territories.   
 
3.50 The countries in the South Asian region have been increasingly articulating the concerns 
about terrorism emanating from Pakistan. The angst among the South As ian countries about 
Pakistan‟s approach was clear when they conveyed to SAARC Chair [Nepal] almost 
simultaneously, their inability to participate in the SAARC Summit to be held in Islamabad in 
November 2016 due to lack of conducive environment. 
 
3.51 Resolutions have been introduced in the US Congress to declare Pakistan a State 
sponsoring Terrorism; to deny it the status of „non -NATO ally‟; to link aid to Pakistan with its 
actions against terrorism. The issue of state -sponsored terrorism has been refl ected in Joint 
Statements issued at various regional/international forums, including the BRICS Summit, 
BRICS-BIMSTEC Outreach Initiative, G -20 Summit, East Asia Summit and the ASEAN -India 
Summit. Recently, in the J oint Statement issued on June 27 , 2017 dur ing the visit of the Prime 
Minister to the US, “the leaders called on Pakistan to ensure that its territory is not used to 
launch terrorist attacks on other countries. They further called on Pakistan to expeditiously bring 
to justice the perpetrators of the 26/11 Mumbai, Pathankot and other cross border terrorist attacks 
perpetrated by Pakistan -based groups.” The Joint Statement also specifically referred to 

41 
 
strengthening cooperation against terrorist groups including Lashkar -e-Taiba, Jaish -e-
Mohammad and D-Company, who are operating from Pakistan. 
 
3.52 The Financial Action Task Force [FATF], looking after the issue of terror financing, has 
in June 2017, again expressed concerns that Pakistan has not effectively implemented its 
obligations under the UN Secu rity Council Resolution 1267,  and the proscribed terrorist 
organizations LeT, FiF and JuD continue to receive and disperse funds in Pakistan. As a result 
Pakistan has been kept under the monitoring of the Asia Pacific Group of the FATF. Clearly, 
there is enhanced international recognition of the danger posed by terrorist networks and 
organizations operating in Pakistan.  
 
3.53 The Pakistani establishment has maintained a posture of denial over the recent terrorist 
attacks.  The Committee feels that this deniability is neither unique nor surprising.  As a strategic 
policy, we need to provide all relevant evidence to the Pakistani Government as well as 
international community to compel them into action.  The Committee, thereby, enquired about 
the details of d ossiers submitted to Pakistani Government from time to time.  The Ministry of 
External Affairs in a written reply apprised the Committee that o ver the years, India has handed 
over 18 Letters Rogatories [LRs] to Pakistan seeking assistance in collecting evi dence in various 
terrorism related cases, including the Mumbai attack case. We have also handed over dossiers to 
Pakistan containing evidence against the Mumbai attack mastermind and Laskhar-e-
Taiba/Jamat-ud-Dawa chief, Hafiz Saeed. A Letter Rogatory [LR] from the NIA Special Court 
on the Pathankot attack case was handed over on March 02, 2016 [through our High Commission 
in Islamabad]. A supplementary LR on the Pathankot attack case handed over to Pakistan on 
May 23, 2016 [through our High Commission in Is lamabad]. The supplementary LR contained 
DNA samples of the four terrorists killed, voice samples and other related evidence.  There has 
been no response from Pakistan to these LRs. 
 
3.54 On the Committee‟s further query about the progress made with regard to Mumbai terror 
attacks trials, the Ministry of External Affairs responded that a s per available information, an 
Anti Terrorism Court in Pakistan is conducting hearings in the trial against Zakir-ur-Rehman 
Lakhvi and six other accused. Meanwhile, the accu sed Lakhvi was released on bail in 2015.  

42 
 
India has consistently called upon Pakistan to take effective action against those accused of 
Mumbai terror attacks, which originated from its territory and was aided and abetted by people 
living there. The matter had also come up during discussions between the NSAs in November 
2015, EAM‟s visit to Islamabad in December 2015 and brief interaction between the Foreign 
Secretaries in April 2016. Pakistan reiterated its assurances for a speedy conclusion of the 
Mumbai trail. 
3.55 In response to Pakistan‟s request for additional evidence in the case, India has conveyed 
its willingness to consider a visit of a Judicial Commission once again to India, on mutually 
agreed terms and conditions, to inspect and record the eviden ce. The importance of ensuring 
justice for the victims of the Mumbai Terrorist attack of 2008 and a successful and expeditious 
trial for bilateral relations has been repeatedly emphasised upon Pakistan.  
 
3.56 It may be further noted that the Joint Stateme nt issued during PM‟s visit to the US on 
June 27, 2017 inter alia calls upon Pakistan to expeditiously bring to justice the perpetrators of 
the 26/11 Mumbai, Pathankot and other cross border terrorist‟s attacks perpetrated by Pakistan 
based groups. 
3.57 Following the Uri attacks, the government‟s policy of diplomatically isolating Pakistan 
both at the regional as well as international level has broadened from reviewing the Indus Water 
Treaty to withdrawal from the SAARC Summit to be hosted in Islamabad. The  Committee 
wanted to know the efficacy of these non -military tactics in impelling Pakistan to act on India‟s 
concerns over terrorism.  The Ministry in a written reply submitted that the Government has 
shown its determination and resolve to firmly deal with  cross border terrorism by all means 
possible. India has repeatedly reminded Pakistan to abide by its solemn commitment of January 
2004 to not allow its territory to be used for terrorism against India in any manner. In the 
aftermath of the Uri terrorist a ttack, in September 2016 India conducted counter terrorism 
operations across the LOC on the terror launch pads based on credible and reliable inputs. The 
Indian armed forces have also been giving strong response to the unprovoked ceasefire violations 
along the Line of Control and the International Boundary by the Pakistani forces, which are  
meant to aid and abet cross border infiltration. 
 

43 
 
3.58 Further, India has also, at various levels, briefed the international community about the 
Pakistan‟s continuing role in fomenting cross border terrorism into India. Today, there is greater 
international understanding of the dangers posed to regional and global peace and security from 
the terrorism emanating from Pakistan. The decision to not participate in the SAARC S ummit 
that was to be held in Islamabad in November 2016 was taken nearly simultaneously by the 
Member States due to lack of conducive environment. 
 
3.59 It is disquieting to note that Pakistan has been indulging in various anti -India 
activities, which inter alia  include sponsoring terrorism, drug trade, circulation of fake 
Indian currency, patronizing Sikh extremist leaders, cross-border infiltration, smuggling of 
narcotics etc.  In the opinion of the Committee, such overt and covert activities are noth ing 
less than a proxy war against India.  The Committee note that Pakistan has been engaged 
in low intensity warfare against India through its Intelligence agency –Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI) and its militant proxies, notably the Laskar -e-Taiba (LET) and similar 
groups.  These activities are being undertaken with the twin objectives of organizing and 
guiding anti-India activities and spreading anti -India feelings amongst certain sections of 
population located along our sensitive border. 
 The Committee express strong disapproval of Pakistan‟s continued strategy of 
spearheading subversive activities in India through ISI.  The Committee feel that the 
Government‟s measures to curb such activities lack the necessary determination.  It is 
understandable that recognizing and proving such clandestine activities is difficult. 
However, in so far as action against such acts being committed within our borders is 
concerned, the Government needs to be more decisive so as to send a clear cut message to 
the sponsors of these acts. The Committee, therefore, would encourage the Government of 
India to pursue a well -coordinated strategy to deal with such nefarious designs that pose a 
serious threat to our internal as well as external security.  The Committee would further 
like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 (Recommendation No.7) 
 

44 
 
3.60  The Committee are well aware that terrorism remains a core concern in relationship 
with Pakistan.  The Committee know that Pakistan‟s policy of abetting and aiding 
terrorism against India is not new but it has assumed challenging proportions over the last 
two decades.  Mumbai, Pathankot, Uri , Nagrota and oth er attacks emanating from 
Pakistani soil , underscore the continued th reat of cross border terrorism, to our overall 
security. However, t he Pakistani Government , instead of acting upon the evidences 
provided by India, has  adopted a dual strategy of denial a nd portrayal of itself  as a victim 
of terrorism.  The Committee feel  that both the se postures of Pakistan on terrorism are 
misplaced.  The existence of ample evidence against the Mumbai attacks, masterminded by 
Laskar-e-Taiba/Jamat-ud-Dawa Chief Hafiz Saee d and Zakir-ur-Rehman Lakhvi and the 
Pathankot attackers speak  volumes about Pakistani hand in these terror ist attacks.  
Further, Pakistan ‟s inaction against these perpetrators of terrorism makes it s intentions 
questionable, especially following the access  provided to Pakistan by the Government of 
India at Pathankot.  India and Pakistan are not equal victims of terrorism in the sense that, 
terrorism in India is inflicted b y Pakistan while terrorist attacks in Pakistan are self-
inflicted. 
 The Committee , the refore, desire that the Government should continue to 
constructively counter Pakistan‟s misplaced and ominous strategy of deniability and 
equivalence at bilateral, regional as well as international levels and corner Pakistan for not 
acting on its 2004 comm itment of not allowing its territory to be used for acts of terrorism 
against India.  Moreover, the Government should continue its efforts to mount pressure  on 
Pakistan to expedite the Mumbai attack trials.  The Government of India ought to also  
spell out well considered policy options -military as well as non -military, including 
diplomatic to deter and deal with Pakistani sponsored terrorism that has been going on for 
decades. 
 The Committee  also observe that  following the recent terrorist  attacks on our 
security establishments, the Government has taken numerous follow-up measures to fill the 
critical gaps.  The Committee are also happy to learn about the enhanced international 
recognition of the dangers posed by terrorist networks and orga nizations operating from 
Pakistan. The Committee , however,  would urge the Government to ensure a thorough 

45 
 
security review of its various establishments on a regular basis with an objective for greater 
synergy between security agencies and intelligence agen cies and also apprise the 
Committee abo ut outcomes of such exercises. Prioritizing our national security 
considerations, the Committee further recommend the Government to enhance its military 
capabilities by modernization of its armed forces and use of advanced technology.  
  (Recommendation No.8) 
III. THE ISSUE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR 
3.61 The State of Jammu &  Kashmir became a part of India in terms of a legally executed 
accession in accordance with terms of the India Independence Act.  For an accurate 
understanding of the history of the Jammu & Kashmir issue, it is imperative to refer to four 
important documents  
(i)   Instrument of Accession of Jammu & Kashmir (1947)  
(ii)  UNSC Resolution No. 47 of 1948  
(iii)  Simla Agreement 1972 and  
(iv)  Parliament Resolution on Jammu & Kashmir (1994).   
 
3.62 The signing of the Instrument of Accession of Jammu & Kashmir  by Maharaja Hari 
Singh in October 1947 resulted in the en tire princely state of Jammu &  Kashmir becoming an 
integral part of India.  The UNSC resolution on Jammu & Kashmir adopted in 1948 envisaged 
three sequential and conditional steps i.e. withdrawal of all Pakistani regular and irregular troops 
from the region to the satisfaction of the UN; thereafter, a reduction in the number of India n 
troops to the minimum necessary for the  maintenance of peace and security; and thereafter a 
plebiscite. The resolutio n became irrelevant after Pakistan refused to take the first step which 
was mandatory for its implementation. Under the Simla agreement, signed in July 1972, India 
and Pakistan agreed to resolve all outstanding issues bilaterally.  Finally, the 1994 Indian  
Parliamentary resolution reiterated the legal position that the entire territory of the erstwhile 
princely state of Jammu  & Kashmir is an integral part of India and asked Pakistan to vacate the 
area under its illegal occupation. 

46 
 
3.63 When asked about the nature of conflict between India and Pakistan over the issue of 
Jammu & Kashmir, the Ministry of External Affairs in a written reply submitted that t he issue of 
Jammu & Kashmir and the national position on the same is enunciated in the Resolution which 
was unanimously adopted by the Parliament on February 22, 1994. The Resolution stated that the 
entire state of the Jammu & Kashmir has been, is and shall be the integral part of India and any 
attempts to separate it from the rest of the country will be resist ed by all necessary means.  The 
Resolution demanded that Pakistan must vacate the areas of the Indian State which they have 
occupied through aggression. Under the Simla Agreement both side have agreed to resolve all 
outstanding issues, including that of the Jammu & Kashmir, peacefully and bilaterally. This was 
reiterated in the Lahore Declaration of 1999. 
3.64 There has been spike in unrest and violence in Kashmir valley ever since the Indian 
forces killed the Hizb ul Mujahideen terrorist Burhan Wani in an encounter on July 8, 2016. Pak-
based terrorists and fugitives from Indian law exploited the situation by addressing large 
gatherings in Muzaffarabad taking out Kashmir Caravan & holding rallies in Islamabad & other 
places, glorifying Wani‟s death. Pakista n also launched a shrill and vitriolic rhetoric, intensified 
its diplomatic outreach and appointed 22 Special Envoys to highlight hum an rights situation in 
Jammu &  Kashmir. It especially targeted the 33 rd Session of UN Human Rights Council in 
Geneva and 71 st UN General Assembly in New York in September where Jammu & Kashmir 
was the central theme of Pakistan PM‟s speech, focusing on unsubstantiated and baseless 
allegations of violations of human rights committed by Indian forces and supported the demand 
of self-determination for Kashmiri people. 
3.65 Pointing out the clear role of P akistan in fomenting  insurgency in Kashmir valley over 
the years, the Ministry of External Affairs in a written reply submitted that i n the garb of 
providing „moral, political and diplomatic support to the Kashmiris‟, Pakistan has been providing 
material and financial support to the terrorist and extremist groups operating in the Indian State 
of Jammu and Kashmir. These groups have found sanctuaries and safe haven in Pakistan and 
receive sponsorship from the state establishment. After receiving training in arms and weaponry, 
these terrorists are facilitated by the state authorities to infiltrate into India with the aim to spread 
chaos and unrest in India. 

47 
 
3.66 Despite its commitment of January 2004 of not allowing territory under its control to be 
used for terrorism against India in any manner, Pakistan continues to nurture terrorist and 
extremist groups, including UN proscribed individuals and groups. It is also actively engaged in 
spreading false and malicious propaganda to incite the youth in Jammu and Kashmir, which was 
clearly evident in the aftermath of the killing of Hizb -ul Mujahideen terrorist in an encounter by 
Indian security forces in July 2016. 
3.67 Following Pakistan's high voltage support to the agitation in Kashmir, which occurred 
after the killing of Burhan Wani, the Government has adopted an assertive policy. As part of this 
approach it raised human rights record in Baluchistan as well as the areas of Jammu and Kashmir 
that are in Pakistan's illegal and forcible control. In this context the Committee wanted to know 
whether the increasing reference to atrocities in Baluchistan is a deliberate strategy resorted to by 
the Government to put a check on Pakistan‟s largely m isleading narrative on Kashmir. The 
Ministry of External Affairs answered that i n her address at 71st session of United Nations 
General Assembly (UNGA) in New York on September 26, 2016, External Affairs Minister 
responded to the baseless allegations made by Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in his 
speech earlier on September 21, 2016 at the UNGA about alleged human rights violations in 
India. In that context she mentioned that "those accusing others of human rights violations would 
do well to introspect  and see what egregious abuses they are perpetrating in their own country, 
including in Balochistan. The brutality against the Baloch people represents the worst form of 
State oppression.”  In addition, we exercised our Right of Reply to Pakistan‟s similar  allegations 
and stated that Pakistan practiced terrorism on its own people, suppressed minorities and women 
and denied basic human rights, including through draconian laws. 
 
3.68 The Committee felt that highlighting the human rights abuses in Baluchistan gives 
Pakistan the reference to internationalize the issue of Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee thereby 
enquired about public opinion on Jammu & Kashmir at the international level, the Ministry of 
External Affairs answered that while Pakistan has been making unsuccessful attempts at 
internationalizing the issue of Jammu & Kashmir and the situation in Baluchistan is well -known 
internationally. The use of airpower and helicopter -mounted gunships to target civilian 
population in Baluchistan by the Pakistan military as well as the issue of forced disappearance of 

48 
 
thousands of Balochs has been well-documented. The EU Parliament has in June 2017 adopted a 
resolution expressing serious concerns at the human rights situation in Pakistan. 
 
3.69 On the contrary, there is greater international recognition of the situation created by cross 
border terrorism in the Indian State of J&K. International community is well aware of India‟s 
impeccable record in protecting and promoting human rights; the rights and freedoms guaranteed 
under the Indian Constitution; and the independent and proactive judiciary and Human Rights 
Commission that provide safeguards against any infringement of human rights by the State 
authorities. 
3.70 There has been enhanced understanding amongst the inter national community about the 
threat posed by terrorism emanating from Pakistan. In this context, recently, on June 2 7, 2017 
the US has designated Syed Salauddin, a leader of Hizb-ul Mujahideen as a Specially Designated 
Global Terrorist. Further, the Joint Statement issued during the visit of the Prime Minister to the 
US on June 6, 2017 inter alia  stated that “the leaders called on Pakistan to ensure that its 
territory is not used to launch terrorist attacks on other countries.” 
3.71 As per the information provided by the Ministry of Home Affairs, a summary of Law & 
Order Incidents in the State of J&K from 8 July 2016 to May 2017 is given below: 
Month No. of Law & Order incidents No. of civilians died No. of SF killed 
July‟16 [since 8 July] 820 42 2 
August 774 19 - 
September 508 10 - 
October 179 1 - 
November 73 1 - 
December 36 - - 
January, 2017 6 - - 
February, 2017 48 - - 
March, 2017 27   
April, 2017 191 12 - 
May, 2017 190 0 - 
Total 2852 12 2 
 
3.72 On being asked about the steps taken to alleviate the situation, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated that the current Law & Order problem started in the Kashmir valley after the 

49 
 
neutralization of three terrorists on 8 thJuly, 2016 by Security Forces. Since then Prime Minister 
and Home Minister have regularly reviewed the security situation in J&K. To resolve the 
problem, Prime Minister also held an All Party meeting and Home Minister has visited Srinagar 
2 times and met the Governor, Chief Minister, all the political parties, various organizations and 
Associations as well as the senior officials. Home Minister also led an All Party Delegation on 4-
5 September, 2016 to Srinagar and Jammu and met the Governor, Chief Minister, various cross 
sections of people of  the State including all the political parties, various organizations and 
Associations as well as the senior officials. 
 
3.73 Additionally, distribution of Essential Commodities like food grains, sugar, milk, fruits, 
vegetables, LPG, kerosene, petrol etc. was ensured to meet the needs of public at large. 
Sufficient stock of Essential Commodities was maintained in the Valley. Availability of 
Doctors/Para-medics, Medicines, Ambulances, Blood Banks etc. was maintained round the 
clock, Team of doctors from AIIM S was also sent. The regular medical services were continued 
unabated. Additional companies of Central Armed Police Forces were also deployed to support 
the State Police. 
 
3.74 The Committee further desired to know the stance of the international community  on the 
issue of Jammu & Kashmir .  The Ministry of External Affairs in a written reply responded that 
the international community is aware that Government‟s consistent and principled position is that 
the entire State of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of the Indian Union and that a  part of 
the territory of the State is under the forcible and illegal occupation of Pakistan. Government has 
also clearly articulated its commitment to take all necessary steps to protect India‟s sovereignty 
and territorial integrity. Jammu and Kashmir is one of the agreed subjects under the 
Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue. There is no scope for any third party role or mediation. The 
international community also recognises the duplicit role played by Pakistan in fomenting cross 
border terrorism in India. T he listing of Pakistan -based individuals and entities – including 
Lashkar-e-Taiba [LeT] and Jaish-e-Mohammad [JeM], Hafiz Saeed, Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi and 
others – in the UNSC 1267 Sanctions List is an outcome successful diplomatic efforts by India in 
mobilising international opinion. More recently, on June 26, 2017 the US has designated Syed 

50 
 
Salauddin, the leader of Hizb-ul Mujahideen, as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist. Hizb-ul 
Mujahideen is already proscribed as terrorist organisation by the EU. 
3.75 The Committee are aware of the growing alienation in Kashmir  valley due to nefarious 
stimulus provided by Pakistan. In this regard, the Committee asked the Ministry of Home Affairs 
to mention the factors that have caused this alienation among Kashmiri people.  The Ministry of 
Home Affairs answered that some of the factors that have led to a sense of alienation among the 
youth of Kashmir valley are radicalization/misguiding of youth by anti -national elements and 
lack of adequate employment opportunities in the State etc. 
 
3.76 On being asked about the steps taken to address their grievances and disillusionment, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the Government has continuously encouraged policies for 
the betterment of the youth, including providing employment opportunities to wean them away 
from militancy. Recently, the Government has also approved the following schemes targeted 
towards generation of employment of youth of J&K: 
 Engagement of additional 10,000 SPOs in J&K Police. 
 Recruitment of around 5381 personnel in 5 new India Reserve Battalions.  
 Recruitment of around 1200 personnel of CAPFs and Assam Rifles. 
Besides, the following schemes are also under implementation by respective 
Ministries/Department for skill development and enhancing the employability of youth 
from J&K: 
 UDAAN: The scheme is being run by the MHA and it aims to provide skill and 
enhance employability of 40,000 youths of J&K. This scheme covers graduates/ 3 -
years engineering diploma holders and above. 
 HIMAYAT: The scheme is being implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
The mandate under this scheme is to train 1.0 lakh unemployed youths [including 
school dropouts] from J&K and place them in jobs with Corporates or make them self 
employed.  
 Special Scholarship Scheme : The scheme is being implemented by the Ministry of 
Human Resources Development and it aims to grant 5000 fresh scholarships per 
annum for higher education outside the State to encourage the youth of J&K state. 
 
3.77 The Committee also expressed its desire to know whether the Government conducted any 
official study to explore the various possible solutions to the problem in Jammu &Kashmir. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs, in their answer, gave a detailed that the Governme nt of India started a 

51 
 
process of dialogue in the year 2006 for consensus building among different groups and sections 
of society on issues relating to J&K. The first Round Table Conference was held at New Delhi 
on 25-02-2006 under the Chairmanship of the t hen Prime Minister. During the 2 nd Round Table 
Conference chaired by the then Prime Minister held on 24 -25 May 2006 at Srinagar, it was 
decided that five Working Groups would be set up so that the views of different segments are 
incorporated in the process: 
[i] Working Group –I: “Confidence Building Measures across segments of Society in the 
State” under the Chairmanship of Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari, the then Chairman of 
the National Commission for Minorities. 
[ii] Working Group –II: “Strengthening relations  across the Line of Control”  under the 
Chairmanship of Shri M. Rasgotra, Ex. Foreign Secretary.  
[iii] Working Group –III: “Economic Development”  under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. 
Rangarajan, the then Chairman of PM‟s Economic Advisory Council.  
[iv] Working Group–IV: “Ensuring Good Governance” under the Chairmanship of Shri N. C. 
Saxena, Member of Planning Commission.  
[v] Working Group–V: “Strengthening relations between the State and the Centre”  under the 
Chairmanship of Justice Saghir Ahmad.  
All the abov e Working Groups [WGs] have submitted their reports [WGs I to IV in 2007 and 
WG V in 2009]. As far as action to be taken by the Governmentt of India on the 
recommendations of the Working Groups is concerned, the Govt. of India has already taken the 
necessary action on the same and the concerned recommendations have been/ are being 
implemented. Regarding remaining recommendations, the State Govt. of J&K was to take action.  
3.78 Further, the Government of India appointed a Group of Interlocutors on 13 -10-2010 to 
begin the process of sustained dialogue with all sections of the people of J&K. The group 
submitted its Report on 12 -10-2011. It was decided to upload the „Report‟ on the website of 
MHA on 24 -05-2012 for the benefit of the public at large. The copies of the Report have also 
been placed in the Parliament Library. A copy of the „Report‟ was forwarded to the Govt. of 
J&K for comments vide letter dated 21-05-2012, which are still awaited. 
3.79 The Committee further enquired whether the Ministry has maintai ned a database on 
causalities suffered -civilians, military and terrorists -during insurgencies in  the Kashmir valley 

52 
 
since 1947. The Ministry of Home Affairs responded that the Ministry has maintained a database 
regarding the State of J&K in this respect fr om 1990 onwards. The details in this respect are 
tabulated below: 
Year No. of 
terrorist 
incidents 
in J&K 
Civilians died 
in  terrorist 
incidents in 
J&K 
Security 
Forces 
martyred 
Terrorists 
killed 
1990 4158 461 155 550 
1991 3765 382 173 844 
1992 4817 634 189 819 
1993 5247 747 198 1310 
1994 5829 820 200 1596 
1995 5938 1031 237 1332 
1996 5014 1341 184 1209 
1997 3420 971 193 1075 
1998 2932 889 236 999 
1999 3071 873 355 1082 
2000 3074 847 397 1520 
2001 4522 996 536 2020 
2002 4038 1008 453 1707 
2003 3401 795 314 1494 
2004 2565 707 281 976 
2005 1990 557 189 917 
2006 1667 389 151 591 
2007 1092 158 110 472 
2008 708 91 75 339 
2009 499 71 79 239 
2010 488 47 69 232 
2011 340 31 33 100 
2012 220 15 15 72 
2013 170 15 53 67 
2014 222 28 47 110 
2015 208 17 39 108 
2016 322 15 82 150 
2017 
[Upto 12-03-17] 
43 4 10 29 
Total 69820 13946 50060 21998 
 
3.80 When asked about the manner in which the Government intends to deal with the 
separatist elements in the Kashmir Valley in order to reach a sustainable peace, the Ministry 
answered that the Government has always been open for dialogue, with all stakeholders , within 
the framework of the Constitution of India. 

53 
 
 
3.81 The Committee are aware that cross border terrorism, law and order problems in 
the Kashmir Valley and material as well as financial support from Pakistan to the 
terrorists and extremist groups operating in J&K are the main concern of the Government 
and the biggest hurdles in the dialogue process. The Committee are d ismayed to observe 
the spurt in unrest and violence in the Kashmir Valley since the death of a Hizb-ul-
Mujahideen terrorist in an encoun ter on July 8, 2016 . Frequent attempts for infiltration of 
terrorists from across the border have become a regular feature. T he Committee, however, 
are happy to observe that our forces have prevented a large number of infiltration attempts 
through the border and have started eliminating the terrorists in the valley in a planned 
way. Moreover, our intense diplomatic outreach has led the international community to 
recognize the role being played by Pakistan in fomenting cross -border terrorism in India.  
The Committee desire  that such efforts should continue till Pakistan is exposed 
internationally and its stops such activities and also till the false narrative of human rights 
violations in Jammu &Kashmir being created at international fora is exposed.  
 The Committee are further concerned to observe the growing sense of alienation in 
the Kashmiri youth, largely due to their radicalization by anti -national elements and lack 
of adeq uate employment opportunities.  The Committee also observe  that a series of 
attempts have been made by the Government of India to mainstream the youth  of J&K by 
providing better education and  employment to them  but it has not yielded the desired 
results.  The Committee , therefore, desire that the Government should take all possible 
measures, including infrastructural and economic developments simultaneously as 
Confidence Building measures to prevent radicalization of youth by Pakistani supported 
anti-national elements within Jammu & Kashmir. 
(Recommendation No.9) 
3.82 The Committee reiterate that the basic facts pertaining to Jammu and Kashmir 
being an integral and inalienable part of India  are well documented and established.  Our 
national position on Jammu &Kashmir has been clearly enunciated in the Parliamentary 
Resolution adopted unanimously by both the Houses of Parliament on 22 February, 1994. 

54 
 
After illegally occupying PoK, Pakistan has  been making attempts through terror funding 
and covert support to terrorists to destabilize the Kashmir Valley.  The Committee further 
note that Pakistan, through unsubstantiated and baseless allegations of violations of human 
rights in Kashmir valley, has been trying to create a false narrative about the Indian State 
of Jammu and Kashmir.  The Committee  are of  the strong opinion that  in the event of 
Pakistan not mending its way s, it is time the Government should become proactive and 
assertive about our rig htful claims on PoK, including Gilgit -Baltistan.  The Committee 
strongly feel that India should firmly keep PoK at the top of the agenda - along with 
terrorism – and insist that Pakistan  vacate the area under its illegal occupation  as also the 
portion ced ed to China, forthwith .  The Committee would also urge the Government to 
launch a diplomatic campaign to explain India‟s stand on PoK and expose Pakistan‟s 
duplicity to all friendly countries.   This is all the more necessary now that the China -
Pakistan Eco nomic Corridor (CPEC) is being built through PoK in violation of India‟s 
sovereignty. 
 (Recommendation No.10) 
 
IV. NUCLEAR & MISSILE PROGRAMME 
3.83 India and Pakistan have signed an Agreement on the Prohibition of Attack against 
nuclear installations under which the list of nuclear installations and facilities were exchanged.  
 
3.84 With regard to nuclear doctrines of India and Pakistan, the Committee  was apprehensive 
about deciphering Pakistan's nuclear designs in the absence of a well articulated Pakistani 
nuclear doctrine. The Ministry of External Affairs stated that  in the absence of any nuclear 
doctrine, statements made by senior officials in Paki stan as well as actual testing and 
development of nuclear and missile capabilities are used inter -alia to understand its current 
doctrine. Pakistan pronouncements on doctrinal aspects have been shifting constantly in a bid to 
justify capabilities. Pakistan  has been focusing recently on maintenance of „full spectrum 
deterrence capability‟ while also talking about „credible minimum deterrence‟ to deter all forms 
of aggression. 
 

55 
 
3.85 Based on media reports, the Committee desired to know whether India‟s „No First Use 
Policy‟ is counter -productive in view of the increasing pace and scope of Pakistan‟s Nuclear 
Programme, particularly its pursuit of tactical nuclear weapons. The Ministry of External Affairs 
replied that India‟s policy of „cre dible minimum deterrence‟, no first use and non -use against 
non-nuclear weapon states is aligned with its larger national security and disarmament goals. 
India‟s nuclear posture, in particular our no -first use pledge, reflects our cultural inheritance and 
our tradition of restraint and responsibility in nuclear matters. 
 
3.86 The Ministry of External Affairs has informed that Pakistan has a small nuclear power 
programme with 1040 MW capacity. However, it is moving to increase this substantially with 
external assistance, including from China. Enumerating the details of nuclear cooperation 
between China and Pakistan in civilian as well as military fields, MEA stated that details of the 
nuclear cooperation between China and Pakistan in civilian as well as milit ary fields are 
reportedly as follows:- 
  China‟s nuclear cooperation with Pakistan is known to date back to 1960s. The 
cooperation has now reportedly extended to areas like nuclear fuel mining and exploration, 
supply of nuclear warhead designs, enriched fue l, transfer of dual use technology and 
materials for the development of nuclear weapons, delivery systems for nuclear weapons 
and training of the scientific personnel by China.  
 The civil nuclear deal between China and Pakistan is said to have been signed in 1986. 
However, the actual text of the so -called agreement remains unreleased and prevents the 
international community from validating Chinese and Pakistani representations.  
 China has reportedly helped Pakistan build and operate plutonium based reactors  in 
Khushab. The Khushab reactors will enable Pakistan to produce weapon grade plutonium.  
 It is reported that Pakistan‟s Chashma reactors (I, II, III and IV) and the proposed Karachi 
II and III reactors will be supplied enriched fuel by China for their li fetime and a large 
portion of all costs for the reactors, operational and under construction, will be borne by 
China. 
 
3.87 On the Committee‟s query on other countries providing external assistance to Pakistan‟s 
weapon programme, the Ministry of External A ffairs responded that it appears that Pakistan 
depends mostly on China for its nuclear programme. There are reports of various Chinese firms 
arranging critical components for the Pakistani nuclear programme from other countries. 
Furthermore, there are well -documented reports about linkages between Pakistan and the 

56 
 
Democratic People‟s Republic of Korea (DPRK) for exchange of nuclear technologies and 
equipment in return for missile technology from DPRK.” 
 
3.88 The Pakistani nuclear effort received considerable assistance from China. In the late 
1970s, Beijing supplied Pakistan with a broad array of missile and nuclear weapons related 
assistance. This assistance included warhead designs, HEU, components of various short and 
intermediate range missile  systems, gas centrifuge equipment and technical expertise. The 
A.Q.Khan network later transferred some of this technology to other countries. 
 
3.89 The Ministry of External Affairs has stated that in addition to providing technical know -
how China is also financing nuclear reactors either under construction or in design stage.  With 
regard to this statement the Committee wanted to know the legal basis of China‟s international 
nuclear trade with Pakistan as the later is neither a signatory to NPT nor NSG.  T he Ministry 
replied that the NPT does not bar civil nuclear commerce with non -NPT countries. Pakistan is 
not a signatory to the NPT nor a member of the NSG but its benefactor, China, is. Although NSG 
Guidelines prohibit civil nuclear commerce with Pakistan , China has stated that it signed nuclear 
agreements with Pakistan prior to joining the NSG in 2004. Since NSG Guidelines exclude such 
agreements signed prior to 2004, Beijing conveniently uses this „grand -father‟ clause in the NSG 
Guidelines to its benefit.  
 
3.90 It is informed that Pakistan is reportedly expanding its nuclear arsenals and developing 
new types of nuclear weapons. However, concerns have been raised internationally regarding 
development of these tactical weapons as Pakistani military commanders could lose the ability to 
prevent the use of such weapons, which would be more portable and mobile than Islamabad's 
current nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles. The mix of terrorism and concerns about safety 
of Pakistan‟s nuclear weapons & mat erial presents challenges which were voiced by President 
Obama at the Nuclear Safety Summit in 2016. 
       
3.91 When asked about India's preparedness or response in case Pakistan uses tactical nuclear 
weapons, the Defence Secretary during oral evidence on 12 January 2107 stated :-   

57 
 
“when tactical nuclear weapons are used, what kind of consequences it can have, one has 
to analyse that because it is not an issue concerning this part of the world alone; it 
concerns the entire world.” 
 
3.92 Serious concerns h ave been raised about the security of Pakistan‟s nuclear weapons, 
infrastructure and installations.  On the Committee‟s apprehensions about physical protection of 
Pakistan‟s nuclear weapons, the Ministry of External Affairs replied that Pakistan claims tha t it 
complies with the security parameters necessary for nuclear power plants. However, the 
precarious security situation in Pakistan raises doubts about the security of the nuclear power 
plants.  
 
3.93 The Committee were anxious to know whether Pakistan h as ever acknowledged the 
damage caused by the A.Q Khan network of clandestinely selling nuclear know -how. The 
Ministry of External Affairs replied that  Pakistan‟s nuclear scientist, A.Q. Khan, apologized to 
the people of Pakistan in a televised address in 2004 but retracted his statement in a 2008 
interview. The Pakistani government has not publicly acknowledged the proliferation network 
headed by A.Q. Khan. On the contrary, Pakistan has chosen to sweep under the carpet its 
proliferation history related to A.Q. Khan. Pakistan claims to have taken some steps to safeguard 
its assets and technology. However, there are reports that the A.Q. Khan network has never 
really been fully dismantled and may still be active.           
 
3.94 On being asked, the Ministry o f External Affairs enumerated the steps taken by India to 
voice its concerns to the international community regarding the precarious cocktail of Pakistani 
sponsored terrorism and safety of its nuclear assets and programmes.  The Ministry stated that  
"India has been pursuing this agenda at various international forums. India has been sponsoring 
a resolution on “Measures to Prevent Terrorists from Acquiring Weapons of Mass Destruction” 
in the UNGA First Committee since 2002, which is adopted by consensus.  At  the Nuclear 
Security Summits, India cautioned against the dangers of nuclear terrorism and raised issues of 
state sponsored terrorism at BIMSTEC, BRICS, GICNT and the United Nations etc. The 
Ministry also raises this issue in its bilateral dialogues with various countries. 
 

58 
 
3.95 One of the experts, Shri Vivek Katju, shared before the Committee that India has not 
really publicized Pakistan‟s irresponsibility as a state with nuclear weapons to foment terrorism 
on the territory of a nuclear state. No other st ate has done so even while engaging in major 
conflict such as during the Cold War.  
           
3.96  The Committee are aware that being nuclear armed states, any conflict situation 
between India and Pakistan attracts  considerable attention at regional as well as 
international levels. The Committee observe that the nuclear doctrines of the two countries 
are quite contradictory. While the Indian nuclear doctrine is well articulated and specific, 
Pakistan has deliberately pursued an opaque and ambiguous doctrinal position, refusing to 
abjure “first use” of nuclear weapons.  Additionally, India intends to use nuclear weapons 
for establishing deterrence while Pakistan‟s nuclear arsenal is meant to compensate for 
conventional weapons asymmetry with India. The Committee note the growing China -
Pakistan cooperation, especially in missile and nuclear programmes. The Committee are, 
however, also aware that serious doubts have been raised about Pakistan‟s nuclear 
infrastructure and installation s, for reasons enumerated in the preceding narrative .  As 
things stand today, th e Committee are in agreement with the Government‟s assessment of 
the Pakistani nuclear threat and the possibility of inadvertent tactical nuclear weapons use, 
which would have serious implications not only on the region but across the globe.  
 In light of the expanding Pakistani nuclear arsenals and its deliberately ambiguous 
doctrine, the Committee would strongly recommend the Government to aggregate its 
nuclear capability and enhance its deterrence capabilit ies. The Committee would also urge 
the Government to internationally publicize the challenges and implication s of the 
Pakistani mix of terrorism and concerns about safety of its current nuclear weapons and 
programme as a threat to regional and global security.  
(Recommendation No. 11) 
V. RECENT SURGICAL STRIKES 
3.97 On September, 29, 2016 the Indian Army had carried out a limited counter terrorism 
operation and destroyed a number of launch pads for terrorists along the Line of Control. When 

59 
 
asked about the events leading to these surgical strikes, the Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs 
responded that: the build up to the counter terrorism operation was escalation in terrorist attacks 
mounted from across the border or LoC. These included the terrorist attacks on the Pathankot Air 
Base of January 2, 2016; Indian army garrison in Uri on September 18, 2016; and the attacks on 
Army facilities in Poonch on September 11, 2016. In fact there had been a series of serious 
incidents of terrorism traceable to Pakistan since July 8, when Hizb -ul Mujahideen commander 
Burhan Wani was killed  in a counter terrorism operation by security forces. Some of these 
included: 
 26 July - neutralization of four terrorists in Naugam (Kupwara) and capture of 
Bahadur Ali. 
 30 July - foiled infiltration bid at Naugam with death of two terrorists and two 
soldiers. 
 08 August – encounter at Machil sector with deaths of three BSF personnel and 
one terrorist. 
 15 August – attack in Srinagar with death of CRPF commandant and injuries to 
11 personnel. 
 17 August – ambush of army convoy with deaths of two army personnel  and one 
police. 
 21 August – fire fight along LoC in Tanghdar sector with neutralization of three 
terrorists. 
 11 September – Similar event in north Kashmir with deaths of four terrorists. 
 11 September – Poonch incident: one police killed and five army/poli ce injured; 
four terrorists killed. 
 18 September – Uri attack: 19 security force personnel killed, 4 terrorists died. 
 
3.98 It is pertinent to mention here that cross border infiltration bids by armed terrorists from 
the Uri sector continued even after the  attacks of September 18, 2016. There were encounters on 
LoC with such infiltrators on September 20 at Naugam sector and Uri sector. The cross border 
linkages of terrorist attacks were convincingly established by hard intelligence, intercepts, 
Pakistani ma rkings of equipments and ammunitions, modus operandi and from confessions of 
captured terrorists. The nature, frequency and sophistication of these infiltration bids from across 
the LoC by heavily armed terrorists charged with attacking Indian targets beli ed the claim of 
Pakistan that the LOC has „water tight‟ arrangements from the Pakistani side. On the contrary, 
such bids could not be continuously mounted without the active support and collaboration of 

60 
 
Pakistani security forces. While it is widely known t hat the training and arming of terrorists is 
freely taking place in Pakistan and the Indian territory under its control, acknowledged leaders of 
terrorist organizations have also been given a free reign and paraded around even in Islamabad. 
Such terrorism is not only directed against India but is now increasingly recognized as a larger 
regional concern. 
 
3.99 Strikes of similar nature have taken place in the past but they have not been publically 
announced. The Committee wanted to know the logic that necess itated a joint MEA -MOD brief 
in the immediate aftermath of these strikes. The Ministry of External Affairs answered that 
MEA-MOD press briefing was held on September 29, 2016. Director General Military 
Operations (DGMO) contacted his Pakistani counterpart on September 29, after the counter 
terrorism operation was over. It was also conveyed to the Pak DGMO that the operation had 
ceased after completion of its objectives. Pakistan was reminded of its commitment of January 
2004 and asked that their army cooper ate with us to fight the menace of terrorism. The press 
briefing by DGMO at MEA also emphasized that the counter terrorism operation was launched 
on the basis of specific and credible intelligence inputs that some terrorist teams had positioned 
themselves at launch pads on the other side of LOC.  
 
3.100 On the same afternoon of September 29, 2016, the Foreign Secretary briefed 28 envoys 
belonging to the Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brazil, China, Egypt, France, 
Germany, Indonesia, Iran, Japan , Maldives, Malaysia, Mexico, Nepal, New Zealand, Qatar, 
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the UAE, the US, the UK, Vietnam, 
and the EU about the limited counter -terrorism operation carried out by the Indian Army earlier 
in the day.  Separately, important opinion makers, think tanks and foreign media corps in New 
Delhi were also briefed. In parallel, instructions were issued to our Missions across the world to 
brief their host governments on the issue at senior levels. Envoys of other countries from Europe, 
Africa, Gulf, Latin America and East Asia & OIC were also briefed by senior officials in MEA. 
India‟s position has been received positively by the international community. As highlighted 
before, a number of countries issued statements in support of India.   
 

61 
 
3.101 On the Committee‟s query on whether the surgical strikes mark a shift in India‟s defence 
strategy from „strategic restraint‟ to „strategic attack‟, the Ministry of Defence clearly indicated 
that the surgical strikes have demonstrated our resolve to pursue the perpetrators of dastardly 
terrorist attacks on Indian Territory, even across the borders. The execution of surgical strikes, 
however, does not indicate our change of policy from strategic restraint to strategic attack.   
 
3.102 Furthermore, the Indian Army is a military instrument to further our national interests. 
The Indian Army had a large number of credible intelligence inputs indicating concentration of 
terrorists along the Line of Control.  The terrorists had positioned themselves to carry out 
infiltration and conduct te rrorist strikes inside Jammu &  Kashmir and in various metros in other 
states.  The surgical strikes were pre -emptive measures to prevent such attacks. The surgical 
strikes have forcefully conveyed to Pakistan our intention of puniti ve punishment to the 
State/Non-State actor who aid, abet or execute actions detrimental to our national interests.  It 
has ensured that a caution is imposed on Pakistan, on supporting or abetting inimical interests 
from its territory or territory under its control. 
 
3.103 Illustrating this point further, the Foreign Secretary during oral evidence before the 
Committee on 18 October 2017 submitted as under:- 
"We do not see the strike as an abandonment of strategic restraint. In fact, the very words 
which the Defence Secretary emphasised were „surgical strike‟. It is a very restrained 
one. The fact that we only hit the launching pads, the fact that we completed the 
operations and we said that we had completed the operation shows that strategic 
restrained is very much in operation except that strategic restraint is operating somewhat 
differently than it used to operate before. But it is still a very restrained policy." 
 
3.104 To the Committee‟s specific point on the objectives of this surgical strike, Lieutenant 
General Bipin Rawat, Vice Chief of the Army Staff (VCOAS)  during oral evidence stated:- 
"The purpose of these operations was to strike at the terrorists about whom we had 
definitive information and who had in the past caused damage to our civilians and th e 
military establishments and in all probability would have caused further damage had they 
successfully infiltrated into our territory, if they were not eliminated at their forward 
bases. With this intent, it was informed that we have now called off the op erations, and 
we do not intend carrying it any further. However, it was also informed that Pakistan 

62 
 
must abide by its commitment of not allowing Pakistan‟s territory or territory under their 
control to be used by agents inimical to our nation." 
 
3.105 During the oral evidence on 18 October 2016 e numerating the objectives behind the 
surgical strikes, the Foreign Secretary further clarified as under:- 
"I think the political objective  of doing  that operation  on September 29 was to tell 
Pakistan  clearly and  publicly  that the  fact that they were  operating from beyond  the  
Line of  Control  does  not   keep  them safe  across  that  line. They  should  not  believe  
any  longer that  they have  the   fre edom   to cross  the Line,  inflict damage,   and the    
moment  they  cross the  Line,  they are home and safe... The message at the end of the day 
was a politico -military message. The politico -military message was that „if you keep 
crossing this Line and escalating attacks within Jammu & Kashmir, India will not remain in 
the posture in which it has done so earlier; and, we have options too, some of which we are 
prepared to escalate." 
 
3.106 On the Committee‟s further query about the logic behind Pakistan‟s denial of these 
operations, the Foreign Secretary enumerated:- 
"When the operation happened, our own sense was that for the first few hours of the 
operation, they were scrambling to (a) find out what happened because it took quite some 
time for their DGMO to come on the line; (b) initially, if you see, there is a disc repancy 
between the statement which Nawaz Sharif put out, which implied there was an incident 
versus the statement which Rawalpindi GHQ put out which suggested there was not. The 
fact was probably there was lack of coordination because they were also tryin g to figure 
out exactly what happened and these launch pads are not the most accessible places. So, 
probably, they were themselves unsure and by the time it comes up the chain of 
command, it would take time, and they were under time pressure. So, the GHQ g ot into 
the mode, that of denial. Once they put out that first statement that nothing happened, 
they were locked into th at..They had to keep building on the first denial statement. So, 
Mr. Nawaz Sharif was silenced and the thrust of the positions which cam e after that were 
really that nothing happened. So, the „nothing happened‟ narrative. I think by taking 
foreign media across the LoC proves nothing." 
 
3.107 On the Committee's query, the Ministry of External Affairs elaborated the international 
and regional reactions to these surgical strikes. Pursuant to our active outreach efforts, several 
countries issued statements strongly condemning cross border terrorism. These included the US 
and Russia. The White House and the US State Department issued statements strongly 
condemning cross border terror attack on India. The Russian Foreign Ministry issued a statement 

63 
 
supporting decisive action against terrorism and also specifically mentioned its expectations 
from Pakistan to take effective steps in order to stop th e activities of terrorist groups in its 
territories.  Further, the Governments  of Afghanistan,  Bangladesh,  Bahrain,  Canada,   China, 
France, Germany, Japan, Korea (ROK), Maldives, Nepal, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, 
the UAE, the UK, and the US in addition to the UN, all criticized the Uri terrorist act and 
affirmed support to tackle the menace of terrorism. 
 At the regional level, India, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan separately but at the same 
time informed SAARC Chair Nepal in writing that pr evalence of terrorism and violence in the 
region preclude conducive environment for hosting of SAARC Summit, and therefore, it would 
not be possible for them to attend the event which was scheduled to be held in Islamabad on 9-10 
November, 2016. Nepal, fol lowed by Sri Lanka and Maldives, also pointed out the absence of 
conducive atmosphere in the region for the SAARC Summit, and withdrew its participation.  
3.108 It is known that on September, 29, 2016 the Indian Army carried out a limited 
counter terrorism operation along the LoC. The Government of India made a public 
statement that the operation was limited and calibrated in scope and nature. The surgical 
strikes were carried out on the basis of credible and specific intelligence inputs about 
positioning of terrorist launch pads along LoC and cumulative build up of terrorist attacks, 
stemming from Pakistani soil. The Committee make a note of the Foreign Secretary‟ s 
statement that these strikes did not indicate an abandonment of India's policy o f strategic 
restraint, rather it amounted to a tactical change and not in the content of the policy. The 
Committee also opine that the surgical strikes  were demonstrative of India‟s restraint and 
mature response. The Committee are satisfied to know that the international , as well as 
regional community perceived India‟s position positively and a number of countries also 
issued statements in its support.  
 The Committee welcome the successful launching of surgical strikes in a restrained 
and focused way by the Indian Army. The Committee feel that by carrying out these 
operations, the Army has effectively raised the cost of using terrorism on Indian territory 
and placed the onus on Pakistan to act , rather than on India to observe restraint. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that strategic restraint has been a cornerstone of our  
defence strategy. The Committee would thereby,  urge the Government to maintain 

64 
 
continuity in this policy and simultaneously complement it with intense diplomatic 
outreach to highlight Pakistan's continued support for terrorism. The Committee are 
hopeful t hat better sense will prevail in Pakistan and it will abandon the strategy of 
carrying out low intensity warfare against India, which remains an insuperable obstacle to 
peace. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
CHAPTER-4 
ECONOMIC & CULTURAL ASPECT 
Given the strained political ties, greater economic integration and increased people to 
people contacts through cultural exchanges have been largely recognized as two significant 
domains through which the mutual hostility and trust deficit between I ndia and Pakistan is 
expected to decline.  However, over the years, instead of overcoming the political stalemate 
between the two countries, economic and cultural engagement has been held hostage to ups and 
downs in India-Pakistan‟s politico-strategic matrix. 
I. ECONOMIC COOPERATION/ENGAGEMENT 
4.2. Normalising trade relations with Pakistan is an important component of India‟s policy of 
overall normalization and improvement of bilateral relations with its neighbour. While deposing 
before the Committee, the C ommerce Secretary tried to situate the position of  India Pakistan 
economic ties in bilateral as well as regional perspective as under:- 
"In terms of significance for India‟s total trade in 2015 -16, Pakistan was a destination for 
just 0.83 per cent of our exports and it was a source of just 0.12 per cent of our total 
imports. In 2015 -16 Pakistan was ranked 47th among our trading partners in terms of 
total trade; 35th in terms of exports; and 70th in terms of imports. So, it is a very small 
part of our total  trade. Among the SAARC countries, Pakistan ranks fourth in terms of 
trade partnership behind Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Nepal with whom we have much 
higher trade, even though the GDP of Pakistan is higher than these countries. This 
indicates the potential for trade between the two countries is certainly much higher. Some 
part of it does reach Pakistan through third countries but the data on this is not 
substantiated; certainly it is not a fully realized potential." 
 
4.3 India has been steadfast in its econo mic engagement with Pakistan.   India 
initiated the move for boost in bilateral trade when it extended the Most Favoured Nation [MFN] 
status to Pakistan in 1996 and the trade volume grew remarkably in the early 2000s. Further, 
transition towards normalizati on of trade relations between India and Pakistan was initiated by 
moving from a positive list [which allowed export of just under 2,000 tariff lines from India to 
Pakistan] maintained by Pakistan to a negative list [allowing Indian export to Pakistan of al l but 
about 1,200 tariff line] regime in 2012 . This was followed by the augmentation of land trade 
through a new Integrated Check Post at Attari in April 2012. 

66 
 
4.4 When asked about the advantages flowing out of the MFN status granted to Pakistan, the 
Department of Commerce replied that the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) principle is enshrined in 
Article I: 1 of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 1994. In terms of this principle, 
any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by any WTO member  country to any 
product from any other country shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the like 
product from other WTO member countries . The object and purpose of the MFN principle is to 
prohibit discrimination among like products from differe nt countries. The advantages associated 
with MFN principle, inter-alia, include:  
 Maximizing efficiency; 
 Minimizing transaction costs; 
 Promoting further reciprocal liberalization; 
 Minimizing costs of trade negotiations; 
 Minimizing uncertainty; etc 
  
4.5. Following the Uri attacks, the Government of India declared to review the MFN status 
granted to Pakistan.  On the Committee‟s query regarding current status, the Department of 
Commerce stated that no decision has yet been taken on the withdrawal of the MFN  status 
provided to Pakistan. 
              
4.6 When asked about the assessment of the Department of Commerce on the reasons behind 
Pakistan's refrain from extending MFN status to India, it responded that apprehension about 
Indian exports overwhelming Pakistan’s market may be the reason for Pakistan to not extend the 
MFN status to India, in addition to its domestic political compulsions. 
 
4.7 Despite the plethora of efforts made, the bilateral trade relations between India and 
Pakistan have largely rema ined inconsequential.  On being asked about the factors impeding 
bilateral trade between the two largest South Asian economies, the Department of Commerce 
stated that a major factor affecting the bilateral trade is the existing political relationship between 
the two countries, which also affects the policy framework of bilateral trade . Under the WTO 
Agreement, India accorded Most Favoured Nation [MFN] status to all WTO members, including 
Pakistan. However, Pakistan is yet to transition fully to MFN status f or India . Since 1982, 
Pakistan was announcing a list of items which can be imported from India . This positive list was 

67 
 
gradually enlarged over the years . In March 2012, a transition was made from Positive List to 
Negative List, whereby a list of 1870 produ cts allowed to be traded under Positive List was 
replaced by a Negative List of 1209 products, which were not allowed to be traded with India . 
This list continues to be in place . In addition, Pakistan permits only 137 products to be imported 
from India through Wagah/Attari border land route . Since India does not maintain any Pakistan 
specific trade restrictions, the bilateral trade is largely affected by the restrictions placed by 
Pakistan on import of products from India. 
4.8 When asked about the recent in itiatives taken by the two countries to strengthen 
economic ties, the Department of Commerce answered that the 7th round of India -Pakistan talks 
on ‘Commercial and Economic Cooperation ’ between Commerce Secretaries of India and 
Pakistan was held in Septemb er 2012 in Islamabad . In the meeting it was agreed, inter-alia that 
Pakistan would notify removal of all restrictions on trade by Wagah -Attari land route, Pakistan 
would transition fully to MFN [non-discriminatory] status for India by December 2012 as agreed 
earlier and both sides would liberalise trade under SAFTA.  
 
4.9 Further, the Commerce Ministers of India and Pakistan met in January 2014 on the 
sidelines of the 5th SAARC Business Leaders Conclave held at New Delhi . Both Ministers 
reaffirmed the c ommitment of their Governments to expeditiously establish normal trading 
relations and in this context to provide Non -Discriminatory Market Access [NDMA], on a 
reciprocal basis . Both sides decided to intensify and accelerate the process of trade 
normalisation, liberalisation and facilitation and to implement the agreed measures . In the 
meeting between Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan on 27 th May 2014 in New Delhi, India 
stated that the two countries could move immediately towards full trade normalisati on on the 
basis of September 2012 roadmap worked out between the Commerce Secretaries of both 
countries.No bilateral trade meeting between India and Pakistan has taken place since then, and 
there is no progress on the agreed roadmap. 
 
4.10 In the analysis of the Ministry of External Afairs , the overall attitude of hostility, non -
cooperation, not fulfilling its commitments and consistent support to cross border terror and 

68 
 
violence by Pakistan has been the main obstacle to normalising relations between India and 
Pakistan, including in the field of trade and commerce.  
 
4.11 The main items of export from India to Pakistan are: cotton, organic chemicals, food 
products including prepared animal fodder, edible vegetables, plastic articles, man -made 
filament, coffee, tea, spices, dyes, oil seeds, dairy products, pharmaceuticals etc. Main items of 
import by India from Pakistan are: copper and copper articles, edible fruits and nuts, cotton, salt, 
sulphur and earths and stones, organic chemicals, mineral fuels, plastic products, wool, 
glassware, raw hides & skin etc. 
 
4.12. The trade data with Pakistan can be summarised as follows:-  
             [Million USD] 
Year Exports Imports Total Trade Balance of Trade 
2005-06 689.23 179.56 868.79 509.67 
2006-07 1,350.09 323.62 1,673.71 1,026.47 
2007-08 1,950.53 287.97 2,238.50 1,662.56 
2008-09 1,439.88 370.17 1,810.05 1,069.72 
2009-10 1,573.32 275.94 1,849.26 1,297.38 
2010-11 2,039.61 332.51 2,372.12 1,707.09 
2011-12 1,541.57 361.93 1,903.50 1,179.65 
2012-13 2,064.89 541.87 2,606.75 1,523.02 
2013-14 2,274.30 426.88 2,701.18 1,847.41 
2014-15 1,857.29 497.31 2,354.60 1,359.98 
2015-16 2,171.14 441.03 2,612.16 1,730.11 
2016-2017 
[Apr-Nov][P] 
995.14 332.95 1,328.09 662.19 

69 
 
4.13 From the above table, it can be clearly observed that over the years India has maintained 
a substantial trade surplus with Pakistan.  Stressing this facet of our relationship, the Commerce 
Secretary, while tendering evidence before the Committee, submitted as under: 
"The continuing trade surplus really indicates India‟s dominance  in the 
bilateral trade and this  needs to be noted while we evaluate the economic 
relations between the two countries."  
4.14 The Committee further enquired about the existence of any interest groups(s) in                  
Pakistan that advocates greater bilateral trade with India.  The Ministry of External Affairs in a 
written reply to the Committee stated that there is a constituency/interest group in Pakistan 
among the country‟s business community for increasing trade relations with India. Leading 
business and trade chambers – Lahore, Karachi and Rawalpindi Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry – visit India for trade fairs and do seek out greater industry contacts in India. These 
groups form a lobby group for increasing trade ties with India. 
4.15 In the Commerce Secretaries meeting held in September, 2012 both sides agreed to 
exchange names of 10 prominent business persons from each country for the Joint Business 
Council (JBC).  Acco rdingly, the India Pakistan Joint Business Forum was constituted in 
October, 2012, consisting of co -Chairpersons and upto 15 members from each side.  The 
Secretariat for the JBF is provided by Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) and Pakistan 
Business Council (PBC). 
4.16 The Committee desired to know about the objectives of this Forum.  The Department of 
Commerce answered that as per the Terms of Reference of the India Pakistan Joint Business 
Forum, the following objectives were identified: 
1. Developing a roadmap for increased cooperation and mutually beneficial contacts 
and partnership between the two countries at the business level. 
2. Addressing issues pertaining to the: 
i. Promotion of Trade and Investment 
ii. Promotion of business alliances and possibilities fo r collaboration between 
Indian and Pakistani companies 
iii. Development of synergies to explore business opportunities in third countries 
3. Addressing sectors of mutual interest, like :- 

70 
 
 Engineering goods 
 Chemicals 
 Gems & Jewellery 
 Textile & Apparels 
 Petroleum and Petrochemicals 
 Energy 
 Handicrafts 
 Services like education, health, information & communication technology 
and tourism 
4. Addressing other sectors of mutual interest in the areas of trade, investment and 
technological co-operation as considered relevant from time to time.                  
4.17 It is further informed that six meetings of the India Pakistan Joint Business Forum have 
been held, as per the details given below: 
Meeting Date Venue 
First Meeting June 28, 2013 Islamabad 
Second Meeting October 11, 2013 New Delhi 
Third Meeting February 16, 2014 Lahore 
Fourth Meeting August 8, 2014 New Delhi 
Fifth Meeting July 28, 2015 Lahore 
Sixth Meeting May 3, 2016 New Delhi 
The Forum has also set up the sectoral Task Forces, which are providing focussed 
recommendations to the Forum to improve bilateral cooperation between India and Pakistan 
 
A. Trade Architecture with Pakistan  
4.18 Bilateral trade with Pakistan is executed through both preferential and non -preferential 
routes.  Since presently there is no bilateral trade agreement with Pakistan, the bilateral trade 
under non -preferential route takes place at MFN rates i.e. tariffs ap plied by a country on the 
import of a product from any country without any tariff preference. The preferential trade with 
Pakistan is executed through two preferential agreements [1] Agreement on SAARC Preferential 
Trading Arrangement [SAPTA] and [2] Agree ment on South Asian Free Trade Area [SAFTA], 
to which both India and Pakistan are members. However, Pakistan has not extended MFN status 
to India.  From 1982, they have followed the practice of announcing a list of items which can be 
traded with India. 

71 
 
4.19 During the 7 th Commerce Secretary level talks in September 2012 in Islamabad, it was 
decided to further deepen the preferential arrangements under SAFTA and both sides developed 
a long term plan for this purpose.  Elaborating upon the roadmap, the Commer ce Secretary, 
while deposing before the Committee on 12 January, 2017 submitted as under: 
“It was agreed that Pakistan would notify removal of restrictions on trade at the Wagah -
Attari land route. That was the first element of the agreement. Thereafter Ind ia would 
bring down its SAFTA Sensitive List by 30 per cent before 2012 keeping in view 
Pakistan‟s export interest. Thirdly, Pakistan was to transition fully to MFN, that is, non -
discriminatory status for India by December, 2012. India would thereafter bring down its 
SAFTA Sensitive List of 868 items for non -LDC countries to 100 lines at six digit level 
by April, 2013. As India progressively notified the reduced Sensitive List, Pakistan was 
also required to simultaneously notify its dates of transition to b ring down its non -LDC 
SAFTA Sensitive List of 1,169 products to a maximum of 100 tariff lines at six digit 
level within five years. The reductions were to be notified by Pakistan in equal measure 
for each year so as to complete the reduction to 100 lines b efore the end of 2017. Thus, 
before the end of 2017, both India and Pakistan were intended to have no more than 100 
six digit tariff lines in their respective SAFTA Sensitive List vis-a-vis each other and 
before 2020 except for the small number of tariff lines under the SAFTA Sensitive Lists, 
the peak tariff rate for other tariff lines was to be brought down to not more than five per 
cent. However, Pakistan did not adhere to any of these commitments subsequent to 
moving to a negative list and, therefore, the roadmap was never implemented.” 
 
4.20 Implementation of agreed roadmap of Commerce Secretary level talks held in Islamabad 
in September, 2012 was reviewed on 18 th January 2014 during the meeting of the Commerce 
Ministers of both sides on the sidelines of  the  5 th SAARC Business Leaders Conclave held at 
New Delhi, wherein both Ministers reaffirmed the commitment of their Governments to 
expeditiously establish normal trading relations and in this context to provide Non -
Discriminatory Market Access [NDMA], [ new terminology coined by Pakistan for MFN] on a 
reciprocal basis.  Both sides decided to intensify and accelerate the process of trade 
normalization, liberalization and facilitation and to implement the agreed measures. 
 
4.21 As per the information furnis hed by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the 
Government of Pakistan has not adhered to its commitments of removing the trade restrictions on 
the land route, as well as the granting of MFN status to India, as agreed during the 7 th Commerce 
Secretary le vel talks held in September 2012 at Islamabad. Further progress in improving 

72 
 
bilateral trade through the SAFTA process hinges on the fulfillment of commitments made by 
the Pakistan side. 
4.22 Thus, Pakistan has not only acted as a hindrance in economic tie s between India and 
Pakistan but also to the entire region.  Since SAARC functions on the basis of consensus, the 
Committee wanted to know whether there are elements in trade relationships with other 
neighbouring countries that have been held hostage to our frosty ties with Pakistan.   
4.23 The Department of Commerce responded that Pakistan does not allow transit of Indian 
exports to Afghanistan through its territory, which has been impacting such exports .However, 
Pakistan used to allow land access for Afgh an exports to India, through Wagah -Attari border . 
Due to the recent closure of the land border between Pakistan and Afghanistan, by Pakistan, the 
access for Afghan exports to India has also been stopped, which is expected to adversely affect 
Afghanistan’s exports to India. 
 
4.24 During oral evidence before the Committee, the Commerce Secretary further reinforced 
the hindrance created by Pakistan in slowing down economic integration of the region by stating 
as under:- 
“...in the context of  the SAARC region, Pakistan has acted as the sole 
obstacle to improving connectivity by withholding consent to the Regional 
Railways Agreement and the Motor Vehicle Agreement. Mention may also 
be made of the fact that Pakistan has taken a narrow political approach to  
transit issues in respect of trade between India and Afghanistan. It is clear 
that Pakistan is more oriented towards China and the Middle East and 
undermines South Asia in terms of economic engagement. Within the 
SAARC, there is growing frustration even o n the part of other members.”  
 
Trade along LoC 
4.25 The cross LoC trade is not considered as bilateral trade but rather as a confidence 
building measure. Cross LoC trade on Sringar -Muzaffarabad and Poonch -Rawalakot axis 
commenced on 21.10.2008.  The trade  is based on barter system in respect of 21 items on zero 
duty basis.  Consequent upon increase in volume of trade, number of trading days was increased 

73 
 
from 2 to 4 days per week ( w.e.f. 15.11.2011) The estimated trade value along Cross LoC Trade 
since 21.10.2008 till 31.10.2016 are Rs. 2778 crores (Export) and Rs. 2932 crores (Import). 
 
4.26 On the Committee‟s query, the Department of Commerce based on inputs from Ministry 
of Home Affairs spelt out the items traded along as follows:  
Items Allowed To Be Traded From Salamabad To Chakoti And Chakandabagh To Rawalakote 
Exports From India 
S.No. Items 
1. Carpets 
2. Rugs 
3. Wall Hangings 
4. Shawls and stoles 
5. Namdas 
6. Gabbas 
7. Embroidered items including crewel 
8. Furniture including walnut furniture 
9. Wooden handicrafts walnut furniture 
10. Fresh fruits and vegetables 
11. Dry fruits including walnuts 
12. Saffron 
13. Aromatic plants 
14. Fruit bearing plants 
15. Dhania, Moongi, Imli and Black Mushrooms 
16. Kashmiri spices 
17. Rajmah 
18. Honey 
19. Papier Mache products 
20. Spring Rubberised Coir/Foam Mattresses, 
cushions, pillows and quilts 
21. Medicinal Herbs 
 
Items Allowed To Be Traded From Chakoti To Salamabad And Rawalakote to Chakandabagh  
Imports Into India 
 
S.No. Items 
1. Rice 
2. Jahnamaz and Tusbies 

74 
 
3. Precious Stones 
4. Gabbas 
5. Namdas 
6. Peshawari leather Chappals 
7. Medicinal herbs 
8. Maize and maize products 
9. Fresh fruits and vegetables 
10. Dry fruits including walnuts 
11. Honey 
12. Moongi 
13. Imli 
14. Black Mushroom 
15. Furniture including walnut furniture 
16. Wooden handicrafts 
17. Carpets and rugs 
18. Wall hangings 
19. Embroidered items 
20. Foam mattresses, cushions and pillows 
21. Shawls and stoles 
4.27 When asked about the regulatory mechanisms governing cross LoC trade, the Department 
of Commerce enumerated that the regulatory mechanism governing Cross LoC trade is the 
Standard Operating Procedures issued on 20 .10.2008, 04 .07.2012 and 12 .07.2012 by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs . For the smooth functioning of the Cross LoC Trade, Trade 
Facilitation Centres (TFC) have been set up at both the trading points i .e. Salamabad, Uri and 
Chakan-da-Bagh, Poonch. An amount of Rs . 10 Crore each was sanctioned by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs for the 1st phase up-gradation of both the TFCs  in 2011. Thereafter, an amount of 
Rs. 10.26 crore and Rs . 10.73crore have been sanctioned in 2016 for the 2 nd phase up-gradation 
of TFC Chakan -da-Bagh, Poonch and TFC Salamabad, Uri respectively . In addition, t he 
proposal for installation of Full Body Truck Scanner (FBTS) in Attari and other two trade 
facilitation centre on the Indo -Pakistan border  is under consideration to mitigate the security 
concerns. 
4.28 During their study visit at the ICP Attari, the Comm ittee took a view of the genesis, 
functions and facilities there. Representative of Land Ports Authority of India informed the 
Committee that there was a lack of coordination between various agencies involved in customs, 

75 
 
immigration and there was evasion o f tax duties, octroi etc. ICP was inaugurated with the 
mandate to develop, sanitize and manage the facilities for movement of passengers and cargo 
including systems to address security imperatives.  
 
4.29 The Committee discern three trends in economic ties  between India and Pakistan.  
First, the tr ade between the two countries albeit paltry, exhibits immense potential. 
Secondly, India has consistently maintained a substantial trade surplus with Pakistan over 
the years. Thirdly, even though bilateral trade is  governed by preferential and non -
preferential routes, the SAPTA agreement is an important mechani sm for preferred 
bilateral trade between the two countries. It is disconcerting to note that the mismatch 
between India and Pakistan both in intention and app roach towards normalization of 
relationship extends to trade and economic ties. While India has proactively taken a host of 
initiatives to bolster economic ties, Pakistan has adopted a parochial approach. Moreover , 
the existing political relationship, Paki stan's narrow economic approach towards India as 
well as the region and Pakistan's continued support to terrorism have acted as serious 
impediments to normal ization of economic ties. Since  the Government of Pakistan has not 
adhered to its commitment of rem oving the trade restrictions on the land route as well as 
reciprocating the  Most Favoured Nation ( MFN) status to India ,  as agreed at the 7th 
Commerce Secretary level talks in September, 2012 at Islamabad,  further progress in 
improving the bilateral trade would now hinge on fulfilling the commitments made by 
Pakistan. The Committee, therefore, desire that all possible efforts should be made to 
persuade Pakistan for taking reciprocal steps of extending MFN sta tus to India and 
removing trade restrictions on the land route as agreed in the 7 th Commerce Secretaries 
talks. The engagement can be taken to a further level if  Pakistan follows the preferential 
arrangements under South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA)  and t hey allow transit of 
Indian exports to Afghanistan through its territory . The Committee would urge the 
Government of India to reach out to Pakistan to move out of i ts narrow approach and 
embrace the various positive steps taken by India as a responsible ec onomic player in the 
region.   
(Recommendation No 13) 

76 
 
4.30 The Committee observe that with the opening of the Integrated Check Post (ICP) 
Attari in 2012, the handling of trade between India and Pakistan has improved 
significantly. The Committee, however, find that there is a further need to improve the 
efficiency of the ICP through better technological handling. The Committee would 
particularly desire that the Land Ports Authority of India (LPAI) should fulfill its mandate 
to provide world class infrastruc ture and improved mechanization  and technological 
penetration at ICP Attari . The Committee desire that the infrastructural impediments at 
ICP like limited storage sp ace, lack of mechanized loading /unloading, loose cargo holding 
area etc. should be done awa y with on priority basis. The Committee also observe that 
there is an increased turnaround time for trucks due to manual loading and unloading of 
goods, lack of containerization of cargo and inadequate infrastructure for handling cargo 
coming through railways and, as such, desire that necessary steps should be taken to 
remove these impediments  also. The Committee further desire that steps should be taken 
for the removal of restriction s on the number of items that can be freely exported through 
ICP and for the rationalization of non -tariff barriers like the plant quarantine , in 
consultation with Pakistan. So far as  the facilities at ICP, Attari  are concerned , the 
Committee express its dissatisfaction that despite earlier reminders, the procurement of  
full body truck scanners has been inordinately delayed and require that this be expedited.  
In addition, hand -held survey instruments, advance X -ray scanning machine for baggage 
and advanced pellet scanning equipment should be procured at the earliest because all 
these are essential for security purpose and to facilitate the smooth movement of goods 
across the border . The Committee had noted that such equipment is already deployed on 
the Pakistani side. 
(Recommendation No 14) 
II. CULTURAL DIMENSION OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
4.31 India is widely recognized as an economic superpower. India and Pakistan share 
enormous cultural and civilizational commonalities.  When asked about the role culture can play 
in cementing ties between the two countries, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that t here is 
great yearning among the people of the two countries for closer and cooperative  relations 
between the two countries.  The Government believes in the promotion of friendly exchanges 

77 
 
and people to people contacts, including in the fields of art, literature, etc for fostering closer 
relations between the two countries. However, Pakistan ‟s continued support to cross border 
terrorism against India has cast a shadow on all efforts to promote closer and friendlier relations 
between the two countries.  
People to People contacts 
4.32 Contacts between people are an essential element of cultural  exchanges. For such 
contacts to happen the pre requisite is obtaining visa and proper travel documents. As per the 
Visa Agreement signed between the Government of India and Pakistan on 08.0 9.2012, the 
following Visas are granted to Pakistani nationals:- 
(1) Visitor Visa 
(2) Visa on Arrival 
(3) Business Visa  
(4) Group Tourist Visa 
(5) Entry and Exit  
In addition to t hese , the following categories of visas are granted by India to Pakistan nationals 
as a unilateral measure:- 
(1) Visitor Visa to reputed Pakistani artists, including actors, musicials etc. visiting India 
for commercial performance. 
(2) Three Year Business Visa. 
(3) Student Visa. 
(4) Medical Visa/Medical Attendant Visa. 
(5) Group Tourist Visa to individual visa applicant for travel in groups  with not less than 
10 and not more than 50 in each group. 
 
4.33 On the Committee's query regarding the granting of visa to Pakistani nationals on the 
basis of reciprocity, the Ministry of Home Affairs responded that in the visa agreement  signed 
between the Governments of India and Pakistan, there is no provision to grant visas to Pakistani 
nationals on the basis of reciprocity. 
 
4.34 The Ministry has informed that many Pakistani nationals, especially those belonging to 
minority communities migrate to India  every year. When asked about the steps taken by the 
Government to facilitate their stay in India, MHA replied that the Cabinet in its meeting held on 

78 
 
13.7.2016, while approving the proposals contained in this Ministry‟s Cabinet Note dated 
11.7.2016, autho rized the Committee of Ministers to examine the proposals and finalize any 
further/ consequential changes that may be considered appropriate. Accordingly, a meeting was 
held under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Home Minister on 14.7.2016 which was attended by  
External Affairs Minister, Finance Minister, Minister of Urban Development and Minister of 
Law & Justice in which a few changes to the proposals were approved. 
 
4.35 Further, the Ministry also gave details about the Status of implementation of decisions 
(1) Instructions were issued to State Governments/ UT Administrations on 19.8.2016 
in respect of the following decisions:-  
(i) Permission to take up self-employment or for doing business. 
(ii) Issue of driving license. 
(iii) Allowing free movement within the State/UT.  
(iv) Permission to transfer of LTV papers from one State/UT to another State/UT. 
(v) Reduction in penalty on non-extension of short term visa/LTV on time. 
(vi) Permission to apply for LTV at the place of present residence. 
 
(2) Following decisio ns were conveyed to the Ministries/Department concerned on 
19.8.2016 for issue of notification/ instructions:- 
(i) Permitting opening of bank accounts (conveyed to Department of Economic 
Affairs/RBI). 
(ii) Permission for purchase of dwelling unit for self - occupation an suitable 
accommodation for carrying out self-employment (conveyed to Department of Economic 
Affairs/RBI). 
(iii) Issue of PAN Card (conveyed to Department of Revenue). 
(iv) Issue of Aadhaar number (conveyed to UIDAI). 
  
4.36 On the Committee's query, the Ministry provided a database of such nationals. As per the 
IVRFT Online Visa Application System, LTV granted to Pakistani nationals during the last three 
years are given below:- 
Year No. of Pakistan nationals granted 
2014 2779 
2015 2142 
2016 2298 
Total 7219 
 

79 
 
4.37 With regard to the issue of medical visa, the Foreign Secretary, during evidence 
submitted as under:- 
"Generally, we continue to issue them on a priority basis for patients and for their 
attendants and there is no significant change in the number of medical visas that we have 
issued in the last two years." 
 
Religious Tourism 
4.38 Religious Tourism constitutes an important factor in our relationship with Pakistan.  
However, it has fallen victim to tensions in our relationship.  When asked about existing 
mechanism(s) for facilitating religious tourism between the two countries, the Ministry of 
External Affairs answered that a Protocol constituting an Agreement between India and Pakistan 
on Visit to Religious Shrines, signed in Sep tember 1974, provides for facilitating group tourism 
visas [up to 20 groups/ „parties‟ per year] to visit a select list of religious places from each 
country. 
4.39 The Government of India has unilaterally, in July 2015, provided Group Pilgrim Visa 
facility to minority communities in Pakistan including Hindus and Sikhs. A number of Pakistani 
minority community pilgrims take benefit of this facility to undertake religious pilgrimage to 
India. From India, the bulk of religious tourists to Pakistan include the Sikh jathas [of about 
4000 pilgrims in two major groups per year] and a few hundred Hindus [of about 250 per year to 
Katas Raj temple complex per year]. From Pakistan about 11,000 visas are issued for pilgrimage 
purposes annually, mostly for members of the  Bohra Community and the Ahmadiya. Bohras 
travel on visit visa [separate provision exists in visa guidelines] and the Ahmadiyas on 
pilgrimage visa.   
4.40 In replying to the Committee‟s query during evidence on 12 January 2017 on the need for 
expanding religious tourism, the Foreign Secretary stated as under:-  
"we  had some discussions on expanding religious tourism. The intention was to hold it 
alongside the comprehensive bilateral dialogue but since, as you are aware, the 
comprehensive bilateral dialogue did not take off, that also remains in limbo." 
 

80 
 
4.41 The Committee during its study tour to Amritsar visited Dera Baba Nanak and came 
across the long pending demand of people for establishment of an exclusive corridor from the  
Indian side to Gurudwara Kartarpur  Sahib through which pilgrims can pay homage without any 
visa or passport. Gurudwrara Kartarpur  Sahib is located in Kartarpur, Narowal District in 
Pakistan and has immense religious significance for Sikhs all across the world, including India.  
4.42 People to people contacts have been dodged whenever there has been a renewal of 
tensions between India and Pakistan.  Consequently, there have been talks of „hardening our soft 
power and softening our hard power‟ towards Pakistan. 
4.43 India‟s soft power capabilities  are manifested globally in its rich cultural heritage, 
music, varied cuisines, traditional knowledge base and literature.  The Committee are 
aware that India and Pakistan share mutually overlapping bonds  of culture and tradition 
which has led to people to people contacts on a regular basis .  The Committee further note 
that religious tourism between the two countries is regulated by a Protocol constituting an 
Agreement between India and Pakistan on Visit to Religious Shrines signed in 1974  and a 
significant number of pilgrims have been undertaking visits from both the sides .  In this 
connection, the Committee urge the Government to explore the feasibility of a pilgrim age 
access to Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib, particularl y in the light of the 550 th Prakash Parab 
in 2019. 
 The Committee feel that by building a robust bridge of mutual understanding and 
trust, people to people contacts can be a potent force in improving ties between the two 
countries in the long run. The role of ICCR and other relevant organizations can play a 
useful role in this regard.  Further, such contacts would widen the peace constituenc y in 
both the countries.  However, the  Committee are disheartened to note that strained 
relations between the two count ries have always cast a shadow on cultural exchanges.  In 
the recent past, India has drastically reduced the number of visas issued to Pakistani 
nationals and strict limitations have been imposed in permitting visits of Indians.  The 
Committee agree  that the generous approach of the Indian Government in the past, 
permitting people to people contacts , has not yielded tangible gains in resolving the 
antagonism between the two neighbours.  The Committee, however, feel that the 
Government should initiate fresh diplomatic measures at all relevant platforms with a view 

81 
 
to make Pakistan aware of the follies of its present policy towards India and persuade it to 
make the necessary course correction at the earliest.  This would ensure that people to 
people contacts a re resumed expeditiously to create a favourable atmosphere for dialogue 
and peace process. 
(Recommendation No 15) 
  

82 
 
CHAPTER 5 
REACTION/ROLE OF GLOBAL ACTORS & INSTITUTIONS 
 To comprehend the Indo-Pak relations in its entirety, it is imperative to look at the role of 
regional and global actors (like China, USA, Russia, Japan) and institutions (like United 
Nations). Immediately after independence, the relation/ties between Indi a and Pakistan got 
embroiled in Cold War politics. While India pursued the policy of non -alignment, Pakistan got 
aligned to the US led bloc. However, with the changing international context, India stands better 
placed diplomatically culturally as well as economically.   
I. THE GLOBAL MILIEU 
A. Role of United Nations in Indo-Pak issues 
5.2 In 1948, India made a reference to the UN under Article 35, which permits any member 
state to bring any situation, whose continuance is likely to endanger international peace and 
security, to the attention of the Security Council.  On April 1948, the UN Security Council 
Resolution 467 was passed.  By this resolution, the United Nation Commission for India and 
Pakistan (UNCIP) was established to ensure restoration of peace  and order along with the 
holding of a plebiscite.  However, the resolution also enumerated the pre -conditions for holding 
the plebiscite, which included Pakistan‟s withdrawal of tribesmen Pakistani nationals from the 
Indian State of Jammu & Kashmir. In th e absence of the fulfillment of these pre -conditions, the 
resolution could not be fully implemented. 
5.3 When asked about the role of the United Nations in Indo -Pak rivalry over the years, the 
Ministry of External Affairs answered that t he Government has clearly articulated its stance that 
it is committed to resolving all outstanding issues with Pakistan bilaterally on the basis of the 
Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration and that there is no scope for any third party 
intervention/ mediation. 
5.4 The Committee further desired to know about the various resolutions adopted by United 
Nations pertaining to the issue  of Jammu & Kashmir . The Ministry of External Affairs enlisted 
the following details:-  
 

83 
 
Resolutions Adopted 
by UN Security 
Council 
Subject 
S/RES/38 [1948] The India-Pakistan Question [requesting India and Pakistan to take 
measures to improve the situation in Kashmir] 
S/RES/39 [1948] The India-Pakistan Question [establishing a Commission on the 
India-Pakistan question] 
S/RES/47 [1948] The India-Pakistan Question [on restoration of peace and order and 
the plebiscite in the State of Jammu and Kashmir] 
S/RES/51 [1948] The India-Pakistan Question [directing the UN Commission for India 
and Pakistan to proceed without delay to the areas of dispute] 
S/RES/80 [1950] The India-Pakistan Question [deciding to appoint a UN representative 
for India and Pakistan and to terminate the UN Commission for India 
and Pakistan] 
S/RES/91 [1951] The India-Pakistan Question [deciding to appoint a UN 
Representative for India and Pakistan in succession to Sir Owen 
Dixon, who resigned] 
S/RES/96 [1951] The India-Pakistan Question [on a plan for the demilitarisation of the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir] 
S/RES/98 [1952] The India-Pakistan Question [on negotiations to reach an agreement 
on a plan of demilitarisation of the State of Jammu and Kashmir] 
S/RES/122 [1957] The India-Pakistan Question [on the final disposition of the state of 
Jammu and Kashmir] 
S/RES/123 [1957] The India-Pakistan Question [on negotiations on the India-Pakistan 
question] 
S/RES/126 [1957] The India-Pakistan Question [on negotiations on the India-Pakistan 
question and the visit of the UN Representative for India and Pakistan 
to the subcontinent] 
S/RES/209 [1965] The India-Pakistan Question [on an immediate ceasefire between 
India and Pakistan] 
S/RES/210 [1965] The India-Pakistan Question [requesting strengthening of the UN 
Military Observer Group in India] 
S/RES/211 [1965] The India-Pakistan Question [demanding immediate ceasefire and 
subsequent withdrawal of armed personnel] 
S/RES/214 [1965] The India-Pakistan Question [demanding that parties observe the 
cease-fire and calls for prompt withdrawal of military personnel] 
S/RES/215 [1965] The India-Pakistan Question [calling upon India and Pakistan to 
schedule troop withdrawal] 
S/RES/303 [1971] The India-Pakistan Question [deciding to refer the question on the 
situation in the India-Pakistan subcontinent to the 26th Session of the 
General Assembly] 
S/RES/307 [1965] The India-Pakistan Question [demanding that a durable cease-fire be 
observed in the India-Pakistan question] 
 

84 
 
5.5 The United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan [UNMOGIP] was 
deployed in January 1949 to supervise, in Jammu & Kashmir, the ceasefire line between India 
and Pakistan under the Karachi Agreement of 1949. Subsequently, after the winding up of the 
office of the UNCIP, the Security Counc il, on March 30, 1951, by its Resolution 91 decided that 
UNMOGIP shall continue to supervise the ceasefire in the State. 
 
5.6 On the Committee‟s enquiry, the Ministry of External Affairs apprised it about the 
current status of UNMOGIP by stating that India‟s stated position regarding UNMOGIP is that it 
has outlived its mandate following the Simla Agreement, under which both sides agreed to 
resolve all the outstanding issues bilaterally and the coming into effect of the Line of Control 
[LoC] which superseded  the cease -fire line of the Karachi Agreement of 1949. Given the 
Government of India‟s position on the mandate of UNMOGIP, the activities of UNMOGIP are 
restricted to their respective locations on our side and they are not permitted to visit areas close 
to the Line of Control [LoC]. The UNMOGIP, which has been created through a UN Security 
Council Resolution, can be wound up once the „India -Pakistan Question‟ is taken off the UNSC 
agenda. 
 
5.7 As a country with strong faith in international law and the principles of United 
Nations, India made a reference to U nited Nations in 1948 following Pakistan‟s aggression 
in the state of Jammu & Kashmir.  However, Pakistan‟s inability to abide by the conditions 
of UN Resolution 4 7 made things difficult on the ground.  The Committee note that the 
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan  (UNMOGIP) was deployed 
in 1949 under the Karachi Agreement of 1949. The Committee observe that f ollowing the 
Simla Agreement of 1972, no resolution has been passed by  the UN on the issue of 
Kashmir. 
 The Committee are of the firm opinion that after the signing of Simla Agreement 
and the coming in to effect of the Line of Control, which superseded the cease -fire line of 
the Karachi Agreement of 1949, there is no scope for  UN  intervention on the issue of 
Indian State of Jammu & Kashmir.  It has been made adequately clear that all outstanding 
issues between India and Pakistan need to be resolved peacefully and bilaterally in 
accordance with the Simla Agreement (1972) and the Lahore Declaration (1999).  The 

85 
 
marginal role played by UNMOGIP and virtually no o fficial UNSC resolution on Kashmir  
in the last four decades  is a testimony to such a recognition.  The Committee, however, feel 
that UN as a global organization with the primary objective of maintenance of 
international peace and security could  serve as a useful platform, together with other 
multilateral bodies  in highlighting India‟s concern s on Pakistani sponsored terrorism.  
Following the 9/11 attacks , global terrorism has emerged as a grave menace before the 
international community.  India has been a victim of cross border terrorism for decades.  
The Committee would, therefore, urge the Government of India to reach out to various UN 
and other fora and highlight this problem of terrorism which has been imposed on us by 
our neighbour in defiance of all acceptable norms of international behaviour. 
(Recommendation No 16) 
 
B.  Role of Major Actors 
5.8 When asked about the role of major powers in Indo -Pak relations, the Ministry of 
External Affairs enumerated that the members of the international community, including the US, 
Russia, Japan and China are well aware of the Government consistent position that we are 
committed to resolving all outstanding issues bilaterally and peacefully on the basis of Simla 
Agreement and the Lahore Declaration and that there is no scope for any third party intervention. 
There is wide support for India‟s position.  
 
5.9 Further, the international community, including the US, the UK, Russia, France and 
Japan have appreciated India‟s conce rns with regard to cross border terrorism and the threat 
posed to regional and global peace and security from sanctuaries and safe havens in our 
neighbourhood. For instance, the Joint Statement issued during Prime Minister‟s visit to the US 
on June 26, 2017 inter alia stated that “the leaders called on Pakistan to ensure that its territory is 
not used to launch terrorist attacks on other countries.”  Earlier, on September 30, 2016, the 
Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs had issued a statement inter alia stating that we hope that the 
Pakistani Government will take effective measures to stop the activities of terrorist groups in its 
territory. There has been international condemnation of the cross border terrorist attacks on India 

86 
 
and many countries openly sup ported India‟s counter terrorism operation of September 29, 2016 
across the LoC.  
5.10 The Committee enquired about the standpoint of the new US administration under 
President Donald Trump towards India -Pakistan ties.  The Ministry stated that t he US 
Government is well aware of India‟s consistent policy that there is no scope for third party 
intervention or mediation in India -Pakistan relations. During the visit of the Prime Minister to 
the US on June 25 -26, 2017 the two sides, inter alia, discussed the sit uation in India‟s 
neighbourhood, especially with regard to terrorism. The Joint Statement issued on June 26, inter 
alia stated that “ the leaders called on Pakistan to ensure that its territory is not used to launch 
terrorist attacks on other countries. The y further called on Pakistan to expeditiously bring to 
justice the perpetrators of the 26/11 Mumbai, Pathankot and other cross border terrorist attacks 
perpetrated by Pakistan based groups.” The US has also designated Syed Salauddin, the leader of 
Hizb-ul Mujahideen at Specially Designated Global Terrorist on June 26, 2017.” 
5.11 For instance, the US Deputy Spokesperson from their Department of State said [on 
September 29, 2016] inter alia : “ We have repeatedly and consistently expressed our concerns 
regarding the danger that cross -border terrorism poses for the region, and that certainly includes 
the recent terrorist attacks in Uri. We continue to urge actions to combat and delegitimize, 
terrorist groups like Lashkar-e-Taiba, Haqqani Network as well as Jaish-e-Mohammed.”   
 
5.12 The Russian Foreign Office issued a statement on September 19, 2016 which stated that 
“We strongly condemn the terrorist attack a gainst an army base in Jammu &  Kashmir‟s Uri in 
the early hours of September 18.... Regarding the Pathankot Indian air base attack in January 
2016, we are very concerned about the terrorist attacks near the Line of Control. We are also 
concerned about the fact that, according to New Delhi, the army base near Uri was attacked from 
Pakistani territory. We believe that this criminal act will be investigated properly, and that its 
organisers and perpetrators will be held accountable. We confirm our continued support for the 
Indian government‟s count erterrorism efforts.” On October 1, 2016, the then Russian 
Ambassador to India Mr. Alexander Kadakin in an interview said that “Greatest human rights 
violations take place when terrorists attack military installations and attack peaceful civilians in 
India. We welcome the surgical strike. Every country has the right to defend itself.” 

87 
 
5.13 India shares robust and strong ties with Russia. In 2010, both countries upgraded their 
relationship from “Strategic partnership” to “Special and Privileged Strategic Par tnership”. On 
the Committee‟s query on the increasing proximity between Pakistan and Russia, the Ministry of 
External Affairs emphatically pointed out that India and Russia enjoy time tested relationship 
and a „Special and Privileged Strategic Partnership.‟ Such a strong and time tested relationship is 
independent of relations with any other country.  
5.14 Recently, in a Statement issued by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs on June 15, 
2017, it was inter alia  stated that “In connection with the report s appearing in the Pakistani 
media regarding the statement of the Official spokesperson of the Pakistan Foreign office about 
Russia‟s alleged readiness to act as a mediator in the settlement of the issue of Jammu 
&Kashmir, we would like to emphasise that t he Russian position remains principled and 
unchanged- the differences between Islamabad and New Delhi should be resolved by them on  a 
bilateral basis in accordance with provisions of the Simla Agreement of 1972 and Lahore 
Declaration of 1999.” 
5.15 With i ncreasing strategic and economic engagement between Pakistan and China, 
particularly in the form of China -Pakistan Economic Corridor [CPEC].  The China -Pakistan 
Economic Corridor [CPEC] was announced officially during the visit of Chinese President Xi 
Jinping to Pakistan in April 2015. Some of the proposed projects under CPEC are in Pakistan 
Occupied Kashmir (PoK). The Government of India‟s consistent position is that Pakistan has 
been in illegal occupation of parts of the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir si nce 1947. The 
Government has conveyed to the Chinese side, including at the highest level, its concerns about 
their activities in PoK and asked them to cease these activities. Subsequently, the Pakistan 
military announced the setting up a Special Security Division [SSD] to protect the project. SSD 
would comprise two wings - the Northern Wing, with jurisdiction from the border with China at 
Khunjareb Pass till Rawalpindi and the Southern Wing, with security responsibility for rest of 
the country. SSD would be  deployed in CPEC project areas to “guide and advice” civilian 
security agencies and act as “first responders” in cases of threats to critical CPEC projects. 
5.16 China is assisting Pakistan in the development of the so-called „China-Pakistan Economic 
Corridor [CPEC]‟. Some of the proposed projects under CPEC are in Pakistan occupied Kashmir 
[PoK]. The Government‟s consistent position is that Pakistan has been in il legal occupation of 

88 
 
parts of the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir since 1947. The Government has conveyed to the 
Chinese side, including at the highest level, its concerns about their activities in PoK and asked 
them to cease these activities. Government ke eps a constant watch on all developments having a 
bearing on India‟s security and takes all necessary measures to safeguard it. 
5.17 The Committee desired to be apprised of the geo -strategic implications of such 
engagement and our consequent strategy to de al with such fallout.  In response, the Ministry 
stated that the Government is aware of China‟s assistance to Pakistan for various hydroelectric & 
nuclear projects, highways, motorways, ports, export processing zones and economic corridors in 
Pakistan. Chi na also provides defence assistance to Pakistan, including training, defence 
equipment and technology. 
5.18 The growing China -Pakistan nexus has been a major stumbling block for taking any 
substantive action against Pakistan sponsored terrorism at the inte rnational forum.  In view of 
this proximity, the Committee desired to know whether India sees a possibility to convince 
China about the seriousness of the menace of cross border terrorism or is it a fait accompli now.  
The Ministry in a written reply respo nded that the issue of cross border terrorism is regularly 
taken up at various levels, including with China.  India has, in particular, explained to China the 
rationale for the proposal to list Masood Azhar as a terrorist at the United Nations under 
resolution 1267, including during the India -China Strategic Dialogue in February, 2017. 
However, China has continued to block his inclusion.  
5.19  For the third time in a row, China has used its veto power to block India‟s appeal to the 
United National to ban J aish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar, the alleged mastermind of the 
Pathankot attack.  In this regard, the Committee sought to know the steps taken by the 
Government of India to raise this matter with China.  The Ministry submitted that the 
Government‟s consistent position has been that Pakistan -based Jaish-e-Mohammad was listed in 
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267/1989/2253 as far back as in 2001 for its well 
known terrorist activities and links to the Al Qaeda. The terrorist attack in Pathanko t in January 
2016 has shown that India continues to bear the consequences of not listing Masood Azhar as a 
UN recognized terrorists under UN Resolution 1267. 
 

89 
 
5.20 The Ministry further elaborated that the Government continues to have a dialogue with its 
international partners, including China, on this issue. It has been pointed out that China‟s 
position on listing of well known terrorists under 1267 Sanctions regime should be in 
consonance with its stated position on terrorism. In January 2017, three United  Nations Security 
Council permanent members – the USA, the UK and France, along with Sweden - moved a fresh 
proposal to list Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar in the United Nations Security Council 
1267 Sanctions Committee. China placed a technical „hold ‟ on the proposal. The fact that this 
application is being pursued by other countries and not by India alone, shows there is 
international support for this measure and concerns about Masood Azhar‟s activities.   
 
5.21 Briefing the Committee on  12 January 2017 over  the growing China -Pakistan 
engagement, the Foreign Secretary submitted as under:-  
“the co-operation between China and Pakistan on CPEC is assuming increasingly serious 
dimensions.  That China, a country which is so sensitive to sovereignty slights itself, has 
chosen to disregard our position is something that warrants deep introspection.  We are 
seeing other signs of growing closeness, including China‟s protection of Masood Azhar 
in the 1267 Committee in the UN, expanded nuclear cooperation in Chashma and 
Khushab, advancements in Pakistan‟s missile programme that has a long history of 
collaboration with China, and strong political support in international forums. We may 
well be poised for greater Pakistan -China strategic collaboration and should prepare 
for that eventuality.” 
 
5.22 It is indeed heartening to know that there is a wide support from the international 
community for India‟s position i.e. peaceful resolution of all outstanding issues between 
India and Pakistan within a bilat eral framework on the basis of S imla Agreement (1972) 
and the Lahore Declaration (1999) without any third party intervention or mediation.  The 
Committee are also happy to learn that India ‟s concern with regard to cross -border 
terrorism has been largely acknowledged and echoed by the international community. It is 
highly satisfying to observe the American recognition of the danger posed by terrorism , 
emanating from Pakistani s oil.  Through various statements and speeches, USA  has urged 
Pakistan to take actions against various terrorist organizations like Lashka r-e-Taiba, 
Haqqani Network and J aish-e-Mohammad and has called on Pakistan to expeditiously 
bring to justice the perpetrators of 26/11 Mumbai  attacks, Pathankot and other terrorist 

90 
 
attacks. The designation of Syed Salauddin, the leader of  Hizb-ul-Mujahideen as „Specially 
Designated Global Terrorist‟ on June 26, 2017 is a much awaited result of India‟s incessant 
efforts.  The Committee are happy that India‟s time tested friend Russia‟s position vis-à-vis 
Indo-Pak conflict  and the issue of Jammu &Kashmir  has remained principled and 
unchanged i.e differences between the two should be resolved on a bilateral basis in 
accordance with Simla Agreement (1972) and Lahore Declaration (1999).  The Committee 
however, observe that t he China-Pakistan proximity has assumed worrisome proportions.  
It is quite  inexplicable that a country so sensitive about sovereignty and territorial 
integrity has been oblivious about our sovereignty concerns on CPEC.  It is worrisome to 
discern that some of the projects under CPEC are in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK), a 
part of the Indian S tate of Jammu & Kashmir which has been in illegal occupation of 
Pakistan since 1947. 
 The Committee would urge the Government to continue its diplomatic outreach and 
political engagement to create a favourable international opinion on the threat posed by 
Pakistani sponsored terrorism to the region in general and to India in particular.  The 
international community need to realize t hat the use of terrorism  as a state policy by a 
nuclear-armed Pakistan is not only India‟s problem also but also a grave global concern.   
The Committee would therefore, suggest that the Government  deepen and widen our 
engagement with both the USA as well as Russia  on this issue .  The Committee would 
strongly recommend the Government to continue its outreach to China at diplomatic as 
well as political levels to express our deep concerns regarding CPEC. The Government 
should also continue the dialogue with i ts international partners, including China, for 
listing of Jaish -e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar under the 1267 Sanctions regime of the 
UN Security Council till it is achieved. 
 (Recommendation No 17) 
II. REGIONAL CONTEXT: 
5.23 The complicated relation betwe en India and Pakistan has played out in the South Asian 
region.  When asked about the manner in which the issue of cross -border terrorism emanating 
from Pakistani soil has been taken up at the SAARC Forum, the Ministry of External Affairs 

91 
 
replied that bilateral aspects of the issue of cross -border terrorism are not taken up in a regional 
forum like SAARC, as according to the SAARC Charter bilateral and contentious issues are 
excluded from deliberations. However, our serious concerns on the menace of terrorism affecting 
India and the region as a whole have been raised forcefully under the mechanism of the meeting 
of Ministers/Secretaries of Home/Interior.  
5.24 Additionally, India has been urging member States to take effective measures to ensure 
implementation of the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism and the 
Additional Protocol in its letter and spirit, including enactment of enabling legislation at the 
national level to give effect to the provisions of these instruments. 
5.25 In the wake of September 18 Uri attacks, India backed by five other SAARC states, 
declared its inability to participate in the 19 th SAARC Summit to be held in Islamabad.  In this 
regard, the Committee were inquisitive to know India‟s policy on evaluating BIMSTEC as an 
alternative regional bloc to SAARC. The Foreign Secretary, while giving testimony before the 
Committee on 18 October 2017, submitted:- 
"Finally, on the SAARC versus BIMSTEC, I think, we frankly contrast too because if 
you look at the membership of BIMSTEC, today these are members who are talking 
development, economics, trade, connectivity, people to people relations where as in 
SAARC because of one country, connectivity is blocked, MFN is not happening, visas 
are difficult to get, transit is blocked.  So, BIMSTEC in a sense holds up a mirror on 
SAARC and drives home the point that India is not against regional cooperation. But 
India is frustrated with a country that is blocking regional cooperation in the name of 
politics at each and every step." 
 
5.26 Further, the divergent interests of India and Pakistan have specifically impacted 
Afghanistan.  Elaborating upon this aspect , the Ministry responded that India supports a stable, 
secure, peaceful, sovereign, united, democratic, plural and prosperous Afghanistan. In this 
context, India has been involved in extending assistance for economic and infrastructure 
development in Afgha nistan. Over the past year, major projects like the Afghan Parliament 
building and the India -Afghanistan Friendship Dam, built with India‟s assistance, have been 
inaugurated and dedicated to the people of Afghanistan. Recently, on June 19, 2017 the Air 
Freight Corridor was made operational between Kabul and Delhi.  This has been further 
extended between Kandahar and Delhi. 

92 
 
5.27 India also supports an Afghan -led, Afghan-owned reconciliation process in Afghanistan 
which also conforms to the internationally recognized red -lines, including severing ties from 
international terrorist groups, stopping violence, accepting the Afghan Constitution, honouring 
the rights of weaker sections like women and children, etc. In this context, it has been 
participating in var ious international forums for promoting peace, security and stability in 
Afghanistan, including the Heart of Asia –Istanbul Process, International Contact Group, 
Brussels Conference, Moscow talks, the Kabul Process. 
 
5.28 On the issue of Pakistan being war y of our engagement with Afghanistan, the Foreign 
Secretary during oral evidence on 12th January, 2017 further stated:- 
"Afghanistan will continue to remain an issue of contention. Pakistan is 
clearly paranoid about India's presence and activities. It is r evealing while 
we have so many developmental projects In that country to our credit, 
Pakistan's only export has been terrorism. We do not intend to let this deter 
us. New commitments have been made to Afghanistan in rehabilitation and 
housing, irrigation works and training of Afghan personnel.”  
5.29 The Sixth Heart of Asia Conference was hosted by India in December 2016 at Amritsar, 
Punjab.  The Ministry of External Affairs highlighted the takeaways of Asia conference stated 
that the „Amritsar Declaration‟ adopted at the conference focused on countering terrorism to 
create stability and security in  Afghanistan; providing Afghanistan connectivity to strengthen 
economic activities; and development, which is essential for the progress of Afghanistan. The 
Amritsar Declaration further recognized terrorism as the biggest threat to peace and stability and 
demands immediate end to all forms of terrorism; and end to all forms of support to it, including 
financing, safe havens and sanctuaries. It called for the early finalization of the draft 
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism and early meetin g of experts to discuss a 
draft Regional Counter-Terrorism Framework Strategy.  
 
5.30 The Amritsar Declaration also reiterated the strong support from the Heart of Asia 
countries for Afghanistan's efforts to use its geographic location to enhance wider reg ional 
economic cooperation. Specific initiatives in this regard, including the India -Iran-Afghanistan 
Trilateral Agreement on developing Chabahar, were acknowledged. During the Conference 

93 
 
various delegations expressed appreciation for the constructive role  that India has been playing 
in supporting Afghanistan and its people in the past decade and a half. 
 
5.31 The Committee feel that the tortuous relationship between India and Pakistan has 
geo-strategic and geo -political implications in the entire region.  The Committee note that 
given the constraint of raising bilateral topics in a regional forum, India has raised the 
issue of cross -border terrorism under the mechanism of the meeting of 
Ministers/Secretaries of Home/Interior of SAARC Members.  The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that by acting as a stumbling block in all major regional connectivity 
and developmental projects, Pakistan has made SAARC almost a dysfunctional regional 
grouping. The Committee appreciate that India‟s concerns over cross-border terrorism has 
found regional support and backing. The withdrawal of Bangladesh, Afghanistan and 
Nepal from the pr oposed SAARC summit in 2016 is  testimony to Pakistani sponsored 
terrorism being recognized as a regional concern.  The Committee would urge the 
Government of India to have constructive engagement with all the SAARC countries to 
take effective measures for the implementation of the SAARC Regional Convention on 
Suppression of Terrorism.     
 The Committee are well aware of India‟s constructive r ole in reconstruction and 
development of Afghanistan.  It is difficult to comprehend Pakistan‟s paranoia about 
India‟s active role in Afghanistan.  In addition to cross border terrorism in India, Pakistan 
has been supporting the Afghan Taliban, Haqqani Net work and other terrorist groups. 
The Committee welcome the Amritsar Declaration adopted at the Sixth Heart of Asia 
Conference in December, 2016.  The Committee would recommend that the Government of 
India continue its support for reconstruction and developmental efforts in Afghanistan. 
 (Recommendation No .18) 
  

94 
 
CHAPTER 6 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 Apart from the numerous conflicting issues between India and Pakistan, there exist three 
other important aspects of this relationship that merit attention.  These include sharing of water, 
humanitarian exchanges (including fishermen) and the Turkmenistan, Pakistan, Afghanistan India 
(TAPI) Pipeline. 
 
I.         SHARING OF WATER 
6.2 Water has been another divisive issue between India and Pakistan.  This issue largely 
revolved around sharing of the waters of the Indus River and its tributaries. The Indus Waters 
Treaty of 1960 forms the basis for sharing of water of Indus River and its tributaries flowing 
through the territory of India. This treaty was the result of over 8 years of painstaking negotiations 
carried out by India and Pakistan with the good offices of the World Bank. The Treaty was 
voluntarily accepted by the two sides as fair and equitable. The thoroughness with which it deals 
with various aspects of water sharing is a testimony to the hard work put in by the negotiators of 
both sides to produce an enduring framework for resolution, in a co -operative spirit, of the 
questions, differences or disputes that might arise in implementation of the Treaty, through 
bilateral means or use, if necessary, of the services of a neutral expert or a Court of Arbitration. 
 
6.3  The Treaty assigned 80% share of water of the Indus system of rivers to Pakistan. The 
Treaty gave the use of Eastern Rivers (Sutlej, Beas and Ravi) – with a mean flow of 33 MAF – to 
India, while giving the use of the Western Rivers, viz. Indus, Jhelum and Chenab – with mean 
flow of 136 MAF – to Pakistan. Since Pakistan was dependent on water supplies from the Eastern 
Rivers until the 15 th of August 1947, India also agreed to pay a sum of 62 million Pound Sterling 
to Pakistan to build replacement canals from the Western Rivers and other sources. 
 
6.4 The Treaty also permitted limited use of water of Western rivers by India in terms of 
domestic use, non -consumptive use, agricultural use, generation of hydroelectric Power and 
storage. This use is subject to the conditions laid down in the Treaty to protect the interests of 
both countries. However, India is yet to use fully its entitlement to t he waters of Western Rivers. 

95 
 
As against its storage entitlement of 3.6 MAF, India has built no storage so far. Out of the area of 
1.34 million acres, permitted for irrigation, we are currently irrigating only 0.792 million acres. 
This includes 0.642 millio n acres which was already irrigated as on 1.4.1960, the date on which 
the Treaty became effective.  Out of a total estimated potential of 18,653 MW, projects totaling 
2324 MW installed capacity have been commissioned and those for 659 MW are under 
construction. In any case, even after India starts using its full entitlement of water from the 
Western Rivers under the Treaty, it will amount to no more than 3% of the mean flow in these 
rivers. 
 
6.5 For implementation of the Treaty, a Permanent Indus Commission  was created, with a 
senior and widely experienced Commissioner for Indus Waters from each side. The Commission 
is charged with the responsibility to establish and maintain co -operative arrangements for 
implementation of the Treaty, to promote co -operation between the Parties in the development of 
the waters of the Rivers and to settle promptly any question arising between the Parties. Each 
Commissioner for Indus Waters serves as a regular channel of communication in all matters 
relating to the implementati on of the Treaty. It has so far undertaken a total of 118 tours, both in 
India and Pakistan, and has held 112 meetings. In the 105th meeting held in 2010, the Commission 
amicably resolved outstanding issues of Chutak HEP in Indus sub -basin and Uri II HEP o n river 
Jhelum, besides the issues raised on the initial filling of the Baglihar HEP on river Chenab. 
Baglihar Project was adjudicated through a Neutral Expert appointed by the World Bank during 
2005-07. Pakistan took the Kishanganga HEP Project to a Court  of Arbitration under the Treaty 
provision in 2010. The Court of Arbitration ruled in favour of inter -tributary diversion of water 
subject to certain conditions. 
 
6.6 When asked about the role of the World Bank in IWT, Ministry of External Affairs stated 
that the Indus Waters Treaty has been signed under the aegis of “the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development” (World Bank) for the purposes specified in Article V 
(Financial Provisions), Article X (Emergency Provisions) and Annexure F (Neutra l Expert), 
Annexure G (Court of Arbitration) and H (Transitional Arrangements). 
 

96 
 
6.7 On the Committee‟s query regarding the specific role of World Bank in resolution of 
differences/disputes arising between India and Pakistan, the Ministry answered that Article IX of 
the Treaty deals with the settlement of differences and disputes. Any question which arises 
between the Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Treaty or the existence of 
any fact which, if established, might constitute a br each of this Treaty shall first be examined by 
the Permanent Indus Commission under the Treaty, which will endeavour to resolve the question 
by agreement. If the Commission does not reach agreement on any of the questions mentioned 
above, provisions have b een made for reference to a Neutral Expert under Annexure -E and a 
Court of Arbitration under Annexure-G. 
 
6.8 The Committee further wanted to know whether India can unilaterally withdraw or 
abrogate the Treaty. The Ministry of External Affairs responded th at Article XII of the Treaty 
provides that “the provisions of this Treaty may from time to time be modified by a duly ratified 
treaty concluded for that purpose between the two Governments.”  Further Article XII provides 
that “the provisions of this Treaty , or the provisions of this Treaty as modified under the 
provisions of Para graph, shall continue in force until terminated by a duly ratified treaty 
concluded for that purpose between the two Governments.” The Government‟s consistent position 
has been tha t it remains committed to addressing all matters within the Indus Waters Treaty‟s 
purview bilaterally with Pakistan through appropriate mechanisms in accordance with the Treaty, 
till it is a Party to the Treaty. The Ministry further stated that t he Government‟s consistent effort 
has been to ensure accelerated development of India's rights over the water resources in the Indus 
Basin under the Indus Waters Treaty.   
 
6.9 The Government remains committed to fully utilize the waters in accordance with the 
provisions of the Indus Waters Treaty. In this context, a number of projects have been 
contemplated on the Eastern and the Western rivers which are at different stages of p lanning, 
investigation, appraisal, approval and execution. These include Bhakra Nangal Hydroelectric 
Project (River Sutlej) and Pong dam (River Beas) which have been successfully executed. Some 
other projects, such as Miyar Nallah H.E. Project (tributary o f Chenab River), Lower Kalnai H.E. 
Project (on tributary of Chenab River), Pakal Dul H.E. Project (on tributary of Chenab River), 

97 
 
Kishenganga H.E. Project (on Kishenganga River, a tributary of Jhelum River), Ratle H.E. Project 
(on River Chenab) are at different stages of implementation. 
 
6.10 Recent developments pertaining to IWT include adjudication of Kishanganga and Ratle 
Hydroelectric Project being constructed by India in Jammu & Kahmir. For resolving technical 
differences on Kishenganga and Ratle Hydro electric Projects, India had requested the World 
Bank on October 4, 2016 to appoint a Neutral Expert as envisaged in IWT. Pakistan views the 
same „differences‟ as „disputes‟, and sought the establishment of a Court of Arbitration and sent 
its corresponding request to the World Bank on October 27, 2016. In the circumstances, India 
urged the World Bank to undertake more consultations on the matter, so that a legally untenable 
situation of two different mechanisms adjudicating the same matter could be avoided.  The World 
Bank, however, initiated both the processes - appointment of a Neutral Expert and constituting a 
Court of Arbitration, simultaneously on November 10, 2016. There has been a delay on India‟s 
request to appoint a Neutral Expert while unreasonable and hasty timelines have been set on 
Pakistan's request. 
 
6.11 The World Bank also offered on October 18, 2016 an extra -Treaty independent mediator 
for helping India and Pakistan choose from the aforementioned two modalities for 
difference/dispute resolution. The Government has strongly protested to the World Bank on the 
developments and also conveyed its grave concerns that these developments may raise serious 
questions regarding the workability of IWT. Consultations offered by the World Bank are 
ongoing.  
 
6.12.    During oral evidence before the Committee  on 12 January 2017 , the Foreign Secretary 
elaborated on the issue of workability of the Treaty as hereunder:-  
 "The key issue is the workability of the Treaty. It is very easy to say that the Treaty has 
stood the test of time or that we should be a responsible country and we should be careful 
about the statements we should make. I think we should also be objective a bout how this 
Treaty is working and how the Pakistanis have handled it and whether we have the 
courage to deal with that reality. If we decide that because something has lasted 70 years 
and it goes against us and we put up with it, that may be your thinkin g, it is not ours. So, 
the point I wish to make here is that the Pakistanis have used legal harassment 
techniques, they have taken minor issues and taken it to Court Of Arbitration with the 

98 
 
sole purpose of tying up the Treaty. They have not let the Commiss ion function. I think a 
very serious look at the Treaty and its working is called for and I do not think this should 
be taken lightly." 
6.13 As part of testimony before the Committee, Vice Air Chief Kapil Kak made a pertinent 
point on the issue of Indus Waters Treaty (IWT) India and Pakistan nurse many myths.  Pakistan 
blames India on slow down of discharge from Western rivers, while the real cause of melting of 
glaciers due to global warming and mismanagement of waters by Pakistan 
6.14 The Committee are aware that the Indus Water s Treaty of 1960, signed between 
India and Pakistan , forms the basis for sharing of water of the Indus river and its 
tributaries.  As per the treaty, India has the right to use the Eastern Rivers (Sutlej, Beas 
and Ravi) while Paki stan would use the Western rivers (Indus, Jhelum and Chenab).  The 
Treaty further permit s the limited use of  water of the Western rivers by India for the 
following purposes:  domestic use, non -consumptive use, agricultural use, generation of 
hydroelectric power and storage.  The Committee also observe that Article IX of the tr eaty 
deals with settlement of di fferences and disputes by the Permanent Court of Arbitration.  
Moreover, provisions have also been made for reference to a Neutral Expert and a Court of 
Arbitration. By withstanding various wars and hostilities, the Indus Water s Treaty has 
been widely perceived as one of the prominent example s of peaceful resolution of a dis pute 
between the two sides.  The Committee, however, observe that in this case Pakistan  has 
also tried to stall the Kishanganga Hydroelectric Project on river Kishanganga and the 
Ratle Hydroelectric Project on River Chena b, but the Committee are  happy to know that 
the World Bank has given the required clearance and further talks would continue in a 
positive direction. The Committee are of the opinion that  there should be no vacillation  in 
this regard and India should take a committed stand to fully utilize  India's treaty rights, 
maintaining its workability and to go ahead with the proposed projects to utilize its share 
of water in accordance with the provisions in the Indus Waters Treaty. 
 (Recommendation No.19)  
II.        HUMANITARIAN EXCHANGES 
6.15 Many fishermen have found themselves caught in the middle of the conflictual 
relationship between India and Pakistan.  On being asked about the Ministry responsible for 

99 
 
apprehending fishermen across border, Ministry of External Affairs stated that the Pakistan 
Maritime Security Agency [PMSA] has been apprehending Indian fishermen who allegedly 
crossed over to the other side of the notional International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL). 
 
6.16 When asked about existing mechanisms to secure the release of detain ed fishermen in 
the two countries, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that under the Bilateral Agreement 
on Consular Access, which was signed between the two countries on 21 May 2008, both sides 
exchange lists of prisoners, including fishermen in e ach other‟s custody on 1 January and 1 July 
every year. After obtaining consular access to the detained fishermen, their nationalities are 
confirmed and the fishermen are released on completion of their sentences.  
 
6.17      The Committee further desired to know whether the Government maintains any database 
on registered fishermen across the coastal borders with Pakistan.  The Ministry of External 
Affairs stated that no such database of Indian fishermen in the coastal districts of India is 
maintained by MEA.  
 
6.18       On the Committee‟s query about the manner in which the fishermen issue has 
complicated the territorial dispute over Sir Creek, the Ministry of External Affairs stated early 
consular access, release and repatriation of prisoners, including fisher men has been regularly 
discussed between India and Pakistan. It may be note that as per the claims made by the Pakistan 
Maritime Security Agency [PMSA], most of the Indian fishermen are apprehended inside the 
Pakistani Exclusive Economic Zone [EEZ]. These does not, in any manner, relate to the 
delimitation of the land boundary in the Sir Creek area.   
 
6.19  When asked about a status note on  the India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners, 
the Ministry stated that it comprises of retired High Court Judge s from both sides to recommend 
steps for humane treatment of prisoners and fishermen and their expeditious release was set up in 
2008. The 7th meeting of the India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners took place from 25-
31 October 2013 in India. The next visit is to be hosted by Pakistan. In June 2017, a suggestion 
has been made to Pakistan to revive the mechanism of Judicial Committee. Paki stan is yet to 
respond in the matter.  

100 
 
 
6.20 The Committee undertook a study visit to Diu and Porbandar and held discussions with 
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government of Gujarat,  Coast Guard and local fishermen associations/families on the 
subject „Indo-Pak relations‟ particularly on the maritime boundary related issues of the fishermen 
along the Gujarat coast 
 
6.21  In Diu, the fishermen presented a common cause under the aegis o f the Diu district 
Fishermen Association (DDFA). During the discussion, the Committee were informed that there 
is a decline in fish caught in Indian waters and good fishing grounds are located at disputed areas 
of the International Maritime Boundary Line ( IMBL). Often, the boat owners pressurize the 
fishermen to venture deep into the sea to catch the economically important fishes like ribbon fish, 
shrimps, cuttle fish, reef cod, pomfret etc. 
 
6.22 The Boat Owners Association made a representation before the  Committee in Porbandar. 
They wanted the Government to announce a loan waiver scheme for fishermen. It should also 
finalize a “no -arrest” policy with Pakistan in order to safeguard the interest of the fishermen on 
both sides of the border. 
 
6.23  The Committee note that fishermen of India and Pakistan intrude/stray into  each 
other‟s territory in search of fish and as a consequence  the security f orces of both the 
countries apprehend them and confiscate their boats.  The Committee have gone deep into 
the issues of fishermen and found that many actions are required to be taken on the part of 
the Government. The Committee have observed that Indian fishermen are often crossing 
the International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) due to non -enforcement of regulatory 
provisions with desired strictness.  The Committee observe  that there exists  two 
mechanisms for humanitarian exchanges,  the Consular Access Agreement of 2008 and the 
India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners , but these are largely inoperative .  It is 
highly unfortunate that the last visit of the Judicial Committee was held back in 2013.   
The Committee observe that the issue of Indian fishermen crossing the IMBL 
encompasses three aspects economic, humanitarian and security .  While the economic 

101 
 
aspect of the problem relates to providing social security and support to the families of 
arrested fishermen, the humanitarian aspect concerns the hardships faced by the arrested 
fishermen and the need for ensuring machinery which results in faster consular access and 
early release.   The Committee observe  that the security dimension of this prob lem is 
significant and require s timely remedial measures.  The risk of an Indian fishing vessel 
being captured and commandeered by subversive forces  as in 2008  is always alive.  The 
Committee would like to draw the attention to a major loophole in the syste m. Fishermen 
are provided with subsidy by the State Government for installation of GPS system and 
distress alarm transmitters on their boats. Several times fishermen enter into Pakistani 
territory while switching off their GPS so that the boats are not tra cked for surveillance. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that boats should be installed with GPS. This is necessary 
for the security surveillance by any agency. T he Government should take all necessary 
steps to plug this security loophole. 
 The Committee maintain that the demand for a „No Arrest Policy‟ is not in 
consonance with the sovereign rights of the States under United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the SEA (UNCLOS).  The Committee , however, would recommend that the 
Government take additional meas ures to ensure early release of the arrested fishermen as 
the current machinery of redressal is not sufficiently responsive to the humanitarian 
interests of the fishermen.  There is a discrepancy between the official figure and actual 
number of the fisherme n arrested by Pakistan because the list of prisoners is exchanged 
twice a year and there are longer delays in consular access to the fishermen. The 
Committee therefore, desire that consular access and support should be provided in the 
shortest possible time and a person knowing the local language of fishermen should be sent 
for that purpose.  The Committee would  also insist the Government to ensure that the 
fishermen are provided insurance cover by the fishing boat owners and in case of their 
detention due to trespassing of territorial waters, the boat owners should be made liable 
towards social security of the arrested fishermen‟s family during the period when 
fishermen are in prison. The Committee also find that maximum number of boats captured 
by Pakistan are not released even after the release of fishermen. The Committee desire that 
the matter may be taken up with Pakistan for release of boats alongwith the released 

102 
 
fishermen. In this regard, the feasibility of using the sea route after the release may al so be 
explored. There is an urgent need for robust arrangements with Pakistan on this issue.  
(Recommendation No.20) 
 
III. TAPI PIPELINE 
 
6.24 TAPI is a natural gas pipeline. Once completed, it is expected to export up to 33 billion 
cubic meters of natural  gas a year from Turkmenistan to Afghanistan, Pakistan and India over 
three decades. In November 2014, the Pipeline Consortium, TAPI Pipeline Company Limited 
(TPCL) was incorporated in Isle of Man, a British Crown dependency. On 13th December 2015, 
the Gro und Breaking ceremony to start the work on the Turkmen leg of the Turkmenistan -
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline was held at Mary, Turkmenistan. 
 
6.25 There are a series of challenges TAPI faces that has raised serious concerns about its 
feasibility.  When asked about the factors impeding the operationalisation of this project, the 
Ministry of External Affairs answered that t he issues related to detailed route survey, security of 
the pipeline along the route, securing finances for the project as we ll as insurance costs for high 
risk areas of the pipeline. All of these are some of the major concerns for the project. 
 
6.26 The Committee are aware that the Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India 
(TAPI) pipeline is a proposed natural gas pipeline connecting Central Asia and South Asia.  
The construction of the Turkmen istan leg of the pipeline started in 2015.  However, it s 
progress appears tardy in view of several challenges.  The Committee note that security, 
funding and geology-detailed route sur vey are major hindrance s to the operationalization 
of this pipeline.  In light of these challenges, the feasibility of this project has been 
questioned. 
 The Committee believe that the TAPI Pipeline Project will not only help in 
transporting gas but will also integrate the economically disconnected region  and ensure 
the energy security of all the four countries. The Committee, would therefore , urge the 

103 
 
Government of India to continue constructive regional engagements for operationalization 
of this pipeline at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
  

104 
 
CHAPTER 7 
CONCLUSION: ROADMAP FOR FUTURE 
 The enduring aspect of the India - Pakistan relationship has been the persistence of 
mutual antagonism, mistrust and conflict. However, the larger truth that makes this relationship 
important for both the sides is the geographical contiguity of the two cou ntries and long shaped 
history.  Despite being tension ridden, both the countries have to be mindful of their presence in 
their vicinity. Their relationship has witnessed many ups and downs sailing through four wars, 
numerous ceasefire violations and crises.  
 7.2 The relationship between the two states is driven by multiple facets. The Committee in 
the previous chapters analysed the political, economic, strategic and cultural aspects. With its 
continuities in these dimensions, both the countries have witnessed fundamental changes as well. 
The Committee observe that over the past three decades, the relationship has been following a 
typical cyclical pattern of dialogue and suspension of dialogue in the aftermath of a major 
Pakistani sponsored terrorist attack . In this process, India has largely been in a reactive mode, 
compelled to break off the dialogue after each unacceptable attack. Keeping our national security 
considerations and interests in mind, the deteriorating relationship between the two countries i s 
of profound concern and thereby calls for deep introspection. 
I. Impediments to Normalization of ties 
7.3 Despite numerous efforts of dialogue and peace process, sustainable peace between India 
and Pakistan has remained elusive. In the opinion of the Committee, there are various obstacles 
to the normalization of ties. The biggest hindrance in smooth ties between India and Pakistan has 
been Pakistan's use of terrorism as an instrument of state policy to destabilize India in general 
and the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir in particular. There is a growing realization among the 
international community about Pakistan being the epicenter of terrorism in the world. The recent 
escalation in tensions is a fall out of mounted terrorists attack on India by terrorist groups and 
outfits operating from Pakistan.  Moreover, Pakistan's strategy of deniability and claiming 
equivalence as a victim of terrorism appears nothing but an alibi for its inaction. Pakistani 
sponsored terrorism is not only a major threat to India but also to the entire region.  

105 
 
7.4 The competing and conflicting interest and territorial claims constitute a nother factor for 
continued hostility and suspicion. As mentioned in the second chapter, Siachen and Sir Creek 
along with Pakistan's interference in the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir has been a major 
issue of disagreement between the two. While Siachen a nd Sir Creek are unsettled territorial 
disputes, however, Pakistan's unsupported claim to the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir has 
been of constant irritation to successive Indian Governments. Historical facts and the Act of 
Accession clearly establish Jamm u & Kashmir as an integral and inalienable part of India. 
Pakistan's involvement in fomenting unrest in Kashmir  valley is a direct encroachment upon our 
territorial integrity and sovereignty, which any state will find impossible to tolerate. Pakistan's 
strategy to internationalize the issue of Jammu & Kashmir is in total contravention of the spirit of 
bilateralism enshrined in the Simla Agreement. 
7.5 Pakistan's deep state (Army and the ISI) has vested interests in the continuation of the 
proxy war and thes e acts as the principal impediment to normalization between India and 
Pakistan. The military establishment‟s self -interest remains the key factor behind the continuity 
hindrances to peace. Chapter three elaborately discusses the role of Pakistan's premier 
intelligence agency- Inter-Services Intelligence(ISI) in undertaking various subversive activities 
in India with a two pronged objective of destabilizing India and hampering our secular fabric. 
The deep state‟s stake in continuing hostility has thwarted al l attempts at peace.  The military 
involvement of Pakistani Army in planning, strategizing and sponsorship of the proxy war helps 
maintain its domination in Pakistan's domestic architecture.  
7.6 The fourth major impediment to a tension -free relationship b etween the two neighbours 
has been inadequate economic, cultural and civilizational links. Instead of expanding people to 
people contacts through visa relaxation, religious tourism, music, sports and arts; there has been 
contraction in cultural exchanges between people to people in all spheres of their lives. A system 
of economic interdependence and integration has been successful in preventing conflicts 
elsewhere. In the case of India -Pakistan, trading relations between the two countries have not 
been mutu ally beneficial on account of Pakistan not reciprocating India‟s grant of „Most 
Favoured Nation‟ Status and imposing negative restrictions on imports from India. As a result 
the trade ties between the two countries have remained negligible.  

106 
 
7.7 The absenc e of a structured dialogue process act as another stumbling block. The two 
countries established dialogue process since 2004 under the rubric of Composite Dialogue and 
resumed Bilateral Dialogue. In 2015, the two sides agreed on the establishment of a 
Comprehensive Bilateral Dialogue (CBD). However, the Pathankot terrorist attacks had put it on 
hold. The dialogue process has followed an on and off process. Consequently, during escalation 
of tensions between the two countries during and after the Pathankot attack, the dialogue process, 
instead of defusing the situation, itself becomes dysfunctional. Still there are numerous informal 
channels of diplomacy which are operational throughout. However, their role during heightened 
conflictual situation has not been so effective.    
7.8 The failure to learn lessons from the past has been another factor that derails the ties 
between the two countries. Pakistan has failed to learn that war and violence cannot offer any 
solution. Pakistan's policy of using terrorism as low intensity warfare against India is back firing 
on its own territory in the form of terrorist attacks. On being asked about the lessons learnt from 
the various wars fought between India and Pakistan, the Ministry of Defence stated the 
following:-  
(i) A greater alertness on the borders/cease fire line is essential. 
(ii) Gathering and transmission of intelligence about the enemy movements is very 
important.  
(iii) Strengthening of the training of our soldiers is required to withstand the rigours 
and horrors of wars.  
(iv) Keeping a young profile of the officers is essential to lead the troops and fight 
well. 
 Both India and Pakistan need to internalize the lessons from the past and act accordingly. 
During times of crisis, the vociferous jingoism and narrative of otherness h as prevented the 
political class of both the countries to take a position. The relationship between the two is 
marked by public opinion stoked by a belligerent media, which has played an unconstructive role 
on both sides. 
7.9 The growing nexus between China and Pakistan in the form of China Pakistan Economic 
Corridor (CPEC), increasing military, nuclear and missile development cooperation as well as 

107 
 
the prevention of UN sanctions on Pakistani sponsored terrorist outfits is adding to the 
complexity of the security dilemma in the region. Parts of the CPEC pass through PoK, which is 
part of Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir that is under illegal occupation of Pakistan. This has 
added to the security and sovereignty concerns of India. 
Roadmap for the Future 
7.10 India and Pakistan have been sharing a complex relationship between crises and dialogue. 
A quick solution between the two over their post -independence conflicts appears unlikely, until 
the various impediments to their relationship are not addressed. It is n ow widely acknowledged 
that bilateral dialogue in accordance with the Simla Agreement, reiterated in the Lahore 
Declaration, is the only agreed upon way to address all bilateral issues between India and 
Pakistan, including Jammu & Kashmir. 
7.11 The use of terrorism remains the most unacceptable form of behaviour from the Pakistani 
Government. The onus is on Pakistan to act upon their 2004 commitment of not allowing its 
territory to be used against India and to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India in 
the state of Jammu & Kashmir. In this context, the Foreign Secretary while giving testimony 
before the Committee on 25 July 2017 submitted as under:-  
"That i t is important that we send a message that if our neighbour is doing all these 
atrocious acts, they cannot take our goodwill and generosity for granted. It is very 
important to send that message. We may have differences as to how we send those 
messages and it is legitimate also, but the sense that they have gamed us, they have 
predicted us, they know that they will do this and then the Indians will come back, I 
think, we should try and get over that. We have to break that sense that if they have 
behaved really badly with us, it is a costless action." 
7.12 India's approach that terror and normalized ties cannot go hand in hand is a clear 
demonstration of two things. First, with the increased spate of terrorist attacks and no subsequent 
action by Pakistan despite presentation of ample evidence has pushed India to a point where it 
cannot comp romise on its national security consideration at any cost. On the other hand, the 
failure of Pakistan to act against terrorists operating from its soil is a clear reflection of its civil -
military equation with the dominance of the Pakistani Army, which is unwilling to give up its  
terrorism-based strategy against India.  

108 
 
7.13 The Committee are in complete agreement with the Foreign Secretary's stance of sending 
a strong message to Pakistan that by continuing the atrocious acts it cannot take India‟s goodwil l 
and generosity for granted.  Therefore, it is important to be consistent and to stay the course.  At 
the same time, the Committee do feel that engagement at the cultural, sporting and humanitarian 
levels should continue. The issues of cultural contacts e merged as a “chicken and egg” problem, 
wherein some members of the Committee were of the opinion that cultural contacts need to be 
put on hold to put across the larger point that terrorism will not be tolerated and inaction on part 
of Pakistan for such act s would lead to closing of all channels of contact. However, a few 
members opined that despite the fact of hostility from the Pakistani deep state, cultural exchange 
should not fall prey to political relations between two countries. Taking a holistic pictu re, the 
Committee are of the considered opinion that cultural, sporting and humanitarian exchanges need 
to be approached from a broader perspective as this could emerge as one potential area of 
creating peace constituencies in both the countries. 
7.14  While analysing Indo -Pak relations, the Committee have noted that both the 
neighbours share a complex and difficult relationship. Various outstanding issues between 
the two sides have led to immense animosity and distrust and thereby crippling initiatives 
to bring sustainable peace. The Committee are of the firm opinion that terrorism aided and 
abetted from Pakistan remains the fulcrum around which the relations revolve today. The 
fixation of Pakistan‟s deep state with destabilizing India through cross bord er terrorism 
appears to be the prime factor behind the persistence of adversarial relations between the 
two countries. Despite gloomy predictions about the inevitability of antagonism between 
India and Pakistan, the Committee are of the strong view that if  proper diplomatic 
measures are taken by both the countries to address the present stumbling block (i.e. the 
absence of structured dialogue) and if there is more cultural and economic engagement, 
there is a hope for conflict resolution. For achieving succe ss in this regard, there is an 
urgent need to clearly spell out short -term, mid-term as well as long -term policy, strategy 
and approach to Pakistan so as towards enable a synergetic response amongst various 
Ministries, involved in dealing with all aspects of our relationship with Pakistan.   Such a 
policy must be clearly articulated to the Indian public, which has been bewildered by the 
repeated oscillations between friendship and hostility in recent years.  The Government 
must evolve the modalities and fra mework for engagement on the basis of the Simla 

109 
 
Agreement of 1972 and the Lahore Declaration of 1999 and proceed in an incremental 
manner. Peace on the LoC, elimination of cross-border terrorism and genuine investigation 
and punishing the perpetrators of t he Mumbai and Pathankot attacks could be the 
probable centre point of the agenda. For the dialogue process to restart Pakistan must 
abide by its 2004 commitment of not allowing its territory for use of terrorism against 
India and to realize that the goodwi ll and generosity of India cannot be taken for granted. 
Therefore, the Committee would recommend the Government to adopt a National Security 
Framework that would spell out our overall strategy and approach and also lead to a 
consistent policy guideline to act upon. The Framework should  impart a muc h needed 
coherence and synergy to our policy vis-a-vis Pakistan.  
Once this is done, the Committee feel that there is a need to widen and deepen 
cultural sporting and economic engagement, which in turn would create a more favourable 
environment for the resolution of bilateral political disputes. The Committee would 
recommend that the Government continue cultural, sporting, and humanitarian exchanges 
as these cannot permanently be held hostage to the irresponsible behavior of Pakistan.  
(Recommendation No 22) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI             DR.SHASHI THAROOR 
10 August, 2017                                  Chairperson 
19 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)             Committee on External Affairs 
  

110 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 18  OCTOBER, 2016 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18 th October, 2016 from 1430hrs. to 1700hrs. in Room 
No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
     Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
3. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4. Prof. Richard Hay  
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hedge 
6. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
7.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa  
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
11. Shri Mohammad Salim 
12. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
13. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
14. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Dr. Swapan Dasgupta 
17. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
18. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
19. Dr. Karan Singh 
20. Shri R.K. Sinha 
21. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
2. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 

111 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri G. Mohan Kumar Defence Secretary 
2. Lt. Gen Bipin Rawat Vice Chief of Army Staff 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri M.K. Singhla Special Secretary (IS) 
2. Shri K.K. Sharma DG, BSF 
3. Shri M. Gopal Reddy Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhir K. Saxena Joint Secretary (IS-I) 
5. Shri V. Shashank Shekhar Joint Secretary (Police-II) 
6. Shri Satyendra Garg Joint Secretary (NE) 
7. Shri Praveen Vashista Joint Secretary (MHA) 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home 
Affairs to the sitting of the Committee to have a briefing on the subject „Indo-Pak relations with 
specific reference to surgical strikes across the Line of Control (LoC)‟. He also drew the 
attention of all to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabh a in order to maintain 
the confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee on various issues related to the 
subject and the impelling circumstances under which India was compelled to carry out surgical 
strikes across the border. The larger implications of these surgical strikes were also explained to 
the Committee.  The representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home Affairs 
also put forth their depositions before the Committee. 
4.  The Members of the Committee then raised various queries related to the subject which 
inter-alia included the nature, scope and objectives of the surgical strikes; diplomatic initiatives 
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar Foreign Secretary 
2.  Shri Gopal Baglay Joint Secretary(PAI) 
3. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
4. Dr. Vinod K. Jacob Director (PAI) 

112 
 
taken by India to garner international support for the strikes; Pakistan‟s continuing denials on the 
matter; Chinese response; and broad contours and limitations of strategic restraint policy, etc.  
The Foreign Secretary and the representatives of Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home 
Affairs responded to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

113 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 12  JANUARY, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12 th January, 2017 from 1400 hrs. to 1630hrs. in Room 
No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
   Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. Richard Hay  
3. Shri A.Anwhar Raajhaa 
4. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
5. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
6. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
7. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
8. Dr. Swapan Dasgupta 
9. Shri Chunnibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
10. Dr. Karan Singh 
Secretariat 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha       -       Additional Director 
2. Shri Janmesh Singh        -       Under Secretary 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
1. Shri G. Mohan Kumar -                Defence Secretary 
2. Shri Ravikant -                Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Jiwesh Nandan -                Joint Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Smt. Sanjeevanee Kutty -                 Secretary (BM) 
2. Rajiv Jain -                 Director, Intelligence Bureau 
3 Shri A.P. Maheshwari -                 ADG, Border Security Force 
4. Shri Gyanesh Kumar -                 Joint Secretary (J&K) 
5. Shri Mukesh Mittal  -                 Joint Secretary (Foreigners) 
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar -            Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Gopal Baglay -            Joint Secretary (PAI) 
3. Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar -            Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
4. Shri Vinod K. Jacob -            Director (PAI) 

114 
 
6. Shri Pradeep Gupta  -                 Joint Secretary (BM-I) 
7. Shri Alok Kumar Mittal -                 IG, National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
8. Shri Rajiv Krishna -                 IG, Border Security Force (BSF) 
9. Shri Amit Nirmal  -                 Director (BM-III) 
 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
1. Ms. Rita Teotia -                 Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Bhalla -                 Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA),  Ministry of Defence (MoD), Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA) and the Department of Commerce to the sitting of the Committee, 
convened to have a briefing on the subject „India -Pakistan Strategic and Economic relations ‟ in 
connection with detailed examination of the subject „Indo -Pak relations‟. The Chairperson also 
drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings.    
3.  Highlighting the historical basis of Indo -Pak relations, the Foreign Secretary elaborated 
upon myriad aspects of India‟s relations with Pakistan which inter-alia included cross -border 
terrorism emanating from Pakistani soil; efforts to diplomatically isolate Pakistan at 
regional/international groupings; issues leading to the surgical strikes; consular access to Indian 
prisoners in Pakistan; review of the Indus Water T reaty; growing nexus between China and 
Pakistan; ongoing unrest in Kashmir; India‟s developmental projects in Afghanistan; 
connectivity agendas and security regimes; nuclear doctrines and policies of both the countries 
and its ramifications for the region.  
4. Reflecting upon the economic and trade relations between the two countries, the 
Commerce Secretary enlightened the Committee on areas like Most Favoured Nation (MFN) 
status; trade surplus with Pakistan; SAARC Preferential Trade Agreement (SAPTA) and S outh 
Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA). 
5. The Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs threw light on various facets of 
border management viz. cross border infiltration, border infrastructure along international border 
and Line of Control (LoC); improv ed technological surveillance, weapons and equipment for 
security forces, border fencing; grant of visas to Pakistani nationals. 

115 
 
6. Thereafter, the members of the Committee raised various questions related to fields like 
development of tactical nuclear wea pons by Pakistan; the Cold Start Doctrine; Turkmenistan -
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) Pipeline Project; Joint Business Forum; physical safety of 
Pakistani nuclear weapons, materials and technology; religious and medical tourism; 
humanitarian exchanges/fishermen issue; takeaways from the recent Heart of Asia Conference 
held in Amritsar; backdoor channel diplomacy; status of the 26/11 trial going on in Pakistan and 
the Pathankot attack investigations; National Security Doctrine; human rights violations in  
Balochistan; existing non -tariff barriers between the two countries; perimeter security of the 
international border; modernization of integrated Check Post at Attari border; multiplicity of 
command forces; at borders subversive activities by Pakistan on the Indian soil and so on.  
7. The representatives of MEA, MHA, MoD and the Department of Commerce responded 
comprehensively to the queries of the members. Before the Committee adjourned, the 
Chairperson directed the principal witness to furnish written rep lies on the points raised by the 
members to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

116 
 
APPENDIX-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 30 MARCH, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 30 March, 2017 from 1510 hrs. to 1715 hrs in Room 
No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Prof. Richard Hay 
3. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
4. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
5. Shri Mohammad Salim 
6. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
7. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
8. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 10. Shri D.P. Tripathi  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3. Shri Janmesh Singh   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
EXPERTS 
  
1. Shri K.S. Bajpai 
2. Lt. Gen. Syed Ata Hasnain (Retired)  
3. Air Vice Marshal  Kapil Kak (Retired)  
4. Shri Vivek Katju  

117 
 
5. Prof. Satish Kumar 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Non -official Witnesses/Experts to the 
Sitting of the Committee convened to avail their opinion in accordance with the Rule 331L of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for and in connec tion with the 
examination of the subject „Indo -Pak relations‟. He also drew their attention to Direction (55)1 
of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha pertaining to maintaining the confidentiality of the 
proceedings.  
3. Thereafter, the five experts shared  their views/suggestions on various facets of India -
Pakistan relations which inter-alia included feasibility of political dialogue, deterrence 
capability, back channel diplomacy, implications of the recent surgical strikes, situation in 
Kashmir, Gilgit -Baltistan, China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), Pakistan sponsored 
terrorism, probable solutions to the current impasse in relationship, people to people contacts, 
humanitarian exchanges, etc. 
4. The members of the Committee then raised various queries im pinging on issues such as 
role of regional and global actors in India -Pakistan relations, sustainability/outcome of Track II 
& III initiatives, steps taken to persuade international community about anti -India activities 
undertaken by Pakistan, etc.  The ex perts responded to the queries raised by the members of the 
Committee. Before the Sitting concluded the Chairperson thanked the witnesses for their 
valuable inputs on the subject matter. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  

118 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 25 JULY, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 25 July, 2017 from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee  
Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Sugata Bose 
3.  Prof. Richard Hay 
4. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
5. Shri Mohammad Salim 
6. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
7. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
8. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
9. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Dr. Swapan Dasgupta 
11. Shri Amar Singh 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.C. Koul        -       Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai         -       Director 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha       -        Additional Director 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1.  Dr. S. Jaishankar   -  Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Munu Mahawar   -  JS (AMS) 
3. Smt. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar  -  JS (Parl. & Coord) 
4. Dr. Deepak Mittal   -  JS (PAI) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairpers on welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the Sitting of the Committee, convened to 
have a briefing on the subject „India and the new US Administration‟  to be followed by further 
evidence on the subject „Indo -Pak Relations‟. The Chairperson also drew the attention of all the 

119 
 
representatives to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to 
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings.   
3.  XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
4. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee took further evidence on the subject „Indo -Pak Relations‟ 
Clarifications were sought on certain issues related to the status of India -Pakistan dialogue 
process, prospects of enhancing people to people contacts, Pakistan Occupied K ashmir (PoK), 
cooperation between Pakistan and China etc. The Foreign Secretary responded to the queries of 
the members.   
The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

120 
 
APPENDIX-V 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 10 AUGUST, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10 August, 2017 from 1600 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in 
Committee Room - 2, Parliament House Annexe Extension Block-A, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
    Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3. Prof (Dr) Sugata Bose 
4. Prof. Richard Hay 
5. Shri Raghav Lakhan Pal 
6. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
7. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
8. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
Rajya Sabha   
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10.  Dr. Karan Singh  
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.C. Koul    -  Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject „Indo -Pak 
Relations‟. The members suggested some minor modifications in the draft Report. The 
Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the members and present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

121 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Instrument of Accession executed by Maharajah Hari Singh on October 26, 1947 
 
Whereas the Indian Independence Act, 1947, provides that as from the fifteenth day of 
August, 1947, there shall be set up an independent Dominion known as India and that the 
Government of India Act 1935, shall with such omissions, additions, adaptations and 
modifications as the Governor General may by order specify be applicable to the Dominion of 
India. 
AND WHEREAS the Government of India Act, 1935, as so adapted by the Governor 
General  provides that an Indian State may accede to the Dominion of IndiaN by an Instrument 
of Accession executed by the Ruler thereof. 
 
Now, Therefore  
I I, Shriman Inder Mahin der Rajrajeswar Maharajadhiraj Shri Hari Singhji, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Ruler of Jammu & Kashmir State, in the exercise of my Sovereignty in and over my 
said State do hereby execute this my Instrument of Accession and 
1. I hereby declare that I accede to the Do minion of India with the intent that the Governor 
General of India, the Dominion Legislature, the Federal Court and any other Dominion 
authority established for the purposes of the Dominion shall, by virtue of this my Instrument 
of Accession but subject al ways to the terms therefore, and for the purposes only of the 
Dominion, exercise in relation to the State of Jammu & Kashmir (hereinafter referred to as 
"this State") such functions as may be vested in them by or under the Government of India 
Act, 1935, as in force in the Dominion of India, on the 15 th day of August 1947, (which Act 
as so in force is hereafter referred to as "the Act'). 
2. I hereby assume the obligation of ensuring that due effect is given to provisions of the Act 
within this State as they are applicable therein by virtue of this my Instrument of Accession. 
3. I accept the matters specified in the schedules here to as the matters with respect to which 
the Dominion Legislature may make law for this State. 
4. I hereby declare that I accede to the Dominion of India on the assurance that if an 
agreement is made between the Governor General and the Ruler of this State where by any 
functions in relation to the administration in this State of any law of the Dominion 
Legislature shall be exercised by  the Ruler of the State, then any such agreement shall be 
construed and have effect accordingly. 
5. The terms of this my Instrument of Accession shall not be varied by any amendment of 
the Act or the Indian Independence Act, 1947, unless such amendment is accepted by me by 
Instrument supplementary to this Instrument. 
6. Nothing in this Instrument shall empower the Dominion Legislature to make any law for 
this State authorizing the compulsory acquisition of land for any purpose, but I hereby 
undertake that should the Dominion for the purpose of a Dominion law which appl ies in this 
State deem it necessary to acquire any land, I will at their request acquire the land at their 

122 
 
expense, or, if the land belongs to me transfer it to them on such terms as may be agreed or, 
in default of agreement, determined by an arbitrator to  be appointed by the Chief Justice of 
India. 
7. Nothing in this Instrument shall be deemed to be a commitment in any way to acceptance 
of any future Constitution of India or to fetter my discretion to enter into agreement with the 
Government of India under any such future constitution. 
8. Nothing in this Instrument affects the continuance of my Sovereignty in and over this 
State, or, save as provided by or under this Instrument, the exercise of any powers, authority 
and rights now enjoyed by me as Ruler of this State or the validity of any law at present in 
force in this State. 
9. I hereby declare that I execute this Instrument on behalf of this State and that any 
reference in this Instrument to me or to the Ruler of the State is to be construed as including  
a reference to my heirs and successors. 
Given under my hand this 26th day of October, nineteen hundred and forty seven. 
Sd/-Hari Singh 
Maharajadhiraj of Jammu and Kashmir State. 
I do hereby accept this Instrument of Accession.  
Dated this twenty seventh day of October, nineteen hundred and forty seven. 
Sd/- Mountbatten of Burma 
Governor General of India 
27th October 1947 
 
SCHEDULE  
The matters with respect to which the Dominion Legislature may make laws for the State. 
 
A. Defence 
1. The naval, military and  air forces of the Dominion and any other armed forces raised 
or maintained by the Dominion; any armed forces, including forces raised or maintained 
by an acceding State, which are attached to, or operating with, any of the armed forces of 
the Dominion. 
2. Naval, military and air force works, administration of cantonment areas. 
3. Arms, fire-arms, ammunition. 
4. Explosives. 
 
B. External Affairs 
1. External Affairs; the implementing of treaties and agreements with other countries; 
extradition, including the surrender of criminals and accused persons to parts of His 
Majesty's Dominions outside India. 

123 
 
2. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India, including in relation thereto 
the regulation of the movements in India of persons who are not British  subjects 
domiciled in India or subjects of any acceding State; pilgrimages to places beyond India. 
3. Naturalisation. 
 
C. Communications 
1. Posts and telegraphs, including telephones, wireless, broadcasting, and other like forms 
of communication. 
2. Federal Railways; the regulation of all railways other than minor railways in respect of 
safety, maximum and minimum rates and fares, station and services terminal charges, 
interchange of traffic and the responsibility of railway administrations as carrier s of goods 
and passengers; the regulation of minor railways in respect of safety and the responsibility 
of the administrations of such railways as carriers of goods and passengers. 
3. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on t idal waters; 
Admiralty jurisdiction. 
4. Port quarantine. 
5. Major ports, that is to say, the declaration and delimitation of such ports, and the 
constitution and powers of Port Authorities therein. 
6. Aircraft and air navigation; the provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of 
air traffic and of aerodromes. 
7. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provisions for the safety of 
shipping and aircraft. 
8. Carriage of passengers and goods by sea or by air. 
9. Extension of the powers an d jurisdiction of members of the police force belonging to 
any unit to railway area outside that unit. 
 
D. Ancillary 
1. Election to the Dominion Legislature, subject to the provisions of the Act and of any 
Order made there under. 
2. Offences against laws with respect to any of the aforesaid matters. 
3. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the aforesaid matters. 
4. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts with respect to any of the aforesaid matters but, 
except with the consent of the Ruler of the acceding State, not so as to confer any 
jurisdiction or powers upon any courts other than courts ordinarily exercising jurisdiction 
in or in relation to that State. 
 
 
 
 

124 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
Tashkent Declaration 
January 10, 1966 
 
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan having met at Tashkent and having 
discussed the existing relations between India and Pakistan, hereby declare their firm resolve to 
restore normal and peaceful relations between their countries and to promote understanding and 
friendly relations between their peoples. They consider the attainment of these objectives of vital 
importance for the welfare of the 600 million people of India and Pakistan. 
  
I. The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan agree that both side s will exert 
all efforts to create good neighbourly relations between India and Pakistan in accordance with 
the United Nations Charter. They reaffirm their obligation under the Charter not to have recourse 
to force and to settle their disputes through peac eful means. They considered that the interests of 
peace in their region and particularly in the Indo -Pakistan Sub -Continent and, indeed, the 
interests of the peoples of India and Pakistan were not served by the continuance of tension 
between the two countries. It was against this background that Jammu &Kashmir was discussed, 
and each of the sides set forth its respective position. 
 
II  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that all armed 
personnel of the two countries shall b e withdrawn not later than 25 February, 1966 to the 
positions they held prior to 5 August, 1965, and both sides shall observe the cease -fire terms on 
the cease-fire line. 
 
III  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that rela tions 
between India and Pakistan shall be based on the principle of non -interference in the internal 
affairs of each other. 
 
IV  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that both sides will 
discourage any propaganda directed against the other country, and will encourage propaganda 
which promotes the development of friendly relations between the two countries. 
 
V  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that the High 
Commissioner of India to Pakistan and the High Commissioner of Pakistan to India will return to 
their posts and that the normal functioning of diplomatic missions of both countries will be 
restored. Both Governments shall observe the Vienna Convention of 1961 on Diplomatic 
Intercourse. 
 
VI  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed to consider 
measures towards the restoration of economic and trade relations, communications, as well as 

125 
 
cultural exchanges between India and Pakistan, and to take measures to imple ment the existing 
agreements between India and Pakistan. 
 
VII  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that they give 
instructions to their respective authorities to carry out the repatriation of the prisoners of war. 
 
VIII  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that the sides will 
continue the discussion of questions relating to the problems of refugees and evictions/illegal 
immigrations. They also agreed that both sides will create conditions w hich will prevent the 
exodus of people. They further agreed to discuss the return of the property and assets taken over 
by either side in connection with the conflict. 
 
IX  The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed that the side s will 
continue meetings both at the highest and at other levels on matters of direct concern to both 
countries. Both sides have recognized the need to set up joint Indian -Pakistani bodies which will 
report to their Governments in order to decide what further steps should be taken. 
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan record their feelings of deep 
appreciation and gratitude to the leaders of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Government and 
personally to the Chairman of the Council of Ministe rs of the U.S.S.R. for their constructive, 
friendly and noble part in bringing about the present meeting which has resulted in mutually 
satisfactory results. They also express to the Government and friendly people of Uzbekistan their 
sincere thankfulness for their overwhelming reception and generous hospitality. 
They invite the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. to witness this 
Declaration. 
Sd /- 
LAL BAHADUR  
Prime Minister of India. 
.  
M.A KHAN, F. M.  
President of Pakistan. 
 
Tashkent, 10 January 1966. 
 
 
 
 
 

126 
 
                      ANNEXURE-III 
Simla Agreement July 2, 1972 
July 02, 1972 
1. The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan are resolved that the two 
countries put an end to the conflict and confrontation that have hitherto marred their relations 
and work for the promotion of a friendly and harmonious relationship and the establishment of 
durable peace in the sub -continent, so that both countries may henceforth devote their resources 
and energies to the pressing talk of advancing the welfare of their peoples.  
In order to achieve this objective, the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan 
have agreed as follows:- 
I. That the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations shall govern the 
relations between the two countries; 
II. That the two countries are resolved to settle their differences by peaceful means through 
bilateral negotiations or by any other peaceful means mutually agreed upon between them. 
Pending the final settlement of any of the problem s between the two countries, neither side 
shall unilaterally alter the situation and both shall prevent the organization, assistance or 
encouragement of any acts detrimental to the maintenance of peaceful and harmonious 
relations; 
III. That the pre-requisite for reconciliation, good neighbourliness and durable peace between 
them is a commitment by both the countries to peaceful co -existence, respect for each other‟s 
territorial integrity and sovereignty and non-interference in each other‟s internal affairs, on the 
basis of equality and mutual benefit; 
IV. That the basic issues and causes of conflict which have bedevilled the relations between 
the two countries for the last 25 years shall be resolved by peaceful means; 
V. That they shall always respect each o ther‟s national unity, territorial integrity, political 
independence and sovereign equality; 
VI. That in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations they will refrain from the 
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of each other. 
2. Both Governments will take all steps within their power to prevent hostile propaganda 
directed against each other. Both countries will encourage the dissemination of such information 
as would promote the development of friendly relations between them. 
3. In order progressively to restore and normalize relations between the two countries step 
by step, it was agreed that; 
I. Steps shall be taken to resume communications, postal, telegraphic, sea, land including 
border posts, and air links including overflights. 
II. Appropriate steps shall be taken to promote travel facilities for the nationals of the other 
country. 
III. Trade and co -operation in economic and other agreed fields will be resumed as far as 
possible. 
IV. Exchange in the fields of science and culture will be promoted. 

127 
 
In this connection delegations from the two countires will meet from time to time to work out the 
necessary details. 
4. In order to initiate the process of the establishment of durable peace, both the 
Governments agree that: 
I. Indian and Pakistani forces shall be withdrawn to their side of the international border. 
II. In Jammu and Kashmir, the line of control resulting from the cease -fire of December 17, 
1971 shall be respected by both sides without prejudice to the recognized position of either 
side. Neither side shall seek to alter it unilaterally, irrespective of mutual differences and legal 
interpretations. Both sides further undertake to refrain from the threat or the use of force in 
violation of this Line. 
III. The withdrawals shall commence upon entry into force of this Agreement and shall be 
completed within a period of 30 days thereof. 
IV. This Agreement will be subject to ratification by both countries in accordance with their 
respective constitutional proced ures, and will come into force with effect from the date on 
which the Instruments of Ratification are exchanged. 
5. Both Governments agree that their respective Heads will meet again at a mutually 
convenient time in the future and that, in the meanwhile, the representatives of the two sides will 
meet to discuss further the modalities and arrangements for the establishment of durable peace 
and normalization of relations, including the questions of repatriation of prisoners of war and 
civilian internees, a final  settlement of Jammu and Kashmir and the resumption of diplomatic 
relations. 
 
  Sd/-  
(Indira Gandhi)  
Prime Minister  
Republic of India 
Sd/-  
(Zulfikar Ali Bhutto) 
President 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
Simla, the 2nd July, 1972 
 
  

128 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
1994 Parliamentary Resolution on Jammu & Kashmir 
 
This House notes with deep concern Pakistan‟s role in imparting training to the terrorists in 
camps located in Pakistan and Occupied Kashmir, the supply of weapons and funds, assistance in 
infiltration of traine d militants including foreign mercenaries into Jammu and Kashmir with the 
avowed purpose of creating disorder disharmony and subversion: 
 
Reiterates that the militants trained in Pakistan are indulging in murder, loot and other heinous 
crimes against the people, taking them hostage and creating an atmosphere of terror; 
 
Condemns strongly the continued support and encouragement Pakistan is extending to 
subversive and terrorist activities in the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir; 
 
Calls upon Pakistan to stop fo rthwith its support to terrorism, which is in violation of the Simla 
Agreement and the internationally accepted norms of inter -State conduct and is the root cause of 
tension between the two countries; 
 
Reiterates that the Indian political and democratic st ructures and the Constitution provide for 
firm guarantees for the promotion and protection of human rights of all its citizens; 
 
Regards Pakistan‟s anti -India campaign of calumny, and falsehood as unacceptable and 
deplorable. 
 
Notes with deep concern the h ighly provocative statements emanating from Pakistan urges 
Pakistan to refrain from making statements which vitiate the atmosphere and incite public 
opinion Expresses regret and concern at the pitiable conditions and violations of human rights 
and denial of democratic freedoms of the people in those areas of the Indian State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, which are under the illegal occupation of Pakistan; 
 
On behalf of the People of India, 
 
Firmly declares that: 
a) The state of Jammu & Kashmir has been, is and shall be an integral part of India and any 
attempts to separate it from the rest of the country will be resisted by all necessary means; 
b) India has the will and capacity to firmly counter all designs against its unity, sovereignty and 
territorial integrity; and demands that - 
c) Pakistan must vacate the areas of the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir, which they have 
occupied through aggression; and resolves that - 
d) All attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of India will be met resolutely. 
The Resolution was unanimously adopted, Mr. Speaker: The Resolution is unanimously passed. 
February 22, 1994 
 
 
 

129 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
Lahore Declaration February, 1999 
February 02, 1999 
Joint Statement ||| Memorandum of Understanding  
 
The following is the text of the Lahore Declaration :  
 
The Prime Ministers of the Republic of India and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:  
 
Sharing a vision of peace and stability between their countries, and of progress and prosperity for 
their peoples;  
 
Convinced that durable peace and development of harmonious relations and friendly cooperation 
will serve the vital interests of the peoples of the two countries, enabling them to devote their 
energies for a better future;  
Recognizing that the nuclear dimension of the security environment of the two countries adds to 
their responsibility for avoidance of conflict between the two countries;  
Committed to the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, and the 
universally accepted principles of peaceful co- existence 
Reiterating the determination of both countries to implementing the Simla Agreement in letter 
and spirit;  
 
Committed to the objective of universal nuclear disarmament and non-proliferartion;  
 
Convinced of the importance of mutually agreed confidence building measures for improving the 
security environment;  
 
Recalling their agreement of 23rd September, 1998, that an environment of peace and security is 
in the supreme national interest of both sides and that the resolution of all outstanding issues, 
including Jammu and Kashmir, is essential for this purpose;  
 
Have agreed that their respective Governments: 
 shall intensify their efforts to resolve all issues, including the issue of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 

130 
 
 shall refrain from intervention and interference in each other's internal affairs. 
 shall intensify their composite and integrated dialogue process for an early and positive 
outcome of the agreed bilateral agenda. 
 shall take immediate steps for reducing the risk of accidental or unauthorised use of 
nuclear weapons and  discuss concepts and doctrines with a view to elaborating measures for 
confidence building in the nuclear and conventional fields, aimed at prevention of conflict. 
 reaffirm their commitment to the goals and objectives of SAARC and to concert their 
efforts towards the realisation of the SAARC vision for the year 2000 and beyond with a view 
to promoting the welfare of the peoples of South Asia and to improve their quality of life 
through accelerated economic growth, social progress and cultural development. 
 reaffirm their condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and their 
determination to combat this menace. 
 shall promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms. 
Signed at Lahore on the 21st day of February 1999.  
Atal Behari Vajpayee - Prime Minister of the Republic of India  
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif - Prime Minister of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
 
Joint statement  
 
The following is the text of the Joint Statement issued at the end of the Prime Minister, Mr. A. B. 
Vajpayee's visit to Lahore: 
1. In response to an invitation by the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Muhammad Nawaz 
Sharif, the Prime Minister of India, Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee, visited Pakistan from 20 -21 
February, 1999, on the inaugural run of the Delhi-Lahore bus service. 
2. The Prime Minister of Pakistan received the Indian Prime Minister at the Wagah border 
on 20th February 1999. A banquet in honour of the Indian Prime Minister and his delegation was 
hosted by the Prime Minister of Pakistan at Lahore Fort, on the sa me evening. Prime Minister, 
Atal Behari Vajpayee, visited Minar -e- Pakistan, Mausoleum of Allama Iqabal, Gurudawara 
Dera Sahib and Samadhi of Maharaja Ranjeet Singh. On 21st February, a civic reception was 
held in honour of the visiting Prime Minister at the Governor's House. 
3. The two leaders held discussions on the entire range of bilateral relations, regional 
cooperation within SAARC, and issues of international concern. They decided that: 

131 
 
The two Foreign Ministers will meet periodically to discuss all iss ues of mutual concern, 
including nuclear related issues. 
 The two sides shall undertake consultations on WTO related issues with a view to 
coordinating their respective positions. 
 The two sides shall determine areas of cooperation in Information Technology,  in 
particular for tackling the problems of Y2K. 
 The two sides will hold consultations with a view to further liberalising the visa and 
travel regime. 
 The two sides shall appoint a two member committee at ministerial level to examine 
humanitarian issues relating to Civilian detainees and missing POWs. 
4. They expressed satisfaction on the commencement of a Bus Service between Lahore and 
New Delhi, the release of fishermen and civilian detainees and the renewal of contacts in the 
field of sports. 
5. Pursuant to th e directive given by the two Prime Ministers, the Foreign Secretaries of 
Pakistan and India signed a Memorandum of Understanding on 21st February 1999, identifying 
measures aimed at promoting an environment of peace and security between the two countries. 
6. The two Prime Ministers signed the Lahore Declaration embodying their shared vision of 
peace and stability between their countries and of progress and prosperity for their peoples. 
7. Prime Minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee extended an invitation to Prime Minist er, 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, to visit India on mutually convenient dates. 
8. Prime Minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee, thanked Prime Minister, Muhammad Nawaz 
Sharif, for the warm welcome and gracious hospitality extended to him and members of his 
delegation and for the excellent arrangements made for his visit. 
Lahore,  
 
February 21, 1999. 
Memorandum of Understanding  
 
The following is the text of the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Foreign Secretary, 
Mr. K. Raghunath, and the Pakistan Foreign Secretary, Mr. Shamshad Ahmad, in Lahore on 
Sunday:  
 

132 
 
The Foreign Secretaries of India and Pakistan:-  
 
Reaffirming the continued commitment of their respective governments to the principles and 
purposes of the U.N. Charter;  
 
Reiterating the determination of both countries to implementing the Shimla Agreement in letter 
and spirit; 
Guided by the agreement between their Prime Ministers of 23rd September 1998 that an 
environment of peace and security is in the supreme national interest of both sides and that 
resolution of all outstanding issues, including Jammu and Kashmir, is essential for this purpose;   
 
Pursuant to the directive given by their respective Prime Ministers in Lahore, to adopt measures 
for promoting a stable environment of peace, and security between the t wo countries;   
 
Have on this day, agreed to the following:- 
1. The two sides shall engage in bilateral consultations on security concepts, and nuclear 
doctrines, with a view to developing measures for confidence building in the nuclear and 
coventional fields, aimed at avoidance of conflict. 
2. The two sides undertake to provide each other with advance notification in respect of 
ballistic missile flight tests, and shall conclude a bilateral agreement in this regard. 
3. The two sides are fully committed to undertaking  national measures to reducing the risks 
of accidential or unauthorised use of nuclear weapons under their respective control. The two 
sides further undertake to notify each, other immediately in the event of any accidential, 
unauthorised or unexplained in cident that could create the risk of a fallout with adverse 
consequences for both sides, or an outbreak of a nuclear war between the two countries, as well 
as to adopt measures aimed at diminishing the possibility of such actions, or such incidents being 
misinterpreted by the other. The two side shall identify/establish the appropriate communication 
mechanism for this purpose. 
4. The two sides shall continue to abide by their respective unilateral moratorium on 
conducting further nuclear test explosions unless  either side, in exercise of its national 
sovereignty decides that extraordinary events have jeopardised its supreme interests. 
5. The two sides shall conclude an agreement on prevention of incidents at sea in order to 
ensure safety of navigation by naval vessels, and aircraft belonging to the two sides. 

133 
 
6. The two sides shall periodically review the implementation of existing Confidence 
Building Measures (CBMs) and where necessary, set up appropriate consultative mechanisms to 
monitor and ensure effective implementation of these CBMs. 
7. The two sides shall undertake a review of the existing communication links (e.g. between 
the respective Directors- General, Military Operations) with a view to upgrading and improving 
these links, and to provide for fail-safe and secure communications. 
8. The two sides shall engage in bilateral consultations on security, disarmament and non -
proliferation issues within the context of negotiations on these issues in multilateral fora. 
Where required, the technical details of the above measures will be worked out by experts of the 
two sides in meetings to be held on mutually agreed dates, before mid 1999, with a view to 
reaching bilateral agreements. 
Done at Lahore on 21st February 1999 in the presence of Prime Minister of India, Mr. Atal 
Behari Vajpayee, and Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Muhammad Nawaz Sharif. 
(K. Raghunath)  
Foreign Secretary of the Republic of India  
 
(Shamshad Ahmad)  
Foreign Secretary of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 