 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
RECRUITMENT, STRUCTURE AND CAPACITY -BUILDING OF IFS CADRE, 
INCLUDING NEED FOR A SEPARATE UPSC EXAMINATION FOR CADRE, 
MID-CAREER ENTRY AND IN-SERVICE TRAINING AND ORIENTATION 
 
 
                  TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-16) 
 
                             SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
12 
 

 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
RECRUITMENT, STRUCTURE AND CAPACITY-BUILDING OF IFS CADRE, 
INCLUDING NEED FOR A SEPARATE UPSC EXAMINATION FOR CADRE, 
MID-CAREER ENTRY AND IN-SERVICE TRAINING AND ORIENTATION 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2nd August, 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd August, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COEA NO. 124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2016 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(__________Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15)          (i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16)          (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION             (iv) 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I.  Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee (2014-15) held on 29.01.2015          65 
II. Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Committee (2014-15) held on 27.02.2015       68 
III. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the Committee (2014-15) held on 18.06.2015       70 
IV. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee (2015-16) held on 16.12.2015               72 
V. Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2015-16) held on 27.7.2016           74 
 
ANNEXURE              76
CHAPTER-I  Introduction 1 
 CHAPTER-II Recruitment and Structure of the Indian Foreign Service                        3 
 A.  Present Strength   3 
   B.       Expansion Plan 6 
a.  Direct Recruitment  8 
b.  Lateral entry 12 
c.  Local cadre 14 
d.  Promotion from the feeder cadre 15 
CHAPTER- III Training and Capacity Building    25 
A. Foreign Service Institute      25 
B. Budgetary provisions for training    26 
C. Present Training Structure 28 
a. Training of IFS Officers 28 
b. Training of other feeder services 32 
D. Modifications in training 34 
E. Language Proficiency 38 
F. Interpreters Cadre 42 
CHAPTER-IV Orientation and the other Issues 51 
A. Quality of the Recruits 51 
B.  Domain Specialization of IFS 54 
C.         Issues Relating to Career Growth 56 
D.         Ambassadorial Postings 59 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) 
 
Sl. No.                                Name of Members 
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
3. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
6. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
7. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
8. Shrimati Rakshatai Khadse 
9. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
10. Shri Jose K. Mani 
11. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi* 
12. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
13. Shri Magantti Venkateswara Rao (Babu) 
14. Md. Salim 
15. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
16. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
17. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
18. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
19. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan^ 
21. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram# 
        Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23. Shri H.K. Dua 
24. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
25. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
26. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
27. Dr. Karan Singh 
28. Shri D. P. Tripathi 
29. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
30. Shri C.M. Ramesh@ 
31. Vacant## 
 
 
 
*Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha has been nominated w.e.f.11.09.2014 vice Dr. K.C. Patel, Member of 
Parliament, Lok Sabha who has been nominated to the Committee on Information Technology.  
 
^ Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha has been nominated w.e.f .25.03.2015 vice Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi, Member 
of Parliament, Lok Sabha who has been nominated to the Committee on Finance. 
 
# Shri Vijay Sampla ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 09.11.2014. 
 
@ Shri Y. S. Chowdary ceased to be Member of t he Committee consequent upon his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 09.11.2014 and Shri. 
C.M. Ramesh has been nominated w.e.f. 28.11.2014. 
 
 # # Shri Murli Deora, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha had been nominated vice Shri Anand Sharma, Member of Parliament , Rajya 
Sabha who had been nominated to the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 25.09.2014. Vacancy arose w.e.f. 24.11.2014 due to 
his sad demise. 
 
 
  (i) 
   

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) 
 
Sl. No.   Name of Members 
  
 1.  Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 4.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 5.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 6.  Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 8.   Prof. Richard Hay* 
 9.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 10.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11.  Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 12.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 13.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
 14.  Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15.  Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16.  Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17.  Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18.  Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20.  Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21.  Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri Raj Babbar$ 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta^ 
 25.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 26.  Smt. Kanimozhi 
 27.  Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 28.  Shri Amar Singh@ 
29.  Shri C.M. Ramesh  
 30.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 31.  Shri D. P. Tripathi    
    
*Prof. Richard Hay has been nominated w.e.f.13.04.2016 vice Smt. Raksha Khadse who has been 
nominated to the Committee on Agriculture 
$ Shri H.K. Dua retired on 17.11.2015 and Shri Raj Babbar has been nominated w.e.f.20.05.2016. 
^Shri Swapan Dasgupta has been nominated w.e.f.20.05.2016. 
@ Shri Pavan Kum ar Varma retired on 07.07.2016 and Shri Amar Singh  has been nominated w.e.f. 
25.7.2016. 
 
(ii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cryil John     –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha   –   Additional Director 
4. Shri Janmesh Singh    –   Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this  Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on 
External Affairs (20 15-16) on the subject ‘Recruitment, structure and capacity -building o f ifs cadre, 
including need for a separate upsc examination for cadre, mid -career entry and in-service training and 
orientation’. 
 
2.             The Committee selected the su bject ‘Recruitment, Structure and Capacity -Building Of IFS 
Cadre, including need for a Separate UPSC Examination for Cadre, Mid -Career Entry and In -Service 
Training and Orientation’ for detailed examination during the year 2014-15. The Committee were briefed by 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 29.01.2015. The Committee held further 
discussion with the representatives of Ministry of External Affairs on 27.02.2015 and 18.6.2015 . The 
discussion remained inconclusive , so, the Committee  decided to co ntinue further with the subject d uring 
their next term i.e. 201 5-16 for detailed ex amination. The Committee took  further oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Mi nistry of External Affairs and Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) on 
16.12.2015. 
 
3. The Committee also undertook the local study tour to Foreign Service Institute (FSI), New Delhi and 
held discussion with representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs  of the Foreign Service Institute  on 
28th January, 2015.  
 
4.        The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 27th July, 2016. 
The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.  
 
5.        The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External  Affairs and Department 
of Personnel and Training (DoPT) for placing before them the material and information as well as tendering 
evidence and placing their considered views before the Committee.  
 
6.         For facility of reference, the observations/re commendations of the Committee have been printed in 
bold letters in the Report.  
 
NEW DELHI         DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
  01August, 2016                                                                Chairperson,    
10 Sravana, 1938(Saka)                                                Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
   INTRODUCTION  
The Indian Foreign Service  has represented our nation before the world with 
dedication and commitment. However, the size of the Foreign Service is an issue of grave 
concern, considering the challenges of representing India‟s  burgeoning interests and our 
growing global presence. The Committee ha ve taken up th e issue of the expansion of the 
IFS cadre in their previous Reports. The subject was also discussed during the examination 
of Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2014 -15. The Committee in their 
Fourth Report ha ve also suggested that the Ministry engage in  a de novo exercise of 
assessing its present available manpower , actual requirements and find  a way to speed up 
the intake process. Attraction of new UPSC recruits towards  the Indian Foreign Service is 
also being questioned and  the quality of newly recruited probationers is another  area of 
concern. Furthermore, the Committee ha ve been regularly stressing the importance of 
training and regular orientation programmes for Ministry personnel and the necessity for 
building in -house capacit ies in view of our dynamic and ever -evolving strategic  and 
technological scenarios and needs.           
1.2  Training is an essential part of skill enhancement in any organization  and an 
indispensible instrument for capacity building and quality enhancement. Towards this end, 
a new Training Framework (TF), in line with the National Training Policy, 2012 was 
adopted by the Ministry of External Affairs in July, 2013. The Foreign Service Institute 
(FSI) is the training arm of the Ministry of External Affairs that trains recruits in line with 
the new framework. The need for enhanced training and regular orientation programmes  
for the IFS and subordinate cadres of the Ministry and for building in -house capacity in 
view of contemporary geopolitical and technological scenarios cannot be overemphasized.  
1.3 As a career diplomat, the Foreign Service Officer is required to project India‟s 
interests, both at home and abroad on a wide variety of issues. These include bilateral , 
political and economic cooperation, trade and investment promotion, cultural interaction, 
press and media liaison as well as a whole host o f multilateral issues.  It is only through 
proper training and orientation that a diplomat can stay abreast of all developments and 
advances in the fields relevant to our international relations. 

2 
 
1.4 Our country‟s heightened external trade, Foreign Direct Investment, Tourism, 
issues related to Overseas Indians and  to Non -Resident Indian s, cannot at present be 
favorably leveraged due to the limitations of the Ministry of External Affairs in terms of 
manpower and resources . In order to restore the balance , the MEA  embarked on an 
Expansion Plan in 2008. The Ministry is in the process of formulating an ambitious pla n 
named MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 which will project the actual requirements of direct 
recruit IFS officers in the Ministry in the next 15 years.  
1.5 The Committee ha ve made a number of  relevant suggestions which would help 
the Ministry of External Affairs strike a balance with our current diplomatic requirements 
which inter-alia include expansion of the IFS cadre, rational e for quality intake of IFS 
probationers, enriching the curricula for training  and an emphasis on in -service training 
and language training for  diplomats. 
  

3 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECRUITMENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE INDIAN FOREIGN SERVICE 
 
The Indian Foreign Service was constituted in 1946 through a Cabinet decision to 
create a dedicated Diplomatic Service responsible for India‟s Foreign Policy engagements. In 
1948, the first batch of Foreign Service Officers was recruited through the Civil Service 
Examination of the Union Public Service Commission. This mode of recruitment has , since 
then, provided the country its diplomats who represent India abroad and uphold our interests.. 
The Indian Foreign Service is an organized Group A Service and the Ministry of External 
Affairs is the Cadre Controlling Authority. It has grown from an initial strength of 40 officers 
in 1947 to 770 in 2014. In  addition, there are 212 officers at the level of Under Secretary 
from the feeder cadre.  
 
2.2  As per the Ministry, the all-India Civil Service Examination (CSE)  conducted by 
the UPSC is the only mode of recruitment for all major All India and Central Civil Services 
including the Foreign Service. The catchment area of the CSE covers the entire geographic 
and demographic spectrum of India. There is an established long -standing parity between the 
Indian Foreign Service and the Indian Administrative Service in terms of recruitment, cadre 
and promotion related matters.    
    
A. PRESENT STRENGTH 
2.3  The number of diplomats is an important factor in projecting and promoting a 
country‟s national interest and in pro-actively engaging all countries. Therefore, a diplomatic 
corps commensurate with foreign policy engagements  and goals is the sine qua non  for the 
realization of our national interests.  
 
2.4  The Committee were informed by the Ministry that t he total strength of the IFS 
and other supporting cadres in the Ministry is 4086 (as on March 31, 2014). Of these , 1940 
posts are at Headquarters and 2146 posts are in Missions/ Posts abroad. In addition, there are 
2231 locally recruited support staff in the Missions and Posts abroad engaged as marketing 
and commercial assistants, and for secretarial, interpretation, and consular work.  

4 
 
2.5  As per the Ministry, when compared to the other All India and Central Services, 
IFS is one of the smallest in terms of cadre strength. Notwithstanding this, the IFS since its 
inception, has demonstrated the highest levels of efficiency and innovation  in manning posts 
in the Ministry of External Affairs and at Missions/Posts abroad. 
2.6  When asked about the total number of IFS Officers in the country, the Foreign 
Secretary submitted as under:-  
„„We have a current sanctioned strength of 912. We are about 140 short of that. 
What happened is during the expansion plan we had to add 314 posts  but because of 
the way the past recruitment done, we are behind the target. So, we were supposed to 
be 912, but the gap is around 140.‟‟ 
 
2.7  When the Ministry was specifically asked whether any comparative assessment of 
the size and strength of the Indi an Foreign Service vis-à-vis such services in other prominent 
countries was made, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-  
„„The size of India‟s diplomatic corps is around 2700 against 1250 diplomats of 
the Republic of Korea, 800 -850 of Singapore, 1300 of New Zealand, 900 of Italy, 
2000 of Brazil, 4500 of China, while Japan‟s diplomatic corps numbers 5700.‟‟  
 
2.8  When asked about the analytical understanding being drawn from the comparative 
assessment of the size and strength of Indian Foreign Services as compared to the Foreign 
Services of other countries, the Ministry, through a written reply, submitted as under:- 
“India has a pool of about 2700 diplomatic rank officers in our Missions/Posts 
abroad and at Headquarters, including those from the feeder service and other 
Ministries and Services. In contrast, China has 4500 diplomats, Japan has 570 0 
diplomats, Brazil has 2000, Italy has 910 and Korea has 1250. United States is 
known to have about 20,000 diplomats. We are, therefore, not among the smallest 
of the diplomatic services, but are also not among the largest.” 
 
2.9  When being specifically asked to account for these numbers, the Foreign 
Secretary stated as under: 
„„I will just give you the break up because I think the traditional number is 912. 
But to this we add 252 Grade-I officers of the IFS(B), 33 of the Interpreters Cadre, 
24 of the Legal and Treaties Cadre, 635 Attaches, 540 diplomatic officers from the 
secretarial staff and 310 diplomatic officers from other Ministries.‟‟ 
 
 
 

5 
 
2.10 He further clarified as under:-   
„„...The point is, technically, if we were to use the word „diplomat‟, for us that 
would be the holder of the diplomatic passport and someone who is reflected in 
our declaration of diplomatic list  to a country . These 2700 people when they are 
abroad – those who are not in Headquarters – would figure in it.‟‟  
 
2.11 When asked about the action taken or likely to be taken on clause 6(3)  of the 
Indian Foreign Service (Recruitment Cadre Seniority and Promotion) Rule, 1961 which lays 
down that t he Central Government shall at the interval of every two years re -examine the 
strength and composition of the Indian Foreign Service Cadre, the Foreign Secretary stated as 
under:-  
„„We have done some reviews, but I must admit that it was not done every two 
years.‟‟ 
 
2.12 It has been informed that k eeping functional exigencies in mind, the Ministry 
takes reformative steps in Service matters as and when required as part of an ongoing process 
of review and appraisal of performance and delivery by various organs of the Ministry.  The 
Committee, in this context, were informed that the last Cadre review of the Indian Foreign 
Service was carried out in 2004. At that time, the total strength of the IFS cadre was 
increased by adding a total of 69 posts. Of these, 29 were in Grade III of IFS (Joint Secretary 
Level), 40 in Junior Time Scale (entry level). This has increased  the intake and career 
progression prospects of IFS officers.  
 
2.13 As per the Ministry, a comprehensive review of various cadres of the Ministry is a 
complex exercise which requires extensive consultations with various stakeholders including 
the Department of Personnel and Training and the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry is 
currently reviewing projections of its manpower requirements for the next 15 years based on 
the number of personnel required both at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad. This 
comprehensive review addresses issues including domain specialization and linguistic ne eds 
of the Ministry in the coming years.     
 

6 
 
2.14 The Ministry was specifically asked whether it is capable of bridging the  
manpower shortage at the current induction rate .  Through a written reply, the Ministry 
offered the following reply:-   
“The number of direct recruitments in a year is directly linked with the number 
of retirements in a given year. Therefore, in order for the cadre to expand, it is 
important that recruitment is higher than the rate of retirement. Ministry has 
indented to U PSC for recruitment of 45 officers through Civil Services 
Examination of 2015 based on projected requirements, which is beyond the 
rate of retirement from IFS. At the current rate of induction, the Ministry 
expects to address manpower requirement in short to medium term. Measures 
including increased recruitment to IFS in coming years, along with deputation 
of officers from complementary Services like Indian Economic Service, Indian 
Revenue Service, Indian Trade Service as well as from the Armed Forces and 
substantial augmentation of Local Cadre in Missions, are expected to be 
commensurate with functional requirements in coming years.” 
 
B. EXPANSION PLAN  
2.15 With India‟s growing profile and global aspirations, one of the challenges facing 
the Ministry of External Affairs is to address the issue of adequate manpower at all levels at 
the Headquarters and Missions/Posts around the world. The issue of inadequate manpower in 
IFS has already been dealt with in the preceding paragraphs.  
2.16 As per the Ministry, t he Union Cabinet approved the MEA Expansion Plan 
providing for creation of 514 posts in MEA over a period of 10 years from 2008 -18 – of 
which 314 posts are at the level of Under Secretary/Deputy Secretary/Direct or and 200 posts 
for support staff. These posts are created in yearly tranches and so far six tranches have been 
operationalized. So far, a  total of 309 posts have been created under  the MEA Expansion 
Plan – of which 187 are IFS posts and 122 are at staff level.   
2.17 When asked whether it is satisfied with the annual number of new recruits to the 
IFS, the Ministry submitted through a written reply:- 
„„MEA is of the view that there is ne ed for additional number of officers to meet 
the growing requirements of international diplomacy. The Ministry is recruiting 30 
to 35 IFS officers every year by indenting these vacancies through DoPT/UPSC. 
This includes 8 additional vacancies created every  year under MEA Expans ion 
Plan between 2008 and 2018.‟‟ 
 
2.18 As per the Ministry, recruitment in to the  IFS over the  last five years is as 
follows:-   

7 
 
2014 – 33 
2013 – 26 
2012 – 36 
2011 – 34 
2010 – 25 
Total – 153 
2.19 While elaborating upon the expansion plans of the Ministry, the Foreign Secretary 
during the submission of evidence submitted as under:-  
„„Even as we are implementing the current Expansion Plan, we would like to 
embark on the next Plan. We would like to start preparing for the next Plan. So, I 
would call it MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 so that we can start the work because it 
takes time in the Go vernment to get the approvals and the financial concurrence 
necessary for that kind of growth. So, what we intended to do is while we will 
continue with the current Expansion Plan which takes us into 2018, we would 
start working on a successor plan which w ould depend on how much support we 
get within the Government. We would see if it could be telescoped into the later 
year‟s plan and the existing plan.‟‟ 
  
2.20 When asked to furnish details of the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0, the Ministry, in a 
written reply submitted as under:-  
„„A three prolonged approach is being considered which would include 
increasing recruitment in IFS, lateral entry and increasing strength of 
MEA‟s local cadre. The focus would be in novative utilization of existing 
GOI provisions and optimizing the manpower resource options available to 
the Ministry. These proposals would have to be formalized in consultation 
with GOI Ministries/Departments as these would have considerable 
financial a nd administrative implications. A brief outline of MEA 
Expansion Plan 2.0, as it is being conceptualized in MEA, is as follows: 
Direct Recruitment to IFS: Ministry is in the process of assessing its 
requirements in 2020, 2025 and 2030. The number of direct  recruitments in 
a year is directly linked with the number of retirements in a given year. 
Therefore, in order for the cadre to expand, it is important that recruitment 
is higher than the rate of retirement. Ministry has intended to UPSC for 
recruitment of  45 officers through Civil Services Examination of 2015 
based on projected requirements, which is beyond the rate of retirement 
from IFS. MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 will project the actual requirements of 
direct recruit IFS officers in the Ministry in next 15 years.  
Lateral Entry from Non -Government Sectors: The Ministry has revised the 
guidelines for recruitment of Consultants from academia and private sector 
on contract basis, as per existing GOI norms. The selection process for 
Consultants to be engaged in Policy Planning and Research Division is 
currently underway.  

8 
 
Lateral Entry of Government Officers on Deputation: Deputation from 
other Ministries/Departments as a mode of recruitment in the Ministry for 
stipulated period three to five years is to be conti nued. The focus is to take 
officers on deputation from contemporary Services like Indian Economic 
Service, Indian Revenue Service (both Income Tax and Customs & Central 
Excise). The deputation programme has been expanded to strengthen in -
house expertise. 
Strengthening Local Cadre: Local staff in Missions/Posts abroad are 
primarily engaged in commercial and cultural outreach activities and 
consular services. In tune with current emphasis on commercial and 
Diaspora issues, it is important that the Missions/Po sts are strengthened 
with additional manpower familiar with local conditions. Given emphasis 
that is attached to promotion of bilateral trade and investment with various 
countries and the growing expectations of the large Indian Diaspora, it is 
important t o substantially augment the strength of local staff in our 
Missions to ensure smooth delivery of services. The Ministry is 
formulating a proposal in this respect to be sent to Department of 
Expenditure.‟‟  
 
2.21 When asked to provide details of the financial and administrative implications of 
the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“Internal consultation and approval process on MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 is 
currently underway within the Ministry. Once the Expansion Plan is finalized 
after internal consultations in the Ministry, the proposal will be forwarded to 
other Ministries/ Departments including Department of Personnel & Training  
and Department of Expenditure.” 
 
a. Direct Recruitment 
2.22 Increased intake through Direct Recruitment to  the IFS is an integral part of the 
ongoing MEA Expansion Plan, as well as the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0. Such Direct 
Recruitment is done by the UPSC through the C ivil Service Examination. At present the 
Ministry is recruiting 30 to 35 IFS officers every year by indenting these vacancies through 
DoPT/UPSC. 
2.23 When asked whether the Ministry has undertaken any study to learn about the 
recruitment processes followed by Foreign Services in other countries, the Ministry through a 
written reply submitted as under:- 
„„Studies on the structure and recruitment process of Foreign Service 
personnel of other major countries were conducted dur ing preparation of the 
MEA Expansion Plan in 2008. Officers of the Indian Foreign Service are 

9 
 
recruited through an Open Competitive Examination conducted by the 
Union Public Service Commission and through departmental -promotion 
route. Countries such as Chi na, Japan, Korea and Italy, follow the 
competitive exam route for selection of their diplomatic officers. In 
Singapore, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in addition to recruitment 
through direct selection at entry level, also recruits „Foreign Service 
Scholars‟ whom the Public Service Commission awards scholarship for 
pursuing studies abroad and these „scholars‟ join the Foreign Service on 
completion of their studies.‟‟  
 
2.24 When asked whether it is satisfied with the quality of candidates recruited through 
CSE, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
„„The Civil Services Examination is undoubtedly one of the most competitive 
examinations in the world. It is also one of the best conducted examinations in 
the world. The value of this examination is well established. Officers recruited 
through this examin ation have the right aptitude to be moulded through proper 
training that meets the requirements of the Indian Foreign Service  (IFS). The 
Civil Services Exam also provides equal opportunities to persons of all 
backgrounds to participate and join the Foreign Service.‟‟  
 
2.25 When asked , in view of the requirement for specific skill-sets to serve in the  
diplomatic service, whether the Ministry has mulled over conducting a separate examination 
for Foreign Service, the Ministry replies as under:-  
„„The All India Civil Services Examination provides for an impressive catchment 
of potential candidates. At the time of taking examination,  many candidates are 
not clear about the career choices. Conducting a separate examination may limit 
the catchment area and exclude candidates who are undecided. We therefore 
attach more value to intensive training after their recruitment into the Indian 
Foreign Service.‟‟ 
 
2.26 When asked about the feasibility of conducting an additional aptitude/skill test for 
candidates to join IFS, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:-  
„„The fundamental purpose of the All India Civil Services Examination is to 
recruit the „most appropriate‟ candidates for the civil services, including the IFS. 
Such candidates are thereafter, through well -designed training at LBSNAA, FSI, 
various institutes/departments/ministries, etc. and then attachment in the  Ministry 
and the Missions, trained and adequately prepared to carry out their d iplomatic 
responsibilities well . The Interview Board of UPSC, while conducting the 
Personality Test, is aware of the service preferences of the candidates and is best 
qualified to judge the aptitude/skill of the candidates who have chosen to opt for 
the IFS or even those who are likely to get IFS.‟‟ 

10 
 
2.27 When asked their opinion on the idea of conducting separate examination s for the 
Foreign Service, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
„„The Ministry feels that it is in the interest of the Indian Foreign Service to 
continue its recruitment through the combined Civil Services Examination.‟‟  
 
2.28 When specifically asked as to ways in which conducti ng a separate examination 
for the Indian Foreign Service will limit the catchment area, the Ministry through a written 
reply submitted as under:-  
„„CSE conducted by UPSC is beyond doubt the most prestigious examination 
conducted in the country for the most coveted of Services. Thus the 
catchment of potential candidates that the UPSC -conducted exam attracts is 
impressive and would be unmatchable for any other exam conducted in the 
country. Having a separate exam for IFS, or for that matter for any other 
service, would not be able to draw as many numbers and as wide a talent 
pool as the existing exam, thus, limiting the catchment for the IFS.  
Conducting a separate exam will significantly reduce the catchment and 
thereby reduce the competition among the candidates. This will in turn 
reduce the quality of intake. 
A very large number of candidates appearing for CSE are those who just 
complete grad uation and may not have precise clarity about their career 
choices. The fundamental objective of CSE is to select candidates who have 
the right aptitude, attitude and potential to be moulded into efficient and 
outstanding civil servants following well -structured training imparted in 
respective Institutes/Academies. Candidates whose preference is to join the 
IFS can always mention IFS as their first (or the only) choice among the 
preferences for the services in the CSE.‟‟ 
 
2.29 When asked about reasons for the ir reservations regarding the Committee‟s 
suggestion to conduct a separate examination for the Indian Foreign Service, the Ministry 
submitted through a written reply:- 
„„Officers of the Indian Foreign Service are recruited by UPSC through the 
Civil Services Examination, which certainly is one of the most competitive 
examinations not only in India but also in the world. It is also extremely well 
conducted and suited to re cruit from an unmatched pool of talent, candidates 
with right aptitude to be molded through proper training that meets the 
requirements of the Indian Foreign Service. While providing equal 
opportunities to persons of all backgrounds to participate in the e xamination 
and join the Service, CSE also ensures that the catchment area for selection 
of right candidates remains as vast and diverse as possible, which may be 
limited if a separate examination is to be conducted. The Committee‟s earlier 
suggestion of introducing an additional paper specific to international affairs 

11 
 
and/ or additional weightage for interview is under consideration in the 
Ministry.‟‟   
 
2.30 On the issue of adding an  additional paper for Foreign Service  applicants or 
giving additional weightage to the personality test, the Foreign Secretary during the evidence 
submitted as under: 
„„…In fact, we were in communication with the UPSC on what should be the 
preferred mode of examination.  We have informed the UPSC that i t is a 
view of the Ministry that we could re -introduce additional papers for the 
Foreign Service and also we should give additional weightage to the 
personality tests.  So, those are two recommendations we have made to the 
UPSC....‟‟ 
 
2.31 The Committee ha ve been informed that the scheme for the Civil Service 
Examination is under a review by an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri B.S. 
Basawan which is requested to submit its report by 11.8.2016.  
2.32 Further, the representative from the DoPT made the following submission before 
the Committee: 
„„… the UPSC has constituted a Committee headed by Mr. B.S. B asawan 
to look into the various aspects of the Civil Service Examination and come 
up with recommendations. The Committee has been given a timeframe of 
six months. I understand that the Department of External Affairs has also 
given their inputs regarding addition al papers and additional weightage for 
the interview, etc.‟‟ 
 
2.33 On the issue of opening up the Civil Service Examination for NRIs, the Foreign 
Secretary made the following submission:- 
„„…We have also informed them that in terms of candidates abroad, it is 
something we could look at in terms of doing the exam abroad but also 
waiving the Indian language provision for people who have done more than 
fifty percent of their schooling abroad. We have recommended to UPSC 
that they could consider waivi ng the Indian language provision for people 
who have done more than 50 per cent of their schooling abroad.  So, in a 
sense, on both these issues, the Ministry‟s view has been positive and has  
been communicated to the UPSC.‟ 
 
2.34 On being asked about examination centres where such candidates can take the 
exam, the Foreign Secretary submitted that: 

12 
 
„„They will have to take it abroad.  It would depend on the place.  I think 
that is less of a problem than enabling enough people to think they cou ld 
qualify and for which today the language issue is an important thing...‟‟  
b. Lateral Entry 
2.35 Lateral Entry route is a viable route for augmenting the capacity of the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Ministry‟s ongoing Expansion Plan 2.0 has a provision for lateral entry. 
The Expansion Plan has provisions for lateral entry on de putation officers for 3 -5 years and 
the Ministry has already taken GOI Officers from various GOI Ministries/Departments on 
deputation. At present, there are 66 deputationalists  serving in the MEA from other 
Ministries/Departments.          
2.36 As per the Ministry, the MEA Expansion Plan has provisions for lateral entry on 
deputation for 3 -5 years. The Ministry has already taken G OI officers from various G OI 
Ministries/Departments. The MEA is ready to take officers from specialized services such as 
Indian Economic Service and India n Trade Service to the Ministry for short term deputation 
and is examining the issue of their optimal deployment.      
2.37 It has been informed that the Ministry has been fol lowing a policy of bringing in 
experienced Officers from other Services and has set apart 120 vacancies in the Expansion 
Plan to be filled in by Officers deputed to the Ministry in a ten-year period from 2008-2018.  
In past years, Officers from the Ministries of Finance, Defence, Telecommunications and the 
Lok Sabha Secretariat, etc. have joined the Ministry on deputation.    
          
2.38  The Foreign Secretary further elaborated on the issue during his submission made 
before the Committee:-  
„„The Ministry is also looking to utilise expertise from other Ministries and 
Departments. We have already taken in 66 officers on short -term deputation 
from other Ministries. We are expanding our deputation program me by 
including officers from the Indian Legal Service in order to strengthen in -
house legal expertise of the Ministry. In order to effectively monitor 
technical aspects of development projects, requests for deployment of 
advisors with experience and expertise in management of road, rail, port and 
power projects have been placed with relevant Ministries.‟‟  
 
2.39 As per the  Ministry, it has revised the guidelines for recruitment of consultants 
from academia and the private sector on contract basis, as per existing G OI norms. The 

13 
 
selection process for Consultants to be engaged in Policy Planning and Research Division  is 
currently underway.   
      
2.40 When asked about the steps taken to optimize the role of consultants, the Ministry 
though a written reply stated as under:-  
“The Ministry has through open advertisement selected scholars and  researchers 
with identified expertise in International Relations to work in the Policy, 
Planning & Research Division of the Ministry. In addition, consultants selected 
thus are deployed in other Divisions also. Similar is the case with the 
Development Partnership Administration (DPA) which is spearheading our major 
international projects.”            
 
2.41 Further elaborating upon the issue, the Foreign Secretary submitted the following 
before the Committee:- 
„„I am happy to report that all the posts that we advertised, we have had two 
people from the academic world and two more will be joining there shortly.  
We are also expecting to recruit five more people for deployment in 
different territorial divisions so we would very soon have nine people from 
the academic world working on contractual-basis in the Ministry.‟‟ 
 
2.42 Moreover, on being asked by the Committee to provide specifics for the 
implementation of lateral entry, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:-  
„„Twelve posts were to be created each year under the Ministry of External 
Affairs Expansion Plan since 2008 to be filled by officers on deputation from 
other Ministries and Departments. There are more than 150 officers posted in 
Missions abroad who are fro m other Ministries and Armed Forces. Ministry is 
planning to expand deputation programmes for strengthening in -house legal 
expertise. In addition to lateral entry through deputation, Ministry is optimizing 
the role of Consultants to tap the intellectual ex pertise available in educational 
institutions and private sector.‟‟  
 
2.43 The Ministry has furnished the following status regarding the implementation of 
the lateral entry scheme from non-Government sectors:- 
“The Ministry presently engages over 40 Consul tants and professionals. 
Four Advisors at a senior level with several years of experience in project 
management for key infrastructure related projects have also been selected 
for Development Partnership Administration Division. Other Divisions 
which have appointed consultants for specialized work include the West 

14 
 
Asia and North Africa (WANA) Division, Latin America and Caribbean 
(LAC) Division, ASEAN Multilateral Division, Legal and Treaties 
Division, Consular, Visa and Passport (CPV) Division and Disarmam ent 
and International Security (D&ISA) Division. Consultants were appointed 
for specialized work related to protocol and hospitality in the India Africa 
Forum Summit Secretariat. Ministry has also appointed scholars and 
researchers to work in key divisions  of the Ministry including Policy 
Planning and Research Division and territorial Divisions.”  
    
c.    Local Cadre 
2. 44 The Committee were informed that strengthening of the local cadre is an 
important part of the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 . Local staff in Missions/Posts abroad is  
primarily engaged in commercial and cultural outreach activities and consular services. In 
tune with current emphasis on commercial and Diaspora issues, it is important that the 
Missions/Posts are strengthened with additional manpo wer familiar with local conditions. 
Given the emphasis that is attached to the promotion of bilateral trade and investment with 
various countries and the growing expectations of the large Indian Diaspora, it is important to 
substantially augment the streng th of local staff in our Missions to ensure  a smooth delivery 
of services. The Committee were further informed that the Ministry is formulating a proposal 
in this respect to be sent to Department of Expenditure.   
  
2.45 On the issue of local Cadre, the Foreign Secretary during the sitting submitted as 
under:  
„„...Today, we have 2,200 local employees working in 183 missions 
and posts. Increasing their number, because they are value for money, 
and improving their quality through training would help our Heads of 
Missions in their efforts to carry out tasks related to commercial and 
cultural outreach and consular services. This is yet another aspect 
which we intend to pursue through the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0....‟‟ 
 
2.46 On the training needs of the local c adre, the Foreign Secretary during the sitting 
submitted as under:-    
„„...We are also preparing a training policy that targets our local staff, 
especially in behavioural skills as in most cases local employees are 
among our first layer of public interface in Missions abroad. Its 
modalities are being worked out.‟‟ 
 

15 
 
2.47 Further, while underlining the importance of local cadre, the Foreign Secretary 
during a sitting submitted as under:- 
„„…We have also made a proposal to expand the local employees‟ 
cadre in our Missions and Posts abroad.  A part of the reason is that 
they are really a value for money.  We do not have in most cases 
medical or residential or passage overheads where they are 
concerned.  I think, as a broad thumb rule the cost, it is one -fifth of 
what an India -based employee would cost.  Considering we get 
language skills inbuilt into local employees, it is something which we 
have looked at.  We have made a proposal for 500 posts in different 
Embassies. Just as a reference, at the moment the global number of 
local posts is about 2,200.  So, this will be a fairly substantial 
increase.  This is under submission to Finance.  It will take some time 
for us to see that this proposal is through…‟‟ 
 
2.48   When asked about the status of the propos al to augment the stren gth of the local 
staff in various Missions/Posts, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“Ministry in consultation with all its Missions and Posts abroad 
undertook a comprehensive exercise to assess the requirement  for 
strengthening Commercial, Cultural and Consular Wings in 
Missions/Posts a proposal for creation of 535 posts in around 130 
Missions/Posts abroad was prepared. The proposal has been forwarded 
to the Department of Expenditure, after obtaining approval o f External 
Affairs Minister and Department of Expenditure‟s approval is still 
awaited.”     
 
d.     Promotion from the feeder cadre 
2.49 Under the MEA Expansion Plan , on an average 32 new posts have been added 
every year at the Officers level which inter -alia includes 12 posts through departmental 
promotions from the feeder cadre within the Ministry. As per the Ministry, the Expansion 
Plan has also addressed the issue of stagnation in the feeder cadres.  
2.50 As per the Mi nistry, upto 22.5 per cent of the posts in IFS (A) are filled by 
Members of IFS Branch B through induction/promotion. As part of MEA Expansion Plan, an 
additional 120 posts for the period 2008 -2018 have been earmarked to be filled through the 
induction of Officers from the feeder cadre. Once promoted, an Officer/Official can join a 
training course for the relevant level and interest.  

16 
 
2.51 The Indian Foreign Service is our dedicated diplomatic service representing 
India at various international fora. The IFS cadre is one of the smallest in terms of 
cadre strength as compared to other All India and Central Service s, with a current 
sanctioned strength of 912 . If we consider th e total pool of diplomatic officers in our 
Missions/Posts abroad and at Headquarters including those from feeder Services and 
other Ministries and Services, t he country has a pool of about 2700 officers who can 
serve diplomatic functions. The size of India’s diplomatic corps is far smaller than that 
of China and Japan  and about one eighth of USA ’s diplomats. It is a matter of grave 
concern for the Committee that there are only 770 IFS Officers against the sanctioned 
strength of 912. The Committee are of the considered view that the size of India’s 
diplomatic corps is inadequate considering the tasks and challenges before the Ministry  
and nation. 
The Committee find that the Ministry has not been adhering to clause 6(3) of 
the Indian Foreign Service Recruitment, Cadre, Seniority and Promotion Rule, 1961 
which lays down that the Central Government shall at the interval of every two years 
re-examine the strength and composition of the IFS cadre. In fact, the la st cadre review 
of the IFS was carried out in 2004 and it has been 12 years since a review took place. 
The Committee feel that the Ministry must reflect a more serious attitude and prevent 
any further deterioration in the already modest numbers  facing India’s diplomatic 
corps. The Committee would therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry take 
urgent notice of the low strength of the IFS cadre as well as that of  the total diplomatic 
corps of the country as compared to the strength of other prominent countries and the 
need for manpower augmentation to handle India’s growing profile and aspirations at 

17 
 
the global stage and to initiate remedial measures at the earliest. To begin with, the 
Committee would recommend that the Ministry fill the gap between the sanctioned 
strength and the current stre ngth of the IFS cadre as well as that of other diplomatic 
officers through periodic cadre review as stipulated under Service Rules. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry undertake the long delayed cadre review 
immediately and also ensure that in future  there is no  failure in conducting periodic 
cadre reviews as stipulated under the Service Rules.         
      (Recommendation No. 1)  
2.52 The Committee observe that the Ministry has been recruiting 30 to 35 IFS 
Officers every year by indenting the se vacancies through  the UPSC. I n order to tide 
over the shortage of manpower , the Ministry has embarked upon an Expansion Plan 
covering a period of 10 years from 2008 to 2018 which provides for the creation of 514 
posts in the Ministry. Till date, 309 posts have been created under the Plan after 
operationalization of six tranches  which includes 187 posts of IFS and 122 posts at the 
staff level. However, the Committee note that despite the Expansion Plan , the critical 
gap between our diplomatic  requirements and available manpower still remains. 
Furthermore, with only two years left for the Expansion Plan to conclude, the 
Committee desire that the timeline for  creating the remaining 205 posts be strictly 
adhered to. The Committee view the Expansion Plan as a beginning to plug the existing 
gap, but it does not  factor in the emergin g requirements of the Ministry for which the 
Committee have been pressing hard through their earlier Reports and which will need 
further intake at a greater scale and speed.  

18 
 
The Committee further note that the Ministry has started working on a long 
term successor plan to the ongoing Expansion Plan known as the Expansion Plan 2.0. 
Under the MEA Expansion Plan  2.0, the Ministry will assess its requirements in 2020, 
2025 and 2030. For the Committee, the plan is the culmination of its exhortations to the 
Ministry for engaging in a de novo exercise of assessing its present available manpower. 
The Committee, would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry initiate the exercise of 
assessing its manpower requirements under the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 with due 
diligence by factoring in diverse future scenarios. In view of the fact that this will entail 
a lengthy process of consultations and financial approvals, adequate planning must be 
invested in without delay. The Committee would like to be apprised about the blueprint 
of the Expansion Plan 2.0 along with the implementation schedule.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
2.53 The Committee observe that Officers of the Indian Foreign Service(IFS) are 
recruited through an open competitive examination called the Civil Service s 
Examination (CSE) conducted e very year on an all India level b y the Union P ublic 
Service Commission (UPSC). The Committee have been informed that  the number of 
direct recruits in a year is directly linked to the number of  retirements that year. The 
Ministry  at present recruits 30 to 35 IFS Officers every year by indenting these 
vacancies through the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT)/UPSC  which 
includes 8 additional vacancies created every year under MEA Expansion Plan for 2008 
and 2018. The Committee understand that the CSE assesses the overall knowledge and 
general aptitude of the candidates through a set of written papers and a persona lity 
test/interview. The Committee also understand that the Civil Services is undoubted ly 

19 
 
one of the most competitive and best conducted examination s in the world. The 
Ministry feel that the Officers recruited through this examination have the right 
aptitude to be moulded through proper training that meets requirements of IFS.  The 
Committee, however, feel that under the existing scheme of the examination, the 
aptitude of the candidate s for Foreign Service  is not being properly  assessed. In the 
opinion of the Committee , it is a major lacuna as the skills required of a career 
diplomat is qualitatively different from those demanded by other services. It is, 
therefore, imperative that only candidates with the right caliber and aptitude who are 
suited to represent India internationally are recruited to the IFS.  
  With a view to ensure that selected candidates match the profile for a career 
diplomat, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the Ministry  and DoPT  
should examine all possible options such as conducting a separate examination for the 
foreign service or introducing an additional paper or according more weightage to the 
interview/personality test.  On the issue of conducting a separate examination for the 
IFS, the Committee were made to understan d that it will constrict the pool of potential 
candidates. Therefore, the Committee have reached an understanding that it may not 
be a worthwhile idea to conduct a separate examination for  the foreign service in view 
of the fact that it may constrict the catchment area of potential candidates and it may 
also be difficult for any examination to  match the popularity of the CSE. However, the 
Committee find it prudent to effect adjustments in the present system of examination to 
make it in consonance with the job requirements of a career diplomat without 
compromising on the wider pool of candidates  offered by the CSE.  The Committee  
suggest that f or selecting suitable candidates, it should be  imperative that  candidates 

20 
 
are also assessed by parameters such as  international aptitude, curiosity about the 
world, knowledge or demonstrated interest in foreign affairs, communication skills in 
English and foreign languages etc.  After due deliberation, the Committee have arrived 
at some viable solutions and accordingly, the Committee recommend that an additional 
paper for testing the aforementioned aptitude/knowledge be introduced by the UPSC  
and that  this should be made obligatory for candidates opting for the IFS . Other 
candidates may be given  the option of not appearing for this paper but passing this 
paper should be mandatory for a ll candidates opting for the IFS. Further, the 
Committee would like that the scope of the personality test should be enhanced suitably 
for candidates opting for IFS and they should be assessed for qualities which are 
considered sine qua non in a diplomat. The interview board while conducting the 
personality test may also be asked to  indicate whether the particular candidate who has 
opted for  IFS is  recommended for IFS or not. In other words, a  candidate may be 
allotted IFS if he/she is in the merit list, has cleared the additional paper and obtained a 
recommendation from the Interview Board.  
The Committee are aware that the Ministry has already given inputs regarding 
additional papers for the Foreign Service and additional weightage to be given to the 
personality test. Furthermore, the B.S. Basawan Committee that looked into revamping 
the Civil Service Examination will be submitting its Report by 11.8.2016. Our 
Committee would desire that the aforementioned recommendations of the  Basawan 
Committee are communicated to the DoPT/UPSC at the earliest for their consideration. 
The action taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee. 
  (Recommendation No. 3) 

21 
 
2.54 The Committee are concerned to not e that the present scheme of Civil 
Services Examination (CSE) where a candidate is required to pass a paper in an Indian 
language is a major impediment for NRIs to appear for the examinations. The 
Committee are of the opinion that wards of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) are capable of 
representing India’s interest s globally in a n effective and convincing way by virtue of 
their exposure and multi -cultural experience abroad. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend that NRIs should be given an opportunity to appear in the CSE  by waiving 
the Indian language provision for those who have completed more than fifty percent of 
their schooling abroad . However, t he selected candidates should be required to gain 
working knowledge of atleast one Indian language during the probationary period. The 
Committee would specifically desire the Ministry to pursue the matter with the DoPT 
with utmost urgency.  Proficiency in a foreign language other than English should 
however be required as a substitute for an Indian language.  
                  (Recommendation No. 4) 
2.55 The Committee note that t he ongoing Expansion Plan of the Ministry has 
provisions for lateral entry for Government of India Officers drawn from other 
Ministries/Departments and that at present 66 deputation ists are working in the 
Ministry. The Committee feel that the Lateral Entry route is a very viable option for 
augmenting the capacity of the Ministry till it develops manpower capacity of its own. 
The Committee are also aware that the Ministry of External Affairs is the 
executing agency for a number of projects overseas. The Committee w ould recommend 
that the Ministry should bring in more officers with experience in the field of project 
management to suitably execute and man these projects on  a long-term basis. Further, 

22 
 
the Committee desire that the duration of deputation of these officers in the Ministry of 
External Affairs may be explored through consultations with  the concerned 
Ministries/Departments and if required , the necessary relaxation of rules may also be 
obtained for their continuation beyond the  period ordinarily permissible  under the 
rules.                                                                                                                              (Recommendation No. 5) 
                                 
2.56 The present gap between existing manpower resources and actual 
requirements is a matter of serious concern for the Committee . Though the present 
cadre of the Ministry is intellectually endowed to fulfill their diplomatic responsibilities, 
the Committee feel that it may still be sufficiently supplemented by bringing in more 
talent from the private sector and academia. The Committee are  pleased to note that 
the Ministry has now started recruiting people from outside government and nine 
people from the academic world are likely to be contracted by  the Ministry. The 
Committee would recommend tha t the Ministry should encourage hiring more experts 
from academia and the private sector and that their deployment should be spread out 
through important Divisions. These experts may be picked from diverse specific fields 
such as area stu dies, foreign languages, public relations , nuclear energy, international 
law, environment al studies , climatology, trade & commerce, security , etc. and their 
terms of employment and remuneration should be competitive in order to attract t he 
best talent in the market. In this regard, the Committee also desire that the Ministry of 
External Affairs explore the possibility of recruiting eminent scholars  into foreign 
service, from amongst those who complete their studies  abroad on scholarship for 
higher studies. 

23 
 
The Committee feel that t here may be times when specialized expertise is 
required on various issues and in -house support for this may not be available with the 
Ministry. In order to make up for shortfalls, the Committee would strongly recommend 
that the role of consultants be suitably enhanced to increase the information base and 
expertise of the Ministry in handling emerging and challenging issues in the field of 
geopolitics, environmental/commercial diplomacy.                       (Recommendation No.6) 
2.57 The Committee feel that a well-trained local cadre is vital for enhancing the 
efficiency of Missions/Posts as they are familiar with local conditions, language and 
customs. The cost of hiring is the local cadre much lower than an India-based employee. 
The Committee are pleased to note that at present around 2,200 local employees work 
in India’s various Missions/Posts abroad and strengthening of the local cadre has been 
an integral part of the Ministry’s Expansion Plan 2.0. However, the Committee are also 
aware that they cannot substitute for the regular diplomatic staff in being responsible 
for our  foreign policy interests and in terms of maintaining confidentiality in  official 
matters. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that keeping in view the 
diplomatic sensitivities involved, the role of the local cadre should be confined to 
manning the service delivery arms of various Missions/Posts except in exceptional 
circumstances. The Committee would further desire that a concrete policy guideline for 
hiring the local cadre, meeting their training needs and making provisions for 
appropriate wages should be worked upon by the Ministry at the earliest.                
(Recommendation No. 7) 
2.58 The feeder cadre which includes Under Secretaries, Section Officers, Private 
Secretaries, Assistants, Cipher Assistants, Personal Assistant s, Stenographers, UDCs 

24 
 
and LDCs comprise a major part of the human resources of the Ministry. They are the 
backbone of the Ministry in terms of carrying out miscellaneous tasks and the 
Committee find it imperative that there should be a well laid out and properly 
implemented promotion policy for them. At present, upto 22.5 percent of the posts in 
IFS (A) are being filled by the members of IFS  (B) through induction/promotion as 
part of the MEA Expansion Plan. Accordingly, 12 posts have been identified for 
departmental promotions from the feeder cadre within the Ministry every year.  In this 
respect, the Committee would desire that promotional avenues for the feeder cadre 
should be further broadened for ensuring seamless career growth and as a means of 
tapping the full hu man resources potential available. The Committee would also 
recommend that the timeline for filling up the posts through promotions be strictly 
adhered to.  
(Recommendation No. 8) 

25 
 
CHAPTER III 
TRAINING AND CAPACITY BUILDING  
A. FOREIGN SERVICE INSTITUTE 
 FSI is the premier institute that caters to the training needs of the MEA.  As per 
the Ministry, IFS officers recruited through the Civil Service Examination by the UPSC 
undergo a rigorous training programme at the Foreign Service Institute (FSI). Though the 
Foreign Service Institute started functioning in 1986, the beginnings of training of Indian 
Foreign Service officers go back to the October 1946 Cabinet decision which stated that 
“The special knowledge and t he professional skill required of a diplomat can only be 
acquired through careful training.” The FSI was set up in the year 1986 as a dedicated 
institution for imparting training to Indian Foreign Service officers. However, it has 
evolved over the years and is now involved in imparting adequate training to all levels to 
develop competencies and skills for  the effective discharge of assigned duties and for 
improvement of service delivery. FSI also collaborates with other national and 
international training institutions in the fulfillment of its mandate.             
3.2 As per the Ministry, the FSI is responsible for designing training programmes for 
all ranks and cadres of the Ministry of External Affairs using dynamic content and 
methodologies. The visiting faculty is drawn from senior serving and retired MEA 
Officers, other officials, experts from academia, think -tanks, public life, industry, media 
etc. Besides providing training to the Officer T rainees o f the IFS, the FSI off ers Mid-
career Training Programme s, Non -mandatory training etc. It also provides training to 
various cadres of IFS (B) like Under Secretaries, Principal Private Secretaries, Section 
Officers, Assistants/UDCs/Stenos/LDCs, multi-tasking Staff/Chauffeurs etc. The FSI also 
conducts courses for locally recruited staff in Missions abroad, and has put in place 
courses for Foreign Diplomats and for Deputationists to MEA. 
 
3.3 The Ministry has also stated that a new Training Framework (TF) for the MEA, in 
line with the National Training Policy, 2012, was adopted by the Ministry of External 
Affairs in July 2013 . Training by FSI is now organized in line with this Framework. All 
training at FSI, barring sensitive o nes, is relayed over  an online platform for the benefit 

26 
 
of members of Indian Missions and Posts in foreign countries. New topics like training 
on ethics, empathy for vulnerable sections, personality development, etc are regularly 
added as and when felt nec essary to supplement existing content. To ensure that the 
regular office work is not affected on account of officers/ officials coming to train, a very 
flexible approach is adopted.       
3.4 FSI also provides training to other cadres of the Ministry, apart from the IFS. 
Elaborating upon the role of  the FSI in this regard, the Ministry furnished the following 
information through a written reply: 
„„Officials belonging to feeder cadres/ grades of Group B viz. Under Secretaries, 
Section Officer, Private Secretary, Assistant, Cipher Assistant, Personal Assistant, 
Steno, UDC, LDC etc are imparted mandatory training at the Foreign Service 
Institute. Officers inducted into IFS from feeder cadre as well as officers on 
deputation to MEA undergo mandatory  training in FSI. At least, two cycles 
organized around a year provide the trainees ample opportunities to update / 
upgrade their knowledge and skills. Completion of successful training has been 
linked to postings. A t raining session in Hindi has been made a part of every 
training cycle in FSI for all categories of officials before their posting abroad.  
 
 3.5 The Foreign Secretary made  the following submission regarding steps taken by 
the Ministry to strengthen the FSI during the course of the evidence: 
„„We do send out people not very often but occasionally ou t of the country for 
training. One thought which has occurred to me but it is something on which we 
still need to work on is how do we find ways of bringing in goo d resource 
people from all over the world into the FSI?  They do not have to come here and 
work.  They have to come here to address a particular training class. But instead 
of taking our people out and building other institutions, we bring others into FSI 
and build our own institution.  I would regard it one day as a great achievement 
if Foreign Services of other countries say that they sent people to the Indian FSI. 
That is the day I would say we have really achieved something by the way o f 
training.‟‟ 
 
B. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS FOR TRAINING 
 
3.6 The Budgetary provisions for training are made u nder the Major Head - External 
Affairs which includes the Minor Head for 'Training'. The Training Head covers the 
anticipated expenditure on activities of Foreign Service Institute (FSI), which include  
Professional Courses for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD), basic training courses and in -
service training program mes for Indian Foreign Service Officers etc. The budgetary 

27 
 
allocation during BE 2015-16 was Rs. 9.06 crore which was increased to Rs . 10.77 crore 
during RE 2015 -16. The budgetary allocation during BE 2016 -17 has been increased to 
Rs. 11.07 crore.      
3.7 The Ministry has furnished the following information regarding the budgetary 
allocation and expenditure made for training during the last 3 years:- 
S. No Financial Year Budget allocated  
(Rs. In crore) 
Expenditure  
(Rs. In Crores) 
1. 2012-2013 8.53 6.42 
2. 2013-2014 8.53 6.27 
3. 2014-2015 8.53 6.82 
 
3.8 The Ministry furnished following data on the budgetary details of the FSI during 
the last 3 years:- 
Object Head of Account 
2061 External Affairs (Major 
Head)00.003 Training (Min. 
Head)01 Foreign Service Instt 
01.01. Headquarters 
Actuals  
2012-13 
Actuals 
2013-14 
Actuals 
2014-15 
Proposed  
BE 2015-16 
(1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  
01.01.13 
Office Expenses 
15598 27867 30890 58800 
01.01.20 
Other Administrative 
Expenditure 
32169 25651 23928 126600 
01.01.27 
Minor Works 
15753 9754 13067 40300 
01.01.28 
Professional Services 
160 64 40 1000 
10.99 Information Tech. 
01.99.13 Office Expenses 
492 839 1214 4000 
 64172 64175 69139 230700 
 
Expenditure on various types of training: 
HEAD 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 
OT’s 57,17,589 77,06,411 66,74,942 
MCTP 51,14,553 - 5,36,732 
CR’s Conf   1,32,775 
Foreign Diplomats Training 
Programme 
1,35,80,366 1,08, 11,603 - 
NRG MEA officials training 
programme 
19,38,202 23,72,095 29,04,686 

28 
 
3.9 On being asked about reasons for the gap between initial Budget Estimates and 
lower actual expenditure under the training head over the last three years, the Ministry 
submitted the following through a written reply:- 
„„FSI has used innovative mechanisms such as the use of online platform through 
webinar, re -organising training in flexible 2 -day capsules to minimise 
interruption of normal work, and repeating the training cycles frequently. These 
innovations have led to  many more officers and officials including in Missions / 
Posts abroad, being able to avail of the training programmes at FSI.  
FSI affected savings through rationalisation of training modules eg. by 
combining batches of Directors for Mid -career training, c ombining cadres of 
IFS(B) for training on subjects that are common to all, reducing the number of 
Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats from 3 to 2 per year while increasing 
the number of participants per course, etc. FSI is making up for what was lost  by 
running additional programmes for foreign diplomats in 2015, two such 
programmes have already been conducted in March/ April 2015 itself.‟‟ 
 
C.    PRESENT TRAINING STRUCTURE 
 
3.10 As per the Ministry, the FSI is implementing the new Training Framework  (TF) 
of the Ministry of External Affairs that was adopted in July 2013. Flowing out of the 
recommendations of the National Training Policy of 2012, the July 2013 Training 
Framework of MEA aims to make training directly relevant to functional requirements by 
developing competencies and skills for effective discharge of duties and functions with 
the ultimate objective of improving service delivery. 
                         
a. Training of IFS Officers 
 
3.11 As per the Ministry, the FSI training programme for IFS Officers consists of basic 
skills, diplomatic training and attachments outside the Institute. The IFS Officers undergo 
a 3-month foundation course in LBSNAA (Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy for 
Administration). The earlier 9 month training at FSI has been reduced to 5 &1/2 months, 
beginning with the 2015 batch. There is a desk attachment now for upto 3 months in the 
Ministry before proceeding abroad on language training. Some of the  training modules 
for IFS Officer trainees are as below: 
 Basic skills: 
 1. Diplomatic communication: writing and reporting, note-taking 
 2. Public speaking, presentations, negotiating skills 

29 
 
 3. Management, teamwork & leadership skills 
 4. Media handling including social media, public diplomacy 
5. Office procedures including MEA Administration, Establishment, 
Accounts, CCB, 
 6. Computer / cyber security  
 7. Cabinet Notes, Parliament Questions 
8. Event organization including VVIP visits, bus iness delegation 
visits, cultural troupes 
 9. Soft skills & personality development: conversation, understanding other  
cultures 
 10. Hospitality and representational functions 
 11. Health & wellness: physical activities, yoga, nutrition  
   Diplomatic training: 
 1.   Theory of international relations; International law; World 
history; 
2. Foreign policy: India‟s relations with neighbouring countries, extended 
neighbourhood, important regions, and with major powers; multilateral 
diplomacy 
3. Defence and s ecurity: conventional and non -conventional 
security;  
4. Contemporary regional and global issues; 
5. Contemporary domestic issues; 
6. Economic and Commercial diplomacy;  
7. Science and Environment; Hydro-diplomacy; 
8. Consular, passport, visa, diaspora issues 
           Attachments outside FSI: 
 1. Neighbouring Missions including visit to the borders;  
 2. Army, navy and air force attachments  
 3. IIFT (Indian Institute of Foreign Trade) module on Economy & Trade  
4. District attachment including STADVI (State, District and Village 
immersion)  
 5. Bharat Darshan  
6. Multilateral event attachments (e.g. Africa Summit, SAARC Summit, 
Delhi Dialogue) 
 
 3.12 It has been added that FSI constantly updates and modifies the Training 
Framework and various training modules to incorporate latest needs, G overnment of 
India directives, methodology and technology. Thus, at present, FSI Training capsules 
incorporate eleme nts on State Specialization, Make In India campaign, economic and 
commercial work, Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan, simplification of forms and procedures, 
doing official work in Hindi etc.  
 

30 
 
 3.13. The Ministry has also stated that feedback on the trainin g programme is 
obtained from the Officer Trainees, FSI Staff as well as trainees in Missions. 
  
3.14 When asked whether the Ministry has done any comparative study of the training 
being imparted to personnel of Foreign Services in major countries and whether any 
modifications were thereafter made in the training procedure, the Ministry through a 
written reply stated as under:- 
„„As a part of its discussions with foreign diplomatic institutions as also 
international academic institutions of repute, FSI constantly endeavours to 
introduce in the institute best practises in the field. This has resulted in the 
past year in introduction of the following concepts: 
 i) Officer Trainees to do literature research / study reference material to 
come prepared to the training classes so that they convert the classroom 
lectures into animated discussions  
ii) Officer Trainees are encouraged to follow up on what they learn during 
training sessions with their own independent studies from other sources 
including online. 
iii) Officer Trainees are assessed on their seriousness, focus and learning 
from a training capsule during weekly tests.  
iv) Each important aspect of training is assessed and given due weightage 
as the  successful training completion certificate is issued  
v) Emphasis is placed on presentations, public speaking, debate and 
discussions  
vi) Whereas broad sketch view is given during induction training, 
emphasis is on what an officer is likely to need till the next mid -career 
training is due  
vii) Period of training is brought down to ensure focus and minimum loss 
to training pool  
viii) While the most common areas  are taught to the group, specialized 
courses too are encouraged as part of thesis / monograph writing  
ix) Thesis and monographs are not only to be submitted but defended in 
front of experts and peers 
x) Emphasis on going beyond knowledge and skills to imparting training 
courses in overall personality development.‟‟ 
 
3.15 Elaborating on the importance of training in the scheme of things, the Foreign 
Secretary submitted as under:- 

31 
 
„„This then brings me to the issue of capacity building and training. MEA t akes 
training seriously and we see it as an important element in developing the 
quality of output of officials of the Ministry and in improving our service 
delivery. The new training programme which has been implemented since 2013 
ensures that during their career, an IFS officer would have undergone structured 
training programmes, including three mid career training programmes, before 
they become a Head of Mission. As we discussed last time, to emphasize the 
importance of training, we have now linked promot ions and foreign postings to 
training. We have worked out a programme which provides training for all 
categories of officers in MEA, including those from the feeder cadres.‟‟ 
 
3.16 Regarding the augmentation of training structure, the Foreign Secretary during the 
course of the evidence furnished the following information:- 
„„We are currently engaged in a series of consultations within our Ministry and 
outside in our endeavour to upgrade our training for all categories of officials. 
We have undertaken a detailed analysis of the training given to the 2013 and 
2014 batches of the IFS. Our endeavour is to transform the Foreign Service 
Institute into a serious training centre. We are trying to learn from the best 
practices in diplomatic training institutes of major countries. We are working on 
a plan to be finalised within the next three months. By the time the next batch of 
IFS joins us, we hope to be ready with a new Foreign Service Institute training 
approach.‟‟  
3.17 When asked whether the current training programme is adequate to train 
personnel to handle the nuances of diplomacy, the Ministry through a written reply  stated 
as under:- 
„„The Ministry is of the view that the current training programme which 
has been  developed in the last two years or so is adequate to train 
personnel to handle the nuances of diplomacy.‟‟ 
 
3.18 When asked to elucidate on the ways in which the FSI has been able to develop 
competencies and skills in the new Officer Trainees, the Ministr y stated the following 
through a written reply:- 
„„FSI has been able to meet the requirement by imparting training in all 
the necessary areas using the latest training methodologies.‟‟ 
 
3.19 When asked to furnish information on mid -career training the Ministry through a 
written reply stated as under:-  
„„Periodic training has been made mandatory in the Ministry. It is done 
roughly every three to five years, for all levels up to Director.  For JS and 
above levels there are such regular platforms as the annual / regional 

32 
 
HoMs' conference. Mid-career training for up to Deputy Secretary level is 
mainly imparted at FSI. For Directors and above, the training is both at 
FSI and at national and interna tional institutions of repute. All non -
sensitive Non-Representational Grade training at FSI is relayed over 
webinar benefit ting both officials at headquarters and those posted in 
Missions / Posts abroad.‟‟ 
3.20 The Ministry has furnished the following  information regarding imparting of 
English language training to the newly recruited officers:- 
„„In Civil Services (Mains) examination, candidates are tested for 
proficiency in the English language. Passing this test in the English 
language is mandatory f or successfully clearing the Civil Services 
Examination. Thus, all the recruited Indian Foreign Service officer 
trainees are proficient in English. However, their oral and written 
communications skills in English are further honed through training 
including practical sessions in public speaking, noting and drafting skills 
etc.‟‟  
 
3.21 The Foreign Secretary during the course of the evidence made the following 
submission before the Committee:- 
 „„…I will look at the English language training. I must confess, I have not 
focussed on it but I do see the challenge there. When we look at the 
training programme for the fu ture batches, it is something that we would 
look at.‟‟                     
     b.   Training of other feeder services 
3.22 The Foreign Service Institute (FSI) provides training to various cadres of IFS (B) 
like Under Secretaries, Principal Private Secretaries, Section Officers, 
Assistants/UDCs/Stenos/LDCs, multi -tasking Staff/Chauffeurs etc. The FSI also 
conducts courses for locally recru ited staff in Missions abroad, Foreign Diplomats and 
for Deputationalists to MEA. 
„„As per the Ministry, u p to 22.5 percent of the posts in IFS (A) are filled by the 
members of the IFS Branch B through induction/promotion. As part of MEA 
Expansion Plan, an  additional 120 posts for the period 2008 -18 have been 
earmarked for filling up through induction of officers from feeder cadre. Once 
promoted, an officer / official can join a training course of the relevant level and 
interest. Some of the courses are, ho wever, mandatory at various levels for fresh 
inductees into Gr I of IFSB.‟‟   

33 
 
3.23 The Ministry has declared that the Foreign Service institute conducts training for 
officers inducted through deputation from time to time. Officers on deputation from other 
line Ministries to Missions abroad are briefed in concerned Divisions at the MEA about 
their country(ies) of accreditation, and administrative and security issues. The Ministry 
provides a brief training to the officers who come from other Ministries/Departments on 
the work of the Ministry of External Affairs. Whenever such officers are inducted in 
groups or in instances when groups can be formed, they are imparted  training at the 
Foreign Service Institute. For officers posted to Missions/Posts, the concerned Divisions 
also brief, sometimes spread over a few days, the officer on their role and the manner in 
which it is expected to be implemented. Tra ining at FSI is a regular feature for all 
officers, including those on deputation, posted at MEA Headquarters. 
 
3.24 The Ministry has furnished the following information regarding training imparted 
to the non- IFS cadre of the Ministry:- 
 „„The officials from LDC/Steno level to Section Office / PS level receive 30 day 
training in 15 two day capsules covering various areas of relevance to them (MEA 
orientation, administration, finance, accounts, establishment, office equipment, 
office procedure, file management, consular, passport, visa, project management, 
protocol, trade promotion, operation of software like IMAS, IVFRT, PRIDE, and 
OCI etc. MTS/Chauffeurs have one day training course, two times a year covering 
general orientation, office etiquettes, hygiene and cleanliness, basic computer 
skills, telephone handling etc).‟‟ 
 
3.25 When the Ministry was asked if it imparts training to personnel of other 
Ministries posted abroad, it replied as under:- 
 „„As often as necessary and as and when groups are available, FSI organizes 
training courses for personnel of other Ministries. In addition, training courses at 
FSI are relayed over webinar to our Missions and Posts and are available even to 
those from other Ministries.‟‟ 
 
3.26 When asked to share their concerns regarding the quality of diplomats drawn from  
outside the Foreign Service, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“The diplomats drawn from outside the Indian Foreign Service sometimes lack 
specialized skills such as proficiency in foreign language as well as negotiation, 
persuasive and representational skills. Often issues arising out of difficulties in 

34 
 
adjustments to  life abroad come into fore. Currently, officers from other 
Departments/ Ministries take up assignments abroad without any exposure to the 
functioning of MEA, which needs to be addressed.” 
3.27 The Ministry furnished the following information regarding training imparted to 
officials of the CPO:- 
„„Training of officials of Central Passport Organisation is being conducted  to 
meet the requirement for upgrading services provided to the public. This includes 
special training conducted for implementation of Passport Seva Project.‟‟ 
 
3.28 On being asked about the provisions for training the CPO and ICCR cadres, the 
Foreign Secretary during the course of evidence replied as under:- 
 „„…Sir, I would first like to address th e issue whether we give training to our 
personnel in passport work and in ICCR .  In the case of passport, we do give 
training to people in the Central Passport Organization and we have an update 
that about 2,000 employees have gone through that.  My broad sense of 
consumer response to our passport services is that there has been a very 
noticeable improvement in the last few years.  Certainly, I would say I would get 
fewer complaints than I used to in terms of quality of service.  So, it seems to be 
working. In the case of ICCR, no we have not done a focused training 
programme and in fact we have been discussing the issue.  It is an area where we 
need to address our training focus…‟‟ 
 
3.29 On training needs of the local cadre  the Foreign Secretary gave  the following 
information during the course of the evidence:- 
„„…We are also preparing a training policy that targets our local staff, especially 
in behavioural skills as in most cases local employees are among our first layer of 
public interface in Missions abroad. Its modalities are being worked out. ..‟‟ 
 
D. MODIFICATIONS IN TRAINING 
   
3.30 It has been informed that i n accordance with the new training policy announced 
by the Government in 2012, the Ministry of External Affairs adopted a new Training 
Framework 2013. The new framework formalized many of the incremental changes and 
improvements brought in by FSI over the years in the training content and methodology. 
As per the Ministry, the following specific elements began in line with the mandate of the 
Training Framework 2013:  
1) On-site MCTP phase II at Director-level for promotion to Grade III (hitherto only 
e-Training was applicable).  
2) MCTP Phase I at US/DS level as mid -career training post return from first round 
of posting. 

35 
 
3) Non-mandatory training. 
4) Organized predictable training for Group B.  
5) Training at all levels and cadres (including interpreter and legal cadres & 
deptuationists). 
6) Linking of training to postings abroad.  
 
3.31 Underlying the significance of providing e -training to officers posted in 
Missions/Posts abroad, the Ministry furnished the following information through a 
written reply:- 
„„Given the vast geographical spread of MEA, FSI has to be conscious of the need 
to train not only those in Delhi but those stationed abroad. Getting its officers for 
onsite training in Delhi for all the training programs not only disrupts the regular 
work but also has high cost implications. FS I has therefore taken recourse to 
available online technology to relay non-sensitive training content to our Missions 
and Posts via Webinar. In this platform, Missions / Posts even in low bandwidth 
countries can connect and not only listen and see presenta tions made at the FSI 
but also contribute to the discussions by speaking over their microphones and 
showing their presentations over computer. For training in sensitive content as 
also for field visits, FSI gets officers to Delhi either as part of mid care er training 
program or as special training courses e.g. for Commercial Representatives or 
encourage the officers to complete this part of the training during their postings in 
Delhi / visits to India during home leave / home leave cum transfer / Bharat 
Darshan / Consultation Duty etc.‟‟ 
 
3.32 When asked to furnish information related to changed training module in light of 
changing diplomatic and technological scenario, the Ministry stated as under:- 
„„FSI periodically reviews the Training Framework  (TF) and various training 
modules to update and incorporate latest needs, GoI directives, methodology and 
technology. Thus, at present, FSI Training capsules incorporate elements on State 
Specialization, Make In India campaign, economic and commercial work, Swachh 
Bharat Abhiyaan, simplification of forms and procedures, doing official work in 
Hindi etc. Some of the modules that have been recently introduced / updated in 
light of changing diplomatic and technologica l scenario include,  Hydro-
diplomacy, IFIs (International Financial Institutions) , Regional Trading blocs, e-
Office, Social media , Cyber security , Team work , Coordination, Project 
Management etc.‟‟ 
 
3.33 When asked as to how the training programme addresses the emerging challenges 
in diplomacy, the Ministry furnished the following information in a written reply:- 
 „„Apart from imparting a wholesome training that includes classroom lectures, 
attachments and Public Speaking modules, to the newly inducted Offic er Trainees 
of the Indian Foreign Service; in order to address the emerging and ever evolving 

36 
 
challenges of diplomacy, Foreign Service Institute has been conducting training 
programmes for the officers at various stages of their career( Mid Career Training  
Programmes), Deputationists and for Branch B of the Indian Foreign Service, 
which includes Section Officers, Private Secretaries, Assistants and Clerks. 
To increase the participation in training programmes and thereby to elevate the 
skills of our diplomatic cadre, the training capsules are delivered through lectures 
that are relayed to the missions through webinar (e-training).‟‟ 
 
3.34 On the issue of training the new recruits to the IFS, the Foreign Secretary stated as 
under:- 
„„...I think that if we adapt our training programme to this catchment area, to 
this sort of intake, my own sense is that it is also necessary for the Ministry 
and for the Embassies to re -adjust to the intake, reformat their training 
programmes and try to get the best out of these people.‟‟ 
3.35 He further added that:- 
 „„On the aptitude of people, this whole recruitment, examination and 
interview, let me step back a bit here . We are not really giving you a stock 
answer. I have a view here, maybe it does not fully reflect the views expressed 
in that answer. The view is that until we devise a better way of getting talent – 
and we can debate that – the key right now to my mind is to focus on 
training...‟‟ 
 
3.36 The Ministry furnished the following information regarding training in the fields 
of economic and environmental diplomacy:- 
  „„The Ministry is aware of significance of emerging fields of diplomacy 
including economic and environmental diplomacy. Training m odules for new 
recruits as well as Mid -career Training Programme for IFS officers include these 
topics. Recently a Conference of Commercial Representatives from all Missions/ 
Posts was organized in FSI which included these aspects.  Economic and 
Commercial Diplomacy and environmental diplomacy are integral components of 
training programs at FSI. These are periodically held (at least twice a year) to 
update our officers with the latest developments.  Our officers working in 
multilateral fora are closely involved in environmental and climate change issues.‟‟ 
 
3.37 On the link between training and posting abroad, the Ministry furnished the 
following information through a written reply:-  
 „„One of the many elements initiated by the Ministry in line with the mandate 
of the Training Framework 2013 is to link training with postings abroad. 30 -day 
training in 15 two -day capsules covering various areas relevant to officials of the 
rank of LDC/Steno to Section Officer/PS has been made a mandatory requirement 
for the officials before they can be sent abroad on posting. Similarly for officers of 

37 
 
US/DS level Mid -Career Training Phase -I has been introduced, completion of 
which is linked with postings abroad.‟‟  
 
3.38 As per the Ministry, the Foreign Service Institute i mparts theoretical as well as 
hands-on training in communication and reporting skills including political and economic 
reporting to Indian Foreign Service officer trainees dur ing their induction training 
programme. Cipher training module is being arranged for officer trainees by Central 
Cipher Bureau, Ministry of External Affairs.   Indian Foreign Service officers are trained 
in basic diplomatic skills including commun ication sk ills, public speaking  and media  
interaction, effective use of social media, etc., at various stages of their career s. XP 
Division of Ministry of External Affairs also coordinates the training of officials in media 
management.    
    
3.39 The Ministry has furnished the following information with regard to the provision 
for training in multilateral diplomacy- 
 „„Officer Trainees are imparted training in multilateral diplomacy during their 
induction programme at Foreign Service Institute. For case studies and  simulation 
exercises on environmental issues, officer trainees are deputed for 2 -3 days 
attachment at Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi. Similarly for 
economic negotiation, officer trainees attend training module at Indian Institute of 
Foreign Trade. Inputs on environmental and economic negotiation are also given 
during mid career training programmes.‟‟ 
 
3.40 The Ministry furnished the following information related to training on social 
media:- 
„„The Ministry recognises the reach and utility of social media and internet in 
projecting the country‟s image. Joint Secretary (External Publicity and Digital 
Diplomacy) and his team of officers regularly impart training to Officers of the 
Ministry on social media. The Ministry also regularly issues gu idelines on 
appropriate usage of social media.‟‟ 
 
3.41 As per the Ministry, t he Foreign Service Institute organizes training sessions for 
improving communication and soft skills of the officers of the Ministry at both officer 
and staff  levels.  Ind ian Council for Cultural Relations regularly conducts training on 
cultural diplomacy  for IFS officers. Similarly, XP Division of the Ministry imparts 

38 
 
training on use of social media while culinary experts of leading hotels in India provide 
training on hospitality.          
3.42 On being asked to suggest modifications to make the current training structure 
more effective and goal oriented, the Ministry stated the following through a written 
reply:- 
„„Ministry of External Affairs has reviewed the training programmes for Indian 
Foreign Service Officers and issued the MEA Training Framework, 2013, 
following the recommendations contained in National Training Policy 2012. E -
training earlier imparted durin g mid career training programme was replaced with 
structured classroom programmes. Similarly, training of officer trainees was also 
reviewed making it more focused and pragmatic. Training duration of induction 
programme for officer trainees is again being reviewed in order to make it more 
practical skills oriented from the present knowledge centric structure by 
experimenting with training methodologies.‟‟ 
 
3.43 On being asked about the provisions to impart training/ orientation about local 
legalities, customs and languages to personnel before posting them abroad, the  Ministry 
through a written reply submitted as under:- 
 “It is a usual practice for the Officers of the Ministry to start their post -training 
career, with a posting in an Indian  Mission/Post abroad. Thus a young Officer 
learns about the local customs, culture, and language, etc. during her/his initial 
days in the Mission/Post. All officers, before their posting abroad receive a 
briefing on security situation/special legal provisi ons (in certain cases), etc. They 
also have  interactions with the officers of the concerned Division for basic 
orientation of the country/assignment.” 
 
E. LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY 
 
3.44 The role of a diplomat is very diverse and challenging. In view of the multitude of 
languages spoken around the world, a diplomat is expected to gain proficiency in one or 
another foreign language. Due to India's increasing engagements at the global level, the 
issue of foreign language proficiency has come at the forefront.  
3.45 As per the Ministry, the broad policy for training in foreign languages for the IFS 
cadre is as under: 
„„Having a working knowledge of the local language enables better understanding 
of the local culture, working style of th e country and allows a diplomat to develop 
skills to interact with interlocutors in the country of accreditation.  Learning a 
foreign language is, thus, mandatory and an Officer Trainee is confirmed in the 
service only once he/she clears the Compulsory For eign Language examination 

39 
 
conducted by the School of Foreign Languages. IFS Officer Trainees study a 
foreign language as a part of their training in the country where that language is 
widely spoken and adequate facilities for teaching the language exist. I t is also 
ensured, to the extent possible, that the first posting after language training for the 
IFS-OTs is in a country where that language is spoken so as to allow him/her to 
consolidate the language skill acquired during one to one-and-a-half (for languages 
such as Arabic, Burmese, Chinese, etc) years.‟‟  
 
3.46 On being asked whether the officers/staff posted abroad are given basic linguistic 
training before their posting abroad, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as 
under:- 
„„The Officers are allotted Compulsory Foreign Language on joining the IFS. 
Similarly, they are sensitized towards the importance of gaining as much expertise 
in the local language as possible at all their stations of posting abroad, besides 
gaining expertis e at Advanced Diploma Level in the  language that they are 
allotted as their Compulsory Foreign Language which an officer is required to 
learn during his fist posting abroad. There are provisions for arranging classes in 
Missions abroad to impart functional knowledge of local language to all employees 
in the Mission. In addition, officers are also encouraged to learn Optional Foreign 
Language (OFL) during the course of their career.‟‟ 
3.47 On being asked to elaborate upon the policy regarding language training to Non-
IFS cadres posted abroad, the Ministry through a written reply stated as under:- 
„„All officers and staff of Indian Missions/Posts abroad are encouraged to learn the 
local language of the country of accreditation. Ministry‟s rules have provisions for 
conducting common language classes for all the members of the Missions/Posts so 
as to enable them to gain some basic linguistic skills to allow easier execution of 
their responsibilities.‟‟  
 
3.48 On being asked about the criteria to allot a particular language to the OT, the 
Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry reviews, on a continuous basis, its linguistic requirements by means 
of deliberation at Headquarters and also by seeking inputs from all the 
Mission/Posts spread around the world. It is only after due consideration that 
number of vacancies for different languages are al lotted in a Batch of the IFS.  In 
every batch of the IFS, the Officer Trainees are allotted foreign languages, with a 
majority of the officers being allotted a UN -language. The other important 
languages are allocated among the remaining officers so as to ensure a wide pool 
of officers proficient in a diverse group of languages.” 
  
3.49  The break-up of the number of IFS Officers with proficiency in various languages 
is given in the Annexure. 

40 
 
3.50 On being asked about the reasons for the relative confinement of the linguistic 
base to UN languages, the Ministry through a written reply stated as under:- 
„„Due to the vast geographical and demographic coverage of the 5 UN languages 
(barring English) i.e. French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic and Chinese, it is natural 
that a majority of the officers in the Ministry possess an expertise in one of these 5 
languages. However, the Ministry has always endeavoured to create a pool of 
language expertise in other major languages and there are officers who are 
proficient in languages such as Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Persian, Sinhalese 
and Burmese.‟‟  
 
3.51 On being aske d about the reasons for offering only a few select languages in the 
linguistic base, the Ministry stated as under:- 
„„The language base of the Ministry is fairly large and with officers proficient 
in a majority of the predominant languages of the world, including all the UN 
languages, the range of languages that are allotted is satisfactory. However, 
the Ministry would be open to consider languages, currently not included in 
the list, on case by case basis.‟‟                                                                             
3.52 The Foreign Secretary elaborated upon the Ministry's vision for enriching the 
linguistic base of the Ministry during the evidence:- 
„„...We are currently working on expanding the language base of the Foreign 
Service. As on date, close to 35 per cent of our officers posted abroad are 
serving in their language zones. All efforts are made to ensure that there is 
enough number of language speaking officers in al particular Mission at a 
given point of time. The Ministry also has a policy of encouraging officers 
to pick up additional foreign languages as other foreign languages during the 
postings abroad. We are seeking to further streamline our policy of language 
postings so that Missions and Posts in  non-English speaking countries will 
have the benefit of having officers who can communicate in the local 
language. This will of course help the officers to hone their skills.‟‟  
 
3.53 On being asked about the correlation between the language acquired and posting, 
the Ministry stated through a written reply as under:- 
“Postings of officers of the Ministry are done by the Foreign Service Board that 
takes into consideration their previous postings, language proficiency, domain 
knowledge and specific requirements of Missions/Posts where vacancies arise. As 
on date, close to 35 % of our officers posted abroad are serving in their respective 
language zones. Officers‟ stay at the Headquarters for a stipulated period and 
fulfillment of mandatory requiremen t of serving for a certain numbers of years at 
the Headquarters for their career progression are also given due importance by the 
Board in deciding postings of its officers.” 
 

41 
 
3.54 The Foreign Secretary during the course of evidence submitted as under:- 
„„...I think that we are now consciously trying both at the Ambassador -level and 
the below Ambassador -level to align postings and deployments as much as 
possible to language skills. So, if I were to consider today recommending an 
Ambassador to Senegal and I had two candidates, then I would go for the French -
speaking candidate if I had that option.‟‟ 
 
3.55 He further elaborated on the issue by making the following submission:- 
“Having said that, we are handling our postings – including Ambassadorships – in 
a way in which we are steering people with language skills back into that area, 
sometimes at the cost of truncating their postings elsewhere. But this will take 
time. I think, it will take a full year because it will take a year for one -third of the 
people t o be redeployed. In about five months, roughly about ten to fifteen per 
cent would be covered. I hope, after a year I could come to you and say my 
language alignment has gone up 35 to 50 per cent. That is what I hope...‟‟ 
 
3.56 On being asked about the steps taken to encourage foreign language learning, the 
Ministry through a written reply stated as under:- 
„„Immense importance is laid by the Ministry in ensuring that there is a wide pool 
of officers who speak major foreign languages at any given point in time. For this, 
besides bearing full expenditure and making all necessary arrangements for its 
officers to gain proficiency in at least one foreign language, the Ministry has 
provisions whereby an interested officer may be allotted an Optional Foreign 
Language from among 38 foreign languages prescribed in the Service Rules. 
Proficiency of the officer in OFL is given due consideration in posting in 
Missions/Posts and the officer, if posted in a country where OFL is the main 
language, is provided certain la nguage allowances.  The Ministry also organizes 
common foreign language classes in those Missions/Posts where members of the 
service express desire to learn the predominant language of the country, thus, 
giving them an opportunity to familiarize themselves and attain proficiency in the 
foreign language.‟‟  
 
3.57 On being asked about the challenges of achieving efficacy  through the rotation 
policy, the Foreign Secretary submitted as under:- 
 “Our problem, very frankly, is that the challenge, which came up in China as to 
how do you rotate people out of their language zones. I think that some of it will 
have to be done because you cannot keep people in a zone for ever. But I think 
that people also need to understand that at the end of the day it is th eir utility to 
the Government, which is the reason why the Government employs them. So, I 
think that there are some tough management issues here, which have to be 
addressed, which certainly I would try to do so.” 

42 
 
3.58 During the course of evidence, the Foreign Secretary submitted as under:- 
„„Hon. Chairperson, if I could move to the language issue, we have been very 
consciously aligning posts with language skills.  Every time we have done a shift 
we have kept that as a significant factor in our decision.   But we are also looking 
at strengthening the interpretation skills of Foreign Service Officers.  At the 
moment it is only in Chinese that we have a Foreign Service Officer who has 
those interpretation skills.  We are hoping to take that into other langua ges 
specifically Russian, Japanese, German and French…‟‟   
 
3.59 Regarding the language allowance given in the Ministry, the Foreign Secretary 
during the evidence submitted as under:- 
„„….we were a little distressed by the Pay Commission Report which did not 
apparently recognize the importance of the need to be proficient in foreign 
languages and it thinks that even the minor financial benefits which people get in 
speaking a language should no longer be given to them but this is an aside…’’  
 
3.60 The Ministry has furnished the following reasons given by the Pay Commission 
for abolishing the language allowance: 
“The Pay Commission in its report has stated that the Language Reward and 
Allowance being extremely meager had lost their significance and hence needed 
to be abolished. The Ministry therefore conveyed to the Commission that the 
allowance was meager as it had not been revised for a very long time and hence 
the requirement was not to aboli sh it but rather to substantially enhance it  
incentivize officers to learn additional foreign languages.” 
 
3.61 When asked about the efforts taken by it to redress the situation, the Ministry 
through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry has requested the Pay Commission to reconsider its 
recommendation regarding abolition of Language Award and Language 
Allowances. The Ministry has conveyed to the Pay Commission that Foreign 
Service Officers should also  acquire  proficiency in the language spo ken in the 
country of their posting even if the local language, in view of the fact that 
knowledge of the local language greatly enhances the efficiency of the officers. 
The Ministry has therefore recommended that allowances for learning Optional 
Foreign languages be not only restored but also substantially enhanced to enable 
officers to acquire instructional material for learning the foreign language.” 
 
F.    INTERPRETERS CADRE 
3.62 As per  the Ministry, there are 33 posts of interpreters  with expertise in 7 
languages only (i.e. Arabic, Persian, French, Spanish, Chinese, German and Russian) . Of 
the 33 MEA interpreters some are posted in Missions/Posts  abroad and others at the 

43 
 
headquarters. They are supported by hiring of interpreters locally by Missions. At present 
there are 105 local interpreters in Missions/ Posts abroad spread across non -English 
speaking countries. The Ministry hires interpreters/ translators from other languages on a 
need-basis both in India and Missions abroad.  Private persons are engaged mostly for 
interpretation/translation of non -sensitive, non -classified work. For all classified work 
MEA officers are engaged.    
                
3.63 Further, the Indian Missions/Posts hire one or more local interpreters in non -
English speaking countries and expenditure is incurred towards payment of salaries of 
such local hires. Besides this, the Missions/Posts also sometimes engage the services of 
professional agencies to undertake voluminous translations like trade and investment 
brochures, tourist promotion literatures, etc. Expenditure is incurred on these as well. 
 
3.64 The Ministry has further informed the Committee that many IFS officers have 
language skills which are used professionally. The Ministry is looking at steps to improve 
training for interpreters for greater language proficiency.     
 
3.65 When asked about the steps taken to improve the language proficiency of 
interpreters, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“We have made progress in our efforts to improve language expertise among 
officers in the Ministry. During the last few months, we have undertaken an 
exercise to identify major language institutions around the world which could 
provide the facilities for o ur officers to learn advanced level of foreign 
language. Our objective is to identify and develop a group of officers and train 
them to acquire expertise in interpretation skills for all UN languages and other 
important languages including German and Japanese.  We are also working on a 
programme to provide professional training for officers of the Interpreters Cadre 
of the Ministry who are recruited based on their proficiency in a particular 
language. Some officers have been trained in advanced levels of their language 
of expertise. One officer o f the interpreters‟ cadre has recently been sent to 
MIIS, Monterey, USA for advanced level interpretation course.” 
 
3.66 The Committee observe that the Foreign Service Institute  (FSI) established 
in 1986 has evolved over the years and is now involved in im parting training at all 
levels in order to develop competency and skills  including to diplomats posted 

44 
 
abroad. As the FSI is involved in providing training to  a wide variety of people with 
diverse training needs, the Committee would desire that the Institute incorporate 
the latest training methods and procedures by following the best international 
practices. The Committee further desire that t he Ministry undertake periodic 
appraisals and ensure requisite capacity building in the Institute through long term 
planning.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to strengthen the FSI to 
bring it up to  international standards. The Committee have a clear view that this 
cannot be done merely by sending a few people abroad for training; good resource 
people from different parts of  the world must be brought into the FSI. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry make provisions for bringing reputed 
international experts , particularly from diplomatic training Institutes of major 
countries, from diverse fields including economic and environmental diplomacy , to 
conduct various training modules and make it a world-class institution.   
(Recommendation No. 9)      
3.67 The Committee note that the Ministry has received an unchanged budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 8.53 crores for training during the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 
2014-15. The Committe e are constrained to note that in spite of according high 
priority to training and capacity building in principle, the Ministry has no t been 
able to utilize even the full allocation earmarked under this heading during the last 
three years, as the actual expenditure was Rs. 6.42 crore s, Rs. 6.27 crore s and Rs. 
6.82 crores respectively. Such a poor expenditure pattern does not augur well for 
our ambitious programmes for training and capacity building lined up by the 
Ministry. The Committee are of the view  that the training budget of the Ministry is 

45 
 
already meag re and underutilization of this existing budget further undermine s 
capacity addition at the Ministry. The Committee are not convinced by the 
arguments put forth by the Ministry that it has resorted to certain cost cutting and 
innovative measures for training. Even with the rationalization of training modules, 
the Committee would have found it more prudent, had the Ministry conducted some 
additional courses or brought in some good  resources for capacity building , rather 
than keeping the allocated money unspent. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry take necessary measures to fully utilize their budgetary allocations 
for improving capacity, status and the performance of the Institute.    
              (Recommendation No. 10) 
3.68  The Foreign Service Institute provides training to IFS Officers at both post 
recruitment and m id-career levels. The initial training and orientation of new 
recruits to the IFS is crucial for grooming them into future diplomats and to 
accordingly equip them with  the necessary skill sets. Newly recruited IFS Officers 
have a three month foundation course at the  Lal Bahadur Shastri Nation al 
Academy for Administration (LBSNAA), nine months’ training at FSI and  a three 
month or longer desk attachment in the Ministry before proceeding abroad for 
language training. The training at FSI consists of basic skills, diplomatic training 
and attachments outside FSI. Considering the relatively short period of nine months 
which is available at  the FSI, the Officer Trainees (OTs) ought to be imparted 
intensive training on a wide variety of  aspects related to th eir future role as career 
diplomats. The Committee desire that the training module be revisited and updated 
periodically, guided by  the best practices in diplomatic training worldwide.  The 

46 
 
Committee are given to understand that the Ministry is working to upgrade training 
for all categories of officials in consultation with all stakeholders, which would be 
ready before starting the training for 2016 batch of the IFS. The Committee desire 
the Ministry to do the needful without any delay, under intimation to them. 
Today English has emerged as the lingua franca of international diplomacy 
and naturally, a lot of emphasis should be placed on developing communicative 
skills in English language.  While the expansion of recruitment  to less conventional 
segments of society has broadened the bases of the IFS and created a diplomatic 
corps that more truly repre sents the social diversity of India than in the past, this 
aspect has been neglected. The Committee have observed that many IFS trainees 
are usually equipped only with an average English language proficiency and lack 
oral fluency and, in some cases, written communication skills. During deliberations, 
the Foreign Secretary acknowledged that the Ministry has not focused on it  so far, 
but there are certain challenges which require attention. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that adequate measures for imparting written and oral English 
language proficiency particularly for Officer Trainees hailing from non -English 
backgrounds should be initiated at the earliest.       (Recommendation No. 11) 
 
3.69 The Committee consider training an important aspect of capacity building 
for any organization and that it should be imparted to all our IFS personnel. The 
Committee are  pleased to note that training has become a regular feature of not 
only IFS Officers, but other cadres of the Ministry as well. At present, training 
courses of varying durations are conducted for promotees to IFS (A), various cadres 

47 
 
of IFS (B), multi -tasking Staff/chauffeurs, deputation ists from other 
Ministries/Departments, Officials of the Central Passport Organization (CPO) and 
local staff. Regretfully, the Committee note , however, that there is no provision for 
training Officials/Staff o f the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) , the 
Cultural Diplomacy arm of the Ministry. The Committee are of the opinion that the 
ICCR being at the vanguard of our cultural diplomacy, it should be ensured that 
opportunities for training are made available to its officials/staff. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that urgent steps should be taken to impart training 
to personnel of the ICCR on a regular basis.                       (Recommendation No. 12) 
 
3.70 The Committee observe that the Ministry has modified its training 
programme by adopting a new Training Framework (TF) in 2013 which 
incorporates and formalizes many incremental changes brought in training content 
and methodology over the years. Various changes have been made in the training 
methods which now incorporate  on-site Mid-career Training Programme (MCTP) 
phase II, Non-mandatory training, linking of training to postings abroad, providing 
training at all levels and cadres etc. While the Ministry has changed the basic 
architecture of training by adopting a new framework, issues related to the quality 
of young officers are still debatable. The Ministry has consistently argued that even 
when there is a n imperfect recruitment system , flaws can be evened out through 
proper training of new recruits. On the contrary, the Committee are of the view that 
even when the Ministry has maintained that it has enriched the training modules of 
the OTs in recent years, the quality of a number  of our young officers is still 

48 
 
unsatisfactory. While we still grapple with the issue of improving the recruitment 
system for new Officers, the Ministry must introspect about existing shortcomings 
in the training structure and ways to rectify them. During deliberations, the 
Committee were apprised that candidates from a wide variety of socio-economic 
and educational background s are now joining the IFS. Some of the se candidates 
have held previous employment before joining the IFS. Therefore, there is a need to 
modify the training programme depending on  the background of the candidates 
involved so that the best in them can be brought out in  their future careers as 
diplomats. The Committee suggest that the Ministry initiate a system of 
differentiated training and evaluation wherein the focus should be on individual 
officers, achieving a benchmark in identified fields through more per sonalized 
interventions. The training needs would vary according to the pre-existing skill sets 
of individual OTs.  
Social media has emerged as a viable platform for the dissemination and 
sharing of information . Therefore, the Committee recommend that training 
modules in the field of social media should be designed by the Ministry and  that all 
officers be trained on the nuances of using it in public diplomacy and for  promotion 
of India’s international objectives.     
 (Recommendation No. 13) 
3.71 The Committee feel that p roficiency in a foreign language is integral to the 
role and responsibility of a diplomat and no Foreign Service establishment can work 
without a substantial number of diverse foreign language speakers within its ranks. 
The Ministry has a provision for imparting foreign language training to Officer 

49 
 
Trainees (OT) and their confirmation in service depends on passing the compulsory 
Foreign Language examination conducted by the School of Foreign Languages. 
There is also a provision for IFS Officers to learn an additional language during the 
course of the ir career which is known as Optional Foreign Language (OFL). The 
Committee are constrained to note that the linguistic base of India’s diplomats is 
largely limited to the five UN languages only and roughly 35 percent of the Officers 
posted abroad are servi ng in their respective language zones. Moreover, out of 
around 770 IFS Officers in service, the number of Officers with proficiency in a 
foreign language is only 569. It may easily be inferred that around 200 IFS Officers 
are not equipped with any o f foreign language  and the Committee were 
disappointed by this dismal state of affairs. There is considerable anecdotal evidence 
of Indian Ambassadors in Arabic -speaking countries being handicapped by their 
lack of knowledge of Arabic, and similar examples in a variety of countries, Indian 
diplomats being unable to appear on television discussions in the countries to which 
they are accredited because of a lack of fluency in the local language, and so on.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take urgent measures to 
conduct an assessment of current language needs and enhance the linguistic base of 
the Ministry by providing intensive foreign language training and periodic refresher 
courses. The Ministry should also ensure that there are no IFS Officers without 
training and proficiency  in foreign languages, at a level that permits them to 
function effectively in the countries where that language is spoken . In view of the 
low alignment of foreign postings with the language proficiency, the Committee 
desire that a policy that mandates to aligning at least 50 percent of the postings with 

50 
 
foreign languages should be initiated by the Ministry. The Committee also strongly 
recommend that , where it is necessary to assign an officer to a country whose 
language he or she does not know,  an intensive one month training should be 
provided to the officer  in the language, culture, society, customs and political 
situation of the country of posting before he/she is posted abroad.  
(Recommendation No. 14) 
3.72 The Committee are  constrained to note that the Interpreter cadre of the 
Ministry is limited to just 33 personnel covering seven languages . The Committee 
are not able to find any justification for the gross understaffing of such a critical 
department of the Ministry at  a time when the country is poised to make a giant 
leap ahead through enhanced global engagements and higher number of foreign 
visits by dignitaries. More often than not, the work of the Ministry is classified in 
nature and therefore, it leaves no ground for overreliance on hired 
interpreters/translators. The Ministry has informed  the Committee  that language  
skills of many IFS officers are  being used professionally. The Committee had in the 
past taken exception to  the arrangement of IFS officers play ing the role of 
interpreters as it compromises the actual performance of our officers as well as the 
job of interpretation. Therefore, t he Committee strongly recommend that the 
interpreters cadre in the Ministry should be strengthened significantly by increasing 
manpower and simultaneously investing in their capacity building programme.  
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ORIENTATION AND OTHER ISSUES 
A. QUALITY OF THE RECRUITS 
The bulk of intake into the IFS is done through direct recruitment where 
candidates are selected on the basis of merit in the Civil Service Examination (CSE) 
conducted by the UPSC every year. It is, therefore, pertinent that the quality of recruits 
remains at par with the high standard required by  the IFS. As per the Ministry, the 
officers who are selected for the Indian Foreign Service at a young age undergo a vibrant 
post-recruitment training programme. Thereafter these officers, through several years of 
hands-on experience at Headquarters and Missions abroad, grow to become s enior 
diplomats and Heads of Missions. Their experience in our Missions abroad including 
some of the most challenging hotspots in the world make the officers ready to face all 
challenges that India and Indians face in foreign lands.    
4.2 When the Min istry was specifically asked whether it is satisfied with the quality 
of candidates recruited through the Civil Service Examination(CSE), The Ministry 
through a written reply stated as under:- 
„„The Civil Services Examination is undoubtedly one of the most competitive 
examinations in the world. It is also one of the best conducted examinations in 
the world. The value of this examination is well established. Officers recruited 
through this examination have the right aptitude to be moulded through proper 
training that meets the requirements of the Indian Foreign Service (IFS). The 
Civil Services Exam also provides equal opportunities to persons of all 
backgrounds to participate and join the Foreign Service‟‟.  
 
4.3 As informed by the Ministry, t he Indian Foreign Service is one  among 23  
participating services in the Civil Service Examination. . The service allocation is done 
based on rank, preference an d the number of vacancies in the particular category in each 
service.  
„„As regards the preference, the service allocation is done based on rank, 
preference and the number of vacancies in the particular category in each 
Service. Actually, we have seen that IFS is the second most preferred service. 
As the respected External Affairs Secretary has said, the first person who got 
allocated to IFS was the 14th rank holder in the combined Civil Service Exam 
and the last person among the general category was 114 th rank holder. I am 
not having the figures readily with me. I can come prepared for that. The size 

52 
 
of recruitment was 32 and in the UR category, the number was 16. Therefore, 
the 16th person who got into IFS was 114th rank holder.‟‟ 
 
4.4 When the Ministry w as specifically asked whether it has undertaken any 
comparative study to analyze the quality and aptitude of officer trainees, it submitted 
through a written reply:-  
„„The Ministry have not conducted any comparative study to analyse  the 
quality and aptitude of officers trainees. However, it has been observed that 
candidates who have been selected through one of the toughest competitive 
examination in the world have the necessary qualities which could be 
nurtured with proper training.‟‟ 
 
4.5 On being asked whether any changes have been witnessed in the quality and 
qualifications of new recruits during the last five years, the Ministry through a written 
reply stated as under:-  
 „„The last few years have witnessed inflow of a very diverse and well -
qualified group of candidates opting for and getting into the Foreign Service. 
The 2014 Batch of the IFS, for instance, has 14 engineers, 3 medical doctors, 
4 MBA/management graduates and one Officer Trainee with a PhD in 
Economics. The previous batch had 8 medical doctors, 6 engineers, 4 lawyers 
and 1 holding PhD in Botany. These qualifications bring along great diversity 
into the Foreign Service, which is further capitalised on by specialised 
training imparted at FSI and during their hand s-on experience in the Ministry 
and Missions/Posts abroad.‟‟  
 
4.6 The Foreign Secretary during the course of evidence made the following 
submission before the Committee:-  
„„Let me say a few words about the quality of intake. Yes, it is true that 
today, p erhaps, the people in the top 10 may not necessarily opt for the 
Foreign Service.  I believe that in this year the top ranked person who has 
opted for Foreign Service is 24th in the overall rank.‟‟ 
 
4.7 On being asked about the likely changes that can be made in the current recruiting 
system to ensure better quality of new recruits, the Ministry through a written reply stated 
as under:- 
„„The Ministry is of the view that the present system of recruiti ng officers to 
the Indian Foreign Service through the Civil Services Exam is yielding 
suitable well -qualified candidates who could be, with proper training, 
nurtured to be successful officers.‟‟  

53 
 
 
4.8 The Foreign Secretary during the evidence submitted as under:-  
„„First of all, I will not say I am dissatisfied with the quality. I note that today 
you have a much more diverse set of people, diverse in terms of their 
backgrounds and origins in India. It is a much less big city service, it is now 
from different States and you have people who actually come from small 
villages to people who come from big towns. It is much more representative 
than it used to be. There are many States, in earlier years, which may not 
have had members in the Foreign Service and interestingly, a lot of them, 
because they have held some job before they join the Foreign Service, they 
come to it with a very different mindset. I think that if we adapt our training 
programme to this catchment area, to this sort of intake, my own se nse is that 
it is also necessary for the Ministry and for the Embassies to re -adjust to the 
intake, reformat their training programmes and try to get the best out of these 
people.‟‟             
4.9 While dealing with the issue of quality of IFS recruits in last few years, the 
Foreign Secretary during the evidence submitted that:-  
„„On the aptitude of people, this whole recruitment, examination and interview, 
let me step back a bit here. We are not really giving you a stock answer. I have 
a view here, maybe it does not fully reflect the views expressed in that answer. 
The view is that until we devise a better way of getting talent – and we can 
debate that – the key right now to my mind is to focus on training. 
When people say, I know – I also hear complaints from my fellow Foreign 
Service officers – about the quality of diplomats we are getting. My stock 
answer is, I think probably today there is more training than I have given for 
Foreign Service officers because I have been partly in it for much longer and 
mostly we work in Missions where we get trainee officers. Roughly about 20 
might have passed through my hands in China; maybe, six or seven more did 
in Japan. My sense is that if Ambassadors take int erest in training which I 
must confess not all of them do, if we instead of complaining about the quality 
of intake instead say we are going to do something about the quality of 
training them for the future I think we would get a much better result. To my 
own colleagues in the Ministry who complain about it I tell them, „Why do 
you not spend some time bettering the HR qualities of the people you have?‟‟ 
 
4.10 The issue of quality of recruits is intricately linked to the relative ranks of selected 
candidates obtained in the CSE and the preference accorded to the IFS vis-à-vis other 
services.  The Foreign Secretary during the evidence submitted that:- 
„„...where does t he Foreign Service stand in the  pecking order?  It is still not 
where it should be.  This year the highest ranking person was placed 14 th in the 
overall list and the next person was 37 th rank.  I think, the year I joined, it 
closed well before 37th.  The last person in was around 37th.‟‟  

54 
 
4.11 The representatives of the DoPT made the following submission before the 
Committee during the evidence:- 
„„As regards the preference, the service allocation is done based on rank, 
preference and the number of vacancies in the particular category in  each 
Service. Actually, we have seen that IFS is the second most preferred service. 
As the respected External Affairs Secretary has said, the first person who got 
allocated to IFS was the 14 th rank holder in the combined Civil Service Exam 
and the last person among the general category was 114 th rank holder. I am not 
having the figures readily with me. I can come prepared for that. The size of 
recruitment was 32 and in the UR category, the numb er was 16. Therefore, the 
16th person who got into IFS was 114th rank holder.‟‟ 
 
4.12 As per the DoPT, the IAS is the most preferred choice for the candidates in CSE, 
followed by IFS, IRS, IPS and customs.  
 
4.13 On being asked about the reasons for the IFS not being the most preferred choice 
of the candidates, the Foreign Secretary submitted the following during the evidence:-  
„„Sir, my sense is that the relative attraction of the Foreign Service has gone 
down. The uncertainties of living abroad have gone up. I think, even with the 
Foreign Service, for example, we have people whose spouses‟ employment is 
disrupted by their being abroad.  I think, as we open more Missions in difficult 
parts of the world, people als o realise that a foreign posting sometimes can be 
more difficult than even a posting in India.‟‟  
 
B.     DOMAIN SPECIALIZATION OF IFS 
4.14 As per the Ministry, f unctional specialization is encouraged in the Ministry and 
this is being done through training, deployments and postings of officers. Training in FSI 
is so organized that specialization follows  naturally. It is delivered in capsules on diverse 
subjects allowing officers to choose those of interest to them. Areas thus covered in 
various caps ules include: foreign policy; defence and security; legislature, executive; 
judiciary; RTI; international law, trade and economic diplomacy, Make in India, Global 
value chains, anti -dumping / safeguards / subsidies, WTO; RTAs / RCEPs; trade 
disputes; clima te change, Science and Technology, culture; media, Consular; Passport; 
Visa; ITEC; Education; Information; Publicity diplomacy; Administration; 
Establishment; Finance & Accounts; Office Procedure; IMAS; IVFRT/ PRIDE/ OCI; 
eOffice; protocol; personality dev elopment; etc. The system of thesis /monograph writing 

55 
 
based on detailed research and discussion on it before one‟s peers and experts, allows 
young Office Trainees  the possibility to further explore a chosen area of specialization.  
The Non-mandatory t raining program allows one to undertake specialized training at a 
premier institution.     
 
4.15 On being asked about the efforts made to encourage domain specialization, the 
Ministry through a written reply stated as under:- 
„„The Ministry encourages func tional specialization and provides opportunity to 
its officers to undergo specialised short -term courses in India and abroad. Such 
courses are also a part of mid -career training, mandatory for all officers during 
different stages in their career. Regular t raining courses on Trade and Economic 
Diplomacy are organized by the Ministry‟s Foreign Service Institute. Since 2014 
three such editions have been organized with emphasis on areas of contemporary 
significance such as Indian macro -economy, hurdles in ease of doing business; 
countering negative perceptions / sentiments about India (if any); Trade 
opportunities and Market Access issues; International Financial Institutions; 
Engaging States in Economic Diplomacy; Trade Regimes: WTO & Mega -
Trading arrangements under discussion, Tech transfer/ know how; Intellectual 
property rights and patents; Export credit and investment opportunities, etc. 
Investment Opportunities in India particularly in various states; engagements in 
host countries; website as the central to ol in Economic Diplomacy; Role of 
Commercial Representative, posted in Indian Missions/Posts abroad are also an 
important component of the training courses. Further, officers are deputed to 
Ministry of Commerce and UN bodies like WTO.‟‟ 
 
4.16 In view of the fact that there is increased multilateral engagement abroad and that 
increased importance is being attached to Economic, Commercial and Environmental 
Diplomacy, the Ministry was asked to enumerate its plans to create  a specialized cadre in 
the Ministry to cater to the new challenges in diplomacy. The Ministry through a written 
reply submitted as under:-   
„„The Ministry provides opportunity for each of the officer to acquire knowledge 
and expertise in areas such as economic, commercial, political, cultural diplomacy 
etc. There is no proposal to create a specialized cadre in the Ministry in these 
areas.  Ministry endeavours to provide hands -on training to each of its offic ers in 
these specialised areas by deploying t hem with Divisions dealing with 
disarmament, climate change, trade & investment, counter -terrorism, 
cybersecurity, multilateral economic relations, development partnership etc. 
Political Diplomacy, Economic and Commercial Diplomacy, Cultural Diplomacy, 
Environmental Diplomacy, etc. need an integrated and calibrated approach and do 
not function in isolation. At FSI, IFS Officers are, inter alia, trained in all fields 

56 
 
of diplomacy. The Officers, by virtue of their handling the issues pertaining to 
economic/commercial and environmental matters at headquarters and in 
Missions/Posts abroad receive in -depth experience and exposure in these fields 
and are, hence, in a position to carry out these specialized roles. Moreover, there 
are specialized Divisions at Headqu arters (Multilateral and Economic 
Relations/United Nations Economic and Political) and also dedicated posts abroad 
that deal with issues related to Economic, Commercial Diplomacy and 
Environmental Diplomacy. FSI has specialized training courses in these areas. For 
advanced knowledge, one is also allowed to undergo non -mandatory training in 
these areas.‟‟    
4.17 The Foreign Secretary during the course of the evidence stated as under:- 
„„Indian diplomats need to develop a holistic understanding of developments in 
different spheres in a country or a region or in a particular domain of diplomacy 
and their ramifications on India‟s national interest.  While domain knowledge and 
region langua ge specializations are encouraged and many of our diplomats are 
domain experts by virtue of dealing with the subjects like disarmament, 
environmental diplomacy, and counselor issues for considerable duration during 
their career, strict specialization has n ot developed to that extent. Equally 
important is the need to focus on training and continuous capacity building to 
enable the Indian diplomat to develop a holistic understanding of developments in 
different spheres in a country or a region or in a particu lar domain of diplomacy 
and their ramifications on India‟s national interest.‟‟  
 
4.18 He further added that:- 
„„...We are also encouraging functional specialization within the Ministry in 
economic, commercial, technology, environment, disarmament and secu rity 
related issues. This has become a factor in our deployments both in the Ministry 
and in Missions abroad. We encourage diplomats who have shown aptitude for a 
particular area to pursue this. We also help them to take advantage of specialised 
courses in India or abroad in reputed institutions. We believe that conceptually we 
are on the right track when it comes to specialisation on economic and 
commercial matters. We are hamstrung right now by the numbers issue. I think if 
we get larger numbers, we can d o more in this area. Certainly, in key issues like 
climate change, disarmament, I think the Ministry has been active. Again, part of 
it is the numbers issue. In fact, a lot of our ability to do things boils down to the 
numbers, which is, of course, the mai n point which the Committee is also 
making...‟‟  
 
C. ISSUES RELATING TO CAREER GROWTH 
4.19 Availability of ample opportunities for career growth is important for any 
organization. In the Ministry‟s workforce, apart from the IFS, there is the feeder cadre 
like Group B Assistants, LDC as well as interpreter s and the stenographic services. The 

57 
 
Central Passport Organization (CPO) and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
are other subordinate offices falling under the Ministry of External Affairs. 
4.20 According to the Ministry, the cadre strength of  the IFS is 912, while that of IFS 
(B) is 3142 (As on 31.3.2016). ICCR has a sanctioned strength of 251 of which currently 
178 personnel are in place. 44 direct recruitment posts which were sanctioned by 
Department of Expenditure and Ministry of Finance could not be filled  due to technical 
reasons in the past and have lapsed.  
 
4.21 As per the Ministry, a s on 31 st December, 2014, the sanctioned cadre strength of 
the Central Passport Organisation is 2697 (Grade „A‟ Post: 223; Grade „B‟ Gazetted Post: 
565; Grade „B‟ Non-Gazetted post: 469 and Grade „C‟ post: 1540). In addition, 21 posts , 
including 15 Technical and 6 supporting staff , were created by the Union Cabinet 
decision in 2007 to man the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Passport Seva 
Project. The recruitment to Central Passport Organisation  Cadre is only at the feeder 
lever of LDC, Assistant, Office Assista nt (MTS), Junior Hindi Translator and 
Stenographer. The recruitment to the post of Passport Officer, Deputy Passport Officer, 
Assistant Passport Officer, Passport Granting Officer and Superintendent is either 
through promotion or by deputation.      
4.22 On being asked to elaborate upon the Ministry‟s current policy of departmental 
promotion from feeder cadre, the Ministry through a written reply stated as under:-  
„„Up to 22.5 percent of the posts in IFS (A) are filled by the members of the IFS 
Branch B through induction/promotion. As part of MEA Expansion Plan, an 
additional 120 posts for the period 2008 -18 have been earmarked for filling up 
through induction of offi cers from feeder cadre. Once promoted, an officer / 
official can join a training course of the relevant level and interest. Some of the 
courses are, however, mandatory at various levels for fresh inductees into Gr I 
of IFSB.‟‟     
 
4.23 When the Ministry w as asked whether they have taken any action on the Tenth 
Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission which inter-alia had 
suggested that  „Each Department, dealing with both the general as well as Specialized 
Services (Group B), may set up Committees to examine what changes are required in the 

58 
 
system of recruitment and promotion of these Posts ‟, the Ministry through a written reply 
stated as under:-  
„„The Ministry recognizes the importance of having a robust policy for 
recruitment and promotion of officers from the feeder Group B cadre. The policy 
for such recruitments and promotions are reviewed from time to time including 
during cadre revie w exercises and necessary course corrections are introduced 
whenever required.‟‟ 
 
4.24 The Foreign Secretary during the evidence submitted the following:- 
„„…we have people who are ambassadors today who joined in the stenographic 
cadre, not too many, but we have a few. We had some who also joined in the 
Interpreter‟s cadre. I think, one of them was ambassador recently, but have now 
been moved to a non-ambassadorial position. So, it happens.‟‟ 
 
4.25 On the issue of promotions from the feeder cadre, the Foreign Secretary during 
the course of the evidence submitted as under:-  
„„...Finally, on the issue of the feeder cadre and how do they integrate, we have 
today, Ambassadors in a number of places, who are drawn from the feeder 
cadre.  I think, one of our challenges today, is to ensure that everybody comes 
up to some common level.  Here language skills, for example, in the past we 
have not always enforced the allotment of languages and testing the proficiency 
of languages of people drawn from the feeder cad re.  Obviously, if you are, 
now, going to make them Ambassadors, it is something that we will need to 
enforce. It is a matter on which, within the Government, we have looked at it.  It 
is between us and the DoPT.  But it is certainly a very valid concern t hat we 
need to address...‟‟ 
4.26 On the issue of maintaining the quality of the promotees, the Foreign Secretary 
during the evidence submitted as under:- 
„„....but I accept the point that when people come out of  feeder cadre, 
interpretation or stenograph ic cadre and join the general cadre, the re has to be 
some levelling exercise.  They have to be tested against some benchmarks and 
brought up. I think that is a completely valid observation.  It would not apply to 
interpreters but certainly people from the stenographic cadres, applying 
language rul es and allotting them languages and making sure that they pass 
language exams are part of the levelling exercise that we need to look at.‟‟   
4.27 On being asked whether officials of Passport offices are being posted abroad in 
the Missions/Posts, the Ministry through a written reply stated as under:- 
„„Officials of Passport offices are presently not posted in Missions/Posts abroad. 
The Central Passport Organisation is a sub -ordinate office of the Ministry. The 
Senior Establishment Board and Junior Establishment Board are mandated to 
post only regular officials of the Ministry.‟‟        
 

59 
 
D.       AMBASSADORIAL POSTINGS  
4.28 The post of Ambassador/HOM is not only crucial for  the organization of the 
Mission/Post but also gives vision and shape to India‟s engagement wit h the country of 
accreditation. It is imperative that the post is filled with the most deserving of candidates. 
On being asked about the procedure for the appointment of ambassadorial and other 
officers/staff abroad, the Ministry stated through a written reply as under:-  
„„Appointment of Ambassadors and other officers are undertaken through 
two completely different processes. IFS officers are posted abroad through 
Foreign Service Board. Other GOI officers are posted in Missions abroad in 
captive posts of various Ministries  through Civil Services Board, with 
approval of Foreign Service Board and the External Affairs Minister as well 
as the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet. Posting of officers of Armed 
Forces as Service Attaches in Missions are done by Ministry of Defens e and 
diplomatic rank is granted by MEA. Currently there are 46 Counsellor/ 
Minister level posts in Missions abroad which are occupied by officers from 
other Services. The appointments of Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
are made with the approval of Hon ‟ble President in keeping with India‟s 
priorities, the requirements in a particular Diplomatic Mission, and overall 
suitability of the officer, including experience, seniority and regional and 
professional expertise. A lengthy procedure of approvals and cl earances is 
required and, thereafter, concurrence of countries of accreditation would have 
to be obtained. There has not been any significant departure from the past for 
Ambassadorial appointments in recent years.‟‟  
4.29 While discussing language skills and postings, the Foreign Secretary in a sitting 
submitted that:-  
„„Having said that, we are handling our postings – including 
Ambassadorships – in a way in which we are steering people with language 
skills back into that area, s ometimes at the cost of truncating their postings 
elsewhere.‟‟ 
4.30 The Ministry has furnished the following data regarding a ppointments of 
Ambassadors in the last five years:-  
Year Indian Foreign Service  Non-IFS (and their background) 
2011 36 1 (Former Foreign Secretary) 
2012 41 1 (Former Naval Chief) 
2013 45 1 (Former Foreign Secretary) 
2014 27 1 (Former Air Chief Marshal) 
2015 24 - 
4.31 The Foreign Secretary, during the evidence made the following submission:-  
„„…The second issue is the non -career Ambassadors.  I must say this is not 
an excuse but really this decision is about my pay grade and I must say it is 

60 
 
not something which is new.  I have seen it evolve certainly in the last 10 
years or more and the number o f non -career ambassadors have steadily 
shrunk possibly because levels of interest in going out have also fallen.  I am 
just guessing that is a factor but I really cannot give a clear cut answer.  But 
if you are down to two people it is not something which happened in the last 
one or two years.  It has really been a fairly steady trend.  I would like to 
think the quality of Foreign Service is improved and perhaps that is a 
reflection....‟‟        
 
4.32 The Committee are concerned at the deterioration in the quality of recruits 
to the Indian Foreign Service. This is happening at a time when the lure and appeal 
of the Civil Service s Examination has increased tremendously and the number of 
applications is rising steadily. The Committee have observed that in the past , only 
the candidates who were able to secure the highest ranks in the Civil Service s 
Examination were able to enter the IFS. It has come as a matter of surprise to the 
Committee that today even low ranked candidates are able to enter the IFS. This 
development is both a symptom and a reason for the erosion of prestige in the IFS. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the IFS being the premier service of the 
country and its officers being responsible for handling multiple responsibilities of 
diplomacy, i t is imperative that only the best candidates are selected from a wide 
pool of human resource available in the country. No doubt, the relative charm of the 
IFS has waned  with the increased accessibility of foreign travel in recent years  and 
the Ministry has acknowledged that people in the top 10 may not necessarily opt for 
the Indian Foreign Service. In fact, the IFS topper s in 2014 and 2015 were ranked 
24th and 14th, respectively in the overall CSE merit list. Similarly, the last person to 
have made it to the IFS from the General/Unreserved category was ranked 114 th in 
the CSE, 2015. The Committee are not fully convinced by the arguments of the 
Ministry that the present system of recruiting officers to the IFS through CSE is 

61 
 
yielding suitable well qualified candidates who could be nurtured to be successful 
officers through proper training. The Committee have alr eady made their view 
clear on the issue of recruitment in the preceding chapters and they would like the 
Ministry to be open -minded about the quality of recruits. The argument that rising 
uncertainties of living a broad and  other extraneous factors prevent top rankers 
from opting for the IFS  are not convincing .  The Committee would desire that the 
Ministry look into  the reasons for the ebbing stock  of IFS vis-à-vis other services. 
Accordingly, urgent steps should be initiated to make the IFS more attractive and 
remunerative as a career choice for Civil Service aspirants.  
(Recommendation No. 16) 
4.33 The field of diplomacy is witnessing important emerging areas like economic, 
commercial, political, cultural, and environmental diplomacy , all of which are 
gaining rapid currency. The nature of global engagements has undergone a sea 
change and there is today an added emphasis on trade and investment, multilateral 
economic relations, developmental partnership , etc. Besides, there is a need for 
calibrated response s to new global challenges like disarmament, climate change, 
counter-terrorism, cyber security, etc. The Committee find it imperative for the 
Ministry to augment capacity in the relevant fields without disturbing the existing 
equilibrium between the domain experts and generalists. This is a very old debate in 
Public Administra tion and Human Resource Management which is unlikely to be 
resolved at this juncture. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
Ministry should suitably enhance the scope of mid-career training to equip officers 
to develop expertise in specific fields based on their educational background . It is 

62 
 
inevitable that a certain amount of specialization would emerge but it would not be 
a prudent idea in the Committee’s view to confine officers to a particular domain 
only. The Committee would , therefore, recommend that the posting s should be 
rotated to ensure a wider pool of officers with a certain amount of specialized 
domain knowledge instead of exclusive  specialization. As a means to achiev e this, 
IFS officers should be incentivized by providing additional increment for research 
work on relevant subjects related to diplomacy, trade & commerce, international 
relations, disarmament, energy security, climate change, etc.  
                 (Recommendation No. 17) 
4.34        The Committee observed that a part from the IFS , the Ministry’s 
workforce comprises of the feeder cadre which includes Group B Assistants, LDCs 
as well as Interpreters and Stenographic services. Besides, there is a substantial 
workforce with the Central Passport Organization (CPO) and Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR) which are subordinate offices functioning under the 
Ministry. The Committee are perturbed that the Ministry has not taken concrete 
action on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Second 
Administrative Reforms Commission which inter-alia had asked the Departments to 
examine the issue of promotions. The Committee deem this a major failure on the 
part of the Ministry. Therefore, the y recommend that the Ministry should make the 
existing policy more robust by exploring ways for enlarging the quota for 
promotions. On the issue of the Expansion Plan of the Ministry, the Committee 
believe that the interests of the Ministry would b e best served if a significant 
number of IFS  officers are sourced from the existing workforce belonging to the 

63 
 
feeder cadres as they are well versed with official procedures , and augmented by 
lateral entry from outside government, including from sectors such as academia and 
the private sector . The Committee would also desire that sufficient exposure and 
training facilities should be made available to officers who are promoted to the IFS  
or enter the service laterally,  in order to ensure that their overall orientation and 
standing is at par with the Direct Recruits. The Committee also recommend that 
sufficient provisions for their integration, language training and evaluation should 
be factored into the promotion policy.  
Further, the Committee would recommend that adequate avenues for 
promotion and career growth should also be made available to the Officers/Staff of 
Central Passport Office (CPO) and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). 
The Committee also observe that at present there is no provision for posting officials 
of the Passport Offices in Missions/Posts abroad while a host of passport/visa related 
matters are being handled by the Embassies. The Committee view it as a wastage of 
human resources that trained workforce capable of handling these requirements is 
not posted abroad. The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should start posting officials of the Passport Offices abroad to man the 
consular sections of various Missions/Posts.                          (Recommendation No. 18) 
4.35 The Committee observe that the Ambassadorial appointments are not being 
made through a designated body unlike other foreign postings of the Ministry, 
which are handled through the Foreign Service Board. Moreover, there are delays 
in appointment and in  the absence of  a designated policy for appointment of 
Ambassadors and High Commissioners, they are done with the approval of  the 

64 
 
Hon’ble President in keeping with India’s priorities, requirements in a particular 
Diplomatic Mission and overall suitability of the Officer, including experience, 
seniority, regional and professional expertise. The Committee are concerned to note 
that the space for non -career ambassadors has considerably shrunk and at present 
there are only two non -career Ambassadors whereas in the past there had been a 
number of highly illustrious Ambassadors who were not drawn from the IFS and 
who served their post s with distinction. The Committee are of the considered view 
that more eminent persons who have excelled in the field of community affairs, 
Diaspora issues, Foreign Policy, area studies, literature , journalism, etc. should be 
considered for appointments as Ambassadors/High Commission ers. There is an 
urgent need to import diversity into the appointment of Ambassadors to bring it in 
consonance with India’s rapidly rising profile globally and for suitably projecting 
our foreign policy interest s. The Committee also recommend that the appointment 
of Ambassadors be made through a designated body with representation of non-
official experts as well . Furthermore, the Committee desire that knowledge of the 
local language of the country of accreditation should be made  a desirable 
qualification for being appointed Ambassador there. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
01August, 2016                                        Chairperson                                    
10 Sravana, 1938(Saka)                                                  Standing Committee 
on External Affairs 
 

65 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 29TH JANUARY, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 29 th January, 2015 from 1000 hrs. to  1100 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
4. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
5. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6. Md. Salim 
7. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
8. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
9. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 10. Shri Shri H.K. Dua 
 11. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 12. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
 13.  Dr. Karan Singh 
 14. Shri Pavan Kumar Varma 
 15. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
       Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani   - Additional Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Smt. Mukta Tomar                           - Additional Secretary (AD) 
2. Smt. Nengcha Lhouvum                  - Dean (FSI) 
3. Dr. Ajay M. Gondane                      - Joint Secretary (SAARC & BC) 
4. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi                - Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO 
5. Shri G.V. Srinivas                            - Joint Secretary (FSI-S) 
6. Shri Sibi George                               - Joint Secretary (AD) 
7. Shrimati Nutan Kapoor Mahawar    - Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
8. Shri Dinkar Asthana                         - Dy Director General (ICCR) 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Sahu                     - Dy Director General (ICCR) 
10. Shri Anurag Srivastava                    - Director (Finance) 
11. Shri B. Vanlalwavna                        - Director (ADP) 

66 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee to have 
a briefing on the subject ' Recruitment, structure and  capacity-building of IFS Cadre  
including need for a separate UPSC examination for cadre, mid -career entry and in -
service training and orientation'.  
 
3. Thereafter, Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs briefed the 
Committee on the subject and highlighted the steps taken by the Ministry to augment 
manpower resources at various levels . She further enlightened the Committee about the 
training framework being followed in the Ministry and the initiatives like encouraging 
officers to learn and specialize in economic profile of a particular state.  
 
4. Further, the Members of the Committee raised queries related to various issues 
like quality of intake into the Foreign Services; additional intake on the basis of 
substantive expertise, linguistic expertise; mid -carrier induction of qualified and 
experienced professionals; altering the fixed c adre ratio; possibility of separate 
examination for the Foreign Services, an additional paper/interview; making Foreign 
Services accessible to Non -Resident Indians; existing deployment of IFS officers in 
Indian Missions; departmental promotion from feeder cadre within the Ministry; 
recruitment on contractual basis; gap between initial Budget Expenditure and lower 
actual expenditure for training; need for social media training; issue of language 
proficiency and assessment of language needs; interpretation an d translation from other 
languages and Hindi language capacity building. 

67 
 
5. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised further queries about the 
comparative assessment of the size and strength of Foreign Services in various countries, 
curriculum and content of training for Indian Foreign Service, etc. It was also decided to 
organise one more sitting of the Committee in which the new Foreign Secretary may brief 
the Committee elaborately incorporating all the points raised by the Members in this 
meeting. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

68 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 27TH FEBRUARY, 
2015 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, 27th February, 2015 from 1515 hrs. to 1645 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
  Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
3. Shri Jose K. Mani 
4. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
5. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
6. Dr. P.R. Senthilnathan 
7. Shrimati Supriya Sule 
8. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 
       Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai         -  Director 
 
   Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs  
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar                          -             Foreign Secretary 
2. Smt. Nengcha Lhouvum              -             Dean (FSI) 
3. Shri Satish C. Mehta                    -             DG, ICCR 
4. Smt. Mukta Tomar                       -            Additional Secretary (AD) 
5. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi            -            Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO 
6. Shri Sibi George                           -            Joint Secretary (AD) 
7. Shri Anurag Srivastava                -            Director (Finance) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee to have 
further briefing on the subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity-building of IFS Cadre, 

69 
 
including need for a separate UPSC examination for cadre, mid -career entry and in -
service training and orientation'. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee on issues related to the 
total sanctioned staff of the Ministry and vacancies thereon, diplomatic strength, current 
recruitment system being followed and the Ministry's Expansion Plan 2.0 . The Foreign 
Secretary addressed the queries raised by the Committee on issues of quality of intake, 
changing profile of new recruit s, need for re -adjusting and reformatting the training 
programmes etc.  
4. The Committee further deliberated upon the idea of a separate examination or at  
least an additional paper or a separate interview for aspirants to Foreign Services and 
opening of Fo reign Servic e Examination to Non -Resident Indians alike. The Foreign 
Secretary also apprised the Committee about the lateral entry, idea of drawing  personnel 
from academia, private sector, military services , hiring  consultants, need to strengthen 
institutions, particularly the Foreign Service Institute , re-structuring of Policy Planning 
and Research Division, functional specialization in the Ministry , language specialization 
policy as well as Mid-Career Training Programmes.  
5.  The Foreign Secretary also apprised the Committee about the resource constraints 
being faced by the Ministry and invited the Committee to visit the five Missions/Posts 
handling maximum workload for passports and visas. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 

70 
 
        APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2014-15) HELD ON 18TH JUNE, 2015. 
 
The Committee sat on Thur sday, the 18th June, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Shri Maganti V. Rao (Babu) 
6. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
7. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
8.  Shri Sharad Tripathi 
9.  Shri Chhedi Paswan 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri H.K. Dua 
11. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
12. Shri Ram Kumar Kashyap 
13. Dr. Karan Singh 
14. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Cyril John         Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar Foreign Secretary 
2. Smt.Nengcha Lhouvum Dean (FSI) 
3. Smt. Mukta D. Tomar Additional Secretary (AD) 
4. Shri Dinkar Asthana DG, ICCR 
5. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO 
6. Shri Sibi George Joint Secretary (AD) 
7. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
8. Shri B. Vanlalvawna Director (ADP & RTI) 
9. Shri Anurag Srivastava Director (Finance) 

71 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee to 
render oral evidence on the subject ' Recruitment, structure and capacity -building of IFS 
Cadre, including need for a separate UPSC examination for cadre, mid -career entry and 
in-service training and orientation' and drew their attention towards Direction 59(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.   
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee on various issues 
concerning the subject and apprised the Committee about the Ministry's Expansion Plan 
2.0; ways to strengthen domain expertise; expanding the deputation programme; intake of 
experts from the private sector; changes made in the functioning of various Divisions; 
training and language policy of the Ministry.  
4. The Foreign Secretary also responded to various queries raised by the Members 
which inter-alia included clarifications regarding actual number of diplomat rank officials; 
appointment of ambassadors; optional paper for Foreign Service aspirants; assessment of 
the current language requirements; lateral entry; revamping of Indian Cultural Centres 
abroad and ICCR's budget and training needs etc. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

72 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 16th  DECEMBER, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16 th December, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1645 
hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
4. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
5. Shri A. Anwhar Raajha 
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
8. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
10. Dr. Karan Singh 
11. Shri Pavan Kumar Verma 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
Ministry of External Affairs 
 1. Dr. S. Jaishankar  - Foreign Secretary 
 2. Smt. Nengcha Lhouvum - Dean (FSI) 
 3. Smt Mukta D. Tomar  - Additional Secretary (AD) 
 4. Shri C. Rajasekhar  - DG, ICCR 
 5. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi - Joint Secretary (PSP & CPO) 
 6. Shri Sibi George  - Joint Secretary (AD) 
 7. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar - Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
 8. Shri B. Vanlalvawna  - Director (ADP & RTI) 
 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) 
1. Shri T. Jacob   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri P.K. Das   - Joint Secretary  

73 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Min istry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to have an o ral evidence on the subject 'Recruitment, structure 
and capacity-building of IFS Cadre, including need for a separate UPSC examination for 
cadre, mid-career entry and in-service training and orientation'. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee on the various issues 
pertaining to the subject viz. broad contours of recruitment to the IFS and the  quality 
issues; foreign language skills of diplomats; need for an additional paper/weightage to the 
personality test for recruitment into Foreign Service etc. 
4. Members of the Committee raised various queries related to the preference given 
to IFS by the candidate vis-à-vis other services as well as the quality of recruits, capacity 
augmentation through feeder local cadre, language proficiency,  cadre review, 
functioning of the ICCR, various constraints faced by the IFS lateral entry to the 
Ministry, functioning of the  Public Policy Division etc.  The Foreign Secretary and the 
representative of the Department of Personnel and Training responded to the queries of 
the Members.   
 The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  
 
  

74 
 
APPENDIX-V 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2015-16) HELD ON 27TH JULY, 2016 
   
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27 th July, 2016 from 1600 hrs. to 1815hrs. 
in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2.  Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
3.  Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
4.  Prof. Richard Hay 
5.  Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
6.  Shri Venakateshwara Rao Magannti 
7.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Mohammad Salim 
11. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
12. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
13. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
14. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
Rajya Sabha 
15.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
16.  Dr. Karan Singh 
17.  Shri Amar Singh 
  Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Shri Janmesh Singh   - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar -          Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri D.M. Mulay -          Additional Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
3. Shri Vikas Swarup -          Joint Secretary (XP) & Spokesperson 
4. Shri Sibi Goerge -          Joint Secretary (Administration) 
5. Ms. Vani S. Rao -          Joint Secretary (OIA-II) Additional Charge of OIS-I 
6. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar -          Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
7. Shri Dinkar Asthana -          Joint Secretary (DPA II) 
8. Shri Manish Gupta -          Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
9. Shri M.C. Luther -          Joint Secretary (OE) & PGE 
10. Shri Sanjay Kumar Verma -          Joint Secretary (GEM) 
11. Ms. Neena Malhotra -          Joint Secretary (E&SA) 
12. Shri Anurag Srivastava -          Director (Finance) 

75 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) 
1. Shri C. Rajasekhar -            Director General  
2. Ms. Namrata S. Kumar -            Deputy Director General  
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1.  Shri Narinder Kumar Sinha -        Secretary  
2.  Shri K.K. Mittal -        Additional Secretary  
3.  Ms. Shefali Shah -         Joint Secretary  
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION)  
 Shri Vinay Sheel Oberoi -        Secretary 
 
NALANDA UNIVERSITY 
     Dr. Gopa Sabharwal                      -          Vice Chancellor, Nalanda University 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity -building of IFS Cadre, including need for a 
separate UPSC examination for cadre, mid -career entry and in -service training and 
orientation'.  
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
The Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating 
the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
6. XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
7.  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
8.  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 

76 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
No. of IFS Officers with Proficiency in various languages (2015-16) 
 
S. No  LANGUAGE   NO. OF OFFICERS 
1.  ARABIC    95 
2.  BHASA INDONESIA  10 
3.  BHASA MALAY   1 
4.  BHASA THAI   1 
5.  BURMESE    6 
6.  CHINESE    75 
7.  FRENCH    83 
8.  GERMAN    31 
9.  HEBREW    6 
10.  JAPANESE    25 
11.  KAZAKH    1 
12.  KISWAHILI    2 
13.  KOREN    5 
14.  PERSIAN    20 
15.  PORTUGESE    22 
16.  PUSHTU    2 
17.  RUSSIAN    90 
18.  SERBO-CROATIAN   1 
19.  SINHALESE    3 
20.  SPANISH    78 
21.  TURKISH    7 
22.  UKRANIAN    1 
23.  VIETNAMESE   4 
  TOTAL    569 
 