 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken  by the Government  on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report on the subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity-
building of IFS Cadre, including need for a separate UPSC examination for cadre, 
mid-career entry and in-service training and orientation'] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018 / Pausa, 1939 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
                          SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 17 
 

 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth 
Report on the subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity-building of IFS Cadre, including need for a 
separate UPSC examination for cadre, mid-career entry and in-service training and orientation'] 
 
 
 Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 31.08.2017 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on   5.01.2018 
       Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 5.01.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
Jaunaury, 2018 / Pausa, 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
COEA NO. 130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
© 2017 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  

CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………  (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................      16 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………    22   
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..   23 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………    29 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee held on 24.8.2017…………       33                                                           
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (16th Lok Sabha)………………………………………………..  35 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2016-17) 
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla* 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 7. Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
 11. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 12. Shri Venakateswara Rao Magannti 
 13. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 14. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita 
 18. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 19. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 20. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 21. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri Raj Babbar 
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 25. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
 26. Smt. Kanimozhi 
 27. Shri C.M. Ramesh  
28. Shri Amar Singh   
29. Dr. Karan Singh 
 30. Shri R.K. Sinha 
 31. Shri D. P. Tripathi  
   
Secretariat 
1. Shri P. C. Koul     –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3.       Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha   –   Additional Director  
4. Shri Janmesh Singh     –   Under Secretary 
 
*Shri Cheddi Paswan, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha had resigned from the membership of the 
Committee w.e.f. 22.11.2016. Vacancy arose w.e.f. 29.11.2016 du e to his resignation and Shri Gurjit 
Singh Aujla has been nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 31.3.2017. 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2016 -17) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report on the subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity-building of IFS Cadre, including 
need for a s eparate UPSC examination for cadre, mid -career entry and in -service training and 
orientation'. 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to the Parliament on 2 August, 2016. The Action Taken 
Replies of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations conta ined in the Report were 
received on 7 April, 2017. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on 24 
August, 2017. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix -I to the 
Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on External Affairs (16 th Lok Sabha) is given at 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                   DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                      
3 January, 2017                                                                                Chairperson,                                  
13 Pausa,1939 (Saka)                                                Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twelfth Report on the 
subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity -building of IFS Cad re, including need for a 
separate UPSC examination for cadre, mid -career entry and in -service training and 
orientation' which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha 
on 2 August, 2016. 
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on 
all the 19 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 7, 8, 10, 12, 16 & 17 
 
                                                                                                                    
Total- 8 
 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 
NIL 
                                                   
Total-0 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:- 
 
Recommendation  Nos.  5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15 & 19 
           
Total- 7 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:- 
 
Recommendation  Nos.  3, 4, 9 & 18  
                                                                                                                        
Total- 4 

2 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report 
should be furnished to them at an early date. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Low strength of India’s diplomatic corps 
 
5. The Committee in their Twelfth Report had noted that t he IFS cadre is one of the 
smallest in terms of cadre strength as compared to other All India and Central Services, with 
a current sanctioned strength of 912. If we consider the total pool of diplomatic officers in 
our Missions/Posts abroad and at Headquarters including those from feeder Servi ces and 
other Ministries and Services, the country has a pool of about 2700 officers who can serve 
diplomatic functions. The size of India’s diplomatic corps is far smaller than that of China 
and Japan and about one eighth of USA’s diplomats. The Committee  had expressed their 
grave concern noting the fact  that there were only 770 IFS Officers against the sanctioned 
strength of 912. The Committee were  of the considered view that the size of India’s 
diplomatic corps is inadequate considering the tasks and cha llenges before the Ministry and 
nation. 
 
The Committee had found  that the Ministry has not been adhering to clause 6(3) of 
the Indian Foreign Service Recruitment, Cadre, Seniority and Promotion Rule, 1961 which 
lays down that the Central Government shall a t the interval of every two years re -examine 
the strength and composition of the IFS cadre. In fact, the last cadre review of the IFS was 
carried out in 2004 and it has been 12 years since a review took place. The Committee had 
felt that the Ministry must reflect a more serious attitude and prevent any further 
deterioration in the already modest numbers facing India’s diplomatic corps. The Committee 
had therefore, strongly recommended that the Ministry take urgent notice of the low strength 
of the IFS cadre as well as that of the total diplomatic corps of the country as compared to the 
strength of other prominent countries and the need for manpower augmentation to handle 
India’s growing profile and aspirations at the global stage and to initiate remedial measures at 
the earliest. To begin with, The Committee had recommended  that the Ministry fill the gap 
between the sanctioned strength and the current strength of the IFS cadre as well as that of 
other diplomatic officers through periodic cadre review as stipu lated under Service Rules. 
The Committee had further desired that the Ministry undertake the long delayed cadre review 
immediately and also ensure that in future there is no failure in conducting periodic cadre 
reviews as stipulated under the Service Rules. 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it has 
undertaken an exercise to review the cadre strength of Indian Foreign Service and 
subordinate cadres of the Ministry and a reviewed proposal on MEA Expansion Plan, ba sed 
on functional requirement of the Ministry, has been submitted to Department of Personnel & 

3 
 
Training and Department of Expenditure. Meanwhile, the Ministry is indenting for 
recruitment of IFS officers as per its requirement through UPSC. The Ministry ha s revised 
the guidelines for recruitment of Consultants from academia and private sector on contract 
basis, as per existing GOI norms. Deputation from other Ministries/ Departments and the 
Armed Forces is to continue to be a mode of recruitment in the Ministry. 
 
7. The Committee had expressed their concern over the low number of India’s 
diplomatic corps as compared to the strength of diplomats in several countries of the 
world and recommended that the Ministry take urgent remedial measures like 
conducting r egular cadre review of IFS and subordinate cadres and manpower 
augmentation considering the tasks and challenges before the Ministry. In its reply, the 
Ministry has submitted that a reviewed proposal on MEA Expansion Plan based on 
functional requirement of  the Ministry has been submitted to the Department of 
Personnel & Training (DoPT) and Department of Expenditure. Meanwhile the Ministry 
is indenting for recruitment of IFS officers as per its requirement through UPSC. The 
Ministry has also stated that it h as revised the guidelines for recruitment of consultants 
from academia/private sector and has also been taking officers on deputation from 
other Ministries/Departments and Armed Forces. The Ministry, however, has neither 
conveyed the details of the steps t aken to fill the gap between the sanctioned strength 
and the actual strength of IFS cadre nor about the outcome of the Cadre review and the 
action plan thereon. The Ministry has also failed to give any assurance about carrying 
out regular periodic cadre re view as stipulated under Service Rules. In the opinion of 
the Committee, with such a low strength of our diplomatic corps India is not able to 
exploit the true potential of its foreign policy. In short the reply of the Ministry failed to 
address the various aspects contained in the Recommendation of the Committee. While 
deprecating this inadequate response of the Ministry, the Committee desire a holistic 
reply on the matter immediately.  The Committee would also like to emphasise that all-
out efforts should  be made to augment the numbers of the diplomatic corps by 
conducting regular cadre reviews, lateral entry and broadening the recruitment net 
such as through facilitating the entry of NRIs. These reforms should all be undertaken 
in a time-bound manner.   
 
 

4 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Expansion plan of the Ministry 
 
8. The Committee had observed that the Ministry has been recruiting 30 to 35 IFS 
Officers every year by indenting these vacancies through the UPSC. In order to tide over the 
shortage of manpower, the Ministry has embarked upon an Expansion Plan covering a period 
of 10 years from 2008 to 2018 which provides for the creation of 514 posts in the Ministry. 
Till date, 309 posts have been created under the Plan after operationalization of six tranches 
which includes 187 posts of IFS and 122 posts at the staff level. However, The Committee 
had noted  that despite the Expansion Plan, the critical gap between our diplomatic 
requirements and available manpower still remains. Furthermore, with only two years left for 
the Expansion Plan to conclude, The Committee desired  that the timeline for creating the 
remaining 205 posts be strictly adhered to. The Committee had viewed the Expansion Plan as 
a beginning to plug the existing gap, but it does not factor in the emer ging requirements of 
the Ministry for which The Committee had been pressing hard through their earlier Reports 
and which will need further intake at a greater scale and speed. 
The Committee had further noted that the Ministry has started working on a long term 
successor plan to the ongoing Expansion Plan known as the Expansion Plan 2.0. Under the 
MEA Expansion Plan 2.0, the Ministry will assess its requirements in 2020, 2025 and 2030. 
For the Committee, the plan is the culmination of its exhortations to the  Ministry for 
engaging in a de novo exercise of assessing its present ava ilable manpower. The Committee 
had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry initiate the exercise of assessing its manpower 
requirements under the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 with due dil igence by factoring in diverse 
future scenarios. In view of the fact that this will entail a lengthy process of consultations and 
financial approvals, adequate planning must be invested in without delay. The Committee 
had wanted to  be apprised about the bl ueprint of the Expansion Plan 2.0 along with the 
implementation schedule. 
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that as 
recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has assessed present availability of manpower 
as well a s its requirement for personnel in the coming years and has formulated a revised 
proposal for MEA Expansion Plan which has been shared with Department of Personnel & 
Training and Department of Expenditure for their views. Since the approval beyond the sixt h 
tranche of the previous MEA Expansion Plan was not granted, it has been proposed that the 
uncreated posts of previous MEA Expansion plan be absorbed into the current plan.  
Thereafter, the proposal will be submitted to the Union Cabinet for approval. 
  
10. The Committee had analyzed the progress of the Expansion Plan of MEA 
covering a period of ten years and had observed that 205 posts were still to be created 
with hardly two years remaining. Simultaneously, a long term succession plan was also 
under consi deration.  The Ministry was asked to initiate the exercise of assessing its 
manpower requirements with due diligence under the MEA Expansion Plan by 

5 
 
factoring in diverse scenarios . The Committee understand that the Ministry has 
assessed the manpower requirement in a fresh manner and a new MEA Expansion Plan 
has been prepared and shared with the Department of Personnel & Training  (DoPT) 
and Department of Expenditure to elicit their views. While taking note of the 
prospective action on the anvil with regard t o the manpower requirement of the 
Ministry, the Committee are disappointed to note that approval beyond the sixth 
tranche of the previous MEA Expansion Plan was not granted . This has led to a 
significant 205 posts not being filled up during the ongoing pla n and getting staggered 
to the next decade. This is a situation that the Ministry of External Affairs can ill afford 
in the present human resource crunch.  Given the critica lity of the matter to the 
Ministry’s future capabilities  to fulfil the country’s dip lomatic endeavours , the 
Committee would exhort the Ministry to take up this matter at the highest level so that 
it is resolved without any further delay and without prolonging the process any further.  
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Lateral Entry from other Ministries/Departments 
 
 
11. The Committee had noted  that the ongoing Expansion Plan of the Ministry has 
provisions for lateral entry for Government of India Officers drawn from other 
Ministries/Departments and that at present 66 deputationists are working in the Ministry. The 
Committee had felt  that the Lateral Entry route is a very viable option for augmenting the 
capacity of the Ministry till it develops manpower capacity of its own. 
 
The Committee were also aware that the Ministry of External Affairs is the executing 
agency for a number of projects overseas. The Committee had recommended  that the 
Ministry should bring in more officers with experience in the field of project management to 
suitably execute and man these projects on a long -term basis. Further, The Committee had 
desired that the duration of deputation of these officers in the Ministry of External Affairs 
may be explored through consultations with the concerned Ministries/Departments and if 
required, the necessary relaxation of rules may also be obtained for their continuation beyond 
the period ordinarily permissible under the rules. 
 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs, in  its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it has 
been taking officers on deputation from other Ministries/ Departments with expe rtise in 
project monitoring and management in different sectors to fulfill the functional requirements 
of the Ministry. 
 

6 
 
13. In view of the fact that MEA is the executing agency for a number of overseas 
projects, t he Committee had specifically recommended that more officers with 
experience in the field of project management should  be brought on deputation into the 
Ministry and extension of the period of deputation  of these officers  should also be 
explored in consultation with the concerned Ministries/Depart ments. Regrettably, the 
Ministry in its reply has simply stated its recruitment policy,  without showing any 
commitment to meet the Committee ’s concerns in this regard . Such a casual approach 
on the part of the Ministry is not appreciated by the Committee a nd in future the 
Ministry should refrain from giving vague and incomplete replies. Th e Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should come out with a clear cut policy for 
bringing more officers with experience in the field of project management o n a long -
term basis and, if required in the public interest, ensure their continuation even after 
relaxing the rules and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Enhancing the number of consultants and their role  
 
 
14. The present gap b etween existing manpower resources and actual requirements is a 
matter of serious concern for the Committee. Though the present cadre of the Ministry is 
intellectually endowed to fulfill their diplomatic responsibilities, The Committee had felt that 
it may still be sufficiently supplemented by bringing in more talent from the private sector 
and academia. The Committee were  pleased to note that the Ministry has now started 
recruiting people from outside government and nine people from the academic world are 
likely to be contracted by the Ministry. The Committee had recommended  that the Ministry 
should encourage hiring more experts from academia and the private sector and that their 
deployment should be spread out through important Divisions. These experts may  be picked 
from diverse specific fields such as area studies, foreign languages, public relations, nuclear 
energy, international law, environmental studies, climatology, trade & commerce, security, 
etc. and their terms of employment and remuneration should  be competitive in order to 
attract the best talent in the market. In this regard, the Committee  had also desired that the 
Ministry of External Affairs explore the possibility of recruiting eminent scholars into 
Foreign Service, from amongst those who comp lete their studies abroad on scholarship for 
higher studies. 
 
The Committee had felt  that there may be times when specialized expertise is 
required on various issues and in -house support for this may not be available with the 
Ministry. In order to make up for shortfalls, the Committee had strongly recommend ed that 
the role of consultants be suitably enhanced to increase the information base and expertise of 

7 
 
the Ministry in handling emerging and challenging issues in the field of geopolitics, 
environmental/commercial diplomacy.  
15. In its reply, t he Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the Ministry presently 
engages consultants including professionals with several years of experience, experts from 
private sector and academia and legal experts in key areas of functioning of the Ministry such 
as project management, bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, international law, consular and 
disarmament related work. 
 
 
16. Much like some other  Recommendations, the Ministry in its reply has merely 
restated the facts about the engagement of consultants in the Ministry which are 
already in the knowledge of the Committee. The Ministry has not mentioned anything 
about the specific steps to be taken to enhance the role of consultants with a view to 
increasing the information base and expertise of the Ministry in handling emerging and 
challenging issues in the field of geopolitics, environmental or commercial diplomacy. 
The Ministry is also  completely silent on the matter of exploring the possibility of 
recruiting emine nt scholars into Foreign Service , including  from amongst those who 
complete their higher studies abroad on scholarship . The Committee find the reticence 
of the Ministry on these very important issues disturbing and desire  that the role of 
consultants should be enhanced by encouraging hiring of experts from varied specific 
fields and deploying them in all important divisions of the Ministry as recommended by 
the Committee. 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Training budget 
 
17. The Committee had noted that the Minist ry has received an unchanged budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 8.53 crores for training during the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. The 
Committee were constrained to note that in spite of according high priority to training and 
capacity building in principle,  the Ministry has not been able to utilize even the full 
allocation earmarked under this heading during the last three years, as the actual expenditure 
was Rs. 6.42 crores, Rs. 6.27 crores and Rs. 6.82 crores respectively. Such a poor 
expenditure pattern d oes not augur well for our ambitious programmes for training and 
capacity building lined up by the Ministry. The Committee were of the view that the training 
budget of the Ministry is already meagre and underutilization of this existing budget further 
undermines capacity addition at the Ministry. The Committee were not convinced by the 
arguments put forth by the Ministry that it has resorted to certain cost cutting and innovative 
measures for training. Even with the rationalization of training modules, the Committee 

8 
 
would have found it more prudent, had the Ministry conducted some additional courses or 
brought in some good resources for capacity building, rather than keeping the allocated 
money unspent. The Committee  had, therefore, recommend ed that the Mini stry take 
necessary measures to fully utilize their budgetary allocations for improving capacity, status 
and the performance of the Institute. 
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that FSI has 
taken note of the recom mendation of the Committee to enhance u tilization of the allotted 
funds. 
 
19. While noting the underutilization of the budget for training purposes  by the 
Ministry, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry  should take necessary 
measures to fully uti lize its budgetary allocations in order to  improve its capacity, as 
well as to enhance the  status and the performance of Foreign Service Institute (FSI). 
However, the Ministry in its reply has merely stated that the Recommendation has been 
noted to enhance utilization of the allotted funds and it has failed to provide the details 
of any tangible steps taken in th at direction. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should undertake specific measures  to ensure that the budget allocation for training 
does not go unspent and it is utilized for improving capacity, status and the 
performance of FSI. The Committee should be apprised of the results of the efforts 
made by the Ministry in this context at the earliest.   
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Imparting English language training to IFS Officer Trainees 
 
 
20. The Foreign Service Institute provides training to IFS Officers at both post 
recruitment and mid -career levels. The initial training and orientation of new recruits to the 
IFS is crucial for grooming them into futu re diplomats and to accordingly equip them with 
the necessary skill sets. Newly recruited IFS Officers have a three month foundation course 
at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy for Administration (LBSNAA), nine months’ 
training at FSI and a three mo nth or longer desk attachment in the Ministry before 
proceeding abroad for language training. The training at FSI consists of basic skills, 
diplomatic training and attachments outside FSI. Considering the relatively short period of 
nine months which is ava ilable at the FSI, the Officer Trainees (OTs) ought to be imparted 
intensive training on a wide variety of aspects related to their future role as career diplomats. 
The Committee had desired  that the training module be revisited and updated periodically, 
guided by the best practices in diplomatic training worldwide. The Committee were given to 
understand that the Ministry was working to upgrade training for all categories of officials in 
consultation with all stakeholders, which would be ready before starting the training for 2016 

9 
 
batch of the IFS. The Committee had desired  the Ministry to do the needful without any 
delay, under intimation to them.  
Today English has emerged as the lingua franca of international diplomacy and 
naturally, a lot of emphasis sho uld be placed on developing communicative skills in English 
language. While the expansion of recruitment to less conventional segments of society has 
broadened the bases of the IFS and created a diplomatic corps that more truly represents the 
social diversity of India than in the past, this aspect has been neglected. The Committee had 
observed that many IFS trainees are usually equipped only with an average English language 
proficiency and lack oral fluency and, in some cases, written communication skills. During 
deliberations, the Foreign Secretary acknowledged that the Ministry has not focused on it so 
far, but there are certain challenges which require attention. The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that adequate measures for imparting written and or al English language 
proficiency particularly for Officer Trainees hailing from non-English backgrounds should be 
initiated at the earliest.  
 
21. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs  has stated that training in 
English language is im parted to IFS Officer Trainees who require such classes, as part of 
their induction training.  
 
22. On the basis of information given by the Ministry that it was working to 
upgrade the training for all categories in consultation with all the stakeholders, the 
Committee had asked the Ministry to take necessary action without any delay. But in its 
reply, the Ministry is silent on the status of the upgradation process and its 
implementation. T he Committee were categorical  in pointing out that adequate 
measures ought to be taken  to impart written and oral English proficiency to the 
Officer Trainees hailing from non -English-speaking backgrounds. However, the reply 
of the Ministry simply states the provision for such remedial training being available on 
demand. Ha d the results from existing practices been satisfactory, it would not have 
spurred the Foreign Secretary to acknowledge that the issue require d some attention. 
The Committee  can infer that the current pattern of imparting English language 
training to Offic er Trainees is not yielding desired results . It is inexplicable how this 
reply, which is contrary to the stand taken before the Committee during their 
examination, has now been submitted by the Ministry. The Committee , therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should apprise the Committee about the status of upgradation 
of the training process for all the categories and also seriously introspect on the 

10 
 
shortcomings of English language proficiency among the Officer trainees and the extent 
to which this handicaps our diplomatic corps in the performance of its duties.  
  
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Enhancing the scope of training 
 
23. The Committee observed that the Ministry ha d modified its training programme by 
adopting a new Training Framework (TF) in 2013 which incor porates and formalizes many 
incremental changes brought in training content and methodology over the years. Various 
changes have been, made in the training methods which now incorporate on -site Mid-career 
Training Programme (MCTP) phase II, Non -mandatory t raining, linking of training to 
postings abroad, providing training at all levels and cadres etc. While the Ministry has 
changed the basic architecture of training by adopting a new framework, issues related to the 
quality of young officers are still debat able. The Ministry has consistently argued that even 
when there is an imperfect recruitment system, flaws can be evened out through proper 
training of new recruits. On the contrary, The Committee were  of the view that even when 
the Ministry has maintained that it has enriched the training modules of the OTs in recent 
years, the quality of a number of our young officers is still unsatisfactory. While we still 
grapple with the issue of improving the recruitment system for new Officers, the Ministry 
must intro spect about existing shortcomings in the training structure and ways to rectify 
them. During deliberations, the Committee were apprised that candidates from a wide variety 
of socio -economic and educational backgrounds are now joining the IFS. Some of these  
candidates have held previous employment before joining the IFS. Therefore, there is a need 
to modify the training programme depending on the background of the candidates involved 
so that the best in them can be brought out in their future careers as dipl omats. The 
Committee had suggested  that the Ministry initiate a system of differentiated training and 
evaluation wherein the focus should be on individual officers, achieving a benchmark in 
identified fields through more personalized interventions. The tra ining needs would vary 
according to the pre-existing skill sets of individual OTs.  
 
Social media has emerged as a viable platform for the dissemination and sharing of 
information. Therefore, the Committee had recommended that training modules in the field  
of social media should be designed by the Ministry and that all officers be trained on the 
nuances of using it in public diplomacy and for promotion of India’s international objectives. 
 
24. The Ministry of External Affairs,  has stated in its  Action Taken Reply that training 
programmes for officers at all levels are customized as per requirement of the Ministry and 
are constantly evaluated.  
 
25. In their Recommendation, the Committee had advocated a system of 
differentiated training and evaluation, taking  into account the varied requirements and 
skill sets of the trainees. The Ministry in its reply has maintained that training 

11 
 
programmes for officers at all levels are customized as per requirement of the Ministry. 
There seems to be a contradiction between what was recommended by the Committee 
and the explanation given by the Ministry reiterating the current training practices. If 
the Ministry was not amenable to the ideas enunciated by the Committee, it could have 
given some sound reasons in defence of the current training practices. The Committee 
strongly feel the need for customized training not only in relation to the requirements of 
the Ministry but also to improve the pre -existing skill sets of individual officer trainees. 
Further, the Committee had also suggested that the Ministry design training modules in 
the field of social media. The Ministry has once again failed to show any credible action 
taken in this regard. Therefore, the Committee deprecate this cavalier approach 
towards their Recommendations  and reiterate that a training module in the field of 
social media is imperative for the IFS officers to be well versed in the art of tapping 
social media for diplomacy and this should be worked out without delay.  
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Language proficiency 
 
26. The Committee had felt  that proficiency in a foreign language is integral to the role 
and responsibility of a diplomat and no Foreign Service establishment can work without a 
substantial number of diverse foreign language speakers within its rank s. The Ministry has a 
provision for imparting foreign language training to Officer Trainees (OT) and their 
confirmation in service depends on passing the compulsory Foreign Language examination 
conducted by the School of Foreign Languages. There is also a provision for IFS Officers to 
learn an additional language during the course of their career which is known as Optional 
Foreign Language (OFL). The Committee were constrained to note that the linguistic base of 
India’s diplomats is largely limited to the f ive UN languages only and roughly 35 percent of 
the Officers posted abroad are serving in their respective language zones. Moreover, out of 
around 770 IFS Officers in service, the number of Officers with proficiency in a foreign 
language is only 569. It may easily be inferred that around 200 IFS Officers are not equipped 
with any of foreign language and the Committee were disappointed by this dismal state of 
affairs. There is considerable anecdotal evidence of Indian Ambassadors in Arabic -speaking 
countries being handicapped by their lack of knowledge of Arabic, and similar examples in a 
variety of countries, Indian diplomats being unable to appear on television discussions in the 
countries to which they are accredited because of a lack of fluency in the loc al language, and 
so on. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry take urgent measures to 
conduct an assessment of current language needs and enhance the linguistic base of the 
Ministry by providing intensive foreign language training and periodic refresher courses. The 
Ministry should also ensure that there are no IFS Officers without training and proficiency in 
foreign languages, at a level that permits them to function effectively in the countries where 

12 
 
that language is spoken. In view of the low alignment of foreign postings with the language 
proficiency, The Committee had desired  that a policy that mandates to aligning at least 50 
percent of the postings with foreign languages should be initiated by the Ministry. The 
Committee had also strongly recommended that, where it is necessary to assign an officer to 
a country whose language he or she does not know, an intensive one -month training should 
be provided to the officer in the language, culture, society, customs and political situation  of 
the country of posting before he/she is posted abroad. 
 
27. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that in order to 
further widen the pool of officers trained in foreign languages, the Ministry has started 
imparting tra ining in Compulsory Foreign Language to all officers of IFS Branch B 
promoted to IFS, as per provisions of Rule (19) (1) of Indian Foreign Service (Recruitment, 
Cadre, Seniority & Promotion) Rules, 1961.  IFS officers are also undergoing training at 
interpreter level in major foreign languages. In addition, the Ministry provides for 
undertaking periodic refresher courses for officers who go back to their language stations. 
Periodic foreign language classes are held in Missions/Posts for officer and official s of all 
levels to familiarize them with language spoken in their country of posting. 
 
 
28.  While observing the unsatisfactory levels of proficiency of IFS Officers in 
foreign languages, the Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry take 
urgent measures to conduct an assessment of current language needs and enhance the 
language base of Ministry by providing foreign language training and periodic 
refresher courses. But the Ministry has once again given a vague and incomplete reply 
and failed to p roperly take the Committee’s Recommendations into account. The 
Ministry has enumerated some of the steps taken to improve language proficiency 
amongst its officers viz. imparting foreign language training to IFS promotees, 
imparting interpreter level train ing, offering some refresher courses and holding 
periodic foreign language classes in Missions/Posts. The remedial steps listed by the 
Ministry are general in nature and do not meet the Recommendation of the Committee. 
In their Recommendation, the Committe e were very categorical in asking the Ministry 
to undertake an assessment of current language needs, ensuring that there is no IFS 
officer without training in a particular foreign language, aligning at least 50 percent of 
the postings with foreign language s, providing urgent remedial training for diplomats 
assigned to countries other than those of their language specialisation, etc. The Ministry 
has not taken even a single step in this direction and the Committee have no choice but 
to decry the casualness w ith which Ministry has been taking the Committee’s 

13 
 
Recommendations. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take 
earnest action as enumerated above in order to improve the overall language 
proficiency of IFS cadre and apprise the Committee about the same.  
 
 
(Recommendation No.15) 
Interpreter’s cadre 
29. The Committee were  constrained to note that the Interpreter cadre of the Ministry is 
limited to just 33 personnel covering seven languages. The Committee were not able to find 
any justification for the gross understaffing of such a critical department of the Ministry at a 
time when the country is poised to make a giant leap ahead through enhanced global 
engagements and higher number of foreign visits by dignitaries. More often than not, the  
work of the Ministry is classified in nature and therefore, it leaves no ground for overreliance 
on hired interpreters/translators. The Ministry ha d informed the Committee that language 
skill of many IFS officers are being used professionally. The Committee had in the past taken 
exception to the arrangement of IFS officers playing the role of interpreters as it 
compromises the actual performance of our officers as well as the job of interpretation. 
Therefore, the Committee had strongly recommend ed that the  interpreter’s cadre in the 
Ministry should be strengthened significantly by increasing manpower and simultaneously 
investing in their capacity building programme. 
 
30. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply , has stated that Ministry 
has initiated action to send officers of the interpreters’ cadre for short -term courses to 
upgrade their language skills and long -term courses for upgrading interpretation skills to 
international institutions of repute. Ministry’s experience with IFS office rs as trained 
interpreters in Chinese language has been positive. Hence, the Ministry is of the view that 
imparting high level training to IFS officers in important foreign languages is in the overall 
interest of the Ministry and the Government.  
 
31. The Committee were perturbed to learn that the interpreters’ cadre in the MEA 
was grossly understaffed and had recommended to strengthen it by increasing the 
manpower and capacity building programme. For capacity building of the cadre the 
Ministry has taken so me steps but no  step has been taken on the Committee’s 
Recommendation to augment its manpower. The Committee have a clear view that i f 
the cadre remains understaffed then nothing concrete will come out of upgrading their 
skills intensively. At this junctur e a sufficient number of interpret ers is required who 
can be extensively deployed at various locations. It is, therefore, imperative that an 

14 
 
adequate number of personnel is appointed at these levels. The deployment of IFS 
officers as interpreters can at best serve as a stop gap arrangement.  
 
(Recommendation No.19) 
Ambassadorial postings 
 
32. The Committee had observed that the Ambassadorial appointments are not being 
made through a designated body unlike other foreign postings of the Ministry, which are 
handled through the Foreign Service Board. Moreover, there are delays in appointment and 
in the absence of a designated policy for appointment of Ambassadors and High 
Commissioners; they are done with the approval of the Hon'ble President in keeping with 
India's priorities, requirements in a particular Diplomatic Mission and overall suitability of 
the Officer, including experience, seniority, regional and professional expertise. The 
Committee were  concerned to note that the space for non -career ambassadors ha s 
considerably shrunk and at present there are only two non -career Ambassadors whereas in 
the past there had been a number of highly illustrious Ambassadors who were not drawn 
from the IFS and who served their posts with distinction. The Committee were  of the 
considered view that more eminent persons who have excelled in the field of community 
affairs, Diaspora issues, Foreign Policy, area studies, literature, journalism, etc. should be 
considered for appointments as Ambassadors/High Commissioners. There is  an urgent need 
to import diversity into the appointment of Ambassadors to bring it in consonance with 
India's rapidly rising profile globally and for suitably projecting our foreign policy interests. 
The Committee had also recommended that the appointment  of Ambassadors be made 
through a designated body with representation of non - official experts as well. Furthermore, 
The Committee had desired  that knowledge of the local language of the country of 
accreditation should be made a desirable qualification for  being appointed Ambassador 
there. 
 
33. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply , has stated that 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted. However, this is beyond the mandate of 
the Ministry.  
 
34. In response to  the Committee’s Recommendation on the appointment of  non-
carrier  Ambassadors and High Commissioners, the Ministry has replied that the same 
has been noted. Simultaneously, it has also been stated that this is beyond the mandate 
of the Ministry. The Committee are of the fi rm opinion that appointment of 
Ambassadors and High Commissioners should either be made by, or based on 
recommendations by the MEA and that it is therefore the Ministry’s responsibility to 

15 
 
evolve a coherent selection  policy for these appointments. Therefor e, the Committee 
strongly reiterate that the Government should take credible action  to consider eminent 
persons outside the Foreign Service  for such appointments . Where such appointments 
go beyond its mandate, the Ministry should discuss the instant Recomm endation with 
the competent authority for the purpose, so that a decision on the Recommendation of 
the Committee does not remain in limbo due to jurisdiction issues.  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
The Indian Foreign Service is our dedicated diplomatic service representing India at 
various international fora. The IFS cadre is one of the smallest in terms of cadre strength as 
compared to other All India and Central Services, with a c urrent sanctioned strength of 912. 
If we consider the total pool of diplomatic officers in our Missions/Posts abroad and at 
Headquarters including those from feeder Services and other Ministries and Services, the 
country has a pool of about 2700 officers w ho can serve diplomatic functions. The size of 
India’s diplomatic corps is far smaller than that of China and Japan and about one eighth of 
USA’s diplomats. It is a matter of grave concern for the Committee that there are only 770 
IFS Officers against the sanctioned strength of 912. The Committee were of the considered 
view that the size of India’s diplomatic corps is inadequate considering the tasks and 
challenges before the Ministry and nation. 
 
The Committee find that the Ministry has not been adhering t o clause 6(3) of the 
Indian Foreign Service Recruitment, Cadre, Seniority and Promotion Rule, 1961 which lays 
down that the Central Government shall at the interval of every two years re -examine the 
strength and composition of the IFS cadre. In fact, the l ast cadre review of the IFS was 
carried out in 2004 and it has been 12 years since a review took place. The Committee had 
felt that the Ministry must reflect a more serious attitude and prevent any further 
deterioration in the already modest numbers facing India’s diplomatic corps. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry take urgent notice of the low strength of the 
IFS cadre as well as that of the total diplomatic corps of the country as compared to the 
strength of other prominent co untries and the need for manpower augmentation to handle 
India’s growing profile and aspirations at the global stage and to initiate remedial measures at 
the earliest. To begin with, The Committee recommend that the Ministry fill the gap between 
the sancti oned strength and the current strength of the IFS cadre as well as that of other 
diplomatic officers through periodic cadre review as stipulated under Service Rules. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry undertake the long delayed cadre review 
immediately and also ensure that in future there is no failure in conducting periodic cadre 
reviews as stipulated under the Service Rules. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has undertaken an exercise to review the cadre strength of Indian Foreign 
Service and subordinate cadres of the Ministry and a reviewed proposal on MEA Expansion 
Plan, based on functional requirement of the Ministry, has been submitted to Department of 
Personnel & Training and Department of Expenditure. Meanwhile, the Ministry is inden ting 
for recruitment of IFS officers as per its requirement through UPSC. The Ministry has 
revised the guidelines for recruitment of Consultants from academia and private sector on 
contract basis, as per existing GOI norms. Deputation from other Ministries / Departments 
and the Armed Forces is to continue to be a mode of recruitment in the Ministry. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 

17 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry has been recruiting 30 to 35 IFS Officers 
every year by indenting these vacancies through the UPSC. In order to tide over the shortage 
of manpower, the Ministry has embarked upon an Expansion Plan covering a period of 10 
years from 2008 to 2018 which provides for the creation of 514 posts in the Ministry. Till 
date, 3 09 posts have been created under the Plan after operationalization of six tranches 
which includes 187 posts of IFS and 122 posts at the staff level. However, The Committee 
had noted that despite the Expansion Plan, the critical gap between our diplomatic 
requirements and available manpower still remains. Furthermore, with only two years left for 
the Expansion Plan to conclude, The Committee desire that the timeline for creating the 
remaining 205 posts be strictly adhered to. The Committee viewthe Expansion Plan as a 
beginning to plug the existing gap, but it does not factor in the emerging requirements of the 
Ministry for which The Committee have been pressing hard through their earlier Reports and 
which will need further intake at a greater scale and speed. 
 
The Committee further note that the Ministry has started working on a long term 
successor plan to the ongoing Expansion Plan known as the Expansion Plan 2.0. Under the 
MEA Expansion Plan 2.0, the Ministry will assess its requirements in 2020, 2025 and 20 30. 
For the Committee, the plan is the culmination of its exhortations to the Ministry for 
engaging in a de novo exercise of assessing its present available manpower. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry initiate the exercise of assessing its manpower 
requirements under the MEA Expansion Plan 2.0 with due diligence by factoring in diverse 
future scenarios. In view of the fact that this will entail a lengthy process of consultations and 
financial approvals, adequate planning must be invested  in without delay. The Committee 
want to be apprised about the blueprint of the Expansion Plan 2.0 along with the 
implementation schedule. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has assessed present availability of 
manpower as well as its requirement for personnel in the coming years and has formulated a 
revised proposal for MEA Expansion Plan which has been shared with Department of 
Personnel & Training and Department of Expenditure for their views. Since the approval 
beyond the sixth tranche of the previous MEA Expansion Plan was not granted, it has been 
proposed that the uncreated posts of previous MEA Expansion plan be absorbed into the 
current plan. Thereafter, the proposal will be submitted to the Union Cabinet for approval.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 

18 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 The Committee feel that a well -trained local cadre is vital for enhancing the 
efficiency of Missions/Posts as they are familiar with local conditions, language and customs. 
The cost of hiring  is the local cadre much lower than an India -based employee. The 
Committee are pleased to note that at present around 2,200 local employees work in India’s 
various Missions/Posts abroad and strengthening of the local cadre has been an integral part 
of the Ministry’s Expansion Plan 2.0. However, the Committee are also aware that they 
cannot substitute for the regular diplomatic staff in being responsible for our foreign policy 
interests and in terms of maintaining confidentiality in official matters. The Com mittee 
would, therefore, recommend that keeping in view the diplomatic sensitivities involved, the 
role of the local cadre should be confined to manning the service delivery arms of various 
Missions/Posts except in exceptional circumstances. The Committee would further desire 
that a concrete policy guideline for hiring the local cadre, meeting their training needs and 
making provisions for appropriate wages should be worked upon by the Ministry at the 
earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Local staffs in Miss ions and Posts abroad are engaged in service delivery arms including 
consular, passport, visa, trade promotion, cultural cooperation related activities. Recruitment 
policy, pay scales and training needs of local cadre are continuously evaluated and revised  as 
per the requirement of the Ministry and in keeping with the local conditions where the 
Missions/ Posts are located.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
The feeder cadre which includes Under Secretaries, Section Officers, Private Se cretaries, 
Assistants, Cipher Assistants, Personal Assistants, Stenographers, UDCs and LDCs comprise 
a major part of the human resources of the Ministry. They are the backbone of the Ministry in 
terms of carrying out miscellaneous tasks and The Committee h ad found it imperative that 
there should be a well laid out and properly implemented promotion policy for them. At 
present, upto 22.5 percent of the posts in IFS (A) are being filled by the members of IFS (B) 
through induction/promotion as part of the MEA Expansion Plan. Accordingly, 12 posts have 
been identified for departmental promotions from the feeder cadre within the Ministry every 
year. In this respect, the Committee would desire that promotional avenues for the feeder 
cadre should be further broaden ed for ensuring seamless career growth and as a means of 
tapping the full human resources potential available. The Committee would also recommend 
that the timeline for filling up the posts through promotions be strictly adhered to. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry attaches utmost priority to promotional aspirations of feeder cadres, for 
proper utilization of human resources available to the Ministry. Promotions are carried out in 
timely manner following the due procedure. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 

19 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has received an unchanged budgetary allocation of Rs. 
8.53 crores for training during the years 2012 -13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. The Committee are 
constrained to note that in spite of according high priority to training and capacity building in 
principle, the Ministry has not been able to utilize even the full allocation earmarked under 
this heading during the last three years, as the actual expenditure was Rs. 6.42 crores, Rs. 
6.27 crores and R s. 6.82 crores respectively. Such a poor expenditure pattern does not augur 
well for our ambitious programmes for training and capacity building lined up by the 
Ministry. The Committee are of the view that the training budget of the Ministry is already 
meagre and underutilization of this existing budget further undermines capacity addition at 
the Ministry. The Committee are not convinced by the arguments put forth by the Ministry 
that it has resorted to certain cost cutting and innovative measures for train ing. Even with the 
rationalization of training modules, the Committee would have found it more prudent, had 
the Ministry conducted some additional courses or brought in some good resources for 
capacity building, rather than keeping the allocated money unsp ent. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry take necessary measures to fully utilize their 
budgetary allocations for improving capacity, status and the performance of the Institute. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
FSI has taken note of the recomme ndation of the Committee to enhance utilization the 
allotted funds.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
The Committee consider training an important aspect of capacity building for any 
organization and that it should be imparted to al l our IFS personnel. The Committee were 
pleased to note that training has become a regular feature of not only IFS Officers, but other 
cadres of the Ministry as well. At present, training courses of varying durations are 
conducted for promotees to IFS (A),  various cadres of IFS (B), multi -tasking
 Staff/chauffeurs, deputationists from other Ministries/Departments, Officials of the 
Central Passport Organization (CPO) and local staff. Regretfully, The Committee had noted, 
however, that there is no provision fo r training Officials/Staff of the Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR), the Cultural Diplomacy arm of the Ministry. The Committee were 
of the opinion that the ICCR being at the vanguard of our cultural diplomacy, it should be 
ensured that opportunities for training are made available to its officials/staff. The Committee 
had, therefore, strongly recommended that urgent steps should be taken to impart training to 
personnel of the ICCR on a regular basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This recommendation is noted for implementation.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
 

20 
 
(Recommendation No.16) 
The Committee are  concerned at the deterioration in the quality of recruits to the Indian 
Foreign Service. This is happening at a time when the lure and appeal of the C ivil Services 
Examination has increased tremendously and the number  of applications is rising steadily. 
The Committee  observe that in the past, only the  candidates  who  were  able  to  secure  the  
highest  ranks  in  the  Civil  Services Examination we re able to  enter the IFS. It has come 
as a matter of  surprise to the Committee  that  today  even  low  ranked  candidates  are  
able  to  enter  the  IFS.  This development is both a symptom and a reason for the erosion 
of prestige in the IFS. The  Comm ittee  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  IFS  being  the  
premier  service  of  the country and  its  officers  being  responsible  for  handling  multiple  
responsibilities  of diplomacy, it is imperative that only the best candidates are selected from 
a wide pool of human resource available in the country. No. doubt, the relative charm of the 
IFS has waned with the increased accessibility of foreign travel in recent years and the 
Ministry  has  acknowledged  that  people  in  the  top  10  may  not  neces sarily  opt  for 
Indian Foreign Service. In fact, the IFS toppers in 2014 and 2015 were ranked 24th and 
14th, respectively in the overall CSE merit list. Similarly, the last person to have made it to 
the IFS from the General/Unreserved category was ranked 114th in the CSE, 2015. The 
Committee are not fully convinced by the arguments of the Ministry that the present system 
of recruiting officers to the IFS through CSE is yielding suitable well qualified candidates 
who could be nurtured to be successful offic ers through proper training. The Committee 
have already made their view clear on the issue of recruitment in the preceding chapters and 
they would like the Ministry to be open -minded about the quality of recruits. The argument 
that rising uncertainties of living abroad and other extraneous factors prevent top rankers 
from opting for the IFS are not convincing. The Committee would desire that the Ministry 
look into the reasons for the ebbing stock of IFS vis-a-vis other services. Accordingly, 
urgent steps should be initiated to make the IFS more attractive and remunerative as a career 
choice for Civil Service aspirants. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry is constantly upgrading its training policy to match the requirement of the new 
recruits and also sensiti zing senior officers including the Heads of Missions, to mentor the 
new recruits to enable them to match the high standards required in the Service.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No.17) 
 The field of diplomacy is witnessing important e merging areas like economic, 
commercial, political, cultural, and environmental diplomacy, all of which are gaining rapid 
currency. The nature of global engagements has undergone a sea change and there is today an 
added emphasis on trade and investment, mu ltilateral economic relations, developmental 
partnership, etc. Besides, there is a need for calibrated responses to new global challenges 
like disarmament, climate change, counter-terrorism, cyber security, etc. The Committee find 
it imperative for the Ministry to augment capacity in the relevant fields without disturbing the 
existing equilibrium between the domain experts and generalists. This is a very old debate in 

21 
 
Public Administration and Human Resource Management which is unlikely to be resolved at 
this juncture. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the Ministry should suitable 
enhance the scope of mid -career training to equip officers to develop expertise in specific 
fields based on their educational background. It is inevitable that a cer tain amount of 
specialization would emerge but it would not be a prudent idea in the Committee’s view to 
confine officers to a particular domain rotated to ensure a wider pool of officers with a 
certain amount of specialized domain knowledge instead of exc lusive specialization. As a 
means to achieve this, IFS officers should be incentivized by providing additional increment 
for research work on relevant subjects related to diplomacy, trade & commerce, international 
relations, disarmament, energy security, climate change, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry encourages functional specialisation in areas of economic, commercial, 
technology, disarmament and security related issues. Opportunities are provided from time to 
time to officers to undergo specia lised short term courses in reputed institutions in India and 
abroad. This has also been built into the posting policy of the Ministry wherein IFS officers 
are posted to stations where they could develop domain expertise in these areas. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 

22 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
NIL 

23 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
The Committee note that the ongoing Expansion Plan of the Ministry has provisions 
for lateral entry for Government of India Officers drawn from other Ministries/Departments 
and that at present 66 deputationists are working in the Ministry. The Committee feel that the 
Lateral Entry route is a very viable option for augmenting the capacity of the Ministry till it 
develops manpower capacity of its own. 
 
The Committee are also aware that the Ministry of External Affairs is the executing 
agency for a number of projects overseas. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should bring in more officers with experience in the field of project management to suitably 
execute and man these projects on a long -term basis. Further, The Committee desire tha t the 
duration of deputation of these officers in the Ministry of External Affairs may be explored 
through consultations with the concerned Ministries/Departments and if required, the 
necessary relaxation of rules may also be obtained for their continuatio n beyond the period 
ordinarily permissible under the rules. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Ministry has been taking officers on deputation from other Ministries/ Departments with 
expertise in project monitoring and management in different sectors to fulfill t he functional 
requirements of the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
The present gap between existing manpower resources and actual requirements is a 
matter of serious concern for the Committee. Though the present cadre of the Ministry is 
intellectually endowed to fulfill their diplomatic responsibilities, the Committee feel that it 
may still be sufficiently supplemented by bringing in more talent from the private sector and 
academia. The Committee are pleased to note that t he Ministry has now started recruiting 
people from outside government and nine people from the academic world are likely to be 
contracted by the Ministry. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should encourage 
hiring more experts from academia and the private sector and that their deployment should be 
spread out through important Divisions. These experts may be picked from diverse specific 
fields such as area studies, foreign languages, public relations, nuclear energy, international 
law, environmental studies, climatology, trade & commerce, security, etc. and their terms of 
employment and remuneration should be competitive in order to attract the best talent in the 
market. In this regard, the Committee also desire that the Ministry of External Affairs explore 

24 
 
the possibility of recruiting eminent scholars into Foreign Service, from amongst those who 
complete their studies abroad on scholarship for higher studies. 
 
The Committee feel that there may be times when specialized expertise is required on 
various issues and in -house support for this may not be available with the Ministry. In order 
to make up for shortfalls, the Committee would strongly recommend that the role of 
consultants be suitably enhanced to increase the information base and expertise of th e 
Ministry in handling emerging and challenging issues in the field of geopolitics, 
environmental/commercial diplomacy.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry presently engages consultants including professionals with several years 
of experience, experts  from private sector and academia and legal experts in key areas of 
functioning of the Ministry such as project management, bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, 
international law, consular and disarmament related work. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 
The Foreign Service Institute provides training to IFS Officers at both post 
recruitment and mid -career levels. The initial training and orientation of new recruits to the 
IFS is crucial for grooming them into future diplomats and to  accordingly equip them with 
the necessary skill sets. Newly recruited IFS Officers have a three month foundation course 
at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy for Administration (LBSNAA), nine months’ 
training at FSI and a three month or longer desk attachment in the Ministry before 
proceeding abroad for language training. The training at FSI consists of basic skills, 
diplomatic training and attachments outside FSI. Considering the relatively short period of 
nine months which is available at the FSI, the Officer Trainees (OTs) ought to be imparted 
intensive training on a wide variety of aspects related to their future role as career diplomats. 
The Committee desire that the training module be revisited and updated periodically, guided 
by the best practi ces in diplomatic training worldwide. The Committee are given to 
understand that the Ministry is working to upgrade training for all categories of officials in 
consultation with all stakeholders, which would be ready before starting the training for 2016 
batch of the IFS. The Committee desire the Ministry to do the needful without any delay, 
under intimation to them.  
 
Today English has emerged as the lingua franca  of international diplomacy and 
naturally, a lot of emphasis should be placed on developing co mmunicative skills in English 
language. While the expansion of recruitment to less conventional segments of society has 
broadened the bases of the IFS and created a diplomatic corps that more truly represents the 
social diversity of India than in the past,  this aspect has been neglected. The Committee 
observe that many IFS trainees are usually equipped only with an average English language 
proficiency and lack oral fluency and, in some cases, written communication skills. During 

25 
 
deliberations, the Foreign S ecretary acknowledged that the Ministry has not focused on it so 
far, but there are certain challenges which require attention. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that adequate measures for imparting written and oral English language 
proficiency particularly for Officer Trainees hailing from non-English backgrounds should be 
initiated at the earliest.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Training in English language is imparted to IFS Officer Trainees who require such classes, as 
part of their induction training.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry has modified its training programme by 
adopting a new Training Framework (TF) in 2013 which incorporates and formalizes many 
incremental changes brought in training content and methodology over the years. Various 
changes have been, made in the training methods which now incorporate on -site Mid-career 
Training Programme (MCTP) phase II, Non -mandatory training, linking of training to 
postings abroad, providing training at all levels and cadres etc. While the Ministry has 
changed the basic architecture of training by adopting a new framework, issues related to the 
quality of young officers are still debatable. The Ministry has consistently argued that even 
when t here is an imperfect recruitment system, flaws can be evened out through proper 
training of new recruits. On the contrary, The Committee are of the view that even when the 
Ministry has maintained that it has enriched the training modules of the OTs in rece nt years, 
the quality of a number of our young officers is still unsatisfactory. While we still grapple 
with the issue of improving the recruitment system for new Officers, the Ministry must 
introspect about existing shortcomings in the training structure and ways to rectify them. 
During deliberations, the Committee are apprised that candidates from a wide variety of 
socio-economic and educational backgrounds are now joining the IFS. Some of these 
candidates have held previous employment before joining the IFS. Therefore, there is a need 
to modify the training programme depending on the background of the candidates involved 
so that the best in them can be brought out in their future careers as diplomats. The 
Committee suggest that the Ministry initiate a sys tem of differentiated training and 
evaluation wherein the focus should be on individual officers, achieving a benchmark in 
identified fields through more personalized interventions. The training needs would vary 
according to the pre-existing skill sets of individual OTs. 
Social media has emerged as a viable platform for the dissemination and sharing of 
information. Therefore, the Committee recommend that training modules in the field of 
social media should be designed by the Ministry and that all officers b e trained on the 
nuances of using it in public diplomacy and for promotion of India’s international objectives. 
 
 
 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Training programmes for officers at all levels are customized as per requirement of the 
Ministry and are constantly evaluated.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
The Committee feel that proficiency in a foreign language is integral to the role and 
responsibility of a diplomat and no Foreign Service establishment can work without a 
substantial number of diverse foreign language speakers within its ranks.  
 
The Ministry has a provision for imparting foreign language training to Officer 
Trainees (OT) and their confirmation in service depends on passing the compulsory Foreign 
Language examination co nducted by the School of Foreign Languages. There is also a 
provision for IFS Officers to learn an additional language during the course of their career 
which is known as Optional Foreign Language (OFL). The Committee are constrained to 
note that the lingu istic base of India’s diplomats is largely limited to the five UN languages 
only and roughly 35 percent of the Officers posted abroad are serving in their respective 
language zones. Moreover, out of around 770 IFS Officers in service, the number of Officer s 
with proficiency in a foreign language is only 569. It may easily be inferred that around 200 
IFS Officers are not equipped with any of foreign language and the Committee are 
disappointed by this dismal state of affairs. There is considerable anecdotal e vidence of 
Indian Ambassadors in Arabic -speaking countries being handicapped by their lack of 
knowledge of Arabic, and similar examples in a variety of countries, Indian diplomats being 
unable to appear on television discussions in the countries to which t hey are accredited 
because of a lack of fluency in the local language, and so on. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry take urgent measures to conduct an assessment of current 
language needs and enhance the linguistic base of the Ministry by providing intensive foreign 
language training and periodic refresher courses. The Ministry should also ensure that there 
are no IFS Officers without training and proficiency in foreign languages, at a level that 
permits them to function effectively in t he countries where that language is spoken. In view 
of the low alignment of foreign postings with the language proficiency, The Committee 
desire that a policy that mandates to aligning at least 50 percent of the postings with foreign 
languages should be initiated by the Ministry. The Committee also strongly recommend that, 
where it is necessary to assign an officer to a country whose language he or she does not 
know, an intensive one -month training should be provided to the officer in the language, 
culture, society, customs and political situation of the country of posting before he/she is 
posted abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
In order to further widen the pool of officers trained in foreign languages, the 
Ministry has started imparting training in Compu lsory Foreign Language to all officers of 

27 
 
IFS Branch B promoted to IFS, as per provisions of Rule (19) (1) of Indian Foreign Service 
(Recruitment, Cadre, Seniority & Promotion) Rules, 1961.  IFS officers are also undergoing 
training at interpreter level in  major foreign languages. In addition, the Ministry provides for 
undertaking periodic refresher courses for officers who go back to their language stations. 
Periodic foreign language classes are held in Missions/Posts for officer and officials of all 
levels to familiarize them with language spoken in their country of posting.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that the Interpreter cadre of the Ministry is 
limited to just 33 personnel covering seven  languages. The Committee are not able to find 
any justification for the gross understaffing of such a critical department of the Ministry at a 
time when the country is poised to make a giant leap ahead through enhanced global 
engagements and higher number  of foreign visits by dignitaries. More often than not, the 
work of the Ministry is classified in nature and therefore, it leaves no ground for overreliance 
on hired interpreters/translators. The Ministry has informed the Committee that language 
skills of many IFS officers are being used professionally. The Committee had in the past 
taken exception to the arrangement of IFS officers playing the role of interpreters as it 
compromises the actual performance of our officers as well as the job of interpretation . 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the interpreters cadre in the Ministry 
should be strengthened significantly by increasing manpower and simultaneously investing in 
their capacity building programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has initiated action to send officers of the interpreters’ cadre for short -term 
courses to upgrade their language skills and long -term courses for upgrading interpretation 
skills to international institutions of repute. Ministry’s experience with IFS officers as trained 
interpreters in Chinese language has been positive. Hence, the Ministry is of the view that 
imparting high level training to IFS officers in important foreign languages is in the overall 
interest of the Ministry and the Government.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
The Committee observe that the Ambassadorial appointments are not being made 
through a designated body unlike other foreign postings of the Ministry, which are handled 
through the Foreign Service Board. Moreove r, there are delays in appointment and in the 
absence of a designated policy for appointment of Ambassadors and High Commissioners; 
they are done with the approval of the Hon'ble President in keeping with India's priorities, 
requirements in a particular Di plomatic Mission and overall suitability of the Officer, 
including experience, seniority, regional and professional expertise. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the space for non -career ambassadors has considerably shrunk and at 
present there are on ly two non -career Ambassadors whereas in the past there had been a 
number of highly illustrious Ambassadors who were not drawn from the IFS and who 
served their posts with distinction. The Committee are of the considered view that more 

28 
 
eminent persons who have excelled in the field of community affairs, Diaspora issues, 
Foreign Policy, area studies, literature, journalism, etc. should be considered for 
appointments as Ambassadors/High Commissioners. There is an urgent need to import 
diversity into the appointment of Ambassadors to bring it in consonance with India's rapidly 
rising profile globally and for suitably projecting our foreign policy interests. The 
Committee also recommend that the appointment of Ambassadors be made through a 
designated body with r epresentation of non - official experts as well. Furthermore, The 
Committee desire that knowledge of the local language of the country of accreditation 
should be made a desirable qualification for being appointed Ambassador there. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. However, this is beyond the 
mandate of the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016]

29 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
The Committee observe that Officers of the Indian Foreign Service (IFS) are recruited 
through an open competitive examination called the Civil Services Examination (CSE) 
conducted every year on an all India level by the Union Public Service Comm ission (UPSC). 
The Committee have been informed that the number of direct recruits in a year is directly 
linked to the number of retirements that year. The Ministry at present recruits 30 to 35 IFS 
Officers every year by indenting these vacancies through t he Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT)/UPSC which includes 8 additional vacancies created every year under 
MEA Expansion Plan for 2008 and 2018. The Committee understand that the CSE assesses 
the overall knowledge and general aptitude of the candid ates through a set of written papers 
and a personality test/interview. The Committee also understand that the Civil Services is 
undoubtedly one of the most competitive and best conducted examinations in the world. The 
Ministry feel that the Officers recruited through this examination have the right aptitude to be 
moulded through proper training that meets requirements of IFS. The Committee, however, 
feel that under the existing scheme of the examination, the aptitude of the candidates for 
Foreign Service is not being properly assessed. In the opinion of the Committee, it is a major 
lacuna as the skills required of a career diplomat is qualitatively different from those 
demanded by other services. It is, therefore, imperative that only candidates with the rig ht 
calibre and aptitude who are suited to represent India internationally are recruited to the IFS. 
 
With a view to ensure that selected candidates match the profile for a career diplomat, 
The Committee were of the considered opinion that the Ministry and DoPT should examine 
all possible options such as conducting a separate examination for the foreign service or 
introducing an additional paper or according more weightage to the interview/personality 
test. On the issue of conducting a separate examination f or the IFS, the Committee were 
made to understand that it will constrict the pool of potential candidates. Therefore, The 
Committee have reached an understanding that it may not be a worthwhile idea to conduct a 
separate examination for the foreign service  in view of the fact that it may constrict the 
catchment area of potential candidates and it may also be difficult for any examination to 
match the popularity of the CSE. However, The Committee have found it prudent to effect 
adjustments in the present sys tem of examination to make it in consonance with the job 
requirements of a career diplomat without compromising on the wider pool of candidates 
offered by the CSE. The Committee have suggested that for selecting suitable candidates, it 
should be imperative  that candidates are also assessed by parameters such as international 
aptitude, curiosity about the world, knowledge or demonstrated interest in foreign affairs, 
communication skills in English and foreign languages etc. After due deliberation, The 
Committee have arrived at some viable solutions and accordingly, the Committee 
recommend that an additional paper for testing the aforementioned aptitude/knowledge be 
introduced by the UPSC and that this should be made obligatory for candidates opting for the 
IFS. Other candidates may be given the option of not appearing for this paper but passing this 
paper should be mandatory for all candidates opting for the IFS. Further, the Committee 
would like that the scope of the personality test should be enhanced suitab ly for candidates 

30 
 
opting for IFS and they should be assessed for qualities which are considered sine qua non in 
a diplomat. The interview board while conducting the personality test may also be asked to 
indicate whether the particular candidate who has opt ed for IFS is recommended for IFS or 
not. In other words, a candidate may be allotted IFS if he/she is in the merit list, has cleared 
the additional paper and obtained a recommendation from the Interview Board. 
  
The Committee are aware that the Ministry h as already given inputs regarding 
additional papers for the Foreign Service and additional weightage to be given to the 
personality test. Furthermore, the B.S. Basawan Committee that looked into revamping the 
Civil Service Examination will be submitting its Report by 11.8.2016. Our Committee would 
desire that the aforementioned recommendations of the Basawan Committee are 
communicated to the DoPT/UPSC at the earliest for their consideration. The action taken in 
this regard should be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry’s views on this matter were conveyed to B.S. Baswan Committee constituted by the 
Union Public Service Commission to look into the format of the Civil Services Examination. 
The recommendation of the Committee has, t herefore, been referred to UPSC and DOPT for 
consideration.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the present scheme of Civil Services 
Examination (CSE) where a candidate is required to pass a pa per in an Indian language is a 
major impediment for NRIs to appear for the examinations. The Committee are of the 
opinion that wards of Non -Resident Indians (NRIs) are capable of representing India’s 
interests globally in an effective and convincing way by  virtue of their exposure and multi -
cultural experience abroad. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that NRIs should 
be given an opportunity to appear in the CSE by waiving the Indian language provision for 
those who have completed more than fifty pe rcent of their schooling abroad. However, the 
selected candidates should be required to gain working knowledge of at least one Indian 
language during the probationary period. The Committee would specifically desire the 
Ministry to pursue the matter with th e DoPT with utmost urgency. Proficiency in a foreign 
language other than English should however be required as a substitute for an Indian 
language. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has already conveyed its views on this matter to B.S. Baswan Committee 
constituted by the Union Public Service Commission to look into the format of the Civil 
Services Examination. This recommendation of the Committee, therefore, has been referred 
to Department Personnel & Training and the Union Public Service Commission for 
consideration.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
 

31 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
The Committee observe that the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) established in 1986 has 
evolved over the years and is now involved in imparting training at all levels in order to 
develop competency and skills including to diplomats posted abroad. As the FSI is involved 
in providing training to a wide variety of people with diverse training needs, the Committee 
would desire that the Institute incorporate the latest training methods and pro cedures by 
following the best international practices. The Committee further desire that the Ministry 
undertake periodic appraisals and ensure requisite capacity building in the Institute through 
long term planning. The Committee had felt that there is an urgent need to strengthen the FSI 
to bring it up to international standards. The Committee have a clear view that this cannot be 
done merely by sending a few people abroad for training; good resource people from 
different parts of the world must be brought  into the FSI. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry make provisions for bringing reputed international experts, particularly 
from diplomatic training Institutes of major countries, from diverse fields including 
economic and environmental dipl omacy, to conduct various training modules and make it a 
world-class institution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Further strengthening of FSI is one of the priorities of the Ministry. In addition to 
deploying senior IFS officers, officers on deputation from oth er Ministries with prior 
experience in designing and conducting training courses and consultant with experience in 
academics have been engaged in FSI. Modern pedagogical methods such as customized case 
studies, gaming, role-play and group discussions are b eing used for IFS Officer Trainees and 
other officers in the Ministry. Bringing international faculty to FSI is under active 
consideration of the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
(Recommendation No.18) 
The Committee observe that apart from the IF S, the Ministry's workforce comprises of the 
feeder cadre which includes Group B Assistants, LDCs as well as Interpreters and 
Stenographic services. Besides, there is a substantial workforce with the Central Passport 
Organization (CPO) and Indian Council f or Cultural Relations (ICCR) which are 
subordinate offices functioning under the Ministry: The Committee are perturbed that the 
Ministry has not taken concrete action on the recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report of the Second Administrative Reforms  Commission which inter -alia had asked the 
Departments to examine the issue of promotions. The Committee deem this a major failure 
on the part of the Ministry. Therefore, they recommend that the Ministry should make the 
existing policy more robust by explo ring ways for enlarging the quota for promotions. On 
the issue of the Expansion Plan of the Ministry, the Committee believe that the interests of 
the Ministry would be best served if a significant number of IFS officers are sourced from 
the existing workfo rce belonging to the feeder cadres as they are well versed with official 
procedures, and augmented by lateral entry from outside government, including from 
sectors such as academia and the private sector. The Committee would also desire that 
sufficient exp osure and training facilities should be made available to officers who are 
promoted to the IFS or enter the service laterally, in order to ensure that their overall 

32 
 
orientation and standing is at par with the Direct Recruits. The Committee also recommends 
that sufficient provisions for their integration, language training and evaluation should be 
factored into the promotion policy. 
 
Further, The Committee recommend that adequate avenues for promotion and career 
growth should also be made available to the Officers/Staff of Central Passport Office (CPO) 
and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). The Committee also observes that at 
present there is no provision for posting officials of the Passport Offices in Missions/Posts 
abroad while a host of passpor t/visa related matters are being handled by the Embassies. 
The Committee view it as wastage of human resources that trained workforce capable of 
handling these requirements is not posted abroad. The Committee would, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should start posting officials of the Passport Offices abroad to 
man the consular sections of various Missions/Posts. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. This is being examined in the 
Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/146/2016] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                   DR. SHASHI THAROOR,                      
31 August, 2017                                                                                Chairperson,                                  
9 Bhadrapada,1939 (Saka)                                                Committee on External Affairs 

33 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2016-17) HELD ON 24 AUGUST, 2017 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24 Augus t, 2017 from 1600 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
      Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. Richard Hay 
3. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
4. Shri Venkateshwara Rao Magannti 
5. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
6. Shri Mohammad Salim 
7. Dr. Mamtaz Sanghamita 
8. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 Rajya Sabha   
9. Shri Raj Babbar 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
12.  Shri Chunnibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
13.  Dr. Karan Singh 
14. Shri D.P. Tripathi 
  
 Secretariat 
1. Shri P.C.Koul    -  Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director  
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for co nsideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report on the 
subject 'Recruitment, structure and capacity -building of IFS Cadre, including need for a 
separate UPSC examination for  cadre, mid -career entry and in -service training and 
orientation'. 

34 
 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The members suggested some minor modifications.  After 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
  
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperso n to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the m embers. It was also decided that since 
Parliament is not in Session, the Chairperson may present the Report to the Hon’ble Speaker 
under Direction 71A of the Directions by the Speaker with a request to permit the printing, 
publication and circulation of the Report under Rule 280 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and the authenticated copy of the Report may be placed 
before the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for his kind information.  Subsequently, the 
Report will be presented to both the Houses of Parliament after commencement of the ne xt 
Session. 
6. The Chairperson also conveyed his heartfelt thanks and gratitude to all the Members 
for their cooperation and valuable contribution during the term of the Committee. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

35 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE TWELFTH REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 7, 8, 10, 12, 16 & 17 
 
                                                                                                                      
Total- 08  
Percentage: 42.10% 
 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 
NIL 
                                                    
  
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been  accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15 & 19 
 
          
Total- 07 
Percentage: 36.84% 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited:- 
 
Recommendation Nos.  3, 4, 9 & 18 
 
                                                                                                                      
Total- 04 
Percentage: 21.05% 