 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the 
subject ‘Welfare of Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’] 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
APRIL, 2023 /CHAITRA, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
21 
 

 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the 
subject ‘Welfare of Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’] 
 
 
  
 
  
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.04.2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.04.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
APRIL, 2023 /CHAITRA, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA No. ---      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………    01  
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................  27  
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...………………………………… 93   
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..……………………….. 96 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………  108 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee held on   29 March, 2023……..    111                                                                  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)…………………………………………….......   115    
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
 
 Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
      Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
21.  Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 
31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 (iii) 
 
  

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2022-23) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report of the  Committee on the subject ‘Welfare of Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’. 
 
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 03 August, 2022 . The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on  3 November, 2022  
(English Version) and 23 March, 2023 (Hindi Version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on     
29 March, 2023. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given at Appendix-I to the 
Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at                    
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                     
29 March, 2023                                                                                                      Chairperson,                                       
8 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifteenth  Report 
of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘Welfare of 
Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’  which was presented to the 
Lok Sabha on 03.08.2022 and laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha on 03.08.2022.  
2.     The Action Taken Notes have been r eceived from the 
Ministry of External Affairs on all the 55 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government: - 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2,  3, 4,5, 7, 11, 12,14, 15, 
16,17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 25,26,27,28, 29,30, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 38,39, 40, 41, 42,43,44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 
51, 52, 53,  and 54  
Total-43  
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue i n view of the 
Government's replies:- 
Recommendation No.8 and 9          

2 
 
        Total- 2 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 6, 10, 13, 21, 36,37, 47,  and 55
                                                       
Total-8   
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos. 24 and 35 
Total-2  
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
comments and observations/recommendations contained 
in Chapter-I of this Report and recommendations included 
in Chapter V may be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 

3 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their observations/recommendations that 
require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
REGISTRATION OF MIGRANT WORKERS AND STUDENTS 
ABROAD WITH INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
5. The Committee in their 15th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad works 
with the motto ‘Indian Embassies: Home away from Home’. A 
robust system of grievance redressal w hich includes bringing 
issues through e -mails, twitter and through CPGRAMS portal has 
been maintained. Keeping in view the fact that the Indian 
Missions/Posts are the direct link between India and its diaspora 
community, the Committee desire that they shou ld play a greater 
and effective role in the welfare of the diaspora and in 
reconnecting them with the motherland. The Committee, 
however, find that a large chunk of the diaspora community 
including migrant workers and students are yet to be registered 
with the Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the diaspora community should be encouraged to 
register with our Missions/Posts and based on an evaluation study 
fresh initiatives to bring the Indian diaspora closer to their roots 
may be taken so that the Indian Embassies could truly become a 
‘Home away from Home’ for them’. 

4 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
“Missions/ Posts have been directed make rigorous efforts for 
reaching out to the diaspora; which Missions have been doing 
on traditional platforms as well as through new initiatives. 
Various forums and initiatives including portals are used to 
encourage the diaspora for registering on Missions/ Posts’ 
portal. Since registration is voluntary, so 100% d iaspora 
might not be registered with the Mission/ Post. However, 
enough mechanisms have been created, where Missions/ 
Posts are able to reach out to the diaspora during times of 
crisis and diaspora members can also keep in touch with the 
Mission. This has been seen during the Covid -19 crisis, and 
also during crises in Ukraine and Afghanistan”. 
 
7. Having noted that a large chunk of the Diaspora 
including migrant workers and students do not get 
themselves registered with the Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad, the Committee, had desired that all out efforts 
should be made to encourage them towards such a 
registration and fresh initiatives based on an  evaluation 
study be made to make our Embassies a ‘Home away from 
Home’ for our Diaspora. The Committee agree to the fact 
that since registration is voluntary, 100% Diaspora might 
not be registered with the Mis sions/Posts and enough 
mechanisms have been created to reach out to them 
during times of crisis. The various forums and initiatives 
including portals are used to encourage them for 
registering on Missions/ Posts’ portal. The Committee, 
however, are of the view that nothing less than a complete 
database is desirable and for that the Missions/Posts 
abroad should be more proactive in reaching out to each 
Indian in that foreign country. The Committee, hence 
reiterate that fresh initiatives based on an evaluatio n 
study of the existing constraints  be taken to register 

5 
 
every Indian abroad bringing the Indian Diaspora closer to 
their roots and make our Missions a ‘Home away from 
Home’ for them, particularly under any crisis. 
 
ONE STOP CENTRES FOR DISTRESSED INDIAN WOMEN 
ABROAD 
Recommendation No. 10 
8. The Committee in their 15th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee have been informed that guidelines for 
establishment of One Stop Centres for helping distressed Indian 
women abroad has been finalized and conveyed to the 
Missions/Posts where such centres are due to be opened in the 
first phase. In view of the pivotal role likely to be played by these 
centres in providing timely assistance to the vulnerable distressed 
Indian women, the Committe e desire that the Scheme should be 
launched without any delay and the status in this regard may be 
furnished to them’. 
 9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
“The recommendation of the committee has been noted for 
compliance.  The preparation for the launch of the One Stop 
Centre Scheme is underway.  As soon as it is launched the 
funds will be allocated to the Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
where OSCs are to be set up. 
10. Having  been informed that the guidelines for 
establishment of ‘One Stop Centres’ for helping distressed 
women have been finalized and conveyed to the 
Missions/Posts where such centres are due to be opened, 

6 
 
Committee had desired for its expeditious launch. 
However, from the reply of the Ministry it is seen that the 
One Stop Centre Scheme is yet to take off.  In view of the 
pivotal role likely to be played by such centres in providing 
timely assistance to the distressed Indian women abroad, 
the Committee reiterate that ‘One Stop Centres’ should be 
opened immediately in Missions where they have been 
approved and the status in this regard may be furnished to 
the Committee. 
 
OPERATIONALIZATION OF GLOBAL INDIAN STUDENTS’ 
PORTAL 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
11. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that the Ministry has undertaken a lengthy, 
domain-specific and time-consuming exercise to prepare a Global 
Indian Students’ Portal which would provide information to the 
students to assist them in taking an informed decision while 
selecting courses in universities abroad. The Ministry is hopeful 
that the first draft template of the Portal would be ready in the 
near future. The Committee are of the view that once the portal is 
operationalized, cases of duping of students by fake universi ties 
and fraudulent agents would be reduced. They, therefore, urge 
the Ministry to expedite the process of data collection, collation 

7 
 
and operationalization of the Students’ Portal along with 
provisioning of adequate resources for the project’. 
12.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under:  
“The Recommendations of the esteemed Committee are 
noted and efforts are being made to expedite the process of 
operationalizing the GISP portal”. 
 
13.   Having noted that the Ministry has devised a ‘Global 
Indian Students’ Portal’ for providing information to the 
students in taking an informed decision while selecting 
courses in universities abroad, the Committee had desired 
to expedite the operationalizat ion of the said GISP portal. 
However, it is seen that the same is yet to be 
operationalized. In view of the usefulness of such a portal 
in minimizing cases of fake universities/fraudulent agents 
duping Indian students, the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation to see the portal operational at 
the earliest.  
 
CRISIS FACED BY INDIAN STUDENTS FROM UKRAINE AND 
CHINA 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 

8 
 
14. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee are deeply concerned about the plight of 
thousands of Indian students pursuing medical and other courses 
in Ukraine and China, who could not return back to these 
countries due to closure of their universities. These students have 
been left in a quandary as they could not re -join their courses 
physically or complete their internship or training in India. The 
Committee have been informed that MEA had recommended to 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to consider allowing 
Indian private medical institutions to enroll returnee students 
from Ukraine in their institutions on a one -time exemption basis. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to pursue the matter with the 
MoHFW vigorously as this step alone may solve the current crisis 
being faced by the students enrolled in Ukrainian univ ersities and 
enable them to complete their courses. 
With regard to the Indian students enrolled in Chinese 
universities, the Ministry has stated that the Indian Embassy in 
Beijing is preparing a list of students to be shared with the 
Chinese side for consi deration for their return to China, on a 
need-assessed basis. Moreover, National Medical Commission has 
issued a circular on 04 March 2022 stating that it has decided to 
accept application from such affected foreign medical graduates 
to complete the remain ing part of their internship in India. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts made in this regard and desire 
that the Ministry should finalize the list of students at the earliest 
and make all out efforts to ensure their smooth return through 
continuous interaction with the Chinese authorities at the Highest 
level, especially as COVID-19 related health protocols are in place 
and vaccination has also been widely done. Keeping in view the 
fact that China has nearly five lakhs foreign students from various 
countries, the Committee urge the MEA to get in touch with the 

9 
 
Embassies of other countries so that coordinated efforts are made 
to facilitate the return of such students to China for resumption of 
their in-person classes. The Committee also urge the Ministry t o 
coordinate with the MoHFW and National Health Commission so 
as to facilitate the medical students enrolled in medical colleges 
in China also to complete the remaining part of their internship in 
India’. 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs 
submitted as under: 
“The Ministry has been consistently taking up the matter of 
return of Indian students with the Chinese authorities both 
in New Delhi and through our Embassy in China.  
The Government of People’s Republic of China had rest ricted 
travel to China by suspending visa and residence permits 
with effect from 28 March 2020 due to the outbreak of 
COVID-19.  
During the External Affairs Minister’s meeting with Foreign 
Minister of China on 25 March 2022, he raised the issue of 
medical students noting that such a restrictive policy puts 
the future of many Indian students in jeopardy.  
The Chinese side expressed its willingness to consider 
facilitating the return of a limited number of Indian students 
on a trial basis depending upon need.  Accordingly the 
Embassy of India in Beijing issued a Press Release on 29 
April 2022 seeking the details of students who intend to 
return to China to continue their studies. A list of all such 
students willing to return to China was provided to the 
Chinese side for their consideration.  
On 13 June 2022, Chinese Embassy in India issued a notice 
updating its visa policy for Indian citizens. The notice stated 
they will start accepting visa applications from (i) foreign 
nationals and their accompanying family m embers going to 
China for resumption of work and production in all fields; (ii) 

10 
 
Family members of Chinese citizens and foreigners with 
Chinese permanent residence permit going to China for 
family reunion or visiting relatives.  
The two sides continued to w ork out further modalities for 
facilitating the return of Indian medical students to China. 
The two sides also discussed this issue during External 
Affairs Minister’s meeting with Foreign Minister of China on 
07 July, 2022 in Bali, Indonesia.  
Meanwhile, Indian students who are studying in China were 
advised to continue checking our Embassy website for 
regular updates on the matter. They were also advised to 
remain in touch with their universities for any updates.  
The Chinese side later conveyed that their  universities are 
reaching out to Indian students to inform them about their 
eligibility to return. From 24 August 2022, the Chinese 
Embassy in India updated its visa requirements, indicating 
application procedures for students returning to China to 
resume their studies.  
The Ministry and Embassy have been continuing to pursue 
the Chinese side to complete the necessary formalities 
enabling the students’ return at an early date. In parallel, 
efforts are being made to raise with Chinese authorities 
issues bei ng faced by Indian students (including difficulties 
in travel owing to restrictions imposed by the Chinese side). 
We have been actively seeking facilitation from the Chinese 
side for students’ return. 
The Ministry has been in contact with the NMC and MoHFW  
regarding the issues pertaining to Indian medical students 
unable to return to China.  
Issues relating to education of Indian medical students from 
overseas are dealt as per extant rules and regulations of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW)  and the 
National Medical Commission (NMC).  

11 
 
NMC has devised a scheme under which Indian medical 
students who did not undergo physical clinical training due 
to the extraordinary situation, but were granted certificates 
of completion of degree by respective  institutes in foreign 
countries, on or before 30 June 2022, will be permitted to 
appear in the Foreign Medical Graduate Examination 
(FMGE). Upon qualifying the FMGE, such students will be 
required to undergo Compulsory Rotating Medical Internship 
(CRMI) for a period of two years in order to be eligible for 
registration in India”.  
 
16.  Due to their concern about the plight of thousands of 
Indian students who were pursuing medical and other 
courses in Ukraine and China, the Committee had desired 
MEA to tak e up with the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare the proposal to allow returnee medical students 
from Ukraine and China to enroll in Indian private medical 
institutions on a one -time exemption basis to complete 
their courses. The Committee had also desire d MEA to 
make coordinated efforts with Missions to facilitate the 
return of Indian students to China for resumption of in -
person classes for those who desire so. The Ministry have 
informed about various actions taken by them in seeking 
facilitation from th e Chinese side for students to return 
and also the efforts made with Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (MoHFW) and the National Medical 
Commission (NMC) regarding medical students who were 
unable to return to complete their studies. The Committee 

12 
 
note in this regard that the NMC has devised a scheme 
under which Indian medical students who did not undergo 
physical clinical training due to extraordinary situations, 
but were granted certificates of completion of degree by 
respective institutes in foreign c ountries, on or before 30 
June 2022, have been permitted to appear in the Foreign 
Medical Graduate Examination (FMGE) and upon qualifying 
the FMGE, such students are required to undergo 
Compulsory Rotating Medical Internship (CRMI) for a 
period of two year s in order to be eligible for registration 
in India. The Committee hope that this option devised by 
the National Medical Commission (NMC) will be a respite 
for those medical students who had returned due to 
emergency situations in Ukraine and China. The Co mmittee 
desire that the updated status of medical students who 
have been benefitted from NMC ’s option along with the 
data of students who returned to the respective countries, 
particularly China, may be apprised to them.  
 
   OUTCOME OF GIRMITIYA CONFERENCE 
Recommendation No. 21 
17. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 

13 
 
 ‘The Committee note that as an outcome of the first ever 
Girmitiya Conference organized virtually in September 2021, the 
MEA has written to the Ministry of Education to introduce the 
history of indentured labour in the school education. The Ministry 
would also try to conduct more events at regional level to 
promote interaction between India and Girmitiya countries and 
would propose to establish a Girmitiya un iversity/faculty/chair. 
The Committee are pleased at the positive outcome of the said 
Conference and urge the Ministry to take follow -up action in this 
regard so that the said initiatives are implemented at the earliest 
and the Committee may be apprised of accordingly’. 
 
18.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
 “The Recommendations of the Committee are noted by the 
Ministry”.  
19. The Committee, while noting the positive outcomes of 
the first ever Girmitiya Con ference organized virtually in 
September 2021 had desired MEA to take up the proposal 
to introduce the history of indentured labour in school 
curriculum with the Ministry of Education and establish a 
Girmitiya university/faculty/chair along with organizing  
more events to promote interaction between India and 
Girmitiya countries. However, the reply of the Ministry just 
states that the recommendations of the Committee are 
noted and is silent about the actions taken. The 
Committee, therefore reiterate their ea rlier 

14 
 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take all follow -
up actions without any further delay and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. 
 
    VIDESH SAMPARK PROGRAMMES 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
20. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that the Ministry has launched State 
Outreach Programme in 2017 under the banner ‘Videsh Sampark’ 
which is an in-depth dialogue between Ministry of External Affairs 
and State Governments with t he objective of seeking cooperation 
in addressing issues pertaining to welfare and protection of NRIs 
living abroad and also to brief the State Governments about the 
Ministry’s initiatives pertaining to engagement and welfare of the 
overseas Indian communi ty and curbing illegal migration. 
However, only six States viz, Telangana, Maharashtra, Kerala, 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka could so far be covered 
under the programme because of the spread of the COVID -19 
Pandemic. The Committee are of the view that welfare and 
protection of Indian diaspora as well as deeper engagement with 
the said community could be effectively achieved only with the 
active participation of the State Governments and also by 
maintaining close coordination with them. The Committe e, 
therefore urge the Ministry to organize more ‘Videsh Sampark’ 
programmes prioritizing the States with migration hotspots and 
thereafter in other States in a time bound manner since the 

15 
 
COVID-19 Pandemic situation has improved. The Committee also 
urge th e Ministry to share with this Committee the outcome of 
Videsh Sampark programmes held so far and step up its efforts of 
coordination and closer interaction with the State Governments 
for successful implementation of its programmes and schemes’  
21. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance.  The Ministry is in consultation with various 
state governments for organizing of the Videsh Sampark 
Programme. 
The Ministry has also undertaken  outreach activities to 
Telengana, Tripura, Tamil Nadu and other states aimed at 
promotion of ties with diaspora and emigrant worker 
community through dedicated state outreach programmes, 
PGE Conferences, etc”. 
 
22. In view of the fact that the active participation of the 
State Governments and their coordination is required in 
effectively achieving the welfare of Indian Diaspora, the 
Committee had urged the Ministry to organize more 
‘Videsh Sampark’ programmes priorit izing States which 
are migration hotspots and thereafter in other States in a 
time bound manner since the COVID -19 Pandemic 
situation has improved. However, from the action taken 
replies, it is seen that the consultation with various State 
Governments is s till going on for organising Videsh 
Sampark Programmes. The Committee look forward to 

16 
 
getting the complete details and therefore, urge the 
Ministry to share with them, the outcome of all Videsh 
Sampark programmes held so far and step up its efforts of 
closer interaction with the State Governments.  
 
FRESH STRATEGY ON MEDIA AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS  
 
Recommendation No. 36 
 
23. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that based on a recommendation of theirs, 
the Ministry has got an Impact Assessment Study done by the 
IIMC regarding media awareness campaigns on safe and legal 
migration run by its OIA II Division. The IIMC has submitted its 
final repo rt which is under consideration by the Ministry. Based 
on the findings of the Impact Assessment Study, the Committee 
feel that media campaigns of the Government are not having the 
desired impact in curbing unsafe practices in migration of 
unskilled workers . The Committee are of the view that vigorous 
campaigns is required to achieve the desired objectives and in 
this digital age, there is an urgent need to make use of social 
media platforms like SMS, YouTube etc. in addition to 
advertisements in the print a nd the electronic media. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make increasing use 
of internet, mobile technology and social media platforms for 
greater awareness and outreach among prospective emigrants on 
safe and legal migration. A fresh strate gy on media awareness 
campaigns may also be worked out based on the findings of the 

17 
 
IIMC. The Committee also recommend that the State 
Governments should be made to play a greater role in the 
dissemination of information on safe and legal migration at the 
grass-root level through Gram Sabha, Panchayat and Sarpanch’. 
24. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
 “The Recommendation of the esteemed Committee have 
been noted”.  
 
25. Based on the findings of the Impact As sessment Study 
done by the IIMC regarding media awareness campaigns 
on safe and legal migration run by OIA II Division, the 
Committee had recommended the urgent need for vigorous 
campaigns using digital media platforms in addition to 
advertisements in the print and the electronic media. 
However, the reply is silent about any fresh strategy 
initiative on media awareness campaigns based on the 
findings of IIMC. The Committee therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire the Ministry to take 
proper action on them under intimation to the Committee.  
 
IMPACT OF MIGRATION AND MOBILITY AGREEMENTS  
 
Recommendation No. 37 
 

18 
 
26. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MoUs/Agreements that provide the overarching framework for 
cooperation on labour and manpower related issues are in place 
with the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries and Jordan. Specific 
Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements were signed between 
India and Denmark in 2009 and with Japan on Specified Skilled 
Worker in January 2021. A similar Labour Mobility Agreement has 
been concluded with Portugal. Further, MoUs on Migration and 
Mobility are under process with Germany, Mauritius, Portugal, 
BNL (Belgium, Net herlands, Luxemburg), Australia, Russian 
Federation etc. India had also signed on to the Global Compact 
for Migration as part of our partnership with the International 
Organization for Migration and with the International Labour 
Organization. The Committee  acknowledge that Migration and 
Mobility Agreements are aimed at providing safe and legal 
migration opportunities to Indian workers in potential 
employment destinations all over the world. However, the impact 
of such MoUs/Agreements and the manner in which  they have 
translated into better deals and more job opportunities for 
potential migrant workers are not known. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should carry out an impact 
assessment of the existing Migration and Mobility Agreements 
and monitor the implementation aspect of such MoUs/Agreements 
and ensure that the issues of interest of the migrant workers 
including their grievances are actually addressed through the said 
MoUs/Agreements’. 
27. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Ext ernal Affairs 
submitted as under: 

19 
 
“Presently, the procedures for modifying the eMigrate 
system to suit the requirements of the Agreement between 
India and Portugal for recruitment of Indian citizens to work 
in Portugal, is ongoing. Afterwards, the eMigrate  portal can 
be used as a facilitating tool for recruitment of Indian 
citizens for overseas employment. The portal can also 
provide data for impact assessment for Migration and 
Mobility Agreements in case of recruitment for overseas 
employment” .  
 
28. Having acknowledged that the Memoranda of 
Understanding (MoUs) on migration and mobility that are 
in place with various countries and which are under 
process are aimed at providing safe and legal migration 
opportunities to Indian workers in potential employmen t 
destinations all over the world, the Committee had desired 
to know the impact of such MoUs/Agreements and the 
manner in which they have translated into better deals and 
more job opportunities for potential migrant workers. For 
this, they had recommended that the Ministry should carry 
out an impact assessment of the existing Migration and 
Mobility Agreements and monitor their implementation 
aspects. However, the reply of the Ministry is not reflective 
of the concerns of the Committee. They, therefore, 
reiterate their original recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to assess the impact of  Migration and Mobility 
Agreements, be it through a study or using e -Migrate 

20 
 
portal and inform the Committee about outcome of the 
same.  
 
INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM FOR FACILITA TING 
EMPLOYMENT OF INDIAN WORKERS ABROAD 
    
   Recommendation No. 47 
 
29.  The Committee in their 15th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that a monitoring committee of Secretaries 
headed by Secretary (CPV&OIA) has been constituted to 
establish a coordinated institutional mechanism on availing 
employment opportunities abroad.  The committee also includes  
Secretaries of MSDE, M/o Labour & Employment, M/o Education 
and D/o School Education. Under the mandate of this committe e, 
the Ministry has been carrying out an  assessment of employment 
opportunities abroad with the help of Indian Missions, India  
Centre for Migration, Industry bodies, State Governments etc. 
and this endeavour is currently underway. The Committee desire 
that assessment of employment opportunities  abroad should be 
completed at the earliest and an institutional mechanism to 
facilitate employment of Indian workers abroad should be 
established without delay. This assumes  greater significance and 
urgency in view of the easing of COVID-19 Pandemic restrictions, 
increased vaccination  and opening up of labour markets in the 
Gulf and other countries’. 
 
30. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 

21 
 
 “Data related to migration for employment purpose has seen 
an  upward  trend. As per data received from the Bureau of 
 Immigration, the number of  Indian nationals, holding ECR 
passports,  who went abroad for employment/work from 
01.01.2019 to  30.06.2022 are summarized  herewith. 
 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
30.06.2022) 
Number of 
Indian 
nationals 
644153 136314 150852 233070 
 
  Details of number of Emigration Clearances issued 
during last  three  years, as per data available on the e-
Migrate portal, are also  given below: 
 
 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
August 2022) 
Number of EC 
issued 
368048 94145 132673 247977 
    
  The  above data confirms a clear upward trend in 
number of  Indian migrant workers going abroad since 
relaxation of Covid 19  related travel restrictions in 2021”. 

22 
 
 
31. Having noted that  the endeavour to carry out an  
assessment of employment opportunities abroad with the 
help of Indian Missions, India  Centre for Migration, 
Industry bodies, State Governments etc. is currently 
underway, the Committee had desired that assessment of 
employment opportunities  abroad should be completed at 
the earliest and an institutional mechanism to facilitate  
employment of Indian wor kers abroad should be 
established without delay. The Ministry, while remaining 
silent on the issues, had provided the data of Indian 
nationals holding ECR passports, who went abroad for 
employment/work from 01.01.2019 to 30.06.2022 and the 
number of Emigra tion Clearances issued during the last 
three years. Based on the said data, the Ministry has 
justified itself that a clear upward trend is confirmed in the 
number of Indian migrant workers going abroad since 
relaxation of COVID -19 related travel restrictio n in 2021. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to complete the 
assessment of employment opportunities  abroad and 
establish an institutional mechanism to facilitate  
employment of Indian workers abroad witho ut further 
delay. Progress achieved in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee. 

23 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE REHABILITATION SCHEME FOR MIGRANT 
WORKERS 
Recommendation No. 55 
 
32. The Committee in their 15 th Report had 
observed/recommended as under: 
‘The Committee observe that though the Ministry is implementing 
various programmes and schemes for the welfare of the Indian 
diaspora, no specific scheme exists for the rehabilitation of the 
workers who lost their jobs including the huge population of Gulf 
returnees, in the wake of the COVID -19 Pandemic. The 
Committee are aware that many workers have gone back to their 
employment abroad with the easing of the COVID - 19 Pandemic 
situation and the re -opening of doors to Indian workers by the 
Gulf countries. The Committee, however, feel that a rehabilitation 
scheme to ensure livelihood security for those workers who lost 
their jobs/could not return/prefer to stay back in the country, is 
still needed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
comprehensive rehabilit ation scheme may be worked out in 
coordination with other Ministries/Departments concerned as well 
as the State Governments for those workers who lost their jobs 
due to pandemics or other disasters to secure means of livelihood 
for them and their families,  at the earliest. The Committee urge 
the Ministry to initiate consultations with all the stakeholders in 
this regard without delay’. 
33. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
“To ensure welfare of returnees, the Government of India 
has taken various steps which are reflected in various 

24 
 
financial packages announced by the Ministry of Finance for 
state governments. To provide assistance to States for 
Capital Expenditure, a new scheme ‘Special Assistance to 
States fo r Capital Expenditure’ was launched during the 
financial year 2020 -21 with the allocation not exceeding Rs. 
12,000 crore in the form of 50-year interest free loan for the 
financial year 2020-21 and with the allocation of Rs. 15,000 
crore in the form of 50 -year interest free loan for the 
financial year 2021-22. The fund allocated under the scheme 
can be used for new as well ongoing capital projects.  
As per data received from the Bureau of Immigration, the 
number of Indian nationals, holding ECR passports, w ho 
went abroad for employment/work from 01.01.2019 to 
30.06.2022 are summarized herewith. 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
30.06.2022) 
Number of 
Indian 
nationals 
644153 136314 150852 233070 
 
Details of number of Emigration Clearances issued 
during last three years, as per data available on the 
eMigrate portal, are also given below: 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till August 
2022) 
Number of 
EC issued 
368048 94145 132673 247977 
 

25 
 
The  above data confirms a clear upward trend in 
number of Indian migrant workers  going abroad since 
relaxation of Covid 19 related travel restrictions in 2021”. 
 
34.  Despite a large number of Indian  workers returning 
from different counties having had lost their jobs during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, the Committee had observed that 
no sp ecific scheme was planned or put in place for their 
rehabilitation. Since the Committee felt the need for the 
same, they had recommended for a special rehabilitation 
scheme to ensure livelihood security for those workers 
who had lost their jobs/could not r eturn/preferred to stay 
back. Replying to this, the Ministry has referred to the 
‘Special Assistance to States for Capital Expenditure’ 
scheme launched during the financial year 2020 -21, the 
funds of which could be used for new as well as ongoing 
capital projects. However the Committee are not sure, how 
the same could be treated as a  special rehabilitation 
scheme for those who returned jobless during the 
pandemic. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation  that a comprehensive and exc lusive 
rehabilitation scheme may be worked out in coordination 
with other Ministries/Departments concerned as well as 
the State Governments for those workers who lost their 

26 
 
jobs due to pandemics or other disasters under intimation 
to the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
          The Committee note that the Indian diaspora comprising 
of over 18 million PIOs  and 13 million NRIs spread across the 
globe is one of the largest overseas community of any country. 
Moreover, the composition of the Indian diaspora is diverse, 
consisting of  labourers/workers, traders, political leaders, 
professionals and students. The Committee  further note that as 
per the World Bank report on remittances, India is the largest 
recipient country of the world in 2021 and its remittances is 
expected to grow by 2.6% in 2022. The Committee are, however, 
surprised that authentic data of the Indian diaspora is  not 
available in the Ministry. The Ministry has put forth the 
justification that since registration by the diaspora is voluntary, 
the entire diaspora does not register with the  Indian 
Embassies/Posts abroad and the data also varies because of the 
mobility of the  diaspora. The Committee strongly feel that the 
Ministry may not be able to implement  welfare schemes for the 
said community as well as address the challenges being faced by  
them effectively in the absence of a comprehensive and up-to-
date database. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Indian 
Embassies/Missions/Posts abroad should play a more pro -active 

28 
 
role, maintain greater outreach and develop closer contact with 
the diaspora community and encourage them to register 
themselves with the Embassies/Missions/Posts in coordination 
with the various diaspora associations, cultural  organizations and 
student bodies so that authentic database is maintained in each 
Embassy/Mission/Post with the Ministry and based on such 
authentic updated data received from various countries,  
concerted efforts may be made to collate an authentic  database 
of the Indian diaspora at Ministry level and use it appropriately in 
preparing and  implementing welfare scheme for  diaspora 
community. 
     
    Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry makes all out effort to maintain an updated 
database from various reliable sources of Indian Diaspora, 
including data received through various means from Missions/ 
Posts abroad, and use the same in preparation of various welfare 
schemes. The r egistration on Mission/ Post and Ministry’s portals 
by the diaspora is on voluntary basis. The Ministry also uses its 
other sources like statistical collection of data from foreign 
countries.  Since the collection of data is on voluntary basis, most 
of the  Diaspora members do not give generic information on 
oneself. However, the Ministry receives inputs on various 
challenges faced by the Diaspora through grievances portals and 

29 
 
other sources.  A number of steps have been taken by the 
Ministry and the Mission s/Posts abroad to address the issues 
faced by Diaspora abroad, including but not limited to creation of 
CPGRAMS Portal, MADAD portal, Global Pravasi Rishta Portal, etc. 
For such countries with a sizable presence of Indian diaspora, 
24X7 helplines have been  opened in Missions/ Posts, along with 
active outreach programmes through social media, open houses 
conducted by Missions/ Pots etc. The Government has also put 
together  various mechanisms along with the foreign 
governments, like Consular Dialogues, Labou r MobilityPartnership 
Agreements, opening of shleter homes in Missions. Various other 
initiatives have also been adopted by the Ministry for workforce 
migrating to ECR countries, like Pre Departure Orientation 
Training and Pravasi Bhartiya Beema Yojna etc. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry had begun a project 
involving a study on  the practices of data management across 
countries to develop a module for migrant workers and students 
studying overseas. In Committee’s view an authentic database of  
migrant workers and overseas students is long overdue as they 
constitute the most vulnerable section of the Indian diaspora. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to  conduct in -depth 

30 
 
study regarding data management system of countries which 
have large  diaspora community at the earliest and develop a 
module for migrant workers and overseas students within a 
specified time -frame. The Committee may be apprised of the  
progress made in this regard. 
      
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry is exploring possibility of creating a facility for 
compulsory online registration of all emigrants who are 
proceeding abroad for employment through various 
airports/check posts of India. Initial discussion regarding design 
of the web-page and details of information to be sought from the 
migrant workers, have been done with Tata Consultancy Services, 
the present service provider for the eMigrate Project. However, 
the process for selection o f a new service provider for eMigrate 
V2 through eTender is underway and the new service provider is 
expected to be selected by the end of October 2022 and the 
matter would be taken up further with the new service provider 
and other stakeholders immediately after that. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee observe that the profile and geographical 
distribution as well as the  enormous and diverse Indian diaspora 
presents a great opportunity for the promotion of  India’s soft 
power and cultural diplomacy abroad. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that this opportunity should be tapped and the potential it  

31 
 
provides should be harnessed to serve as an effective tool in 
furthering India’s interest and influence globally. The Committee 
also recommend that the Ministry should prepare a policy 
framework in this  regard and work  out an action plan  to 
implement the same in a time-bound manner. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has a diaspora policy framework in place which 
is characterized under the rubric of 4Cs - Care, Connect, 
Celebrate & Contribute. The Ministry connects to the Indian 
diaspora abroad through thematic events and conferences aimed 
at promotion of sectoral expertise on various subje cts including 
economy, energy, science & technology, culture, trade & tourism, 
health, social and other contemporary issues, and through 
various welfare schemes and programmes aimed at promotion of 
cultural ties with the diaspora. The policy of the Governm ent also 
evolves based on the feedback which it gets from the diaspora 
from time to time. Missions are also given grants from the 
Ministry under Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) 
Scheme. Missions also have other funds at their disposal to mak e 
effective outreach to the diaspora. 
 The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) accept the strategic 
significance of the work of soft power projection through public 
and cultural diplomacy as among the key tools in the formulation 
and implementation of India’s foreign policy and therefore, Heads 

32 
 
of Mission attach top priority and   importance to the task of soft -
power projection.  Missions draw the country specific demand 
based on local interest including the presence of any diaspora and 
recommend activities wh ich should be effective in promotion of 
the soft power.  All ICCR’s activities, including    those conducted 
through its extended arms Indian Cultural Centers, the Chairs of 
Indian Studies in Foreign Universities, and the foreign students’ 
scholarships programme, are conducted in close coordination with 
Indian Missions/posts in the country concerned. 
 
 For greater coordination among other stake holders, 
MEA/ICCR is working with other department involved in 
projection of soft powers such as Ministries of  Culture, Education, 
Sports and Youth Affairs, Textiles, AYUSH, Information and 
Broadcasting, Department of Commerce. Further   cooperation 
with the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats   to project 
democracy, constitutional values, electoral practices, good 
governance and other aspects of soft power, in a more sustained 
manner to foreign Parliamentarians, legislature staff and media is 
also being enhanced. 
 
 ICCR closely works with the Ministry of Culture(MOC) in 
implementation of Cultural Exchange Programmes(CE Ps). The 
Standing Committee for planning and coordinating Festivals of 
India abroad is chaired by Secretary(Culture) where DG, ICCR is 

33 
 
also a member. The Governing Body of ICCR includes members 
from Ministry of Culture as well as all major principle 
organizations working the area of cultural and soft power 
projection. 
 
 The above mechanism broadly takes care of tapping and 
harnessing the opportunity provided by the enormous and diverse 
Indian diaspora in furthering India’s interest and influence 
globally.The Ministry and ICCR will continue to supplement the 
efforts of Government in this regard. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry  of External Affairs 
engages with  the diaspora through its various programmes and 
schemes and the policies of the Government  evolve based on the 
feedback from the diaspora from time to time. The Committee 
also acknowledge that India’s engagement with its diaspora has 
moved from ‘All of Ministr y approach’ towards an ‘All-of-
Government approach’ in which other wings of the Government, 
other Ministries and  Departments as well as the  State 
Governments are involved in the process of diaspora affairs. The 
Committee are, however, surprised that a  clear-cut policy on its 
diaspora is yet to be drafted by the Government despite having a  
huge diaspora playing a very important role in the socio-

34 
 
economic development of their home country. In view of the 
Government’s evolving policy in relation to its diaspora, the 
Committee, desire that the Ministry should bring out a policy 
document on its diaspora to  serve as a guiding principle for 
deeper and wider engagement with the diaspora community with 
an objective that all involved in the process of diaspora affairs 
may work in tandem to achieve the objectives set in this regard. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has a diaspora policy framework in place, as 
has been explained in Recommendation No. 3. In times of crisis, 
the government can mobilize all available resources at its disposal 
for the rescue and taking care of Indian nationals in distress; 
which was demonstrated during Vande Bharat Mission, Operation 
Ganga and Operation Devi Shakti, etc. For connecting with 
diaspora, the Ministry has a number of engagement programmes  
like the Know India Programme, Scholarships for diaspora 
Children, Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojna, Promotion of Cultural Tie 
with Diaspora, Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz etc. and events like the 
Pravasi Bhartiya Divas Convention, pre - PBD Conferences, 
Regional PBDs, Youth PBDs etc., many of which are being 
conducted in partnership with Stat e Governments. The 
Government also promotes sectoral expertise in partnership with 
other Ministries through programmes like Pravasi Bharatiya 
Academic and Scientific Sampark (PRABHASS), Global Initiative 
of Academic Networks (GIAN), Visiting Advanced Joint  Research 
(VAJRA) faculty scheme,  Skilled Workers Arrival Database for 
Employment Support (SWADES), Aatmanirbhar Skilled Employees 
Employer Mapping (ASEEM) etc. Most of the state governments 
have a dedicated NRI Wing. The Ministry also has dedicated state  
outreach programmes and a States Division, to promote 

35 
 
connection and coordination with states. More and more states 
are organizing Global Investment Summits and other events 
where they are attracting diaspora participation. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee note that  the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs (MOIA) was  merged with the Ministry of External Affairs  
(MEA) in 2015 and the  merger has been  like a  re-integration 
bringing in  a more holistic approach towards dealing with the 
issues of the Indian diaspora. The Committee, however, are of 
the view that the success and  efficacy of the merger can only be 
known after proper evaluation  by an independent body. The 
Ministry has recently constituted a Working Group to analyze the 
objectives, working and challenges  of various  
schemes/programmes/initiatives undertaken by it  for the welfare 
of the Indian diaspora. The Committee hope that the Working 
Group will  specifically focus on the outreach and delivery under 
the said welfare schemes post merger of MOIA with MEA. The 
Committee also desire that evaluation of the said schemes  be 
completed at the earliest so as to ensure effective 
implementation of the schemes for the welfare of the Indian 
diaspora. 
 
   Reply of the Government 

36 
 
          In accordance with the Recommendations of the 
Committee, a Joint Working Group has been constituted by the 
Ministry to analyze the objectives, working and challenges of 
various programmes/ initiatives/ schemes for welfare of Indian 
diaspora under the chairmanship of Secretary (CPV & OIA). The 
first meeting of the JWG has already been held and the 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
      
    Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 The Committee note that a dedicated Community Welfare 
Wing has been established in Missions and Posts where there is a 
sizeable Indian community. The Committee are of the view that 
such wings would facilitate closer contact between Indian  
diaspora and Indian Missions/Posts. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry do apprise the Committee about the objectives 
achieved through establishing such community  welfare wings in 
Missions/Posts and also to  establish Community Welfare Wing in  
all important Indian Missions/Posts on priority basis. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Dedicated Community Welfare Wings have been set up in 
Missions in all countries with large population of Indian Diaspora.  
In countries with lesser number of Diaspora, community welfare 
activities are assigned to officers handling Consular matters. All 
Missions have also set up 24X7 Emergency helplines which are 
displayed prominently on website of the Missions.  Missions are 

37 
 
accessible to Indian community through these helplines on 24 
hours basis. This mechanism has resulted in bridging the gap 
between the Indian community and Missions abroad.  These 
mechanisms have also instilled a feeling of better connection 
between the community and the Government. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 While examining ‘The Registration of Marriage of Non 
Resident Indian Bill, 2019’  referred to the Committee for 
examination and report, the Committee had considered all  the 
issues relating to NRI marriages including the provisions for 
registration of NRI marriages in various Central legislations and 
made recommendations/suggested amendments in the Bill. The 
Report of the Committee was presented to Parliament on 12  
March 2020. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
complete its consultations with  all the concerned 
Ministries/Departments and stakeholders in this regard at the 
earliest and enact a Legislation  for the benefit  of the Indian  
diaspora/NRIs. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry submitted the Recommendations of the 
Standing Committee on External Affairs in its 3 rd Report on the 

38 
 
Registration of Marriage of Non-Residential Indian Bill, 2019 along 
with the inputs received from Department of Legal Affairs 
(MoL&J), Legislative Departme nt (MoL&J) and Judicial Wing 
(MHA) to the Department of Legal Affairs (MoL&J) for further 
examination by the Ministry of Law and Justice and further 
reference to the Law Commission of India for in depth study/ 
examination as suggested by the Legislative De partment 
(MoL&J). 
 The matter has subsequently been referred to Department 
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice for recommendation 
to Law Commission of India vide Letter dated 31.08.2022 for 
detailed and in depth examination of the Registration of Marriage 
of Non-Residential Indian Bill, 2019. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 The Committee note that the Government had launched the 
Rishta Portal in December 2020 for real time engagement with 
the diaspora and around 15,000 registrations have been done on 
the Portal so far. Keeping in view the huge population of  the 
Indian diaspora in various countries,  the Committee find the 
response lukewarm and  desire that publicity/awareness 
programmes about the Portal should be disseminated widely so 
that the objective behind launching of the Portal is achieved. 
Efforts may also be made to ensure that the Portal serve as an 

39 
 
effective tool for the diaspora to contribute to the National  
development efforts of the Government. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee  are taken 
into account.  Missions/Posts are making all out efforts to 
popularize the Portal through  various means such as using social 
media including Facebook and Twitter  handles, community 
Whatsapp groups, Mission’s virtual news letters and adding the 
link of the portal to the Homepage of the Mission’s website. 
Heads of Missions have also held meetings with the office bearers 
of the Indian Associations and prominent membe rs of the 
diaspora. Indian Associations have been requested to spread the 
word about the existence of RISHTA portal and popularize  the 
Portal among Indians abroad. Missions and Posts have been 
explaining about the usefulness of the RISHTA portal to the Ind ia 
diaspora in various events of the Missions/Indian Cultural Centres 
such as during Pravasi Bharatiya Divas events, Hindi Divas, 
National Days, celebration of ICCR Foundation Day, various 
Indian festivals, etc. The response to the Portal has been picking 
up slowly as overseas Indians have started interacting with the 
Missions through the Portal. After getting some feedback from 
feedback from Missions/ Posts, the portal has been tweaked to 
improve its functionality. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 

40 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 The Committee note that e-Sanad, an electronic service 
delivery platform for Apostille and Attestation of documents 
issued by the Government of India aiming at contactless, cashless 
and paperless attestation , launched in 2017 is currently 
operational in  14 Centres (Branch Secretariats/RPOs) across the 
country as well as at Attestation/OI  Section of CPV Division of 
MEA, New Delhi. The Committee further note that since the  
launch of the e-Sanad Portal till 4 January 2022, 8,16,213 
documents have been successfully processed. The Committee 
feel that the project is extremely beneficial to the  Indian diaspora 
community and urge the Ministry to extend the service to Indian 
citizens residing abroad at the earliest. The Committee also 
desire that e-Sanad should be operationalized in all the States 
and UTs of the country in a phased manner. A timeline for  the 
same may be prepared and shared with the Committee. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 CPV Division in MEA which is the nodal Div ision for 
Attestation/Apostille services for legalisation of documents is 
already in the process of making e -Sanad online portal for 
Attestation/Apostille of documents more useful and accessible to 
all to get these services through online portal in an effi cient and 
transparent manner. In order to streamline the process of pre -
authentication involved before final Attestation/Apostille 

41 
 
documents, CPV Division in April, 2022 organised a brainstorming 
session with all Resident Commissioners of the State 
Governments based in Delhi, which was chaired by Secretary 
(CPV & OIA), followed by his letters to Chief Secretaries and 
Administrators in all the States and UTs to integrate various 
Documents Issuing Authorities (DIAs) in States and UTs to e -
Sanad and to enhance  the coordination and cooperation between 
MEA and State/UT Governments to appoint Nodal Officers in 
States/UTs to speed up the process of pre -authentication of 
documents issued by various DIAs in States/UTs in timely manner 
by the designated Regional authe ntication Centres of the 
State/UT Governments.  
 
 CPV Division is also in process of integrating around 1200 
academic institutes which are already registered with National 
Academic Depository (NAD) and on -board on DigiLocker through 
API Setu to e -Sanad.  O ut of 1200 institutes, 538 have already 
been linked to e -Sanad and being uploaded in the phase manner 
after trial. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 The Committee observe that a large number of Indian 
students are studying abroad  but many of them have not been 
registered with the Indian Missions/Posts. The Committee  are 
apprehensive that without such imprint, our Missions/Posts will 
not be in a position to  reach out to them in times of need/crisis. 

42 
 
The Committee  also feel that without constant  cultural 
engagement, students might lost touch with our Indian culture 
and ethos. The  Committee, therefore, desire that these students 
should be brought into closer contact with  the Indian Embassies. 
In this digital era, in creasing use of ICT tools may be promoted 
for the purpose. The Committee also urge the 
Missions/Consulates abroad to organize more  cultural 
events/themes showcasing the rich historical and cultural 
heritage of India on a  regular basis. Wide publicity of such 
cultural programmes may be given including through social media 
platforms and  Indian students abroad  may be encouraged to 
participate actively in such events. The Committee further desire 
that Indian Embassies/Consulates  should be very proactive in 
reaching out to our students in their universities/institutes so  that 
they are made to feel that our Missions/Posts are really a ‘Home  
away from Home’. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Ministry through Missions/Posts abroad have been actively 
encouraging students to get themselves registered online to 
enable the Government in taking decisions in time of need. The 
Ministry has been able to put in place a mechanism to enable a 
successful outreach in times of crisis; which the Ministry has been 
able to demonstrate during the recent Ukraine crisis. Also, it 
facilitates in creation/ modification database for various schemes 

43 
 
of the government. Head of Mission/Head of Post and senior 
officers visit Universities and educational institutions, where there 
are large numbers of Indian students, for regular interactions. As 
already informed, Indian students are engaged in various cultural 
events of the Missions/Posts and are also encourages to regularl y 
interact with the Missions/ Poss on various digital platforms.  
 Ministry is making all out efforts to involve Indian students 
through regular interactions either directly with the students or 
through various students Associations. Indian students are als o 
invited to National Day celebrations and other cultural events of 
the Missions/Posts. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry  as well as our 
Missions/Posts have been  receiving co mplaints from students 
regarding fake universities, unreasonable fee structure  and 
fraudulent agents/consultants duping the students going abroad. 
Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic and holding of only online classes, 
students are also facing difficulty in getti ng remission or refund of 
certain kinds of fees. The Committee desire that the issues faced 
by such students should be resolved at the earliest and urge the 
Ministry as well as Indian  Missions/Posts abroad to pursue the 
matter with the host countries, local authorities and  universities 
to ensure prompt redressal of the grievances of the said students. 

44 
 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has received information from Missions/Posts 
abroad that there have been very few cases of complaints 
regarding fake universities, unreasonable fee structure and cases 
of refund of fees. Our Missions/Posts have been actively taking up 
the matters, if received, whenever they occur, with the concerned 
authorities in the host government. Most of the cases do get 
resolved with the intervention of Mission/ Post.  
 
 The Missions/Posts also issue advisories to warn students 
about fake/unrecognized universities. Missions/Posts also share 
the link of the list of genuine universities on their website so that 
students may apply to  these universities only. Social media 
platforms are also utilized to sensitize the Indian students about 
the unrecognized universities. As per our information, the total 
number of such cases is not large. 
 
Global Indian Students Portal (GISP) : The Ministry has been 
working on setting up of the GISP. The need to set up this portal 
was felt due to the fact that a large number of Indian students 
are pursuing undergraduate, post graduate, post doctoral studies 
in various courses such as Medical, E ngineering, IT, Media, 
Management, Humanities etc, across the world and these 

45 
 
students face a number of issues before taking admission in 
foreign countries and after joining the courses as well. These 
issues can be addressed to a large extent if proper upd ated 
information is available to the students at one platform. The 
proposed Portal would provide such information to students in 
order to assist them in taking an informed decision in selecting 
courses in universities abroad and also in addressing their 
grievances during their stay abroad. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the plight of 
thousands of Indian students pursuing medical and other courses 
in Ukraine and China,  who could not return  back to these 
countries due to closure of their universities. These students 
have been left in a quandary as they could not re-join their 
courses physically or complete their internship or training in 
India. The Committee have been informed that MEA had 
recommended to  the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to 
consider allowing Indian private medical  institutions to enroll 
returnee students from Ukraine in their institutions on a one -time 
exemption basis. The Committee urge the Ministry to pursue the 
matter with the MoHFW  vigorously as this step  alone may solve 

46 
 
the current  crisis being faced  by the students  enrolled in  
Ukrainian universities and enable them to complete their courses. 
 
With regard to the Indian students enrolled i n Chinese 
universities, the Ministry has  stated that the Indian Embassy in 
Beijing is preparing a list of students to be shared with the 
Chinese side for consideration  for their return to China, on a 
need-assessed basis. Moreover, National Medical Commission has 
issued a circular on 04 March 2022 stating  that it has decided to 
accept application from such affected foreign medical graduates 
to complete the remaining part of their internship in India. The 
Committee appreciate the  efforts made in this regard and desire 
that the Ministry should finalize the list of students at the earliest 
and make all out efforts to ensure their smooth return through 
continuous interaction with the Chinese authorities at the Highest 
level, especially as COVID-19 related health protocols are in 
place and vaccination has also been widely done. Keeping in  view 
the fact that China has nearly five lakhs foreign students from 
various countries, the  Committee urge the MEA to get in touch 
with the Embassies of other countries so  that coordinated efforts 
are made to facilitate the return of such students to China for 
resumption of their in -person classes. The Committee also urge 
the Ministry to coordinate  with the MoHFW and National Health 
Commission so as to facilitate the medical students  enrolled in 

47 
 
medical colleges in China also to complete the remaining part of 
their internship in India. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has been consistently taking up the matter of 
return of Indian students with the Chinese authorities both in 
New Delhi and through our Embassy in China. The Government of 
People’s Republic of China had restricted travel to China by 
suspending visa and residence permits with effect from 28 March 
2020 due to the outbreak of COVID-19.  
 During the External Affairs Minister’s meeting with Foreign 
Minister of China on 25 March 2022, he raised the issue of 
medical students noting that such a restrictive policy puts the 
future of many Indian students in jeopardy.  
 
 The Chinese side expressed  its willingness to consider 
facilitating the return of a limited number of Indian students on a 
trial basis depending upon need. Accordingly the Embassy of 
India in Beijing issued a Press Release on 29 April 2022 seeking 
the details of students who intend  to return to China to continue 
their studies. A list of all such students willing to return to China 
was provided to the Chinese side for their consideration.  
 
 On 13 June 2022, Chinese Embassy in India issued a notice 
updating its visa policy for Indian  citizens. The notice stated they 

48 
 
will start accepting visa applications from (i) foreign nationals and 
their accompanying family members going to China for 
resumption of work and production in all fields; (ii) Family 
members of Chinese citizens and foreig ners with Chinese 
permanent residence permit going to China for family reunion or 
visiting relatives.  
 The two sides continued to work out further modalities for 
facilitating the return of Indian medical students to China. The 
two sides also discussed thi s issue during External Affairs 
Minister’s meeting with Foreign Minister of China on 07 July, 2022 
in Bali, Indonesia.  
 
 Meanwhile, Indian students who are studying in China were 
advised to continue checking our Embassy website for regular 
updates on the matter. They were also advised to remain in touch 
with their universities for any updates. 
 
 The Chinese side later conveyed that their universities are 
reaching out to Indian students to inform them about their 
eligibility to return. From 24 August 2022, the Chinese Embassy 
in India updated its visa requirements, indicating application 
procedures for students returning to China to resume their 
studies.  

49 
 
 The Ministry and Embassy have been continuing to pursue 
the Chinese side to complete the necessary form alities enabling 
the students’ return at an early date. In parallel, efforts are being 
made to raise with Chinese authorities issues being faced by 
Indian students (including difficulties in travel owing to 
restrictions imposed by the Chinese side). We hav e been actively 
seeking facilitation from the Chinese side for students’ return.  
 The Ministry has been in contact with the NMC and MoHFW 
regarding the issues pertaining to Indian medical students unable 
to return to China.  
 Issues relating to education o f Indian medical students from 
overseas are dealt as per extant rules and regulations of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and the National 
Medical Commission (NMC).  
 NMC has devised a scheme under which Indian medical 
students who did not  undergo physical clinical training due to the 
extraordinary situation, but were granted certificates of 
completion of degree by respective institutes in foreign countries, 
on or before 30 June 2022, will be permitted to appear in the 
Foreign Medical Gradu ate Examination (FMGE). Upon qualifying 
the FMGE, such students will be required to undergo Compulsory 
Rotating Medical Internship (CRMI) for a period of two years in 
order to be eligible for registration in India.  

50 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 The Committee are pleased to note that the Government has 
launched various programmes like VAJRA Faculty Scheme, 
PRABHASS and VAIBHAV to facilitate the  diaspora community to 
contribute or give back to the country. The VAJRA Faculty 
Scheme taps the expertise of International Faculty/ 
scientists/technologists including NRI  and PIO/OCI in highly 
competitive areas of research and development by offering them  
adjunct/visiting faculty positions in Indian 
Institutions/Universities while PRABHASS: Pravasi Bharatiya 
Academic and Scientific Sampark – Integrating Indian diaspora 
with the Motherland is an initiative to develop a database and a 
virtual platform to bring on  board the Global Indian S&T 
Community to address the domestic social challenges/problems. 
Under the aegis of PRABHASS, the  VAIBHAV Summit, a global  
virtual summit of overseas and resident Indian researchers and 
academicians was held in  2020. The Committee desire that more 
programmes should be  conducted under the aegis of these 
initiatives and wider dissemination  of the Schemes should  be 
made amongst the  diaspora through the Indian Missions/Posts. 
The outcome of the deliberations held under  these initiatives may 
also be integrated into the National Development Agenda. 
 

51 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry envisages engagement with all cross-sections of 
diaspora abroad, including academic and scientific verticals. The 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted by the Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 The Committee observe that Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is 
the flagship event of  the Government to celebrate the 
contributions of Indian community abroad in the development of 
the country. The participants of PBDs include Head of 
Governments/Head of  States and Ministers of Indian origin from 
other countries besides businessmen, educationists, scientists, 
engineers, doctors, research scholars and members of the 
common diaspora. The Committee are further informed that the 
participation for PBD celebration  is open for all diaspora including 
the migrant workers. The Committee, however,  are apprehensive 
that low/semi-skilled and blue collar workers may not find place 
or feel  comfortable to participate in the said celebration as the 
general profile of participants is seen to be of very high level. The 
Committee have a strong view that the participation and  
involvement should be more broad -based accommodating the 
vulnerable sections of the  diaspora community too . The 
Committee regret to note that at present the Ministry has no  
proposal to review the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Events. In the 

52 
 
opinion of the Committee,  there is a need for greater outreach 
and diverse participation under the PBD celebrations  and events. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
conduct a  review on the implementation of its flagship 
programme viz. the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas  to make the ‘Divas’  
truly representative of the ‘Pravasi Bharatiya’ community. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Government has taken various steps for wider engagement 
with our Diaspora. The scale of organization of PBD has been 
revamped in 2015 with much greater participation of diaspora. 
Level of participants include HoGs/HoSs & Ministers of Indian 
origin from other countries, renowned businessmen, eminnent 
members of diaspora abroad and experts from various fields.  We 
have tried to get diaspora participants from various sectors and 
disciplines, including but not limited to trade, business, youth, 
sports, science & technology, academics, research, engineering 
and culture; as well as from various segments of society, 
including youth diaspora, migrant workers and women.  
 During the upcoming 17 th PBD Convention scheduled in 
January 2023, there are special  plenary sessions dedicated to 
women and emigrant workers respectively. There would also be a 
special focus on the Ministry’s Scheme of ‘Surakshit Jao, 
Prashikshit Jao’ during the inaugural session. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 The Committee note that the action points generated out of 
PBD Conferences are  discussed with concerned Ministries and 

53 
 
stakeholders so that the same could be integrated  into the policy 
framework for the diaspora. The Ministry is, however, silent on 
the achievement regarding integration of such action points into 
its diaspora policy. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry 
to present a comprehensive details in this regard  and ensure that 
the policy inputs out of such discussions are derived and 
integrated into its policy framework for the diaspora of concerned 
Departments / Ministries so that the PBD  
Conferences/Conventions become more meaningful  to the 
diaspora community. 
   Reply of the Government 
           The action points generated out of PBD Conventions and  
Conferences are discuseed and shared with Ministries concerned 
for integration into policies. Some of them do find resonance in 
the outcome of various initiatives of the Government. For 
example, tweaking of t he migration policy, policy towards foreign 
nationals studying in India, canges in various diaspora - related 
schemes, offering of scholarships to diaspora children, cultural 
outrech programmes, implementation of VAJRA, PRABHASS, 
GYAN, SWADES, ASIM schemes are some outcomes of such 
inputs.    
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 

54 
 
 The Committee note that Bharat ko Janiye Quiz is one of the 
important initiatives of the Government of India to engage Indian 
diaspora and friends of India. However, the  details regarding the 
level of participation under the various categories has not been 
provided by the Ministry. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
should popularize the  programme through wide publicity so that 
the number of participants, especially students, is increased and 
the desired impact is achieved amongst the diaspora community. 
The Committee also desire that a separate category for school 
children should be introduced under the BKJ Quiz. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz is open for all NRI, OCI and 
Foreign youths between the age group 18-35 years irrespective of 
their profession. All out efforts for popularizing  the quiz were 
made through Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  The BKJ quiz ha s 
one element of Bharat Darshan tour for winners which is to 
encourage more participation. Recently, Ministry organized a quiz 
titled “Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotasav”,  to commemorate the 75 years 
of India’s independence,  which was opened for all NRI, OCI and 
Foreign youths. In order to increase the participation of school 
children the minimum age  for participation  was decreased to 14 
years from 18 years and the response was good, especially from 
foreign youth. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 

55 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 The Committee commend the initiatives taken by the Ministry 
in organizing the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) online Quiz for 
the overseas Indian/Foreign youth and  MEA AKAM  Week to 
celebrate and commemorate 75 years of independence and the  
glorious history of our people, culture and achievements.  It is 
also seen that during the  MEA AKAM Week, a series of 
commemorative events and activities were organized by the  
Ministry across the country with participation of various 
stakeholders including members of the public, dignitaries, foreign 
diplomats, students, media etc. The Committee note that  the 
Ministry has made special efforts to ensure active and 
enthusiastic participation by the  residents of Foreign Missions in 
India also during the MEA AKAM Week to make it truly  reflective 
of our ideals and practice of ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’. The 
Committee are of  the view that these initiatives will bring the 
Indian diaspora community closer to their roots, foster the sense 
of patriotism amongst Indian nationals in the country and 
abroad as well as promote Indian culture and its soft power 
projection abroad. The Committee, therefore,  urge the Ministry to 
organize events on themes related to the history and culture of 
India annually through the Ind ian Missions/Posts abroad and 
make the celebration of MEA AKAM Week an annual affair. 
 
      

56 
 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 
 Indian Missions/ Posts abroad have celebrated over 8800 
AKAM related events in physical/ hybrid format keeping in view 
the Covid-19 guidelines and restrictions in various countries. The 
details are being regularly shared with the Ministry of Culture. A 
wide range of events commemorating the ‘Azadi Ka Amrit 
Mahotsav’ were held by the Indian Missions/ Posts in July - August 
2022. The Missions/ Posts abroad will also continue to publicize 
multiple AKAM eventsbeing organized by them by directly 
uploading the det ails on Ministry of Culture’s AKAM portal 
(amritmahotsav.nic.in) on real time basis.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 The Committee appreciate the assistance rendered to 
distressed/stranded Indian  nationals abroad under the ICWF 
during the COVID -19 Pandemic. The funds collected  under the 
ICWF have been adequate for the Indian diaspora abroad and an 
amount of Rs.  429 crore is available in the ICWF as on 31 
December 2021. The Committee also observe  that in case  some 
Missions/Posts had to incur expenditure beyond the ICWF 
collected by  them, funds are transferred from one Mission/Post 
to another upon request. The Committee acknowledge that due 

57 
 
to various unforeseen circumstances like the COVID -19 
Pandemic, political crisis requiring evacuation of Indian nationals, 
natural disasters etc.,  some Missions/Posts might require 
additional funds and desire that the Ministry should  have an 
institutional arrangement to assist such Missions/Posts to meet 
any eventuality. The Committee also desire that the Ministry 
should facilitate transfer of funds from one  Mission/Post to 
another upon request after ensuring its merit expeditiously. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry receives requests from Missions/Posts abroad 
for additional funds to replenish their ICWF account, especially 
during emergent situations to assist Indian nationals including 
evacuations from the affected countries. During January -July 
2022 Ministry has approved several such transfers of funds from 
one In dian Mission to another Mission abroad to replenish the 
ICWF accounts of the recipient Mission. During this period 
approximately Rs.7.63 crore was transferred to nine (9) Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to replenish their respective ICWF accounts 
by other Mis sions/Posts from their respective ICWF accounts, to 
incur expenditure on ICWF assistance, including handling of 
crises/emergency situations. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
 The Committee note that the ICWF guid elines have been 
revised w.e.f 1 September  2017 considerably expanding the 
scope of on-site welfare activities for the benefit of distressed 

58 
 
Indian nationals who could be assisted through the Fund. The 
revised guidelines  now include provisions for setting up of legal 
panels in countries with sizeable Indian  diaspora, payment of 
fines/penalty for petty crimes for release of prisoners and 
assistance to distressed Indian women abroad. The Committee 
further note that all Indian Missions/Posts, where there are a 
substantial number of Indian workers, have legal panels. 
However, keeping in view the fact that migrant workers and 
distressed Indian women, who are the most vulnerable sections of 
the diaspora community, are in almost all the countries  but may 
not have the resources for legal assistance in case of need, the 
Committee recommend that legal panels may be set up in all the 
Indian Missions/Posts having diaspora community, irrespective of 
the size of the diaspora. 
 
   Reply of the Government 
        Forming of a Panel of Lawyers in the GCC and top 20 
countries with large Indian Diaspora has been provided for in the 
revised ICWF guidelines just as an internal procedural 
requirement of the Missions. This does not affect timely legal 
assistance to the In dian nationals requiring legal assistance 
through ICWF. Indian nationals needing legal assistance have to 
approach the concerned Mission to seek legal assistance 
irrespective of the fact whether a panel of lawyers exists or not. 
All Missions are authorized  to provide legal assistance to needy 

59 
 
Indian nationals through ICWF on means tested basis even if 
panel of lawyers has not been set up. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 The Committee note that though the Ministry attaches 
highest importance to the  issue of expeditious transportation of 
mortal remains of Indians who die abroad, several  instances of 
facing extreme difficulties have  come to notice in bringing  the 
dead bodies back home. Hence, the Committee fe lt the need for 
simplification of procedures in this  regard. However, it is seen 
that at present the Ministry has no plans to simplify the latest  
guidelines of the ICWF as it has already simplified almost all 
aspects of ICWF guidelines  including the process for 
transportation of mortal remains. The Ministry has also stated  
that the local procedures for transportation of mortal  remains 
differ from country  to country and the time taken in obtaining 
necessary clearances etc., depends upon t he local rules in foreign 
countries. The Committee, therefore, desire that utmost priority 
should be attached to the humanitarian concerns relating to the 
transportation of mortal remains of  Indian nationals who die 
abroad and all out efforts should be made by the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to ensure the expeditious transportation  of 
the mortal  remains. Head of Missions/Head of Posts may be 
proactive in coordinating with the local authorities  for obtaining 

60 
 
the necessary clearances and utilize their delega ted powers 
whenever there is a delay. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The utmost priority is accorded to the humanitarian 
concerns relating to the transportation of mortal remains of 
Indian nationals who die abroad and all out efforts are being 
made by the Indian Missions/Posts abroad to ensure the 
expeditious transportation of the mortal remains. Head of 
Missions/Head of Posts are  proactive in coordinating with the 
local authorities for obtaining the necessary clearances and utilize 
their delegated powers whenever there is a delay.   During 
January-June, 2022 the Missions/Posts have incurred an 
expenditure of Indian Rupees 3.82 crore out of ICWF and 
recorded 251 instances in which mortal remains of Indian 
nationals were sent to India. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 The Committee observe that multiple grievance Portals such 
as MADAD, e -Migrate, and CPGRAMS exist in addition to Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras for online redressal of grievances of 
Indian nationals abroad. MADAD is the primary platform for  
consular complaints in general while e -Migrate is for addressing 
all matters related to  recruitment and employment of workers 
including related grievances. The Ministry h as further stated that 
consular grievances are also received through CPGRAMS, mainly 
from family members of NRIs residing in India. While 
acknowledging that MADAD and e - Migrate portal are interlinked 

61 
 
and e-Migrate is also a sub -portal for MADAD handling a  specific 
area, the Committee are apprehensive that multiple grievance 
Portals might lead to  delay in resolving the grievances of Indian 
nationals abroad. The Committee, therefore,  urge the Ministry to 
ensure that multiplicity of grievance portals do not lead to 
duplication or overlapping of work or difficulty in sieving the 
complaints/grievances registered so as to  ensure quick and 
satisfactory resolution of the grievances of the Indian workers 
abroad and make the desired modification in this regard. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry tries its best to ensure that multiplicity of 
grievances do not lead to duplication or overlapping of work or 
difficulty in sieving the complaints/grievances. A senior level 
officer in the OE&PGE Division has been ass igned to monitor and 
to ensure quick and satisfactory resolution of the grievances 
received from the Indian migrant workers, in a timely manner.  
 The MADAD Portal is regularly monitored at higher level in 
Ministry. Given its popularity and effectiveness in  the grievance 
redressal, MADAD Portal has been further expanded and MADAD 
has now become an effective tool for providing consular 
assistance as well.   Multilingual Call Centres, Student 
Registration, Prisoners Module, Integration with the portal 
“eMigrate”, Integration with State Governments in India, Module 

62 
 
for assistance through Indian Community Welfare Fund, etc. have 
been added to the scope of the portal. 
MADAD can be accessed through website 
(www.madad.gov.in) or through mobile app.   So far around 
81000 grievances have been registered and out of which around 
77000 with an  impressive resolvement rate of over 95%  have 
been resolved. Similarly, on  MADAD Twitter handle, over 186000 
tweets have been received so far, out of which around 99 percent 
have been replied to. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 The Committee note the CPGRAMS portal is the quickest way 
to interact with the  State Governments or district police as it is 
connected down to the thana level. Despite its  advantages, the 
CPGRAMS portal is not as popular overseas as it is within the 
country. In  view of the fact that the resolution of grievances in 
most cases may require a connect with  the local level, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should generate more 
awareness regarding the CPGRAMS Portal among the Indian 
nationals abroad too so that the Portal  can serve as an  effective 
tool in speedy redressal of their grievances. 

63 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 It may be mentioned that the progress in redressal/disposal 
of grievances on CPGRAMS is closely monitored by DARPG as well 
as PMO at the highest level through periodically review meetings 
stressing on expeditious ac tion on the cases pending on 
CPGRAMS Portal for redressal, especially those which are pending 
beyond the stipulated time of 30 days . Therefore, from time to 
time, MEA instructs the Indian Missions/Posts for due importance 
to be given to grievances/complain ts lodged/registered in 
CPGRAMS to ensure speedy redressal of grievances/complaints 
on CPGRAMS and to generate more awareness among NRIs to 
make the Portal successful in abroad also. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 The Committee note that a large number of grievances have 
been registered on the online MADAD portal/e-Migrate portal over 
the years but the status of redressal of such  grievances has been 
far from satisfactory. The number of grievances 
unresolved/pending in  the various Embassies, Consulates and 
offices of the Protector of Emigrants are quite high.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to bring about qualitative 
and quantitative improvements in the grievance redressal system 
so that  all the pending cases are resolved  within a specified 
timeframe and the response time is also reduced to the 
minimum. The  Committee may also be apprised of the specific 
steps being taken/proposed to achieve the same. 
    Reply of the Government 

64 
 
 A large number of grievances are being registered by Indian 
emigrants on eMigrate and MADAD Portals. The Ministry has 
taken several steps to strengthen grievances redressal 
mechanisms and other measures to ensure speedy resolution of 
emigrant’s grievances including  those received by our 
Missions/Posts abroad. A multilingual 24X7 helpline of Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) provides information, 
guidance and grievances redressal on all issues and problems 
pertaining to Indian workers. The unresolved/pending g rievances 
are monitored by a senior level officer, who remains in touch with 
the Protector of Emigrants(POEs) and Missions/Posts abroad for 
timely resolution of pending grievances. From time to time, the 
Head of the Division interacts with all concerned au thorities to 
resolve the grievances in a specified time frame. Necessary 
instruction are also issued to the concerned Registered Agents at 
regular intervals to make necessary efforts for resolution of all 
pending grievances against them to the satisfaction  of migrant 
workers/Ministry and provide update about the efforts made by 
them in this regard. 
 
 As MADAD Portal is regularly monitored at the higher level in 
Ministry, all concerned including Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
have been instructed to give top priority to attend and resolve the 
grievances and complaints registered on MADAD Portal. As a 
result, MADAD Portal has a very impressive resolvement rate of 
95 percent and become an effective and popular tool in the 
grievance redressal and to provide consular assistance as well. 

65 
 
The number of grievances/complaints which remain unresolved 
are below 5 percent are  related to cases where the action on 
foreign governments are involved, like matters related to death 
compensation, release of sentenced prisoners and other legal 
issues, jobs, students studying in foreign universities, etc. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 The Committee note that the Emigration Bill, 2022 which 
seeks to establish a robust, transparent and comprehensive 
emigration framework involving State Governments, Union 
Territories and other stakeholders has  been under consultation 
and vetting for long. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
complete all the formalities at the earliest and introduce the Bill in 
Parliament so as to ensure the welfare/protection of  Indian 
migrants and empower them for overseas employment. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The  Emigration Bill, 2022 in consultation with Ministry of 
Labour and Employment is in  advanced stage and will be 
introduced into the Parliament in near future. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 

66 
 
 The Committee note that the number of insurance policies 
issued under the Pravasi  Bharatiya Bima Yojana has gone down 
since 2017-18 with drastic reductions in the number during 
2020-21 and 2021 -22 as compared to the earlier yea rs. Since 
2016-17, only 2915 claims have been received upto 2021 -22 out 
of which 2112 claims have been settled  which is far from 
satisfactory. The Ministry has revealed in this regard that the 
insurance companies rejecting the claims of the migrant workers  
on flimsy grounds has been the  reasons for pendency of claims.  
Keeping in view the fact that migrants  workers are the  most 
vulnerable section of the diaspora community,  the Committee are 
of the view that  special protection is needed for these poor and 
simple workers so that they are not left at  the mercy of insurance 
companies. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take 
up the cause of these workers and ensure that their claims are 
settled by the insurance companies expeditiously. Efforts may 
also be made to increase the number of insurance  policies issued 
so that all the eligible workers are covered under the PBBY. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry invariably takes up the  cause  of  such workers 
whenever such cases are brought to its knowledge  and  ensures  
that  their  claims  are  settled  by  the  insurance companies  
expeditiously.  Besides, efforts  are being  made  to  increase  the  
number  of  insurance policies issued so that all the eligible 
workers are covered under the PBBY.  PBBY,  is mandatory for  all 
citizens of India who apply for and obtain an emigration clearance 

67 
 
as required under the Emigration Act, 1983 (31 of 1983)  as well 
as emigrants going for overseas employment for various 
professions  falling  under  work  categories  covered  under  
Section  2  (o)  of  Emigration  Act,  1983  irrespective  of  the  
passport category. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry is expanding its PDOT 
programme by opening more centres at major overseas migration 
hot spots in the country taking the total  number of such centres 
from 31 to 100. The Committee further note that for new centres, 
the Ministry is planning to partner with industry bodies such as 
CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM  and Common Services Centre, e-
Governance Service India limited of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information besides the NSDC. Keeping in view the fact that 
enhancing the  soft skills of migrant workers is crucial for their 
employability and realisation of better  returns for their skills/jobs, 
the Committee desire that the modalities for imparting PDOT by 
industry bodies and Government agencies should be finalized at 
the earliest. The Committee also urge the Ministry to prepare a 
year and area-wise action plan to cover such parts of the 
country which are not covered under the programme so far, 
including the  North-eastern region. Since collaboration with the 
State Governments is essential for the  successful implementation 
of the programme,  an effective mechanism for the same  may 
also be evolved at the earliest. 

68 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Recently, Ministry had opened 58 new PDOT centres to be 
run through State Agencies of concerned State Government.  
Presnetly, 90 PDOT centres are operational.  A new PDOT centre 
will be opened in Tripura soon. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 The Committee note that online PDOT is helping the Ministry 
in providing training  to more migrants even in remote areas and 
has drawn very positive response from participants, especially 
women participants. The Committee are happy that the Ministry  
intends to continue online PDO training post COVID and provide 
both online and in - person training options to prospective 
emigrants. The Committee are of the view that the  number of 
prospective emigrants would  increase with the opening up of 
international labour markets in the post COVID period and hence 
urge the Ministry to work out a target  oriented annual action plan 
for imparting both offline and online PDO training and make  
provisions for adequate resources to meet the challenges. 
    Reply of the Government 
         The Ministry is able to  make provisions for adequate 
resources to meet the challenges arising on account of increase in 
the number of prospective emigrants  with the opening up of 
international labour markets in the post COVID period.   

69 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 38) 
 The Committee are pleased to note that after the launch of 
the Global Passport Seva Project, no complaint regarding passport 
services has been received from the Indian diaspora. The GPSP 
system has provided a platform for expedited redressal of 
grievances because of real time availability of the data and 
standardized processes developed under the system.  The 
Committee further note that  as on 25 th December 2021,  a total 
of 176  Indian Missions/Posts have been integrated into the 
Passport Seva Programme through the  Global Passport Seva 
Project and integration of the remaining 5 Indian Missions/Posts 
viz, Chiangmai, Thailand; Islamabad, Pakistan; Pyongyang, DPR 
Korea; Mazar-e-Sharif, Afghanistan and Kabul -Afghanistan is in 
progress. The Committee urge the Ministry to  complete the 
integration of these Missions/Posts through the GPSP system 
within a specified timeframe so that the Indian diaspora 
community in the said countries can enjoy  smooth, hassle free  
and expedited passport services. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has launched a new updated portal in October 
2018 for Diaspora seeking passport related services. The 
Diaspora can easily apply and avail services smoothly through a 
single window portal https://embassy.passportindia.gov.in/ .  As 

70 
 
on date 178 (179 including Taiwan) Indian Missions/Posts have 
been integrated into passport seva programme.   
 
 In the upcoming PSP V2.0, the Diaspora will be provided 
with the facility to upload their photograph o nline and would not 
require to print the online filled up form to be produced at the 
time of processing to the outsource agency engaged by the 
Ministry. The Ministry is also working on the modalities of 
accepting fee online directly through the online port al at the time 
of submission of online form. The applicant would also be 
provided with ‘Chat Bot’ assistance and the online form will be 
dynamically designed with guided document advisor.  
 
 The police verification (PV) process has been integrated 
online and any Mission/Post requiring a fresh police report for an 
applicant can directly trigger the PV process to concerned Police 
District online (or to Thana level wherever integrated). The GPSP 
application has provision to cater to these requirements. Once the  
police authority verifies and submits the PV report, the same is 
received on a real time basis by the concerned Mission/Post. This 
has drastically reduced the PV time for the Mission/Post. The 
integration has also helped in real time fetching and verifica tion 
of applicant available credentials directly from the central 
passport database (PRIDE) and thus resulting in timely and 
appropriate decisions by the PIAs across the Globe. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 39) 

71 
 
 The Committee note that since inception of the Know India 
Programme (KIP) in  2004, 59 editions of KIP have been held 
with the partnership of 22 States and Union  Territories and a 
total of 2061 diaspora youth participated in the KIPs. The 
Committee further note that the Ministry could not host any KIP 
edition in 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 because of the ongoing COVID -
19 Pandemic. Keeping in view its objectives of reconnecting  
young persons of Indian origin  with their motherland  and 
motivating and inspiring  them by the transformations taking 
place in contemporary India, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
conduct more editions of KIP in the current financial year, as the 
COVID-19 Pandemic situation has improved. States and Union 
Territories who have not partnered  with the Government so far 
under KIP should be pursued to ensure their active participation 
under the Scheme. 
 
    
    Reply of the Government 
          The Ministry has already announced the six (06) editions, 
from 60th to 65th, for the current Financial Year  2022-23 and the 
60th edition of KIP has successfully been conducted from 25 th 
August to 14 th September, 2022 with the partner State Goa.  
Willingness from 06 partner states for hosting the state leg of the 
06 editions scheduled in FY 2022 -23 has already b een received 

72 
 
by the Ministry. However, the views of the esteemed Committee 
has been duly noted and more stringent effort would be made 
regarding the partnership under KIP with the State 
Government/Union Territories who have not partnered in 
previous edition.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 40) 
 The Committee note that the Pravasi Teerth Darshan 
Yojana (PTDY) is a fairly new scheme launched in the financial 
year 2018 -19. Only four editions of this programme  have been  
conducted so far with the participation of 160 PIOs. Two editions 
of PTDY are  scheduled for 2021 -22 but have not yet been 
announced due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. The Committee desire 
that the Ministry should make efforts to conduct PTDY in the  
current year as the COVID-19 Pandemic situation in the country 
has improved. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
popularize the Scheme amongst the elder generation of the 
diaspora community so that they can utilize the opportunity to 
reconnect with their roots. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
         The PTDY was not conducted in the FY 2020 -21 and 2021 -
22 due to COVID -19 pandemic. MOU for the year 2020 -21 could 
not be signed due to the ongoing pandemic conditions at the 
time. However, the Ministry is continuously in touch with the 

73 
 
IRCTC and the Ministry of Railways and is  making efforts to start 
the PTDY as early as possible. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 41) 
 The Committee note that the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC) introduced in 2006-07 was revamped in 
the Academic Year 2015 -16 extending it to children  of Indian 
workers in 17 ECR countries. Out of the 150 scholarships offered 
every year, 50  are reserved for PIOs, 50 for NRIs and 50 for 
children of Indian workers in ECR countries.  The Committee 
further note that except for the year 2019 -20, the number of 
slots have not  been filled up totally. Moreover, the number of 
seats utilized for children of Indian workers  who studied in India 
has been very low.  The Committee regret to note tha t the 
progress under this important Scheme has been slow from the 
start and the applications received  from eligible students were 
not many. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to  
popularize the scheme through wide  publicity with the active 
participation of the State Governments and other stakeholders so 
that children of Indian workers who may not have the resources 
to continue higher studies, may get the opportunity to do so. 
    Reply of the Government 

74 
 
          This is to state that all 150 slots under the SPDC Scheme 
were filled in the academic year 2019 -20. The SPDC for the year 
2020-21 was not announced due to COVID -19 pandemic.  
Subsequently, after the programme was restarted after the 
Covid-19 pandemic, all 150 slots were filled up for AY 2021 -22, 
and the programme is back on track. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 42) 
 The Committee also note that  the SPDC Programme for the 
year 2020-21 could not be announced due to the COVID -19 
Pandemic while the Programme for the year  2021-22 is under 
process. The Committee urge the Ministry to finalize the SPDC 
programme for 2021-22 and 2022-23 without delay so that the 
needy students belonging to the diaspora community are not 
deprived of the benefits of the Scheme. 
    Reply of the Government 
          The SPDC for the year 2021 -22 had been announced and 
all the 150 slots were filled.  The process for the SPDC Scheme 
for the year 2022 -23 is underway and the same will be 
announced shortly. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 43) 
 The Committee note that under the Scheme of Promotion of 
Cultural Ties with  Diaspora started in 2005, the Ministry provides 

75 
 
grants to Indian Missions/Posts abroad to  support their initiatives 
aimed at strengthening ties with the Overseas Indian Community  
and also in preserving,  maintaining and showcasing  Indian 
heritage and culture. Grants are also provided to think-tanks and 
organizations in India which organize events pertaining to the 
overseas Indian community. The Committee further note that the 
Ministry has started a concerted effort to encourage our 
Missions/Posts to organize activities  under this Scheme and an 
amount of Rs. 5.45 crore has been utilized since 2016. However, 
the Committee are of the view that the number of programmes 
and activities  organized under the Scheme so far are not 
adequate and the expenditure incurred since  2016-17 for the 
same is very meagre.  The Committee,  therefore, urge the 
Ministry to  pursue the Indian Missions/Posts abroad to conduct 
more programmes and activities aimed at promoting cultural ties 
with our diaspora and provide sufficient funding to think - 
tanks/organizations for the same. The Ministry may also assess 
the nature and types of  programmes/activities that can be taken 
up to nourish and strengthen the cultural bonds  between India 
and its diaspora. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has made all out efforts and our Missions and 
Posts and Posts abroad have been able to design more 
programmes under the PCTD Schme since the reopening of 
engagement activities after Covid -19 pandemic; and we have 

76 
 
been able to sanction a higher  budget in the current FY for this 
purpose. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 44) 
 The Committee note that there are about 479 Diaspora 
Associations working with  Indian Missions to support their 
initiatives aimed at strengthening ties with the Overseas  Indian 
Community under PCTD. The Committee further note that 
Diaspora Association(s)  do not exist in some countries and 
Missions/Posts work directly with the diaspora in many  countries. 
The Committee feel that only a st rong and vibrant Diaspora 
Association can  effectively coordinate and implement various 
programmes/activities for strengthening the  cultural bonds 
between India and its diaspora. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the  Indian Missions/Posts abroad should encourage 
establishment/formation of Diaspora Associations in those 
countries where no such association exists.  The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to facilitate deeper and broader engagements 
with the Diaspora Associations  by all the Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Most of outreach and cultural promotion events particularly 
under Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav are carried out under ‘Jan 
Bhagidari’. The Ministry has been encouraging Missions/Posts for 

77 
 
establishment/formation of Diaspora Associations in those 
countries where there are no associations. There are various 
schemes and initiatives which arm our Missions and Posts abroad 
to strengthen these associations and also assist them financially. 
As a result, we have made a headway in increasing the number of 
Diaspora Associations and Organizations and as per data 
available, there are now  566 Diaspora Associations/ 
Organizations working with the Missions as on date.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 45) 
 The Committee note that the erstwhile PIO Card Scheme, 
launched in 1999 was  merged with OCI Scheme in 2015. The 
process of submission of OCI card application has  also been 
streamlined. In view of the ongoing COVID -19 Pandemic, the 
timeline for re- issuance of OCI cards has also been temporarily 
extended upto 31 December, 2022. The  Committee further note 
that the registration of OCI cardholder has been increased 
significantly during the last few years and a total of 23,39,104 
OCI cards have bee n issued  from 2015 till  29 December 2021 
bringing the average cards issued per annum to 3,35,157.  
However, keeping in view the fact that there are over 18 million 
PIOs spread across the  globe, the Committee feel that the 
response under the Scheme has been  slow and the  number of 
OCI cards issued so far is inadequate. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to popularize the Scheme amongst the targeted 
group through wider dissemination of information through social 

78 
 
media platforms also, in coordination wi th the State Governments 
and other stakeholders. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) S cheme is hugely 
popular amongst the Indian diaspora as it provides several 
benefits in various matters to the Indian Diaspora present 
worldwide. Due publicity is given by the  Ministry and Indian 
Missions abroad for the popularization of the OCI Cardholder 
Scheme. As recommended by the Committee, Ministry has noted 
it for compliance and will further issue directions to all Indian 
Mission/Consulate abroad to give even wider publ icity widely 
through Missions/Posts’ websites  to the OCI Scheme and share 
the benefits of OCI Scheme like life-long visa and parity with NRIs 
in various matters, especially in economic, financial and 
educational matters. Also, through electronic and print media, 
digital social media platforms and also regular interactions with 
the Indian community and reaching them out at all level, so as to 
popularize the ‘PIO to OCI card’ Scheme amongst the PIOs 
spread all over the globe. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 46) 
 The Committee note that the OCI policy falls under the 
purview of MHA, while its  implementation is done primarily 
through Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  The Committee desire that 
the process of registration and issuance of OCI cards should be 
sped up and  urge the Ministry to identify all the bottlenecks 
including lack of clarity in policy matters,  procedural difficulties, 
technical grievances etc. and resolve the same through improved  

79 
 
coordination with the MHA so  that conversion of all PIO cards to 
OCI cards is completed by the deadline of 31st December 2022. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of External Affairs regularly shares and takes up 
the difficulties being faced by applicants and feedback with 
suggestions regarding  lack of clarity, if received from PIOs 
directly or through Missions/Posts abroad with MHA on regular 
basis for appropriate amendments and relaxations in the policies 
to make it more user friendly and reduce the time in issuance of 
OCI cards to such applicants.  
 As recommended by the Committee, for conversion of more 
and more PIO cards to OCI Cards before the deadline and to 
encourage more and more PIOs to apply for OCI cards, any 
bottlenecks which slow down the process and discourage the  
applicants are being taken up with the MHA. W ider publicity to 
the OCI Scheme is being given at all levels through all possible 
channels/platforms to interact and disseminate OCI related 
information with targeted PIO population abroad. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 48) 
 The Committee note that MEA is coordinating with MSDE and 
NSDC to develop  skill training of potential migrants in 
collaboration with the State Governments. Under the  Pravasi 

80 
 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana, the MEA and MSDE are jointly 
collaborating as partners to enhance the skills set of potential 
emigrant workers in select sectors and job roles, in line  with 
international standards, to facilitate overseas employment. MSDE 
conducted training  for the first batch of 600 candidates on pilot 
basis in 2018. But the Committee did not find  any significant 
progress in development of new model on Private Public 
Partnership. The  Committee, therefore, desire that MEA and 
MSDE should work together in a time bound  manner in 
overcoming the challenges in  respect of international migration 
by redefining  the ‘core employability skills’ to include critical 
soft skills besides technical skills, developing skilling curriculum 
in line with the demand of the international labour market, 
dissemination of labour related opportunities abroad and 
availability of training courses  through the State Governments 
etc. The Committee also feel that adequate steps have not  been 
taken so far to tap the skills and competencies acquired by 
Indian workers abroad and urge the Ministry to work out a 
strategy in collaboration with other stakeholders so that skills and 
technical knowhow acquired at destination countries by the 
migrant workers are tapped and passed on.. The Ministry has also 
stated that the IISCs are spread  across 261 districts of the 
country, while covering 68% of the top 50 migrating districts.  
The Committee desire that each potential migrant worker should 
be given the opportunity  to receive skill training and recommend 

81 
 
for setting up of IISCs in all the remaining migrating districts of 
the country in the shortest possible time. 
    Reply of the Government 
  Inputs received from MSDE are as under: 
 NSDCI under international mobility initiatives is providing 
trainings on technical skills, soft skills, language skills 
(wherever applicable) and employability skills for Indian 
workers migrating to overseas countries. Further, NSDCI is 
in discussions with  MEA for revising PDOT scheme, which 
shall be added as a training component under mobility 
initiatives.  
 NSDCI has set -up its offices in UAE (for GCC countries), 
Japan and Australia for passing of knowledge on skills and 
knowhow acquired by the candidates in the destination 
country after migrating from India. NSDCI has entered into 
G2G agreement with Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for skills 
harmonization. On similar lines discussions have been 
proposed with UAE. Furthermore, mutual acceptance of 
qualifications with Australia is under discussion. 
 NSDCI has developed empanelment guidelines for Skill 
India International Centre (SIIC). SIIC shall play a pivotal 
role in servicing demand through facilitation of sourcing, 
counselling, training, assessment, certification,  recruitment 

82 
 
and immigration of candidates. As on date, 33 SIICs have 
been empaneled under Skill India International.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 49) 
 The Committee are pleased to note that the first Upskilling 
& Training Centre in the UAE has been set up in January 2021 in 
Dubai for improving the skills of the migrant  workers. Such 
upskilling sessions have also been organized in Sharjah and 
Ajman and  about 350 Indian workers have participated in such 
programmes. Keeping in view the huge  number of migrant 
workers in the Gulf countries, the Committee desire that 
adequate number of such training centres should be set up in all 
Gulf Cooperation Countries where  sizeable number of low skilled 
and semi-skilled Indian migrants are working. Efforts may  also be 
made to increase the level of participation of the said workers in 
the upskilling  programmes to ensure favourable condition of 
employment and better returns and the MEA through its Missions/ 
Posts should actively facilitate the same. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry will extend necessary support to requests 
received from Missions/Posts in other Gulf countries, for 
establishment of more such Upskilling and Training Centres. 
Efforts are already being made by our Missions/Posts to increase 

83 
 
the participation of Indian workers in such Upskilling programmes 
and further impetus will be given on this outreach as 
recommended by the Committee. 
 Inputs received from MSDE are as under: 
 An MoU was signed between  Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and The National Qualifications 
Authority, UAE on 29 th April 2016 to collaborate in the area 
of mutual recognition of qualifications. This collaboration will 
specifically benefit Indians who aspire to work overseas.  
 NSDC International Ltd. has launched Project TEJAS 
(Training for Emirates Jobs and Skills) to train, certify and 
place 10,000 Indians in the GCC region in 1 year in 
partnership with some of the leading employers, in the 
region. Going forward, the project will be scaled to place 
1,00,000 Indian workers across the GCC region over the next 
5 years. Ea ch element of the TEJAS program has been 
designed to ensure that only skilled and certified candidates 
are placed in the GCC region.   The project will provide the 
Indian workforce with requisite skills and certification as per 
global standards. 
 NSDC signed  an agreement with United Assessment and 
Certification, UAE to implement the pilot program. Wherein, 
the Indian training centres mobilized the candidates for 
providing Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) on 

84 
 
benchmarked qualifications (Assistant Electrician , Mason 
General, Mason Tiling, Construction Electrician). Out of 133, 
63 candidates were selected for deployment by UAE 
Government. Post interviews, 18 Certified candidates were 
deployed in UAE on incentivized work permit fees in 
February/March 2020. 
 In partnership with UAE’s leading driving training institution 
Emirates Driving Institute (EDI) and India’s Learnet Driving 
Training Institute, an India -UAE hybrid training and licensing 
facility has been established in Ajmer, Rajasthan. Pilot batch 
of 10 candi dates have finished the training and fly out to 
Dubai in April 2022. Talks have also been initiated with EDI 
to provide taxi driver training at the existing Ajmer facility. 
And Dubai Taxi, a 100% government owned company has 
committed to employ approximate ly 80 taxi drivers annually 
coming through this program. Further, NSDCI plans to 
collaborate with other training institutions to expand the 
existing facilities across India. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 50) 
 
 The Committee note that the international labour market is 
now demand driven as  compared to the earlier supply driven 
system. With the emergence of new labour markets  in East and 
South East Asia including Japan, Korea, Taiwan etc. and in 

85 
 
countries of Europe, skilling of potential migrant  workers and to 
provide matching skills with the  destination countries is a new 
challenge, especially in the post COVID era. The need of the  hour 
is to improve the quality of our domestic skilling and standardize 
curriculum acr oss the country so that migrant workers can go 
abroad and secure employment with better  wages. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the MEA to work in close collaboration 
with the  Ministry of Skill Development  and Entrepreneurship in 
this regard and make all out  efforts to facilitate migrant workers 
to go abroad with the requisite skill sets and competencies in line 
with the demand of international labour markets and the 
destination countries. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has already initiated discussions with the 
Ministry of Skill Development  & Entrepreneurship in this regard 
and is hopeful of arrive at a common agreement in near future.  
 
Inputs received from MSDE are as under: 
 
Global Skill gap studies and market research need to be pursued 
to keep abreast with the latest job market scenarios – for 
partnering with prospective destination countries for workforce 
mobility projects. It gives an insight on the: 

86 
 
 Latest trends of job market in the destination countries 
 Popular sectors in demand where worker employment 
can be pursued 
 Skill upgrading required for the current skills imparted 
through training 
 
Alongside, it is essential to focus on following :  
 Skill harmonization and benchmarking of job roles in priority 
sectors of destination countries with a focus on new high 
level skill qualifications. 
 
 Recognition of certificates issued by Skilling Centres of 
destination countries and India and promotion of 
international/dual certification, virtual/physical ex change 
programmes. 
 
 Opening of Skill Centres in destination countries and 
facilitating the assessment for the smooth and easy mobility 
of manpower. 
 
 Leveraging Global Chain and Extending Joint Training 
services through strong industry and SSC connect in 
destination countries and India. 
 

87 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 51) 
 The Committee note that an agreement on a Memorandum of 
Cooperation on Specified Skilled Worker (SSW) was signed with 
Japan on 18 January, 2021. The Committee welcome this step as 
it would facilitate skilled Indian workers to find employment in 
select sectors and job roles with favorable condition of 
employment. The  Committee further urge the MEA to actively 
facilitate signing of such agreements wi th other countries across 
various sectors for low skilled, semi -skilled, skilled workers and  
professionals so that  these people can go abroad for  a stable,  
secure and better future. 
     
    Reply of the Government 
           Presently, the procedures for modifying the e -Migrate 
system to suit the requirements of the Agreement between India 
and Portugal for recruitment of Indian citizens to work in 
Portugal, is ongoing and similar cooperation with other interested 
countries inc luding Japan are also underway. Exploring 
employment opportunities in Japan for Indian workers under 
Specified Skilled Worker(SSW) category is one of such recent 
initiative and similar arrangements would be make with other 
interested countries as and when the Ministry becomes aware of 

88 
 
such requirements. The recommendations of the Committee is 
duly noted. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 52) 
 The Committee note that the India Centre for Migration has 
done a labour market assessment study at emerging sectors in 
countries like Japan, Korea etc. and has identified the 
opportunities for Indian workers therein.  The Committee are of 
the view that the endeavor of the Government should be to grasp 
the opportunities and recommend wider  dissemination about the 
new opportunities in emerging labour markets to potential 
migrant workers across the country with the active participation 
of all concerned Ministries/Departments and the State  
Governments. 
 
     Reply of the Government 
 As ICM is now merged with Indian Council of World Affairs 
(ICWA), recommendations of the Committee  will be conveyed to 
ICWA. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 53) 

89 
 
 The Committee note that SWADES (Skilled Workers Arrival 
Database for Employment Support), a joint initiative of Ministry 
of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Ministry of External Affairs has been  launched for 
citizens returning under the Vande Bharat M ission at the 
beginning of the Pandemic with the aim of creating a database of 
returning citizens based on their skill sets  and experience. More 
than 33,957 candidates have registered SWADES Skill Card as on  
28th February 2022. The Committee further note t hat all the 
stakeholders have been given  access to the SWADES candidate 
database with uploading of details on the ASEEM (Aatmanirbhar 
Skilled Employee Employer Mapping) portal for Employer connect 
under different sectors and as per an initial  stage assessm ent, 
job connects have been established  with 7,495 candidates by 
employers registered on the ASEEM portal.  The Committee  
appreciate this initiative and urge the Ministry to generate more 
awareness about SWADES amongst the migrant workers and 
improve the registration, in coordination with  the Ministries of 
Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and Civil Aviation. Efforts 
may also be made to improve job connects between Employer 
and Employee and registration of Employers on the ASEEM portal 
so as to facilitate continuous interaction between employers and 
candidates. 
    Reply of the Government 

90 
 
 MSDE has been requested to give wide publicity about the 
SWADES and ASEEM portals and 34118 candidates have 
registered so far for SWADES skill card (as on June 2022). 
 Inputs are as under: 
 34,108 candidates have registered SWADES Skill Card as on 
31st July 2022. 
 
 Also, Employer’s registration from vacancies as registered on 
SWADES may be considered for deriving skill gap studies.  
  
 Convergence across these Ministries wi ll build a strong 
supply –demand side of labour market information system 
supporting overseas engagement of skilled manpower from 
India to overseas. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 54) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry does not possess the 
overall data of migrant workers who returned to India in the wake 
of the COVID -19 Pandemic. However, the  Committee have been 
apprised that about eight lakh twenty five thousand workers 
have returned from all over the world through the flights 
arranged under the Vande Bharat  Mission. The Committee further 
note that with the development of COVID -19 related health 
protocols and vaccination, the Government  has made efforts for 

91 
 
the return of workers and their families to Gulf cou ntries and 
2,26,818 emigration clearances were  granted in the last two 
years. The Committee view the welfare of Indian workers and the  
issue of their employment/livelihood seriously and urge the 
Ministry to make all out efforts  to ensure the expeditious re turn 
of the remaining  workers to their destination countries by  
vigorously pursuing the matter with the respective countries at 
the Highest level. The MEA may also facilitate new recruitment for 
such workers and the Indian Missions/Posts may  take up  the 
issue of realization of payments due to them on priority. 
    Reply of the Government 
 As per data received from the Bureau of Immigration, the 
number of Indian nationals, holding ECR passports, who went 
abroad for employment/work from 01.01.2019 to 30.06.2022 are 
summarized herewith. 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
30.06.2022) 
Number of Indian 
nationals 
644153 136314 150852 233070 
 
 Details of number of Emigration Clearances issued during 
last three years, as per data available on the eMigrate portal, are 
also given below: 

92 
 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
August 2022) 
Number of EC issued 368048 94145 132673 247977 
  
 The  above data confirms a clear upward trend in number of 
Indian migrant workers going abroad since relaxation of Covid 19 
related travel restrictions in 2021. Senior leadership gave top 
priority to the issue of return of Indian migrant workers during 
their visits/interaction with counterparts especially in Gulf 
countries. Our Missions/Posts in the Gulf have also actively 
pursued the matter of early return of Indian migrant workers with 
respective local governments. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
 
  

93 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note that while the ICM serves as a research 
think-tank to the MEA  on all aspects of international migration as 
well as mobility and the ICCR plays a key role  in the promotion 
of India’s soft power abroad and supplements the efforts of 
MEA to leverage Indian diaspora in soft power projection. The 
Committee feel that the ICM can  play a greater role towards 
policy inputs so that the efforts of the Government for the  welfare 
of the Indian diaspora is more result-oriented. Moreover, 
potential of ICCR being a bridge between India and other 
countries and being the ‘Indian voice’ in various multilateral fora, 
promoting India’s soft power abroad needs to be harnessed 
effectively. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
deepen its engagement with the ICM and  the ICCR so that a 
strong and vibrant Indian diaspora can be utilized as an effective 
tool in cultural diplomacy and soft power projection abroad. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The ICM has already been merged with Indian Council of 
World Affairs as one of its vertical unit.  ICCR will continue to 

94 
 
supplement the efforts of Government in the implementation of 
its foreign policy and in achieving the desired goals enshrined in 
it. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that the MEA has been providing funds 
to the India Centre for Migration and the Antar Rashtriya Sahayog 
Parishad for research/data output relating to  the Indian diaspora. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should monitor the 
utilization of such funds; ensure that research activities, seminars 
and workshops etc. are conducted  regularly and the funds 
provided are actually utilized for the said purpose. The Commi ttee 
also urge the Ministry to ensure that the findings/data regarding 
such activities are effectively utilized for policy formulation  on 
diaspora affairs. 
     Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has been providing grant to Antar Rashtriya 
Sahayog Parishad for research related to Diaspora activities.  A 
grant of Rs. 60,00,000 was approved by the Ministry to Antar 
Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad for Research Activities of Diaspora 
Research a nd Resource Centre (DRRC) for the financial years 
2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23. Grants for 2020-21 and 2021-22 
have been released.   

95 
 
 The Ministry monitors regularly the Utilization of Funds and 
ensures that the grant is effectively utilization for research 
activities, seminars and workshops etc. which contribute for 
policy formulation on diaspora affairs.   This is ensured by way of 
seeking Annual audited accounts along with Utilization Certificate 
and Annual Performance cum Achievement Report, indicating 
outputs/deliverables and outcomes generated from the fund 
given by the Ministry. Diaspora Research and Resource Centre 
(DRRC) organised 10 international conferences in the F.Y. 2020 -
21 besides other regular activities.  
 The ICM is merged with ICWA and accordingly funds 
available with ICM has also been transferred to ICWA. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
  

96 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
works with the motto  ‘Indian Embassies: Home away from 
Home’. A robust system of grievance redressal which  includes 
bringing such issues through e -mails, twitter and through 
CPGRAMS portal has  been maintained. Keeping in view the fact 
that the Indian Missions/Posts are the direct link  between India 
and its diaspora community, the Committee desire that they 
should play a  greater and effective role in the welfare of the 
diaspora and in reconnecting them with the  motherland. The 
Committee, however, find that a large chunk of the diaspora 
community including migrant workers and students are yet to 
be registered with the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the diaspora community should 
be encouraged to register with our Missions/Posts and based on 
an evaluation study fresh initiatives be taken to bring the Indian 
diaspora closer to their roots may be taken so  that the Indian 
Embassies could truly become  a ‘Home away from Home’ for 
them. 
    Reply of the Government 

97 
 
 
 Missions/ Posts have been directed make rigorous efforts for 
reaching out to the diaspora; which Missions have been doing on 
traditional platforms as well as through new initiatives. Various 
forums and initiatives including portals are used to encourage the 
diaspora for registering on Missi ons/ Posts’ portal. Since 
registration is voluntary, so 100% diaspora might not be 
registered with the Mission/ Post. However, enough mechanisms 
have been created, where Missions/ Posts are able to reach out to 
the diaspora during times of crisis and diasp ora members can 
also keep in touch with the Mission. This has been seen during 
the Covid -19 crisis, and also during crises in Ukraine and 
Afghanistan. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee have been informed that guidelines for 
establishment of One Stop  Centres for helping distressed Indian 
women abroad has been  finalized and conveyed to  the 
Missions/Posts where such centres are due to be opened in the 
first phase. In view of the  pivotal role likely to be played by these 
centres in providing timely assistance to the vulnerable distressed 
Indian women, the Committee desire that the Scheme should be  

98 
 
launched without any delay and the status in this regard may be  
furnished to them. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance.  The preparation for the launch of the One Stop 
Centre Scheme is underway.  As soon as it is launched the funds 
will be allocated to the Indian Missions/Posts abroad where OSCs 
are to be set up. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has undertaken a 
lengthy, domain-specific and time-consuming exercise to prepare 
a Global Indian Students’ Portal which would provide information 
to the students to assist them in taking an informed decision 
while selecting courses in universities abroad. The Ministry is 
hopeful that the first draft template of the Portal would be ready 
in the near future. The Committee are  of the view  that once the 
portal is operationalized, cases of duping of students by fake 
universities and  fraudulent agents would be reduced. They, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to expedite the process  of data 
collection, collation and operationalization of the Students’ 

99 
 
Portal along with provisioning of adequate resources for  the 
project. 
      
    Reply of the Government 
   
 The Recommendations of the esteemed Committee are 
noted and efforts are being made to expedite the process of 
operationalizing the GISP portal. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 The Committee note that as an outcome of the first ever 
Girmitiya Conference organized virtually in September 2021, the 
MEA has written to the Ministry of Education  to introduce the 
history of indentured labour in the school education. The Ministry 
would also try to conduct more events at regional level to 
promote interaction between India and  Girmitiya countries and 
would propose to establish a Girmitiya university/faculty/chair. 
The Committee are pleased at the positive outcome of the said 
Conference and urge the  Ministry to take follow -up action in this 
regard so that the said initiatives are implemented  at the earliest 
and the Committee may be apprised of accordingly. 
 
     
    Reply of the Government 

100 
 
 The Recommendations of the Committee are noted by the 
Ministry.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 The Committee note that based on a recommendation of 
theirs, the Ministry has got  an Impact Assessment Study done by 
the IIMC regarding media awareness campaigns on  safe and legal 
migration run by its OIA II Division.  The IIMC has submitted its 
final report which is under consideration by the Ministry. Based 
on the findings of the Impact  Assessment Study, the Committee 
feel that media campaigns of the Government are not  having the 
desired impact in curbing unsafe practices in migration of 
unskilled workers.  The Committee are of the view that vigorous 
campaigns is req uired to achieve the desired  objectives and in 
this digital age, there is an urgent need to make use of social 
media platforms like  SMS, YouTube etc. in addition to 
advertisements in the print and the  electronic media. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Mi nistry to make increasing use 
of internet, mobile technology and social media platforms for 
greater awareness and outreach  among prospective emigrants on 
safe and legal migration. A fresh strategy on media awareness 
campaigns may also be worked out based on the findings of 
the IIMC. The Committee also recommend that the State 
Governments should be made to play a greater  role in the 

101 
 
dissemination of information on safe and legal migration at the 
grass-root level through Gram Sabha, Panchayat and Sarpanch. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Recommendation of the esteemed Committee have 
been noted.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
 The Committee note that Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MoUs/Agreements that provide the overarching framework for 
cooperation on labour and manpower related  issues are in  place 
with the Gulf Cooperation  Council Countries and  Jordan. Specific  
Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements were signed between 
India and Denmark in 2009  and with Japan on Specified Skilled 
Worker in January 2021. A similar Labour Mobility  Agreement has 
been concluded with Portugal. Further, MoUs on Migration and 
Mobility are under process with Germany, Mauritius, Portugal, 
BNL (Belgium, Netherlands, Luxemburg), Aus tralia, Russian 
Federation etc. India had also signed on to the Global  Compact 
for Migration as part of our partnership with the International 
Organization for  Migration and with the International Labour 
Organization. The Committee acknowledge  that Migrati on and 
Mobility Agreements are aimed at providing safe and legal 

102 
 
migration opportunities to Indian workers in potential 
employment destinations all over the world.  However, the impact 
of such MoUs/Agreements and the manner in which they have 
translated into better deals and more job opportunities for 
potential migrant workers are  not known. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should carry out an impact  
assessment of the existing Migration and Mobility Agreements 
and monitor the implementation aspect of such 
MoUs/Agreements and ensure that the issues of interest of  the 
migrant workers including their grievances are actually addressed 
through the said MoUs/Agreements. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Presently, the procedures for modifying the e -Migrate 
system to suit the requirements of the Agreement between India 
and Portugal for recruitment of Indian citizens to work in 
Portugal, is ongoing. Afterwards, the eMigrate portal can be used 
as a facilitating tool for recruitment of Indian citizens fo r overseas 
employment. The portal can also provide data for impact 
assessment for Migration and Mobility Agreements in case of 
recruitment for overseas employment.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 47) 
 The Committee note that a monitoring committee of 
Secretaries headed by Secretary (CPV&OIA) has been 

103 
 
constituted to establish a coordinated institutional mechanism on 
availing employment opportunities abroad.  The committee also 
includes Secretaries of MSDE, M/o Labour & Employment, M/o 
Education and D/o School Education. Under the mandate of this 
committee, the Ministry has been carrying out an  assessment of 
employment opportunities abroad with the help of Indian 
Missions, India  Centre for Migration, Industry bodies, State 
Governments etc. and this endeavour is currently underway. The 
Committee desire that assessment of employment opportunities  
abroad should be completed at the earliest and an institutional 
mechanism to facilitate  employment of Indian workers abroad 
should be established without delay. This assumes  greater 
significance and urgency in view of the easing of COVID -19 
Pandemic restrictions,  increased vaccination  and opening up of 
labour markets in the Gulf and other countries. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Data related to migration for employment purpose has seen 
an upward trend. As per data received from the Bureau of 
Immigration, the number of Indian nationals, holding ECR 
passports, who went abroad for employment/work from 
01.01.2019 to 30.06.2022 are summarized herewith. 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
30.06.2022) 

104 
 
Number of Indian 
nationals 
644153 136314 150852 233070 
 Details of number of Emigration Clearances issued during 
last three years, as per data available on the eMigrate portal, are 
also given below: 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
August 2022) 
Number of EC 
issued 
368048 94145 132673 247977 
  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 55) 
 The Committee observe that though the Ministry is 
implementing various programmes and schemes for the welfare 
of the Indian diaspora, no specific scheme exists  for the 
rehabilitation of the workers who lost their jobs including the 
huge population of  Gulf returnees, in the wake of the COVID -19 
Pandemic. The Committee are awar e that  many workers have 
gone back to their employment abroad with the easing of the 
COVID- 19 Pandemic situation and the re -opening of doors to 
Indian workers by the Gulf countries.  The Committee, however, 
feel that a rehabilitation scheme to ensure livel ihood security for  

105 
 
those workers who lost their jobs/could not return/prefer to stay 
back in the country, is still  needed. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a comprehensive rehabilitation scheme  may be 
worked out in coordination with other Ministrie s/Departments 
concerned as well as  the State Governments for those workers 
who lost their jobs due to pandemics or other  disasters to secure 
means of livelihood for them and their families, at the earliest. 
The Committee  urge the Ministry to initiate consultations with 
all the stakeholders in this regard without delay. 
     
    Reply of the Government 
 To ensure welfare of returnees, the Government of India has 
taken various steps which are reflected in various financial 
packages announced by the Ministry of Finance for state 
governments. To provide assistance to States for Capital 
Expenditure, a new sch eme ‘Special Assistance to States for 
Capital Expenditure’ was launched during the financial year 2020 -
21 with the allocation not exceeding Rs. 12,000 crore in the form 
of 50-year interest free loan for the financial year 2020 -21 and 
with the allocation of  Rs. 15,000 crore in the form of 50 -year 
interest free loan for the financial year 2021 -22. The fund 
allocated under the scheme can be used for new as well ongoing 
capital projects.  

106 
 
 As per data received from the Bureau of Immigration, the 
number of India n nationals, holding ECR passports, who went 
abroad for employment/work from 01.01.2019 to 30.06.2022 are 
summarized herewith. 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till 
30.06.2022) 
Number of Indian 
nationals 
644153 136314 150852 233070 
 
Details of number of Emigration Clearances issued during last 
three years, as per data available on the eMigrate portal, are also 
given below: 
Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 (till August 
2022) 
Number of EC 
issued 
368048 94145 132673 247977 
  
 The above data confirms a clear upward  trend in number of 
Indian migrant workers going abroad since relaxation of Covid 19 
related travel restrictions in 2021. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 

107 
 
 
 
 
  

108 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL 
AWAITED 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has launched State 
Outreach Programme in 2017 under the banner ‘Videsh Sampark’ 
which is an in-depth dialogue between Ministry of External Affairs 
and State Governments with the objective of seeking cooperation 
in addressing issues pertaining to welfare and protection of NRIs 
living abroad and also to  brief the State Governments about the 
Ministry’s initiatives pertaining  to engagement and  welfare of the 
overseas Indian community and curbing illegal migration. 
However, only six  States viz, Telangana, Maharashtra, Kerala, 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka  could so far be covered 
under the programme because of the spread  of the COVID -19 
Pandemic. The Committee are of the view that welfare and 
protection of Indian diaspora as well as deeper engagement with 
the said community could be effectively achieved only  with the 
active participation of the State Governments  and also by 
maintaining close coordination with them. The Committee, 
therefore urge the Ministry to  organize more  ‘Videsh Sampark’ 
programmes prioritizing the States with migration hotspots and 
thereafter in other States in a time bound manner since the 
COVID-19 Pandemic situation has improved. The Committee also 

109 
 
urge the Ministry to share with this Committee the  outcome of 
Videsh Sampark programmes held so far and step up its efforts of 
coordination and closer interaction with the State Governments 
for successful implementation of its programmes and schemes. 
 
     
     
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance.  The Ministry is in consultation with various state 
governments for organizing of the Videsh Sampark Programme. 
 The Ministry has also undertaken  outreach activities to 
Telengana, Tripura, Tamil Nadu and other states aimed at 
promotion of ties with diaspora and emigrant worker community 
through dedicated state outreach programmes, PGE Conferences, 
etc. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35) 
 The Committee note that India Centre for Migration has so far 
developed country - specific two PDOT manuals for 18 ECR 
countries and Japan respectively.  Further, India  Centre for 
Migration and International Labour Organisation have also 

110 
 
prepared a pre - departure handbook for Indians going to the 
European Union. The Committee further note  that ICM has also 
been working on 7 country - specific booklets for Jordan,  
Lebanon, Libya, Indonesia, Malaysia, Sudan, South Sudan and 
Thailand and these are in the final stages  of development. The 
Committee desire that the PDOT booklets should be finalized at 
the earliest so that prospective emigrants are made aware about 
safe and legal migration and are  also acquainted  with the rules 
and regulation of the destination countries. 
      
Reply of the Government 
 The work on PDOT training manual is almost complete.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                P.P. CHAUDHARY,                     
29 March, 2023                                                                                     Chairperson,                                       
8 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)                                       Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 

111 
 
APPENDIX- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022 -23) HELD ON 29 MARCH, 
2023 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 29 March, 2023 from 1525 
hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Main Committee ,  Parliament House Annexe,  
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Dileswar Kamait 
3.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
4.    Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
5. Smt. Queen Oja 
6.    Dr. K. C. Patel 
7.    Shri N. K. Premchandran 
8. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
9. Shri Rebati Tripura  
   10.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
   11. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
Rajya Sabha  
 
 
12. Shri Anil Desai 
13. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
14. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Sanjay Verma  - Secretary (West) 
2. Smt. Vani Rao  - Additional Secretary (AMS) 

112 
 
3. Shri  Sandeep Chakravorty- Joint Secretary (EW) 
4. Shri  Anil K. Rai  - Joint Secretary (Parl & 
Coord)  
5. Shri  Prakash Gupta - Joint Secretary (UNP) 
6. Shri J.P Singh  - Joint Secretary (PAI) 
7. Shri Devesh Uttam  - Joint Secretary (CPV) 
8. Shri K.D. Dewal  - Joint Secretary (CT) 
9. Shri M. Keivom  - Director (CT) 
  
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
 
1. Shri Alkesh Kumar Sharma - Secretary  
2. Shri Amit Agrawal   - Additional Secretary  
3. Dr. Sanjay Bahl   - DG CERT - In 
4. Dr. Sandip Chatterjee - Scientist G and Group 
Coordinator – Cyber Law 
5. Dr. S. Sathyanarayanan  - Scientist E 
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
 
1. Shri Vivek Aggarwal  - AS (Revenue)  
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan      - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut       - Deputy Secretary 

113 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to 
the Sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the dr aft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report 
of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘Welfare of 
Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’.  
4. The Chairperson invited the Members t o offer their 
suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. The 
Members suggested some minor modifications. After 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report with these 
minor modifications. 
 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize 
the Report incorporating the suggestions made by the Members 
and present the same to Parliament.  
 
6. XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
7. XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 

114 
 
8. XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
9. XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

115 
 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE FIFTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (17TH LOK SABHA) 
                                      
(i) Total Number of Recommendations      
 55                                                                            
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7,  11, 12, 14, 15, 
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 53 and 54 
           
         Total-43 
Percentage:  78.18% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies. 
  
Recommendation Nos.  8 and 9 
 
        Total- 02 
 Percentage: 3.64 % 
 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the  Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require  reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  6, 10, 13, 21, 36, 37, 47 and 
55 

116 
 
         Total-08 
 Percentage: 14.54% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of  the  Government are still 
awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  24 and 35 
                                            
Total- 02 
Percentage: 3.64% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 