 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee 
on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2019-20] 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 February, 20201/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
5 
 

 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
the year 2019-20] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.02.2021 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021 / Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
COEA NO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………  (iii)     
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………    1  
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted                             
  by the Government………………………………...........................................  28   
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………. 56 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee …………………… 58 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………      65    
  
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 17.12.2020…………      74 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs.  ……………………………………………...           77                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 
 Lok Sabha   
  
2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
11.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
12.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
13.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
14.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
15.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
16.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
17.  Shri Navneet Ravi Rana  
18.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
19.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
20.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
21.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
Rajya Sabha  
  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
29.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
31.  Shri Brij Lal  
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri P. C. Koul     –  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3.       Shri Paolienlal Haokip   –   Additional Director  
4. Shri Maneesh Mohan Kamble -  Under Secretary 
(ii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (20 20-21) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fifth Report on action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First  Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2019-20. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to the Parliament on 12 December, 2019. The Action Taken Replies 
of the Government on all th e Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on                   
12 March, 2020 (English version) and 11 June, 2020 (Hindi version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report on action taken at their Sitting held on  
17.12.2020. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the First Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                              P.P.CHAUDHARY,                                                          
10 February, 2021                                                                                                Chairperson,                                  
21 Magha (Saka),1942                                                 Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their First Report on the 
Demands for Grants for the year 2019 -20 which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the 
table of the Rajya Sabha on 12 December, 2019. 
 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 
36 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categor ized as 
follows: - 
(i)    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government.  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 
31, 33, 34, 35 and 36 
Total - 25 
  
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Government. 
 
 Recommendation No. 3   
Total - 01 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government   have not 
been accepted by the Committee. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 8, 15, 27 and 30 
Total - 04 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited. 
 Recommendation Nos.  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 32 
Total - 06 
3.    The Commi ttee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I and 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be furnished to 
them at an early date. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Govern ment on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 

2 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 
5. The Committee had noted that the allocations for Scheme side was Rs. 5985.05 crore at 
BE 2018-19 stage which was increased to Rs. 6466.00 crore at RE stage. During 2019 -20 the 
allocation of Rs. 8175.79 crore with an increase of Rs. 2190.74 crore in BE allocation vis -à-vis 
BE 2018-19 and further an increase of Rs. 1709.79 crore in RE allocation of 2018 -19 was noted.  
The enhanced allocation under the Scheme Head was mainly on  account of expenditure in 
respect of MEA‟s assistance projects under Aid to Bhutan, Aid to Nepal, Aid to Sri Lanka, Aid 
to Maldives, Aid to Myanmar, Aid to Other Developing countries, Aid to African Countries, 
Investment Promotion and Publicity Programme,  Aid to Eurasian Countries, Aid to Afghanistan 
and Loans to Govt. of Maldives, to ensure that India‟s projects abroad and other international 
commitments were not adversely affected due to lack of funds.   Similarly, in the Non -Scheme 
side the BE allocation  for 2018-19 was Rs. 9025.59 crore which was increased to Rs. 9116.00 
crore at RE stage. The BE allocation during 2019 -20 was Rs. 9708.99 crore which was an 
increase of Rs. 683.04 crore from BE 2018-19 and Rs. 592.99 crore from RE 2018-19 stage.  
 
While welcoming the increase in allocations under both Scheme and Non -Scheme needs during 
2019-20 and also the Ministry‟s commitment towards assistance for projects under Aid to 
foreign countries, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should monitor  the  
implementation  of  the  projects  closely  and  take  corrective  measures  to complete them 
within a specified timeline. They had also desired that they be apprised about the physical and 
financial progress made in each of these projects. 
 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it  would like 
to assure the Hon‟ble Committee that implementations of the projects are being closely 
monitored and corrective measures are regularly taken to complete them within a specified 
timeline. Budgetary allocation and Utilization of funds upto third quarter of FY 2019 -20 in key 
Aid heads under Schemes are given below: 

3 
 
Aid Heads BE  
2019-20 
RE  
2019-20 
Actual 
Expenditure upto 
Dec. 2019 
Aid to Bhutan 2135.79 2048.28 1650.41 
Aid to Nepal 1050.00 1200.00 973.71 
Aid to Sri Lanka 250.00 205.00 152.26 
Aid to Maldives 400.00 150.00 87.34 
Aid to Myanmar 400.00 170.00 90.67 
Aid to Other Developing 
Countries 
150.00 150.00 115.86 
Aid to African Countries 450.00 450.00 354.14 
Investment Promotion 
and Publicity Programme 
300.00 200.00 179.63 
Aid to Eurasian Countries 45.00 45.00 24.91 
Aid to Afghanistan 400.00 400.00 330.41 
 
7. Inspite of the Ministry’s assurances to the contrary, the Committee still note both 
cost and time over runs.   In case of Aid to Maldives for FY 2019 -20, the Committee  note 
that the BE of Rs. 400 crores was revised to Rs. 150.00 crore at RE stage but the Actual 
Expenditure was Rs. 87.34 crore only till December, 2019. Similarly, against the BE of Rs 
400 crore, the RE for  Aid to Myanmar was kept at 170.00 crore and Actual Expendit ure 
was Rs. 90.67 crore till December, 2019.  A similar trend is visible in case of Aid to Bhutan 
and Sri Lanka also where BE was revised to the lower side at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure is substantially less even then. All this denotes a slow pace  of implementation 
of projects in those countries. The Ministry has also not submitted any details about the 
efforts made by it to address the issues of under -utilization of funds and the impact of the 
monitoring mechanism followed for effective implementa tion of these projects.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should open a bilateral dialogue with 
beneficiary countries for strictly adhering to specified timelines for finishing the projects 

4 
 
abroad and if necessary, an independent inspecti on mechanism may also be appointed to 
examine the progress of the projects undertaken.  The Committee may be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard and the outcome thereof. 
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
8.  The Committee had noted with dismay that the Minist ry had not shown any 
determination in following the overarching principle of Zero Based Budgeting through 
continuous evaluation and assessment of budgetary allocation as against funds utilization in the 
Ministry‟s budget management. The Ministry had only e xplained the procedures followed by it 
like periodic quarterly meetings, review of ongoing projects, supplementary demands to be made 
etc. The Committee felt that some concrete steps should be taken by the Ministry towards the 
overarching principle of Zero Based Budgeting which guides the evaluation and assessment of 
budgetary allocation with a view to improve its management of finances in a more business like 
manner. Furthermore, the Ministry should take pre -emptive measures to seek all the necessary 
clearances before seeking funds for international Aid projects. On another note, and 
notwithstanding the satisfact ion expressed by the Principal W itness regarding the adequacy of 
allocation at BE 2019 -20 stage, the Committee were informed by the Ministry that post 
globalization and opening of the economy, the foreign policy of countries has acquired a deeper 
meaning than even before. Foreign policy now influenced a country‟s economic policy in a 
major way too. The Committee, therefore, had felt that MEA should explore new dimensions and 
hitherto, unexplored vistas with a view to secure India‟s interest in the increasingly globalised 
matrix. The Commi ttee had expected the Government to ensure that there was no shortage of 
funds for Ministry of External Affairs in its pursuits. 
9. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Ext ernal Affairs has stated that it agrees with 
Hon‟ble Committee‟s view that pos t globalization and opening of the economy, the foreign 
policy of countries has acquired a deeper meaning and is more interlinked with the economic 
policy than ever before. The Ministry undertakes continuous monitoring of projects under 
implementation, periodic review of its various commitments and assessment of fund utilization 
as part of its budgetary management exercise while finalizing its requirements. Ministry would 

5 
 
like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee that it would continue to engage with the Ministr y of 
Finance at all levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in its pursuits.” 
10. The Committee in their 21 st Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), 24 th Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) and 1 st Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) have been continuously 
recommending the Ministry to take steps towards embracing the imperative of Zero -Based 
Budgeting for improved budgetary assessment and efficient financial management and 
planning.  The Ministry has failed  to mention any specific steps taken in that direction and 
has once again informed about the normal procedure being followed for monitoring of 
projects under implementation and that about the periodic review of various commitments 
being done. 
 The Ministry has further stat ed that it would continue to engage with Ministry of 
Finance to ensure that there is no shortage of funds.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their several previous R ecommendations and strongly urge the Ministry to embrace the 
overaching principle of Zer o-Based Budgeting for a better budgetary assessment, 
management and utilization and submit a pin -pointed reply on the specific steps taken in 
this regard.   Further, on the issue of exploring new vistas to secure India’s interests, the 
Committee strongly d esire that the Ministry should frame an effective policy  document 
underlying the vision  and objectives of India’s foreign policy, and establish clear linkages 
of projects to objectives outlined, which would help the Ministry to open new avenues in 
strengthening the country’s position in international relations. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
11.  The Committee had noted that that the budgetary allocation under the Head „Embassies 
and Missions‟ at BE during year 2018 -19 was Rs. 2701.00 crore. At RE stage this had been 

6 
 
reduced to Rs. 2678.81 crore with actual expenditure being Rs. 2737.69 crore. Dur ing the year 
2019-20, against the projection of Rs. 3243.22 crore, the allocation at BE stage is Rs. 2748.06 
crore, which is a paltry increase over last year‟s spending. As India‟s global outreach and 
influence had increased over the years and based on assessment of India‟s geo-political priorities, 
level of bilateral ties, regional factor diaspora connections, commercial developmental, cultural 
interests and reciprocal arrangement with the concerned country, the Ministry had commenced 
opening new Missions in countries where there was no resident Indian Mission, starting with 
Africa. The Union Cabinet in March, 2018 approved the opening of 18 Missions in Africa in a 
phased manner. 9 Missions have already been operationa lised and 3 more Missions will be 
operationalised in next 3 -4 months. In view of the increased budgetary allocations, the 
Committee had desired the Ministry to prepare a roadmap and adhere to the timelines in opening 
the remaining Missions/Posts in Africa. Th ey had also desired that the Ministry of Finance 
should be impressed upon simultaneously to create adequate number of posts to run the new 
Missions/Posts. 
For the purpose of improvement in monitoring of performance and evaluation of e xisting 
Missions/Posts abroad, the Committee had hoped that the Ministry would adhere to the timeline 
of launching revamped PEMS by December, 2019 which will improve the evaluation process o f 
Missions/Posts. They had also desired that they be apprised of the progress of the project and the 
outcome thereof, in terms of improvement in services, saving of time and expenditure. 
 
12. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs  has stated that i t is submitted 
to the Hon‟ble Committee that the Union Cabinet, in March 20 18, approved the opening of 
eighteen Missions in Africa in a phased manner over a period of four years from 2018 -2021. 
Accordingly, in keeping with this timeline, Missions in the following 9 countries have already 
been operationalized: Republic of Guinea ( Conakry), Equatorial Guinea (Malabo), Burkina Faso 
(Ouagadougou), Rwanda (Kigali), Djibouti (Djibouti), Republic of Congo (Brazzaville), 
Kingdom of Eswatini (Mbabne), Eritrea (Asmara) and Cameroon (Youande). Three more 
Missions, in Liberia (Monrovia), Sao Tome and Principe (Sao Tome), Sierra Leone (Freetown) 
are also likely to be operational by the first quarter of next financial year. The remaining 6 
Missions would be opened subsequently, within the time frame approved by the Cabinet. 

7 
 
Appropriate budgetary provisions are projected as per the expected timeline of operationalization 
of the Missions, in consultation with the Internal Finance Division of the Ministry. Posts at 
officer and staff level have also been approved by the Ministry of Finance for these new 
Missions.  
Ministry introduced a web -portal namely Performance Evaluation and Monitoring 
System (PEMS) in 2016 using a set of 60 binary questions for use as basis for selection 
of Missions/Posts for onsite inspections. On the basis of this, till date 46 Missions/Posts 
have been inspected so far. However, it was felt that on -site inspection of 
Missions/Posts is a time consuming process and it is not possible to inspect more than 
15-20 Mission/Posts in a year. It was thus decided that off -site inspection mechanism 
may also be put in place. Keeping this in mind, it was planned that existing PEMS 
portal be modified with a view to not only identify Missions/Posts for onsite inspection 
but also to enable Ministry to undertake off -site inspection of all Mission /Posts on the 
basis of documents submitted/uploaded by them on PEMS portal. 
As this was an innovative step being planned by any Ministry/Department of the 
Government of India, it thus took some time for Ministry to implement. Inputs from 
several Divisions have already been sought to frame suitable questions/queries which 
would enable the Ministry to conclude whether a particular Mission/Posts is in 
compliance with ministry‟s directions on a particular subject/matter. Since, 
Missions/Posts abroad work with l imited work-force, attempt has also been made that 
the submission/upload of documents on revamped PEMS portal by Missions/Posts do 
not add to the existing work pressures. The revamped PEMS port al is likely to be 
launched by Ministry in the second quarter of 2020.” 
13. The Committee observe that the Union Cabinet had approved the opening of 
eighteen Mission s in Africa during a period of four y ears from 2018 -2021. Out of this 9 
Missions have been operationalis ed and three are i n advance stage of operationalis ation. 
The Committee are happy to note that the budgetary provisions have also been projected 
as per expected timeline s and Ministry of Finance has also approved the posts of officers 
and staff for all 18 missions. The Committee desire that the Ministry sh ould strictly adhere 
to the timelines to operationlise remaining missions in Africa so that they may now take up 

8 
 
the work of operationlis ing missions in other countries where there is no resident Indian 
Mission.  
The Committee are not exactly satisfied with the stereo-type reply submitted by the 
Ministry on the delay in implementing revamped PEMS web portal. The Committee 
observe that due to undue delay in launching of revamped PEMS portal for an off -site 
inspection process of all Missions/Posts, on the bas is of documents submitted/uploaded by 
them on the portal out of 183 Indian Missions/Posts only 46 Missions/Posts have been 
inspected so far after the introduction of Web -Portal PEMS in the year 2016. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry shoul d ensure the launch of revamped 
PEMS portal within the specified time frame of second quarter of 2020 to enable them in 
conducting off -site inspection of all Missions/Posts on regular basis. The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry should prepare a time -bound action plan for covering all the 
Missions/Embassies through on -site or off -site annual inspections and the Committee may 
be intimated of the same. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
14.  The Committee observed that an allocation of Rs. 246.00 crore had been made under the 
budget head “Information Technology” in the financial year 2019 -20 which included an 
expenditure on setting up of POPSKs. The Ministry had apprised the Committee that as the 
budgetary provision under this head was channelized for setting up of POPSKs, there was no 
fund constraint for opening up of PSK/POPSKs, and the necessary procurement of IT and non IT 
related equipment for each Kendra during 2018 -19. Since only the ope ning up of PSK/POPSK 
will not serve the purpose until they are provided with proper and adequate IT related 
infrastructure. The Committee desired that the Ministry should take up this issue with the 
Ministry of Finance for allocation of adequate funds for opening of Kendras and for procurement 
of all necessary IT infrastructure in the proposed new PSKs/POPSKs. The Committee also 

9 
 
desired that in the future, channelizing the allocation for the purpose of IT related infrastructure 
should be avoided. 
15. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the Ministry is 
working towards providing adequate IT -related infrastructure in every POPSK in the country, 
including laying of Managed Network Services - Multi-Protocol Level Switches (M PLS) lines 
by BSNL. Ministry has taken up the issue for allocation of adequate funds for procurement of 
necessary IT infrastructure in the Passport Seva Kendras. Funds allocation under IT head in the 
Revised Estimates 2019 -2020 has been increased to Rs. 33 1 crores from Rs. 246 crores 
sanctioned at the BE stage. 
16. The Committee have been continuously expressing their concern over under -
allocation of funds for setting up of new POPSKs/PSKs along with IT related and non -IT 
related infrastructure and equipments.  Now that the allocation has been raised from Rs. 
246.00 crore to Rs. 331.00 crore under the IT head. The Committee expect the Ministry to 
kindly reassess the requirement of all PSK/POPSK and ensure that the enhanced funds 
leave no scope for any shortcomings in their functioning.  The Committee further desire 
that if funds are still inadequate, then the Ministry should seriously take up the issue of 
allocation of funds, specifically for IT infrastructure of existing as well as new 
PSKs/POPSKs with Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to provide adequate fund s 
in view of the urgency of upgradation of systems to efficiently handle the volume of work 
relating to passport issuance. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
17.  Noting the  challenge being faced by the Ministry in the expansion of the Passport Sewa 
Project due to  shortage of personnel in the Cent ral Passport Organization (CPO) at the 
superintendent level as against a  total sanctioned strength of the CPO Cadre of 2697 was only 
1996 as on 10 May, 2018 and i n view of the tardy progress of work relating to filling up of the 
vacancies and opening up of 424 POPSK in all the Parliamentary constituencies and other parts 
of the country, the Committee were of the strong view that the man power constraints will 

10 
 
further aggravate. Therefore, they had strongly desired the Ministry to impress upon the Ministry 
of Finance, Department of Expenditure to complete the staffing study of CPO at the earliest so 
that the vacant posts are filled up by DOPT within a fixed time framework. 
 
18. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs informed the Committee that 
the recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it is being impressed upon the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure to complete the staffin g study of CPO at the 
earliest. As regards vacant posts, the Staff Selection Commission has been indented to fill the 
vacancies for the posts of 31 Junior Translators, 6 Stenographers (Grade „D‟) and 24 Office 
Assistant (MTS) grade. 
19. The Committee are a nguished to note the progress made so far in the direction of 
undertaking staffing study of CPO and also in filling up the vacancies in CPO cadre. The 
Ministry has been able to indent only 61 posts from SSC against the existing vacancies of 
around 700 personnel in CPO and the requirement of more staff for new POPSKs to be 
opened in all Parliamentary constituencies. Moreover, they have also not been able to get 
conducted the staffing study of CPO. In Committee’s view with such shortfall in personnel 
in CPO, the existing PSKs/POPSKs may not be able to function optimally. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the urgency of providing more staff may be impressed upon the 
Department of Person nel and Training and after getting completed the staffing study of 
CPO on priority basis by the Department of Expenditure, the Ministry should make all 
efforts to fill up the vacancies in existing as well as new PSKs/POPSKs in the shortest 
possible time. T he Committee further desire that if necessary, the recruitment through 
lateral entry of qualified and experienced individuals from academic, private and other 
cadres of the Ministries  may also be undertaken.  
 

11 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
20.  Noting with grave concern that there was no improvement in regard to the timely and 
efficient delivery of passport services and the citizens faced a tough time in seeking basic 
information, getting appointments, and tracking their application in the POPSKs establ ished in 
different parts of the country.  Further, noting that t he previous system of providing guidance or 
support to the passport seekers has been suddenly with drawn, leaving them in jeopardy, t he 
Committee, had desired that the Ministry should adopt urg ent measures to resolve the problems 
arising at the POPSKs. Apprehensive about the achievement of the Ministry‟s ambitious target of 
having one POPSK in each of 543 Parliamentary constituency by 2021. Moreover, the 
Committee felt that only opening a PSK or  POPSK in all 543 constituencies is not beneficial 
until and unless it is fully equipped with fully modernized infrastructure and adequate skilled 
man power. The Committee, therefore, had recommended the Ministry to take necessary steps to 
achieve the targ et of opening of POPSKs during 2019 -20 equipped with adequate skilled 
manpower and modern infrastructure. 
21. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that as on 19 February 
2020, 424 POPSKs have been made operational. There are 517 Passport Seva Kendras 
functioning in the country. 158 POPSKs are operating on full -fledged PSK mode with dedicated 
communication link of 2 Mbps each. MEA is working with BSNL for l aying down Managed 
Network Services -Multi-protocol level switches (MPLS) lines for the remaining POPSKs as 
well. The Ministry of External Affairs and the Department of Posts are working together to open 
a POPSK in every Lok Sabha Constituency where there is no PSK or POPSK to ensure that there 
is at least one PSK or PO PSPK in every Lok Sabha Constituency. By opening 93 PSK and 424 
POPSK, the Ministry has covered 488 Lok Sabha Constituencies where there is at least one 
Passport Kendra. The Ministry is worki ng closely with the Department of Posts to ensure 
operationalization of a POPSK in the remaining 55 Lok Sabha Constituencies. 
22. The Committee observe that several steps have been taken by the Ministry to bring 
about qualitative and quantitative changes i n modernizing the infrastructure as well as 
increasing the number of PSKs/POPSKs in the country.  The Committee are satisfied to 
learn that the Ministry has opened 93 PSKs and 424 POPSKs in the country thus covering 
488 Lok Sabha constituencies which will have at least 1 Passport Seva Kendra each.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry will achieve the operationlization of 55 more POPSKs in 
remaining Lok Sabha Constituencies within the time frame fixed in this regard. The 
Committee, however, find that the Mi nistry has not furnished any details about the steps 

12 
 
being taken for providing infrastructure and skilled staff in the new POPSKs. The 
Committee feel that in its absence  the task of opening up of new PSKs/POPSKs cannot be 
termed as achieved . The Committee,  therefore, strongly desire that the Ministry should 
ensure that the adequate experienced, qualified staff is placed in each PSK/POPSK so that 
these centres can work optimally. Furthermore, the Committee desire that technical 
training may be imparted for s taff of Department of Posts who are engaged in the newly 
created POPSKs to acquaint them about operationalization of POPSKs and also prepare a 
plan to provide training to the staff to be engaged in POPSKs to be established in 
remaining 55 Lok Sabha constituencies where PSKs/POPSKs are yet to be operationalised.  
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
23.  The Committee had noted that the budgetary allocation under the minor head, 
“Entertainment Charges”, the allocation of which at BE 2018 -19 was Rs. 70.50 crore. This was 
reduced to Rs. 46.00 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure was Rs. 45.82 crore. The 
allocation at BE 2019-20 is Rs. 367.75 crore. The enhanced allocation in the 2019 -20 is towards 
allocation for maintenance of aircraft of Air India and expenditure on V ice President‟s visits 
abroad. In view of the rationalization of the sub heads under other expenditure, a new sub head 
„high level delegation‟ under which expenditure towards maintenance cost of Air craft of Air 
India for VVIP travel, Vice President visit and other special delegation have been opened. 
Therefore, there was a rise in the allocation at BE 2019 -20. Further, pertaining to the bills 
received/settled and amount involved in the above mentioned travels during the last three years, 
the Ministry had i nformed the Committee that the concerned division is in the process of 
compiling the data because the bills accruing annually due to foreign visits of dignitaries run into 
several hundreds. The Committee deplored the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in 
furnishing the complete information about expenditure made under this head despite continuous 
emphasis by the Committee upon the timely submission of bills relating to the visits of 
dignitaries in order to manage fiscal discipline and prudence in the Ministry. 
 

13 
 
 
24. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the number 
of bills received/settled and amount involved in the transaction during the last three years for the 
incoming visits of foreign dignitaries have been tabulated as under:  
 
 
Year  Number of bills 
received 
Number of bills 
processed 
Amount Settled  
(in crores) 
2016-17 970 970 35.19 /- 
2017-18 973 973 32.98 /- 
2018-19 1427 1341 33.04 /- 
 
 
b) With regard to amount involved in the transaction during the last three years for the outgoing 
visits, it is kindly submitted that Ministry settles the expenditure of the Air India chartered 
aircraft only for the overseas visits of Hon’ble Vice President of India. Details are tabulated as 
under: 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2016-17 15.00 15.00 7.54 
2017-18 180.00 150.00 158.27 
2018-19 48.00 48.00 48.24 
 
 
c) With regard to amount involved in the transaction during the last three years for the 
Maintenance cost of Aircrafts of Air India for VVIP travel , it is kindly submitted that 
Ministry settles the bills of the Air India aircraft towards MEA‟s share for the maintenance cost 
of Aircraft of Air India. Details are tabulated as under: 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2016-17 0.01 100.01 100.00 
2017-18 215.00 215.00 214.85 
2018-19 141.00 420.00 420.00 
 

14 
 
25. On examination of the details  of RE and Actuals of the last three years under the 
head ‘Maintenance cost of Aircrafts under Air India for VVIP travel’, the Committee find 
that the BE of Rs. 0.01 crore during 2016 -17 was revised to Rs. 100 crore at RE stage and 
spent whereas the BE for 201 7-18 of Rs. 141.00 crore went up to Rs. 420.00 crore at RE 
stage. The Committee do not find any justification in the substantial  variations in Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Estimates after year . The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their re commendation of timely submission of Bills related to foreign visits of 
dignitaries by the concerned divisions of MEA and pruden t fiscal management under this 
Head.  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
26.  The Committee observed that ICCR‟s sanctioned strength had come down from 350 in 
the 1990s to 206 at present. Actual working strength of ICCR as on date is 149. As many as 44 
posts were abolished in the year 2016. Since the discontinuation of practice of nomination of 
candidates by the Staff Selection Committee for regular appointment, ICCR had not been able to 
make direct recruitment on a regular basis and in absence of direct recruitment in a timely 
manner, the posts in ICCR‟s cadre meant to be filled -up through direct recruitment lapsed. 
Creation of new posts and recruitment against the same is a time -consuming exercise which 
requires approval of the Ministry of Finance. ICCR is in the process of hiring an outsourced 
agency to make recruitment against 32  posts available in ICCR cadre for direct recruitment. 
ICCR is also pursuing its proposal for creation of 200 new posts in its cadre. It will require the 
approval of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee viewed the human resources crunch of 
ICCR very seri ously. Further, the work of existing cultural centres will further deteriorate with 
its severe human resource crunch. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommended the Ministry 
to pursue this matter with the Ministry of Finance for the creation of 200 new posts in the cadre 
of ICCR. In the mean time, ICCR should complete the process of hiring an outsource agency to 
make recruitment of 32 posts available in ICCR cadre for direct recruitment. The Committee 
were to be apprised of the steps taken in that regard. 

15 
 
27. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs informed the Committee that 
Ministry has taken note of Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation and acknowledges that for the 
smooth functioning and effective implementation of ICCR‟s mandate and to rejuvenate the 
Council, adequate staff is essential. Ministry is examining proposal for creation of additional 200 
posts in ICCR. Regarding recruitment of 32 Direct Recruitment posts, Ministry has already 
identified the Recruitment Agency for conducting  competitive exam on behalf of ICCR. The 
process is likely to be completed by April/May 2020. 
28. In view of serious human resource crunch in ICCR, t he Committee ha ve 
consistently recommended the Ministry to pursue with Ministry of Finance the creation of 
200 new posts in the cadre of ICCR and also to complete the process of recruitment for 32 
posts through direct recruitment. The Committee, however, find that the prop osal for 
creation of 200 posts is still at Ministry level and not yet sent to Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee also observe that the direct recruitment process for appointment on 32 posts is 
also yet to culminate. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA should expedite action on 
both these points and revert back to the Committee with the positive inputs expeditiously. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
29. The Committee had observed that as a key instrument of our foreign policy, the scope 
and magnitude of develop mental partnership had been widened over the past few years. The 
Committee were happy to note that as per the Recommendations of the Committee in their 
earlier Reports on Demands for Grants to refrain from cuts in this head and suitable increase of 
allocation at RE stage, the Ministry of Finance had increased the allocations of Rs. 5148.55 crore 
given at BE 2018-19 to Rs. 5970.50 crore at RE stage. The increase is Rs. 821.95 crore. Further, 
the allocation at BE 2019-20 has also witnessed an increase with allocation of Rs. 7333.79 crore. 
The Committee were also happy to note that as per Government‟s neighbourhood first policy the 
allocations have been enhanced at BE 2019 -20 over BE 2018 -19 for Bhutan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, 
Myanmar, Maldives and Afghanistan. 
The Committee had been apprised that Aid programmes are influenced by the dynamics of 
India‟s national interest, diplomatic engagements and political relations. The pace of 

16 
 
implementation of agreed projects are dependent on the host beneficiary Government‟s readiness 
and local security and climatic factors. In this regard, the Committee in their 21 st Report had 
recommended to undertake a thorough review of all Aid projects and prepare a roadmap for their 
completion. The Committee are of the opinion that sin ce the budgetary allocations have been 
increased, the Ministry should make a thorough review of all Aid projects to observe the status 
of physical and financial progress of each project. The Committee reiterated their earlier 
Recommendations to explore the  feasibility of setting up of an autonomous aid disbursal body 
along the line of USAID to monitor the progress of the projects and to avoid arbitrary cuts 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance and prioritise the projects within the available allocation. 
The C ommittee strongly feel that in this way the aid to various countries for technical and 
economic cooperation will play a desired role for ushering developmental diplomacy. 
30. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that  assured the 
Hon‟ble Committee that it closely monitors expenditure and fund releases are made in line with 
physical and financial progress of projects to avoid any parking of funds with implementing 
agencies. The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) in MEA is entrusted with 
implementing India‟s development cooperation initiatives with partner countries. The Projects 
under DPA are regularly reviewed at various levels. A timeline for both physical and financial 
progress is part of project planning and regular stakeholders meeting helps to review the progress 
of the Project against these timelines and resolve bottlenecks.  
As regards the setting up of an autonomous aid disbursal body, it is submitted that our 
development partnership is based on the needs of our partner countries and our foreign policy 
priorities which are assessed in close coordination with the concerned Territorial Divisions of 
the Ministry. Specific proposals are progressed on the basis on assessment made by the 
Territorial Divisions factoring in the political relationship with the countries. The 
Development Partnership Administration evolved over the past seven years, by inducting 
expertise from other Ministries and also and leveraging capacities from outside government 
also. DPA is an integral  part of Ministry and its programme are tightly linked with country's 
foreign policy priorities, which require flexibility and nimbleness to quickly respond and 
adapt to the inherent dynamic nature of international relations. Governments of many other 
countries are increasingly rethinking on the idea of an autonomous and independent agency on 
the lines of USAID. Some Governments, which earlier had separate autonomous aid/ 
developmental agencies, have moved towards creating agency like DPA; for example, 
Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) has now been transformed to become an 
integral part of their Ministry of Foreign Affairs- Global Affairs of Canada.”  

17 
 
31. The Committee are aware that the Ministry is cognizant of the importance of 
India’s development co-operation initiatives with partner countries and a regular review of 
the projects is being done at various levels through the Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA) since last seven years.  The Committee, however, find that there are 
still delays in implementation of projects and arbitrary cuts in funds under the direction of 
Ministry of Finance affecting the projects and reputation of the country advers ely. That is 
why for better monitoring and to avoid such Budgetary cuts, the Committee had 
recommended that the feasibility of setting up of an autonomous aid disbursal body along 
the line of USAID may be explored. The Committee are not convinced with the justification 
given by the Ministry for not setting up of such body referring the case of Canada where an 
independent agency, CIDA has been converted as DPA like agency making it a part of their 
Ministry of Foreign Affair and also that Governments of many countries are increasingly 
rethinking on the idea of an autonomous and independent agency on the lines of USAID. 
The Ministry, however, to prove its view in the matter, has not clarified whether the 
current system of DPA is capable of reviewing all Aid Pro jects to different countries and 
monitor physical and financial progress made in each project efficiently or not the Ministry 
has also not presented any review report of all the aid projects as recommended by the 
Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiter ate their recommendation and desire that the 
Ministry should explore the feasibility of setting up an autonomous aid disbursal body 
along the lines of USAID to implement and monitor the progress of projects abroad after 
preparation of a review report of all the aid projects. 
(Recommendation No. 27) 

18 
 
32.  In their first Report the Committee observed that the aid to Myanmar under BE 2018 -19 
was Rs. 280.00 crore and the same was increased to Rs. 370.00 crore at RE stage. The allocation 
for BE 2019-20 has further increased to Rs. 400.00 crore. The Committee had been apprised that 
the main infrastructure projects that require significant funding in BE 2019 -20 are the Kaladan 
Multimodal Transport Project, Trilateral Highway linking India, Myanmar and Thailand, Coas tal 
Surveillance System for Myanmar on its Bay of Bengal coast and the Andaman Sea; a Women's 
Police Training College; an ongoing project to support the Myanmar Institute for Information 
and Technology (MIIIT). The Committee, further, noted that based on a ssessment of Myanmar's 
current capacity to absorb projects, the stage at which the existing menu of projects has currently 
reached, and the capacity to work with Myanmar's specific rules and regulations, the Ministry 
believes that the allocation currently sought is sufficient to secure India's fundamental strategic 
interests in Myanmar. The Committee were happy to note that the Ministry has successfully 
completed and handed over to 250 housing units under the Rakhine State Development 
Programme. In the Kala dan Multi -Modal Project, the waterways component comprising the 
Sittwe Port, the island water transport terminals at Sittwe and Paletwa, the navigation channel 
and six 300 tonne vessels have been completed. However, the Committee were constrainted to 
note the long delay in completing the work on the Kaladan -Multi Modal road component which 
was accorded in March 2017. The Committee noted the reasons attributable to the delay are the 
worsening security situation as a result of Rohingya issues and financial in solvency of the 
contractors. In that regard, the Committee suggested the Ministry to make sincere efforts to 
ensure that at the tendering stage, the Ministry, along with the line Ministries, to examine the 
credibility of the contractors through a proper tendering process and they should regularly follow 
the examination so that the scarce resources of the Government of India do not get blocked or 
wasted due to the financial insolvency of the contractors. The Committee might be apprised of 
the steps taken in that regard. The Committee further desired that the Ministry in consultation 
with Myanmar Government to draw a road map for completion of the Kaladan-Multi Modal road 
component to ensure smooth and timely completion of the transport corridor. 
33. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs informed the Committee that 
it vigorously pursuing with the host Government to expedite the completion of major 
infrastructure projects including the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project.  We 
have been trying to expedite the project by starting work from the Northern end, from the 
Zorinpui – Myeikwa end for the 60 -109 km stretch of the road component. A Myanmar 

19 
 
delegation and an inter Ministerial Indian delegation visited the Zorinpui area (Mizor am) in 
December 2019. Men and material are being moved towards the Zorinpui by the contractor to 
start the work of the 60 -109 km through Zorinpui. W e have been able to gain some momentum 
in our efforts in moving ahead with the project from the Zorinpui end , with the Government of 
Myanmar starting procedures to give access to the contractors via Zorinpui (Mizoram). 
Meanwhile, India handed over the Sittwe port operations to A to Z Exim on 31 January 2020.  
The Ministry in consultation with the Government of M yanmar would frame a roadmap 
for the completion of the project - taking in to account the fact that the project is 
hampered due to multiple factors including the local adverse security situation, over 
which even the Government of Myanmar does not have full control. 
34. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has taken positive steps 
towards completion of Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project. However, they 
reiterate their concern over delay in completion of the Project, firstly, due to se curity 
situation there and secondly, due to financial insolvency of the contractors, which portray 
lack of due diligence  in the matter . The Ministry however, has not conveyed whether the 
Ministry in consultation with the Myanmar Government has finalized any road map for 
completion of the Project or not. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry in 
consultation with the Government of Myanmar should draw a road map for completion of 
the project and stick to the same so that the project is completed without any further delay. 
Moreover, the Ministry should conduct a thorough due diligence and financial insolvency 
check of all contractors before finalizing/awarding them the contracts in Myanmar 
Projects to avoid any time and cost overruns of projects due to re-tendering. 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
35.  During examination of the Demands for Grants 2018 -19, the Committee had observed 
considerable ad-hocism in the issue relating to Overseas Indians Affairs. Even after two years of 
merger of the erstwhile Mini stry of Overseas Indian Affairs, no separate budget head was 
provided for matter related to Overseas Indians. Allocation for the various schemes and 
programmes related to Overseas Indians were being made under the budget head “Other 

20 
 
Expenditures”. Therefore, the Committee had desired to do away with the odd budgetary practice 
and create a distinct budget head specifically pertaining to Overseas Indians. The Committee 
were pained to note the continuation of the ad -hoc approach in the financial year 2019 -20, 
which is the third year of post merger of the erstwhile MOIA with MEA. In the detailed 
Demands for Grants 2019 -20, the schemes/programmes related to Overseas Indian Affairs are 
covered under the sub heads i.e. (i) engagement with Indian Diaspora under the  minor head 
International Cooperation and (ii) welfare of Overseas Indian under the minor head Passport and 
Emigration. The Committee were of the view that this budgetary practice does not reflect the 
serious attitude of the Ministry to look after the Over seas Indians. Therefore, the Committee 
reiteratef their earlier recommendation to create a separate budget head exclusively dealing with 
all the schemes/programmes related to Overseas Indians. The Committee were apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
36. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that t he 
recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee regarding opening of separate heads have been duly 
complied with and the new budget heads have been opened after obtaining necessary approval of 
the Office of the Controller General of Accounts. The Ministry undertook review of various 
schemes and programmes under erstwhile „Other Expenditure‟ minor head and decided to open 
these two heads as following. 
All schemes targeted towards welf are of migrant Indians have been placed together by opening 
a new sub -head „welfare of overseas Indians‟. This sub -head is placed under Minor Head 
„Passport & Emigration‟ as all these programmes are for the welfare of Indian citizens who 
have migrated abroad. Due attention has been given to ensure adequate allocation of budgetary 
resources towards these schemes and Allocation in BE 2020 -21 has been enhanced to Rs 7.27 
crore from RE 2019-20 allocation of Rs. 3.29 crore. 
On the other hand, all diaspora relate d schemes and programmes have been placed together 
under newly opened sub-head „Engagement with Indian Diaspora‟ as distinct from schemes for 
Indian citizens abroad. These schemes are placed under „International Cooperation‟ Minor Head 
clearly reflecting t he priority attached by the Ministry towards engagement with India‟s 
diaspora community. Due attention has been given to ensure adequate allocation of budgetary 
resources towards these schemes and Allocation in BE 2020 -21 has been enhanced to Rs 69 
crore from RE 2019-20 allocation of Rs. 38.12 crore.” 
37. The Committee note that due to continuous persuas ion of the Committee the 
Ministry has created some separate Budget sub - heads like ‘ Welfare of Overseas Indians’ 

21 
 
and ‘Engagement with Indian Diaspora’ replacing the head ‘ Other Expenditure’ and has 
also enhanced the allocation for the Schemes/Programmes related to overseas Indians. 
However, the Committee are unable to understand the reasons for not creating a separate 
Budget Head for all the matters rela ted to Overseas Indians which the Committee have 
been continuously recommending. In the Committee’s view, it is necessary to create a 
separate Head exclusively dealing with all the Schemes/Programmes related to overseas 
Indians and making provision of suff icient fund for each Scheme/Programme under this 
Head. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to conduct an exercise of assessing the benefits the Diaspora renders to our 
country and their welfare requirements and find a way to expedite the process of creating a 
separate Budget Head dedicated only to the Schemes/Programmes relating to them with 
sufficient allocation every year. 
(Recommendation No. 32) 
 
38.  The Committee noted that a Pre -Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) was given to 
potential emigrants under the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PKVY) Scheme. The Committee 
noted that Rs. 10.00 crore was released to the Ministry of Skill Development and Training in 
March, 2017 and only Rs. 3.00 crore have been u tilized till date out of this. Due to this under 
utilization of funds, rationalisation has been done and in BE 2019 -20, an allocation of Rs. 5.5 
crore has been made. An enhancement is considered based on the progress of work and 
utilization of earlier rele ased funds. The Committee noted that the number of emigrant workers 
imparted training under PDOT are the most in city of Mumbai which amount to 38976 trainees 
followed by New Delhi at 18727 trainees. 
 
The Committee felt that the training centres in Metro -politan areas of Mumbai and New Delhi 
are running with full capacity while the smaller towns do not have the same priority. The 
Ministry had informed that new PKVY training centres have been opened in t owns of Jaipur, 

22 
 
Sikar, Hyderabad, Karim Nagar, Nizamabad, Gaya, Muzaffarpur and Patna. The Committee 
desired that the Ministry of External Affairs take up the matter of PDOT on a grand scale and 
impart training in the particular domain that the potential e migrants want to learn like plumbing, 
carpenter, nursing, technician etc. The Committee also felt that guiding the emigrants against 
potential working hazards like passports being taken away by employers, loss of money through 
fake agents, etc. can also be  part of the PDOT programme. The Committee had also 
recommended the Ministry to target more towns like Kochi, Chennai, Kolkata, Chandigarh, etc. 
to open new PDOT centres for potential  emigrants. The Committee were apprised of the 
initiatives taken in this regard. 
 
39. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that a one day Pre-
Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) programme has been started in a structured manner 
since January 2018, beginning with two centres each at Mumbai and New Delhi. Gradually, 
number of PDOT Centres has been increased to 21 by the end of 2019. Out  of these 21 centres, 
15 new PDOT centres have been opened across various states in India in 2019. Presently, PDO 
Training is being imparted to the prospective emigrant workers under the two models i.e. firstly, 
PDOT centres managed by NSDC empanelled Trai ning Partners under MOU between MEA and 
MSDE on the implementation of PKVY and secondly, through State Government agencies. In 
this regard, MEA has transferred Rs 10 Lakhs each to State Government Agency/Department of 
Rajasthan, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Rs 5 Lakhs to Andhra Pradesh. 
 
77,109 emigrant workers have been imparted PDO Training across 21 PDOT centers 
in the country by the end of year 2019 as follows:- 
 
 
S.No 
 
PDOT Centre 
Agency Year of Opening 
1. Mumbai (Videsh Bhawan)  
NSDC Empanelled Training 
Partners under PKVY 
2018 
2. Mumbai  (Andheri) 2018 
3. Delhi  (Okhla) 2018 
4. Delhi (Mandir Marg) 2018 
5. Kochi  2018 
6. Lucknow 2018 
7. Gorakhpur 2019 
8. Chandigarh 2019 

23 
 
9. Chennai 2019 
 
10. Jaipur  RSLDC (Rajasthan) 2019 
11. Sikar 2019 
12. Nagaur 2019 
 
13. Hyderabad  TOMCOM 
(Telangana) 
2019 
14. Karimnagar 2019 
15. Nizamabad  2019 
 
16. Darbhanga Labour Resource Department, 
Government of Bihar 
2019 
17. Gaya 2019 
18. Muzaffarpur 2019 
19. Patna 2019 
 
20. Vijaywada OMCAP 
(Andhra Pradesh) 
2019 
21. Kadapa 2019 
TOTAL 
 
In reference to the Committee‟s recommendation to deliver domain training for potential 
emigrants, MSDE has conveyed that a pilot program comprising 14 India International Skill 
Centers (IISCs) was launched. Based on the learnings from the pilot, MSDE is revising the 
policy guidelines of IISCs, under which operational guidelines had to be redrafted for 
implementation of IISCs. MEA is yet to receive proposal from MSDE in this regard. 
 
In reference to the Committee‟s recommendations to target more towns like Kochi, Chennai, 
Kolkata, Chandigarh etc. to open new PDOT Centres for potential emigrants.  Ministry has 
opened PDOT centers in these cities. In January 2019, the Ministry has conveyed its approval 
to the Labour Department, Government of West Bengal for opening of PDOT centers 
districts of Nadia, South 24 Paraganas, North 24 Paraganas, Murshidabad, Hooghly, Kolkata 
and Howrah. However, opening of the same is still awaited. Ministry is regularly follo wing-
up with the State Government on this.”  
 
 
40. The Committee express their satisfaction in regard to the Ministry opening of new 
Pre Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Centers in the town s like Kochi, Chennai, 
Kolkata and Chandigarh alongwith even smaller towns like Nagaur (Rajasthan), 

24 
 
Muzaffarpur (Bihar) and Kadapa (Andra Pradesh) having their own dedicated PDOT  for 
potential emigrants. The Committee hope that the newly approved PDOT Cent res in 7 
Districts of West Bengal will also see the light of the day soon. The Committee also observe 
that in spite of launching a pilot programme for 14 India International Skill Centres 
(IISCs), MEA is yet to receive the revised Policy guidelines of IISC s incorporating 
redrafted operational guidelines from the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE). The Committee urge the Ministry to attach significant 
attention to secure the revised policy guidelines for IISCs on priority basis so that  these 
centres may be able to deliver domain training to potential emigrants without any further 
delay. The Committee would also like to know about the inclusion of sufficient safeguards 
in the PDOT to protect the  migrants against the potential working haz ards like passports 
being taken away by employers, loss of money through fake agents , etc. The Committee 
may be informed of the progress made in each matter. 
 
(Recommendation No. 34) 
41. The Committee noted that South Asian University is an ambitious proje ct of the 
Government. The allocation at BE 2018 -19 for South Asian University was Rs. 375.00 crore. 
Out of Rs. 375.00 crore, Rs. 31.00 crore was for operational cost, Rs. 310.00 crore for capital 
cost and Rs. 34.00 crore for rent. At RE stage the allocatio n was reduced to Rs. 246.00 crore 
because of slow pace of construction of South Asian University Campus and reduction in the 
operational cost. For the year 2019 -20, Rs. 317.5 crore has been allocated as per the 
requirements projected for building works. Th e Committee noted that the construction work of 
South Asian University campus has now gained momentum. One building of Package II has 
almost been completed and another is scheduled to be completed in February 2020. Under 
Package III, 6 percent of physical progress has been achieved as on September, 2019 and the 
remaining works are expected to be completed by September, 2020. The Committee welcomed 

25 
 
these achievements. However, the Committee were pained to note that the works on remaining 
buildings under pack age IV could not be taken up until now due to various land acquisition 
issues and court cases and the Ministry has provided any specific schedule for completion of the 
work under package IV. The Committee have been apprised that the Ministry accords top 
priority for timely completion of the South Asian University project and are making all efforts to 
ensure all outstanding issues are resolved at the earliest. The Committee hoped that the Ministry 
would continue its efforts with all concerned agencies with i ncreased pace of expenditure to 
complete the remaining works of South Asian University in a time bound manner. 
42. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that it would like to 
update Hon‟ble Committee on the further progress of work in SAU construction project. As of 
December 2019, progress under Package II and Package III has reached 85% and 65% 
respectively. Four buildings under Package II have already been completed. One housing block 
is scheduled for completion in February  2020. These will be habitable after completion 
certificate/occupancy certificate is granted by the concerned authorities. Work under Package III 
is scheduled to be completed by September 2020. 
As regards Package IV, concerted and sustained efforts are bei ng made for approval of 
revised DPR, clearance of forest land pockets and tree cutting permission from Forest 
Department and expeditious conclusion of court cases. The Ministry is continuously 
reviewing and monitoring the progress with a view to ensure tim ely completion of the 
South Asian University project. 
43. The Committee observe that the construction of South Asian University has been 
going on since 2010 and is phased in 4 packages.  The Ministry in its reply has informed 
that work under package III wi ll be completed by September, 2020. However, the 
Committee feel that given the outbreak of COVID -19 pandemic causing lockdown etc. it 
may be difficult to complete work related to Package III by September, 2020. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the Ministry should revamp its complete plan of 
construction work and complete the Project as per the revised schedule. 
 Further, the Committee feel that as regards to work on package IV of th e project, 
the Ministry should m ake concerted efforts to get cleared the legal and environmental 

26 
 
issues in an expeditious manner so that the construction is completed within stipulated time 
frame under intimation to the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
44.  The Committee noted that an allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore was provided for Nalanda 
University at BE 2018 -19 which was reduced to Rs. 190.00 crore at RE stage. The allocation at 
BE 2019-20 is Rs. 220.00 crore. The Ministry anticipated the expenditure on this project would 
be close to 400.00 crore but Rs. 220.00 crore was allocated deliberately. 
The Committee had been apprised that the actual construction work of this University started in 
May, 2017. The current projection for completion of Nalanda University by the year 2021 -22, 
but the Ministry has not made any projection about the escalation of the cost for completion of 
the project. Further, contribution to operational and capital costs of Nalanda University from 
other countries are voluntary in nature and no foreign contribution wa s received during the last 
three years. Channelizing contribution from other countries has a limited scope. Reduction of 
allocations at RE (2018 -19) stage, ongoing pace of work and providing lesser allocation against 
the anticipated high expenditure during  2019-20, was indicative of a serious lack of 
determination to complete the construction of the University by 2021 -22. The delay in 
completion of Nalanda University – an international institution of excellence for pursuit of 
intellectual, philosophical and  historical studies was deplorable. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended the Government to finalise the revised cost of the proposal to be 
disbursed during the next two financial years so that the project is completed by 2021 -22. The 
Ministry sho uld also explore the possibilities to get contributions from other participating 
countries to supplement the progress. 
45. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that it  has taken 
note of Hon‟ble Committee‟s concern regarding the delay in starting the construction of the 
Nalanda University construction project. Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee 
that the Ministry is in constant touch with the implementing  agencies so that adequate fund flow 
to the project is ensured and momentum of progress in the construction is maintained. Based on 
the progress of the project, allocation at RE stage was increased to Rs. 300 cr. from Rs. 220 cr. at 
the BE stage. As regard s voluntary contribution from the participating countries, the efforts are 
being made by requesting some of the resident Missions of the Nalanda partner countries in India 
to continue their patronage to the institution through voluntary financial contribution. 

27 
 
46. The Committee had suggested that the Ministry should expedite the process of 
completion of Nalanda University Project as the delay leads to escalation of cost apart from 
still costlier in delay in operationalisation of the project . The Committee h ad also strongly 
recommended the Ministry to finalize the revised cost to be disbursed during the next 2 
years so that the project is completed by 2021 -22 positively.  The Ministry in its action 
taken note has assured the Committee that adequate fund flow to the project is being 
maintained and the allocation has been increased to Rs. 300.00 crore at RE stage from Rs. 
220.00 crore for BE 2019 -20.  The Ministry is also making efforts for voluntary financial 
contributions from resident missions of Nalanda Part ner Countries present in India.  The 
Committee reiterate that the Ministry should ensure the adequate fund flow to the project 
and simultaneously make efforts for getting voluntary contributions from the other 
participating countries to supplement the prog ress of Nalanda University Project and 
ensure timely completion of the project.  
 
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
While observing the pattern of demand, allocation and expenditure in the Ministry of External 
Affairs from the year 2014 -15 to 2017 -18, the Committee have noted that there has been a 
continuous mismatch between budgetary demand by MEA and actual allocation by MoF, 
reduction in allocation at RE stage and lesse r actual expenditure in comparison to the allocations 
given at RE stage as well as uneven quarterly expenditure. The Committee in their various 
Reports on Demands for Grants and Action Taken Reports have been emphasizing upon the 
Ministry for working out a  formal budgetary mechanism with regular monitoring and evaluation 
of each Unit at the highest level, and constantly engaging with the Ministry of Finance at all 
possible levels to convince them about the need for providing substantial budgetary allocation s 
to match with the broad frame work of Foreign Policy goals and to secure our national interest 
abroad. 
The Committee further observe that the Ministry has been taking up the issue of the gap between 
the projected amount and the actual allocation with the Ministry of Finance at all levels. This has 
shown the results and the gap has gradually reduced with a modest increase in the period under 
consideration. The Committee, however, feel that the spread and scale of MEA activities still 
requires additional fu nds to ensure that the Ministry fulfils its international commitments. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should project the actual requirement of funds and 
strongly impress upon the Ministry of Finance to enhance the budgetary allocation i n future by 
closely monitoring the expenditure pattern and fund releases in line with physical and financial 
progress of projects. 
Reply of the Government 
Over the years, the issue of provision adequate allocation of funds has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance at various levels, including EAM, Foreign Secretary and Financial Advisor. 
The response of the Ministry of Finance has been positive and constructive, as also indicated by 
the higher allocation for MEA in BE 2019-20 (Rs. 17884 cr.) and RE 2019-20 (Rs. 17372.27 cr.) 
as compared to the allocation in the interim budget 2019 -20 (Rs. 16061 cr), or in previous years, 
i.e. RE 2018-19 (Rs. 15582 cr.) or BE 2018-19 (Rs. 15011 cr.).  
 

29 
 
The Ministry holds extensive discussions with Ministry of Finance at all stages of the budgetary 
cycle, including when the demands for grants for RE of a given financial year and the BE of the 
next financial year are submitted by the Ministry and discussed with Ministry of Finance.  
The suggestion of the Standing Committee for evaluation of all aspects, such as physical and 
financial, in the recipient foreign country, before allocating funds for any particular 
project/programme, has been noted by the Ministry for compliance so as to ensure time bound 
and efficient execution of the projects. Ministry will make all efforts to continue to ensure 
optimum, balanced and full utilization of the allocation made. The Ministry would like to 
reaffirm that it continues to engage with Ministry of Finance to keep them informed of funds 
required to meet our international commitments and to emphasize the importance of providing 
adequate budgetary allocations to the Ministry.  
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
The Committee observe that due to continuous persuasion by the Committee and with regular 
quarterly reviews of the projects, the Ministry has been successful in striking a balance in the 
spending during each quarter of 2018 -19. Through close monitoring of expenditure and fund 
release in line with phy sical and financial progress of projects, the Ministry could spend more 
than the allocations made in the 1 st and 2nd quarter and in the 3 rd quarter against the allocation of 
Rs. 3352.45 crore the expenditure was Rs. 3008.05 crore. In the 4 th quarter against the allocation 
of Rs. 4953.65 crore the expenditure was Rs. 4164.57  crore  which  is  about  27%  of  the  total  
allocations  and  thus  within  33%  of allocations as per the instructions of the Ministry of 
Finance. While on this aspect, the Committee  would also like to point out a serious shortcoming 
in the outlay information that has been furnished to the Committee. Varying figures were 
provided in writing to the Committee by MEA in regards to BE 2016 -17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 
in replies to their queri es.  It was only at the Report drafting stage when these disparities were 
pointed out to the Ministry that reconciled figures were furnished only/as late as on 5 December, 
2019. While disapproving this casual approach of the Ministry in financial matters, the 
Committee desire that extreme caution should be exercised by the Ministry while submitting 
information to the Committee. 
In the last quarter of the year, within the constraints of majority of the spending being in foreign 
countries which are conditioned by the local regulations, the Ministry could spend the allocations 
allocated to it in all the quarters of the Financial year. The Committee appreciate the optimal 
utilization of budgetary resources and are hopeful that the good work will continue during 2019-
20 and ahead and that the monitoring mechanism will be further strengthened. Further, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should anticipate the country/region -specific challenges they 
face abroad while implementing various projects and take appropriate steps in a timely manner to 

30 
 
overcome them. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken on these lines and the impact 
thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
To ensure optimal utilization of budgetary resources, quarterly expenditure is being closely 
monitored at different levels including at the level of Foreign Secretary and the Financial 
Advisor in consultation with Divisional Heads. Accordingly, funds are r eleased in line with 
physical and financial progress of projects to ensure that there is no parking of funds with 
implementing agencies. Importance of adhering to the balanced pace of expenditure during each 
quarter is also emphasized to various Divisions and Spending Units.  
The Ministry agrees with Hon‟ble Committee‟s suggestion regarding assessment of 
country/region-specific challenges faced in implementation of projects. Ministry has been 
closely monitoring implementation of projects in different countr ies. Review mechanisms are at 
three levels – intra-Ministry, inter-Ministry and bilateral. Implementation of some projects have 
been part of „PRAGATI‟ review meetings chaired by Prime Minister. Within Ministry, EAM and 
concerned Secretaries frequently chai r inter -ministerial stakeholders meetings to assess 
implementation of all ongoing projects in various countries and regions and appropriate action to 
overcome challenges being faced in smooth implementation of projects are initiated.                                                   
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
The Committee note that pertaining to the rationale and methodology of ceiling being laid down 
for expenditure of allocated funds on schemes, programmes and projects, the Ministry submitted 
that it undertakes a detailed and careful assessment of requirements for the various heads in the 
MEA budget. This is done in consultation with concerned Divisions and Spending Units as per 
funds utilization status and impl ementation progress of projects, schemes and programmes to 
suitably allocate funds within the budgetary ceilings conveyed by Ministry of Finance to ensure 
that Ministry‟s ongoing projects, schemes, programmes and commitments have requisite funds. 
The Committee, however, observe that despite close monitoring and review meetings, there was 
under-spending in several important heads like Aid given to Bhutan, Mangedchhu, 
Kholongechhu, Maldives, Mangolia, ITEC Programme and MER. The Committee feel that there 
is a need for the Ministry to develop a focused and well defined budgetary planning process so as 
to ensure feasible targets for the projects. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry take stringent steps to address this issue without any further delay so that under 
utilization of funds does not continue in the financial year of 2019 -20. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the Ministry‟s efforts and endeavours in this regard and the outcome 
achieved therefrom. 

31 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry accords utmost priority towards effective and secure budgetary allocation under 
Technical & Economic Cooperation. The budgetary resource prioritization and allocation by the 
Ministry is aligned, both towards Aid commitments by the Government as well as efficient 
utilization of the allocated budgetary resources to the Ministry within the overall constraints of 
Government finances.  
The allocations for various Aid heads are done through careful prioritization within available 
resources to ensure that none of our developmental work suffers any setback and all our 
commitments are implemented smoothly and speedily.  
Under-spending in some heads sometimes occurs because of the factors outside the control of 
Government of India such as geo -political situation, non -resolution of project implementation 
issues, and political unrest in the host countries. Mi nistry is conscious of the need for utilizing 
the available funds and project review meetings are regularly held to ensure that these factors 
causing delay in implementation of various projects are minimized.  
Reallocations at RE stage are carried out to c ater to spending needs under other heads based on 
physical progress by identifying savings in other Aid heads after undertaking a realistic spending 
assessment based on project implementation cycles, local conditions and physical progress. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
19965.57 crore the Ministry has been allocated Rs. 17884.78 crore at BE 2019 -20 stage. This is 
19.14% more than the allocations given at BE 2018 -19 and 14.78% more than the allocations at 
RE 2018-19. However, in percentage terms, there has been only 0.01% increase in the budget of 
the Ministry of External Affairs in comparison to the overall budget of Government of India. 
Allocation is made to various heads based on Ministry‟s priorities and realistic r equirement of 
funds during the budgetary period. The Committee have been further apprised that the Ministry 
has been making constant endeavours to project its requirement of funds in a given year based on 
realistic and need based estimation of schemes and projects. During the oral evidence Foreign 
Secretary admitted that while the allocation is still short of the projected expenditure, it will 
substantially enable the Ministry to fulfill many of its obligations. 
The Committee trust that the Ministry would ensure an optimum utilization of the budgetary 
allocations during each quarter of the year after finalizing the new initiatives in consultation with 
the concerned beneficiary governments and operationalizing the same at the earliest. 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has made full efforts to ensure optimum utilization of the available budgetary allocation 
evenly throughout the year. In 2019 -20, Ministry has ensured smooth and balanced pace of 
expenditure during each quarter. Cumulative expenditure in the fir st three quarters has been 
24%, 55% and 75% of the BE 2019 -20. This has also ensured that Ministry has fully satisfied 
Ministry of Finance instructions that expenditure in the final quarter should not be more than 
25% of BE. All efforts will be made to also ensure that as per Ministry of Finance guidelines this 
year, expenditure in the final month of March will also remain with the 10% ceiling. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee observe that out of the total  allocations of Rs. 17884.78 crore at BE 2019 -20, 
Rs. 16511.23 crore has been allocated under Revenue Section and Rs. 1373.55 crore under 
Capital Section. In comparison to the allocations for Revenue Section at the BE 2018 -19 
i.e.13374.50 crore the RE allo cation is Rs. 14636.50 crore. This shows an increasing trend. The 
allocations under Capital Section at BE 2018 -19 i.e Rs. 1636.50 crore has been reduced to Rs. 
945.50 crore at RE stage. In comparison to BE 2018 -19 and 2019-20, there is a reduction of Rs. 
262.95 crore. Capital outlays on public works, Housing and Loans to Government of Bhutan 
were affected due to reduced allocations. At BE 2018 -19 allocations were kept at a higher level 
due to the minimum capital allocation specified by the Ministry of Finan ce. Reduction at RE and 
BE 2019 -20 on account of capital budget was due to a realistic assessment of project 
implementation cycles and physical progress of ongoing projects. In addition, fund requirements 
for upcoming constructions, renovations and acquisi tions have also been considered. The 
Committee are further apprised that the Ministry is taking corrective steps to resolve the 
problems related to delay in implementation of various projects through project monitoring 
mechanism but the hindrances arising out of geo-political situation or political unrest in the host 
countries are beyond the control of the Ministry as well as the concerned Mission/Post. 
While acknowledging the above reasons put forth by the Ministry, the Committee are still 
apprehensive of the adequacy of the current allocations under Capital Section. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly desire that the Ministry should monitor the project implementation at every 
stage and after regular calculation of the anticipated expenditure, it should impre ss upon the 
Ministry of Finance to allocate judicious funds at RE stage. 
Reply of the Government 
Reduced allocation due to delays in acquisition of diplomatic properties abroad or in 
construction/renovation are primarily due to restrictive or changing norm s and local regulations 
in the host country, which are beyond control of the Ministry. However, in order to proactively 
pursue the diplomatic properties projects and avoid delays, Ministry has strengthened the 

33 
 
Technical Team of Engineers and Architects by increasing the number of personnel. In addition, 
Ministry endeavours to undertake preparation activities and seek approvals simultaneously to 
optimally use the time available. Newer technologies for construction and renovation are being 
used to reduce the overall completion time. Ministry has also standardized various document 
templates so that the processing time for approvals is minimized. With extensive use of modern 
information technology tools and setting up of institutionalized review processes, the delays have 
been curtailed significantly. The Ministry continues to hold extensive discussions with Ministry 
of Finance at all stages of the budgetary cycle to convince and impress upon the need for 
judicious allocation of funds. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
The Ministry has furnished a plethora of reasons for non -acquisition of Chanceries and 
residential properties in foreign States of Stockholm, Mexico, Pakistan and Sudan. The reasons 
elaborated for non -acquisition are non -suitability of property, local regulations, geo -political 
situations etc. The Committee desire that the Ministry should examine local rules and regulations 
as well as whether the properties are lease based ownerships before acquiring them so that t he 
construction and acquisition of diplomatic properties is a smooth process. The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry to closely assess and examine the factors due to which these delay 
causing hurdles and barriers are arising and find a way to overcome t hem. The Committee also 
desire that a status note in this regard may be furnished to them within three months. 
The Ministry has stated financial stress as the reason for the main contractor in the construction  
project  in  Wellington  going  into  receive rship,  resulting  in  a  decrease  in expenditure.  The 
Committee desire and strongly recommend the Ministry to exercise due diligence before 
awarding contracts of construction so as to avoid stalling of projects because of bankruptcy of 
the contractor. S uch hurdles lead to time and cost overruns which are unaffordable and 
inexcusable. The Committee recall that in their previous Reports they had advised the Ministry 
to make changes to improve contract management in view of the adverse comments by the 
C&AG in its report about property management of the Ministry of External Affairs. The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to apprise the Committee of steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has been strongly pursuing acquisition of prope rties, especially at high rental 
Missions/Posts abroad. Instructions to actively pursue acquisition of properties are being issued 
to the concerned Missions/Posts abroad from time to time. In the last three years, properties have 
been acquired at Amman, Kabul, Cape Town, Hong Kong, Hamburg, Tashkent and Nairobi. The 
Ministry is currently processing acquisition proposals for Missions/Posts at Doha, Tel Aviv, 
Rome,   Berne, Bishkek, Milan and Manila.  
 

34 
 
As regards non –acquisition of properties in Stockholm and  Mexico City, the acquisition of 
identified property in Stockholm was not concluded because owner‟s asking price was much 
higher than the price at which it was acquired by the owner two years ago, which couldn‟t be 
justified, notwithstanding that the marke t evaluated price was comparable with the asking price. 
The Mission in Stockholm has been directed to identify suitable alternate properties. Acquisition 
of the identified property in Mexico City has been delayed in want of a written confirmation 
from the concerned authorities for suitable land use change.   
The reference to geo –political situation in Pakistan and Sudan in Ministry‟s initial reply was in 
the context of construction projects in these countries and not in context of acquisition projects.  
Before considering any acquisition proposal, Ministry obtains detailed information on the 
ownership of the properties (whether freehold or lease -hold), local rules and regulations for 
acquisition/ construction by diplomatic Missions/Posts, applicable urban pa rameters, land –use 
permissions, etc. and thoroughly examines the information.  
A composite team from the Ministry comprising representatives from the Global Estate 
Management Division, including its Technical Cell, and Integrated Finance Division visits th e 
concerned stations for on –the–spot–assessment of the identified properties and to hold 
comprehensive discussions with all concerned stakeholders including the Foreign Office, urban 
authorities and owners of the properties. Subsequent to identification of  a suitable property by 
the team, professional evaluations by reputed local firms/ agencies are undertaken for 
ascertaining the market price and structural soundness of the property. Due diligence by a 
reputed local law firm is carried out to establish the  Owners‟ clear title and right to sell the 
properties. All these steps considerably diminish the risk of unforeseen hurdles/barriers cropping 
up at a later stage in the acquisition process.  
 
Despite all these efforts, unforeseen circumstances/ developments sometimes come in the way of 
timely conclusion of acquisition proposals.  
 
The Ministry has noted the advice of the Committee to continue to assess the hurdles faced by 
the Ministry and find ways to overcome them to make the acquisition of the diplomatic  
properties a smooth process.  
Construction: 
The contractors are selected through an open tender, as per provisions of General Financial Rules 
(GFR) with such modifications, as may be required to synchronize it with local regulations and 
practices. Essential safeguards and financial eligibility crite ria, as mandated in CPWD Manual, 
CVC guidelines, and other GOI instructions, are also invariably adhered to, with appropriate 
modifications, where required in accordance with local regulations or practice.  The tender 
conditions and eligibility criteria ar e regularly updated as per decisions/instructions of the 
Government.  Any relaxation or modification in accordance with local regulations or practice is 
permitted only after thorough examination and obtaining concurrence of the Integrated Finance 
Division. The financial soundness of the bidders is assessed as part of the tender process and 
financial safeguards obtained in accordance with the above criteria.  

35 
 
 
The contractor in Wellington was one of the largest contractors in New Zealand. All mandatory 
financial criteria were fulfilled by the contractor. It also submitted the required financial 
safeguards. 
 
Taking note of the advice of the Committee in its previous reports, Ministry has undertaken few 
changes for better contract management. The Technical Cell  in the Ministry comprising 
Architects and Engineers, who advise the Ministry on technical aspects and assist it in contract 
management, has been strengthened. The Ministry has also begun engaging a separate Project 
Management Consultant in construction pr ojects for focused monitoring of the progress of the 
works.  
 
Further, the Ministry has introduced two stage two bid system for major construction projects to 
ensure that only adequately technically qualified and financially sound bidders are invited to 
submit the financial bids.  
 
Learning from the experience of Wellington, Ministry will continue with its efforts to examine 
the financial soundness of the contractors with due care and diligence. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
The Committee observe that the PSKs and POPSKs are projects initiated by the Ministry to bring 
about qualitative and quantitative improvement in Passport Services to citizens of India. One of 
the objectives of opening more centres i s to reduce the time period for Police Verification 
process. The Committee find that in several states the period has reduced but in many states it 
requires improvement. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should sincerely follow 
up this issu e with all the State Governments and Police Authorities and impress upon them to 
reduce the Police Verification period to the minimum by using online connectivity between 
PSKs/POPSKs and Police authorities. The Committee should also be apprised of the stat us of 
linking the Police Verification process with the database being prepared by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 
Reply of the Government 
The Police Verification Process under Passport Seva Project has marked a significant 
improvement during the last five years. Over the years, there has been significant improvement 
in the submission of Police Verification (PVR) reports by the States/UTs. The Ministry has taken 
significant steps to improve the Police Verification Process and submission of PVR in an 
expeditious manner. Some of the noticeable improvements taken by the Ministry are as under: 
 

36 
 
 Integration with 741 District Police Headquarters  (DPHQs) in real -time with the 
Passport          Seva System 
 Process Improvements in Police Verification  
 Doing away with physical submission of PVRs 
 End-to-End digital movement of PV reports 
 Improvements in Police Verification Questionnaire 
 Launch of Mobile Police App „mPassport Police App‟ through which the Police 
Authorities    can directly upload the data at Thana/Applicant‟s residence  
 Visit of Police Verification Personnel to applicant‟s address on a need basis 
 
On the basis of above, the all India average time to submit PVR has come down to 16 days for 
the month of December 2019. For the State/UT using mPassport Police  App, the average time of 
PVR submission is only 3 to 5 days. Ministry has been regularly emphasizing on the State/UT 
Governments and State Police authorities to reduce the time taken in completing the police 
verification process. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
The Committee note that in BE 2018 -19 ICCR was provided with an allocation of Rs. 255.00 
crore which was reduced to Rs. 235.00 crore at RE stage and was actually spent. At BE 2019 -20 
it has been provided with Rs. 250.00 crore. The Ministry has informed that ICCR also carries out 
a detailed budgetary exercise based on realistic achievable objectives in line with overall a 
priority of the Government for cultural diplomacy. ICCR is the only organization of the Min istry 
of External Affairs which promotes India‟s soft power abroad. ICCR activities are spread across 
the globe. These activities cover scholarship for organizing exhibitions and performing arts and 
visual arts programmes. Keeping in view the broad spectru m of the activities of ICCR, the 
Committee find that in view of wide ranging important activities, there is a need to enhance the 
budgetary allocation of ICCR as per their demand. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the Government to increase the budgetary allocation for ICCR at RE 2019 -20 and 
BE 2020-21 stage. The Ministry in its candid submission has also accepted that there is further 
scope of enhancement of budgetary grant to ICCR. Moreover, it will also require commensurate 
increase in ICCR‟s regular staff strength to plan and execute its activities globally. The 
Committee, therefore, also desire that the recruitment process in ICCR should be expedited to 
minimize the existing manpower crunch in ICCR and future needs. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has noted the Hon'ble Committee's recommendations and  would ensure an optimum 
utilization of the funds allocated to ICCR. As part of overall streamlining drive of ICCR‟s 
functioning, ICCR has initiated framing guidelines for all its programmes and activities related to 
financial and administrative management. Under the same process following action is underway: 

37 
 
 
(i) Guidelines and rules on resource mobilization, expenditure and accounting procedures 
have been prepared and are under consideration of the Ministry 
(ii) Learning from the success of existing Public -Private Partnership models, standard 
guidelines are in the process of being drafted. 
ICCR has identified the Recruitment Agency for conducting competitive exam on behalf of 
ICCR for recruitment of personnel at existing posts. The process is likely to be completed by 
April/ May2020. BE 2020 -21 allocation of  ICCR has been enhanced to Rs 290 crore from BE 
2019-20 and RE 2019-20 allocation of Rs 250 crore in line with Committee‟s recommendation . 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
The Committee note that ICCR‟s cultural centres abroad are the principal instrument of India‟s 
institutional cultural outreach. The Ministry has submitted that establishment of a new cu ltural 
centre is dependent on various factors such as allocation of additional funds for 
establishing/running cost, identification of suitable premises and creation of post to man the 
cultural centre. During examination of Demands for Grants of the last tw o years the Committee 
were informed that ICCR was in the process of opening three new cultural centres in Tel Aviv 
(Israel), Paris (France) and Washington (USA). However, there has been no progress during the 
last three years. In view of the mandate of ICCR to project the rich cultural diversity of India and 
use the soft power diplomacy abroad, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to take 
concerted steps to open the new cultural centres at the earliest. The Committee also emphasize 
that the new cul tural centres should be equipped with credible human resources along with 
judicious allocation of funds to the centres to undertake their activities. The Committee may be 
apprised about the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Steps taken by  Ministry in opening of three new cultural centres in Tel Aviv (Israel), Paris 
(France) and Washington (USA) are enumerated below: 
SVCC, Paris: For establishment of SVCC Paris, Govt. of India has already purchased a property 
from the Govt. of France in a h eritage Area of Paris. The building is presently under process of 
renovation and expected to be completed during the current financial year. Various functional 
requirements & number of personnel / India based teachers and local staff required at SVCC, 
Paris will be finalised in due course. 

38 
 
Washington: Ministry is in process of hiring of a multi - purpose hall for undertaking cultural 
activities till the regular cultural centre becomes operational. Ministry is taking efforts to 
remodel the U-Street property, which was purchased several years ago for this purpose and make 
it functioned as soon as possible. 
Tel Aviv:  Ministry has  received approval of the President for opening of the Indian Cultural 
Centre, Tel Aviv and approved 4 India based and 4 local staff p osts. In respect of hiring of 
premises for Cultural Centre, a property of 510 sq. m. is finalized in accordance with the area 
norms specified by the ICCR.  
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
The Committee observe that ICCR‟s sanctioned strength has come down from 350 in the 1990s 
to 206 at present. Actual working strength of ICCR as on date is 149. As many as 44 posts were 
abolished in the year 2016. Since the discontinuation of practice of nomination of candidates by 
the Staff Selection Committee for regular appointment, ICCR has not been able to make direct 
recruitment on a regular basis and in absence of direct recruitment in a timely manner, the posts 
in ICCR‟s cadre meant to be filled -up through direct recruitment l apsed. Creation of new posts 
and recruitment against the same is a time -consuming exercise which requires approval of the 
Ministry of Finance. ICCR is in the process of hiring an outsourced agency to make recruitment 
against 32 posts available in ICCR cadr e for direct recruitment. ICCR is also pursuing its 
proposal for creation of 200 new posts in its cadre. It will require the approval of the Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee view the human resources crunch of ICCR very seriously. Further, the 
work of exi sting cultural centres will further deteriorate with its severe human resource crunch. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to pursue this matter with the 
Ministry of Finance for the creation of 200 new posts in the cadre of ICCR. In th e mean time, 
ICCR should complete the process of hiring an outsource agency to make recruitment of 32 posts 
available in ICCR cadre for direct recruitment. The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken note of Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation and acknowledges that for the 
smooth functioning and effective implementation of ICCR‟s mandate and to rejuvenate the 
Council, adequate staff is essential. Ministry is examining proposal for creation of ad ditional 200 
posts in ICCR. Regarding recruitment of 32 Direct Recruitment posts, Ministry has already 
identified the Recruitment Agency for conducting competitive exam on behalf of ICCR. The 
process is likely to be completed by April/ May 2020. 
 

39 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
The Committee were informed that ICCR had been designated as the principal coordinating 
organization in the country to take welfare measures for all foreign students in India. The 
Committee note  that in order to provide better services to the scholars studying under ICCR 
scholarships, an e-portal by the name Admission to Alumni (A2A) has been set up for admission 
of foreign students/scholars. The Committee desire that a proper feedback mechanism should be 
established to address the grievances posed by students/scholar and ICCR should act as a 
guardian and facilitator to them for ensuring their security and safety. The Committee also desire 
that besides looking into the various aspects of welfare o f foreign students, the Ministry should 
also consider widening of the scope of scholarships and increase the number of ICCR 
scholarships also. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has noted all the recommendations made by the esteemed committee for compliance.  
The security and safety of foreign students is the foremost priority of Ministry. ICCR has its 
Regional Offices in 19 states, which function as first point of contact for all the ICCR students to 
reach to in times of difficulty. ICCR‟s regional offices al so function in close coordination with 
the local FRROs as well as the International Students‟ Advisors (ISAs) or Dean International of 
the Universities and Institutes where ICCR students are studying, to jointly address the matters 
related to students‟ wel fare. A feedback mechanism has also been established so as to receive 
grievances of foreign students and address them effectively in a time bound manner under direct 
supervision of DG, ICCR. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
The Committee observe that the allocation for Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) at BE 
stage during the year 2018 -19 was Rs. 16.70 crore which was reduced to Rs. 11.87 crore at RE 
stage. The reasons attributed by the Ministry for reduction at RE stage were primarily due to 
slow pace of expenditure and anticipated expenditure in the year 2018 -19. This was done to 
ensure optimal utilization of funds. The slow pace of expenditure was primarily on account of 
unsatisfactory performance of CPWD which wa s assigned to carry out the renovation work of 
the library and annexe building of ICWA. During the year 2019 -20 an allocation of Rs. 15.00 
crore has been given as per ICWA‟s requirement of funds for the year. The Committee note that 
ICWA is endowed with th e task to carry out research on political, economic and security 
development in Asia, Africa, Europe, United States, Latin America and Caribbean and the wider 
geo-strategic environment. These research works always give strong inputs while framing the 
foreign policy agenda of India. The Committee note that during the period 2018 -19 the Council 

40 
 
had organized a total of 107 conferences /seminars/dialogues/panel discussions & book 
discussions which includes 20 international interactions in the form of Conferenc es and Bilateral 
Dialogues. The outcomes emerging out of these conferences and bilateral dialogues were 
beneficial in framing foreign policy agenda. In view of the above, the Committee strongly desire 
the Ministry not to look at only the slow pace of expen diture in the renovation work for lowering 
the budgetary allocations. ICWA should be fully supported by the Ministry by supplementing 
adequate budgetary allocations at the RE stage, under intimation to the Committee so that they 
may be able to give the best inputs to the Government in Foreign Policy matters. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry will continue to work in consultation with ICWA to ensure adequate budgetary 
resources are available with it. Ministry has enhanced allocation to ICWA to Rs 16.50 crore in 
BE 2020 -21 from Rs 15 crore in BE 2019 -20 in line with Hon'ble Committee's 
recommendations. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
RIS is a think tank specializing in international economic relations and development cooperation, 
serving as a forum for fostering effective policy dialogue among think tanks of developing 
countries. An outlay of Rs. 12.00 crore has been earmarked under the head RIS at BE 2019 -20 
stage. The same amount was there at BE and RE stages in 2018 -19. RIS continues to engage 
across intergovernmental processes of several regional economic cooperation initiatives. 
Through its intensive networks, RIS seeks to enhance policy coherence on international 
economic issues and the developmental partnership canva s. In view of the far reaching 
implications of the RIS initiatives, the Committee would recommend suitable enhancement of 
the budgetary allocations as per their requirement at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry will continue to closely work with RIS to ensure adequate funds are available with it for 
its programmes and activities. In BE 2020 -21, an enhanced allocation of Rs. 13 core in line with 
the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
 

41 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
The Committee observe that as a key instrument of our foreign policy, the scope and magnitude 
of developmental partnership has been widened over the past few years. The Committee are 
happy to note that as per the Recommendations of the Committee in their earlier Reports on 
Demands for Grants to refrain from cuts in this head and suitable increase of allocation at RE 
stage, the Ministry of Finance has increased the allocations of Rs. 5148.55 crore given at BE 
2018-19 to Rs. 5970.50 cr ore at RE stage. The increase is Rs. 821.95 crore. Further, the 
allocation at BE 2019 -20 has also witnessed an increase with allocation of Rs. 7333.79 crore. 
The Committee are also happy to note that as per Government‟s neighbourhood first policy the 
allocations have been enhanced at BE 2019 -20 over BE 2018 -19 for Bhutan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, 
Myanmar, Maldives and Afghanistan. 
The Committee have been apprised that Aid programmes are influenced by the dynamics of 
India‟s national interest, diplomatic engagement s and political relations. The pace of 
implementation of agreed projects are dependent on the host beneficiary Government‟s readiness 
and local security and climatic factors. In this regard, the Committee in their 21 st Report had 
recommended to undertake a thorough review of all Aid projects and prepare a roadmap for their 
completion. The Committee are of the opinion that since the budgetary allocations have been 
increased, the Ministry should make a thorough review of all Aid projects to observe the status  
of physical and financial progress of each project. The Committee would also like to reiterate 
their earlier Recommendations to explore the feasibility of setting up of an autonomous aid 
disbursal body along the line of USAID to monitor the progress of th e projects and to avoid 
arbitrary cuts imposed by the Ministry of Finance and prioritise the projects within the available 
allocation. The Committee strongly feel that in this way the aid to various countries for technical 
and economic cooperation will play a desired role for ushering developmental diplomacy. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry assures the Hon‟ble Committee that it closely monitors expenditure and fund releases 
are made in line with physical and financial progress of projects to avoid any parking of funds 
with implementing agencies. The Development Partnership Administra tion (DPA) in MEA is 
entrusted with implementing India‟s development cooperation initiatives with partner countries. 
The Projects under DPA are regularly reviewed at various levels. A timeline for both physical 
and financial progress is part of project pla nning and regular stakeholders meeting helps to 
review the progress of the Project against these timelines and resolve bottlenecks.  
As regards the setting up of an autonomous aid disbursal body, it is submitted that our 
development partnership is based on  the needs of our partner countries and our foreign policy 
priorities which are assessed in close coordination with the concerned Territorial Divisions of the 
Ministry. Specific proposals are progressed on the basis on assessment made by the Territorial 
Divisions factoring in the political relationship with the countries. The Development Partnership 

42 
 
Administration evolved over the past seven years, by inducting expertise from other Ministries 
and also and leveraging capacities from outside government also. DPA is an integral part of 
Ministry and its programme are tightly linked with country's foreign policy priorities, which 
require flexibility and nimbleness to quickly respond and adapt to the inherent dynamic nature of 
international relations. Governments of many other countries are increasingly rethinking on the 
idea of an autonomous and independent agency on the lines of USAID. Some Governments, 
which earlier had separate autonomous aid/ developmental agencies, have moved towards 
creating agency like DPA;  for example, Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 
has now been transformed to become an integral part of their Ministry of Foreign Affairs- Global 
Affairs of Canada.  
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
In the context of developmental aid to various countries, the Committee note that there has been 
decrease in aid to countries like Maldives, Afghanistan, SAARC and ITEC Programme from BE 
stage to RE stage in the year 2018 -19 and Chabahar Port and the Seychelles  from BE to RE 
2018-19 and from BE 2018 -19 to BE 2019 -20. The Committee further note that the progress of 
implementation of projects depends upon the geological and other practical challenges. 
Many a time, the Ministry faces difficulties of applying Indian  procurement rules in external 
market while constructing building abroad. As consequences, the pace of construction activities 
becomes very slow. When the Ministry float tender documents based on rules and regulations 
made in India, companies abroad are un willing to bid for those tenders because the Indian 
requirements do not match the requirement of the foreign companies. This is the hindrance both 
for procurement and construction works. The Committee note that the Ministry is deliberating 
this issue with the Ministry of Finance to gradually relax the norms for the construction activities 
abroad as well as on Lines of Credit or other grant projects. On this account, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to vigorously pursue this matter with the Ministry of Fina nce for an early 
decision. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee for compliance. The 
Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Finance and Exim Bank has revamped IDEAS 
Guidelines for funding of development projects funded through India‟s Line of Credit extended 
to various countries. Similarly, under Rule 144 (iii) of GFR 2017, the flexibility to frame 
technical specifications based on requirements and standards of the host beneficiary 
governments, wherever such standards exist, has also been made available for GOI funded 
development projects abroad. 
 

43 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation under Aid to Bangladesh for the year 2018-
19 was Rs. 175.00 crore an increase in comparison to the budgetrary allocation of Rs. 125.00 
crore in BE 2017 -18. However, at the RE stage of 2018 -19 the allocation was reduced to Rs. 
120.00 crore. The expenditure till 30 th September, 2018 was Rs. 52.79 crore only. The lower 
allocation at RE stage and slow pace of expenditure during the year 2018 -19 was attributable to 
the local and other factors like heavy rains, etc. The allocation for the year 2019 -20 is Rs. 175.00 
crore. The Ministry has  informed that an enhanced allocation of Rs. 175.00 crore has been 
provisioned to cater to expenditure anticipated towards ongoing development projects such as the 
Akhaura-Agartala rail link project, India Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline and dredging of 
fairway on inland waterway protocol routes apart from training of Bangladesh personnel, 
scholarships, and small development projects, etc. It is expected that the work will pick up pace 
from November,2019 onwards after retreat of monsoon and mobilization of resources at the local 
level. 
While looking at status of utilization of fund up to 31 st September, 2019, the Committee are 
pained to note that for Akhaura-Agartala rail link project, out of totalapproved cost of Rs. 392.50 
crore the released fund is only 85.52 crore. For construction of IBF pipeline from Siliguri to 
Prabatipur the release amount is only 2.85 crore against the approved cost of Rs. 285.00 crore. 
For dredging of rivers there is no release of funds against the approved cost of Rs. 245.00 crore . 
For HICDPs the released amount is Rs. 112.57 crore against the approved cost of Rs. 187.78 
crore. For scholarship/training/health scheme the Ministry has released 4.64 crore. The total fund 
released up to 31 st September, 2019 is Rs. 205.58 crore. The Com mittee express their 
disapproval of the slow pace of utilization of fund in all projects/schemes till now. In view of the 
tardy implementation a various projects in Bangladesh the Committee strongly urge the Ministry 
of External Affairs that they should ma ke all out efforts to fully utilize the allocations and 
complete the projects within the agreed timeline. The Committee also wish to reiterate their 
earlier Recommendations that the Government of India should use its good offices to engage 
with Government of Bangladesh for promptly reciprocation in furnishing proposals and complete 
the projects in a fixed timeframe. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry acknowledges the Hon‟ble committee‟s concern on slow pace of utilization of fund. 
Brief report on key ongoing development projects in Bangladesh and underlying reasons for 
delay are mentioned below: 
 

44 
 
 Akhaura-Agartala rail link project:  The project is d elayed mainly due to delayed 
handing over of Site, relocation of utilities and hindrances due to encroachment of land,that are 
pending with the Bangladesh Government. As of now, 28.50% of the work has been completed. 
Further, our High Commission in Dhaka and Ministry have been regularly following up the issue 
with the concerned Bangladesh authorities and contractor b y undertaking frequent site 
inspections, Project Steering Committee meeting and also through video conferencing. 
 
 Construction of IBF Pipeline from Siliguri to Prabatipur:   The current status of the 
project is as under: 
 
PROJECT DETAILS IN BRIEF: 
 
Pipeline (Length/Size/Capacity) 129.5 Km / 10 inch dia/ 1.0 MMTPA 
Project start date 20.06.2018 
Project period 30 months from 20.06.2018 
Scheduled Commissioning target 19.12.2020 
 
FINANCIAL INFORMATION: 
Total Project Cost Rs. 346.04 Cr. (As of February 2017 pricing level) 
Investment from NRL Rs. 60.80 Cr. (for Indian portion) 
Investment from MEA, GoI Rs. 285.24 Cr. (for Bangladesh portion) 
 
FINANCIAL PROGRESS (AS ON 31.01.20) : 
India/Bangladesh,  
IBFPL 
Expenditure  
planned 
upto FY 19-20 
(in Cr) 
Commitment 
Budget 
(in Cr) 
Expenditure  
incurred 
(in Cr) 
Indian part 40.0 28.62 1.00 

45 
 
Bangladesh part 123.5 124.57 4.32 
Total Expenditure 163.5 153.19 5.32 
 
 
PHYSICAL PROGRESS: Scheduled - 61.7 % and Actual - 21.4% (status as on 31.12.2019*) 
MAIN REASON FOR MAJOR DELAYS: 
Delay is due to slow progress in land acquisition for pipe laying, SV stations  and for Receipt 
terminal in Bangladesh. We are in constant touch with the concerned Bangladesh authorities and 
Bangladesh Petroleum Corporation to resolve these issues w hich are impeding speedy 
implementation of the project within the given timeframe. The Project Review Monitoring 
Committee meeting for the project with the participation of the concerned authorities of 
Bangladesh has been conducted twice in the year 2019. 
 
(3) Dredging of Rivers: An MoU was signed between GoI and GoB during the visit of 
Bangladesh Prime Minister to India in April, 2017. The total cost of project is Rs. 305.84 cr, out 
of which India‟s share would be Rs. 244.67 cr  and Bangladesh share would be Rs. 61.16 cr. 
(Project duration is 7years from the year 2019).  
 
(i) Ashuganj-Sirajganj Stretch : Dredging started on the Ashuganj -Zakiganj stretch in April 
2019, but halted in May 2019 due to floods.  Work resumed from 17 December 2019. As the 
year 2019 was the first year of the project, the dredgers found it difficult to mobilize the dredgers 
initially and also the alignment for dredging was released late by the BIWTA, Bangladesh. The 
issue was also discussed in the Shipping Secretary Level talks held i n December 2019 in Dhaka 
and it was agreed that dredging will be expedited on this stretch. It is pertinent to mention that 
dredging becomes difficult during the Monsoon season in Bangladesh; hence the dredging would 
be feasible for only 6 months in a year (January to May and December).  
 
(ii) Sirajganj- Daikhawa Stretch : Dredging has not started yet as the BIWTA, Bangladesh is 
finding it difficult to fix the alignment for this stretch due to frequent shifting of the river 
channels. The issue was also discu ssed in the Shipping Secretary Level talks held in December 
2019 in Dhaka and it was agreed that resolution of this problem of not able to fix the alignment 
for the dredging will be discussed in the technical level Joint Monitoring Committee meeting to 
be held in Dhaka in February 2020 between the officials of the IWAI and IWTA. The case is 
also being taken up with the BIWTA and IWAI for the early appointment of the PMC (Project 
Management Consultancy) for the Dredging project. 
 
(4) HICDPs (formerly SDPs):  With regard to HICDPs, in the CFY 2019-20 the total number of 
ongoing HICDPs is 38 of which 2 are new projects undertaken.  The overall progress of the 

46 
 
projects is satisfactory except a few projects due to issues such as unavailability of laborers and 
materials especially in long rainy seasons etc.  It may be mentioned that of the 38 ongoing 
projects in the CFY 2019 -20, 12 projects have already been completed and payment has also 
been effected.  Of the remaining 26 projects, around 20 projects are likely t o be completed in the 
CFY.   
 
Nevertheless, Ministry, through our High Commission in Dhaka, will continue to exert all 
possible efforts for speedy implementation and timely completion of these projects. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
The Committee observe that the Government of India has disbursed 100 percent earmarked 
assistance of Rs. 5000.00 crore to Bhutan committed for their 11 th Five Year Plan which has 
concluded. The Government of India has now made a fre sh commitment of Rs. 4500.00 crore 
during their 12 th Five Year Plan. During the year 2018 -19 the BE was Rs. 1813.50 crore. This 
has been increased to Rs. 2014.50 crore with an actual expenditure of Rs. 1985.87 crore. The 
allocation at BE 2019 -20 is Rs. 213 5.79 crore which is an increase of 17.77 percent vis -à-vis 
funds allocation during 2018 -19. The increase in the allocation is on account of loan and Grant 
component of Mangdechhu Hydro Electrical Project (HEP), which has got commissioned in June 
2019. Support for projects during 'Bridge' period (period after completion of 11 th FYP of Bhutan 
in September 2018) and before commencement of our assistance for 12 th FYP. Loan and Grant 
component of Associated Transmission System (ATS) for GoI assisted HEPs in Bhut an. The 
Committee are happy to note that Mangdechhu Hydroelectric Project was jointly inaugurated by 
both the Prime Ministers on 17 August, 2019. The Committee further note that the construction 
of Punasanchu -I and Punasanchu -II projects are facing some ge ological challenges but the 
resolution of these issues is being worked out and India and Bhutan are also currently beginning 
discussions on the Sankosh Hydroelectric Project. The Committee hope that both the 
Government will come to an early conclusion and complete all the projects in a fixed timeframe 
by utilizing 100 percent fund allocation maintaining the earlier track record. 
Reply of the Government 
Punatsangchhu-I and II hydroelectric projects have been delayed due to severe geological 
challenges encountered at the project site. Technical experts from both the countries are devising 
strengthening measures to counter the geological challenges. These issues are discussed in 
respective Project Authorities, which has representatives from MEA, Ministry of Pow er, Central 
Electricity Authority, Central Water Commission from the Indian side and their counterparts 
from the Bhutanese side, in a transparent manner. The last Project Authority meetings have been 
held in September 2019 in New Delhi. Apart from this reg ular Technical Coordination 

47 
 
Committee meetings of the Projects have been held over the year to discuss and finalize remedial 
measures to counter the geological issues.   
With significant technical efforts, Puna -II HEP is by and large back on track and proj ect 
management is implementing remedial measures based on technical recommendations. 
CWC/WAPCOS have recently have concluded an assessment of the right bank slope stability at 
Puna-I and submitted a report on „holistic solution‟ in October 2019. Subsequent ly, Ministry of 
Power has directed NHPC for an independent review of the „holistic solution‟.  Regarding 
Sankosh Reservoir HEP, discussions are ongoing between both the sides for finalizing the 
implementation modalities involving Financing Modality and Gov ernance Structure. Last Talks 
were held on 21 October 2019.  
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
The Committee note that the allocations given under Aid to Maldives was at BE 2018 -19 
was Rs. 125.00 crore was increased to Rs. 440.00 crore at RE stage and the amount of Rs. 439.40 
crore was spent during that period. The allocations for the year 2019 -20 is Rs. 400.00 crore. The 
allocation has kept at the same level to meet the requirement of funds towards budgetary support 
of US $ 200 million to Government of Maldives in addition to the ongoing Projects such as 
construction of a MOD building, Police Academy, CTC, ISLES, supply of equipment and 
construction material, assistance in the digital mapping of the Maldives Islands, 
Defence/Police/Civil training etc. The allocation have been increased with the return of political 
stability in November, 2018. The Committee have been apprised that now the Ministry has 
renewed its focus on completing the ongoing project which were stall by the previous 
Government of Maldives and they are also undertaking new projects of mutual interest. The 
Foreign Secretary also expressed hope to complete the construction of the Institute of Security 
and Law Enforcement Studies and the Ministry of Defenc e building by mid 2020. The 
Committee trust that all the projects of Maldives will be completed in the scheduled time with 
100 percent fund utilization thereof. The Committee may be apprised about the financial and 
physical achievement made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Construction of Institute of Security and Law Enforcement Studies (ISLES) project is scheduled 
for completion by July 2020. The current physical progress is 73.80% and the funds released so 
far for the project is Rs. 118.18 crore.  

48 
 
Construction of Composite Training Centre has been completed and was inaugurated by PM in 
June 2019.  
Construction of MOD Building is a new project and site readiness as well as procurement 
process for implementation is currently underway in Maldives. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
The Committee are happy to note that Africa has become an important Foreign Policy priority 
for the Government. Under the Head, „Aid to African countries‟ the allocation at BE 2018 -19 
was Rs. 200.00 crore which was increased to Rs. 330.00 crore at RE stage. The utilization 
thereof was Rs. 340.00 crore. At BE 2019 -20, the allocation has been further increased to Rs. 
450.00 crore. The quantum jump in allocation is to meet several commitments announced at 
highest political level in India Africa Summit III (AFS III) and are based on the anticipated 
expenditure in financial year 2019 -20. The major projects in Africa include a major Convention 
Centre in Niger in commemoration of the 150 th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and it has 
been named after him, IT and Vocational Training Centres in Namibia, Lesotho, Mozambique 
and Gambia and the Technology Park in Zimbabwe. The Ministry has sent medicines Rs. 66.00 
crore to various African countries who  are in need of such assistance and which has been highly 
appreciated. The flagship project is the e -VidyaBharti and e -ArogyaBharti programmes that we 
they be launching in phases in all 54 African States which willallow thousands of students to 
access onli ne learning programmes to access online learning programmes. Besides the 
Government of India is also providing lines of credit around 10 billion US dollars of which 
projects of about 6.5 billion dollars are either already been approved or already in the 
implementation stage. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry is taking steps to open 
18 new embassies in Africa of which 9 are already in operational. As stated previously in their 
Report the Committee trust that the Ministry will implement the pr ojects in a time bound manner 
to increase India‟s presence in Africa which will in turn boost the strong bilateral relations and 
facilitate in enhancing the trade. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry appreciates Hon‟ble Committee‟s acknowledgement of its efforts and initiatives in 
African region. The Ministry would like to assure that it will continue to implement the projects 
in a time bound manner to increase India‟s engagement with countries in Africa with a view to 
boost bilateral relations and facilitate trade. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
 

49 
 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
The Committee note that Government accords highest priority to India‟s deep rooted and  multi-
dimensional relations with Sri Lanka. India is an active development partner of  Sri Lanka and is 
involved in various projects there. On this account, the Committee are happy to note that the 
allocation of Rs. 150.00 crore at BE 2018 -19 was increased to Rs. 165.00 crore at RE stage. The 
Ministry could also spend Rs. 168.77 crore durin g the said period. The allocations at BE of 
2019-20 has been increased to Rs. 250.00 crore based on anticipated expenditure towards new 
projects in addition to payments against ongoing projects like completion of Jaffna cultural 
centre the construction wor k for remaining 4000 houses meant for Estate workers in the 
plantation Area in Phase III and additional 1000 houses under phase IV, Island -wise extension of 
free emergency Ambulance Services and many high impact community development projects. 
The Committe e appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry to strengthen the developmental 
partnership with Sri Lanka on its own independent footing and in accordance with the domestic 
compulsion in our Foreign Policy. The Committee desire the Ministry to scrupulously u ndertake 
the monitoring mechanism to ensure timely completion of the projects with 100 percent fund 
utilization. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry appreciates Hon‟ble Committee‟s acknowledgement of its steps taken to strengthen 
development partnership with Sri Lanka. Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee 
that it will continue to scrupulously monitor implementation of various projects with a view to 
ensure their timely completion. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 31) 
The Committee are happy to note that there has been enhancement in the fund allocation at RE 
2018-19 and BE 2019 -20 under the schemes like Know India Programme, ScholarshipScheme 
for Diaspora Children, Awareness campaign/media plan, Pravasi Bhar tiya DivasCelebration. 
However, the Committee note that under the schemes naming promotion of Cultural ties with 
Diaspora, repatriation of Indian destitute, evacuation of Indian due to war or civil disturbance 
and Legal assistance to women facing NRI marriage, the allocation remains constant at BE 2018-
19 and 2019 -20. The Committee further observe that with an aim to extend the benefits of 
MEA‟s scheme for distressed Indian women married to NRI spouses, the guidelines for 
utilization of the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) were revised with the approval of the 
Union Cabinet with effect from 01 September 2017, and the amount of legal assistance to all 
Indian Missions and Posts abroad was increased to US$ 4000/ - per case. The Committee are 
constrained to n ote that with a meager allocation of Rs. 12 lakh in the Budget how can the 
Ministry extend the legal assistance of US $ 4000/- per case and to how many distressed women? 
As the number of women facing problems in NRI marriages has increased the Committee 

50 
 
strongly desire the Ministry to ponder on this issue and suitably increase the allocations at RE 
stage and BE stage of the year 2020-21. 
The Committee observe that under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with the Diaspora budget 
head, earlier proposals were received on an ad hoc basis and processed as and when received. In 
February 2017, in an attempt to streamline the procedure of fund allocation and optimise the use 
of available funds, all Indian Missions and Posts abroad were asked to send consolidated and 
timely proposals for PCTD. The budgetary allocation has been in the tune of Rs. 2 lakh during 
the year 2018-19 and 2019-20. The committee desire the Ministry to persuade Missions and post 
abroad for timely submitting the proposal of PCTD so that the Ministry  can examine the nature 
of assistance required thereof and take appropriate action to promote cultural ties with Indian 
Diaspora. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should also chalk out mechanism to 
incorporate the feedback of the Indian Diaspora into the foreign policy agenda. 
Reply of the Government 
The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is aimed at assisting Overseas Indian nationals in 
times of distress and emergency in the „most deserving cases‟ on a „means tested basis‟. In view 
of its immense utility, ICWF stands extended to all Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The ICWF 
guidelines were revised in September, 2017 to expand the scope of welfare measures which 
inter-alia includes financial and legal assistance upto US$ 4000, to distressed  Indian women 
married to NRI or a foreigner. The ICWF has become self sustaining in all Missions and Posts 
abroad with a global corpus of around Rs 400 Crore. This fund is sufficient to carry out onsite 
welfare activities including assistance to distressed NRI spouses. 
The budgetary allocation under PCTD for the year 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 is  
Rs. 2.00 crore. The Ministry seeks proposals from Missions/Posts abroad for financial assistance 
before commencement of the financial year, so that proposals are submitte d and processed in a 
timely manner. The proposals are examined and cultural assistance extended as per PCTD 
guidelines. Ministry takes note of the suggestions of the committee and would emphasize once 
again to all Missions to timely submit the proposals. 
To incorporate the feedback of the Indian Diaspora into the foreign policy agenda,deliberations 
of the PBD Conferences feed into the discussions of the plenary sessions of the PBD 
Conventions.  The recommendations of the PBD Conventions then form the input s for policy 
making in the Government of India. The recommendations of PBD Conferences and PBD 
Conventions are shared with Union Ministries / Departments / Institutions of GoI for further 
action. Ministry has also started to take feedback from KIP delegate s participating in the Know 
India Programme (KIP).  
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 

51 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
The Committee are aware that the Know India Programme is a significant scheme to reconnect 
the Indian Diaspora youth with their roo ts. The Committee observe that during the year 2018 -19 
the Government had announced ten Know India Programme with an allocation of Rs. 7 Crore but 
only 8 programmes could be organized. Allocation for KIP has been reduced to Rs. 6.00 crore at 
BE 2019-20. The Committee are pained to note that there is no proposal to increase the number 
of Know India Programme. The Committee further note that Prime Minister and External Affairs 
Minister have sought inputs from all the Central Ministries for ideas/suggestions f or 
reinvigorating Know India Programme. Some of the suggestions are yet to be incorporated in 
future KIP editions. The Committee are perturbed to note that such a significant scheme of 
Ministry of External Affairs is not getting due cognizance. Therefore, they strongly desire that 
the suggestions received from the Ministries should be duly incorporated and the number of 
Know India Programme should be increased supplemented by adequate budgetary allocation for 
KIP. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is organizing 06 editions of Know India Programme every year after revamping of the 
scheme in the financial year 2015 -16. In the financial year 2018 -19, Ministry had launched two 
new schemes “Self -financing Know India Programme” & “Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yoja na” for 
which expenditure had been incurred from the budget head of Know India Programme. Ministry 
had also organized 50 th edition of Know India Programme as “Golden Jubilee Know India 
Programme” in addition to 06 regular Know India Programmes to celebrate  the golden jubilee 
edition of Know India Programme on the occasion of the 15 th edition of Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 
(PBD) Convention in the financial year 2018 -19. Ministry had announced 07 Know India 
Programmes, 01 Self -financing Know India Programme and 02  programmes of Pravasi Teerth 
Darshan Yojana (total 10 programmes) in the financial year 2018 -19, hence the budgetary 
allocation was slightly enhanced to Rs. 7.00 crore. Ministry had conducted 07 Know India 
Programmes and 02 programmes of Pravasi Teerth Da rshan Yojana in the FY 2018 -19 (total 09 
programmes).  The scheduled programme of Self -financing Know India Pogramme was not 
organized due to the lack of minimum number of applications from diaspora youth. Ministry has 
announced 06 regular Know India Progr amme and 02 programmes of Pravasi Teerth Darshan 
Yojana for current financial year 2019 -20. Hence the budgetary allocation has been reduced to 
Rs. 6.00 crore. 
Ministry has received overwhelming response and positive feedback from diaspora youth for the 
KIP programmes. Ministry has incorporated relevant suggestions received from various 
Ministries / Departments in order to make KIP more attractive for the diaspora youth.  

52 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 34) 
The Committee note that South Asian University is an ambitious project of the Government. The 
allocation at BE 2018 -19 for South Asian University was Rs. 375.00 crore. Out of Rs. 375.00 
crore, Rs. 31.00 crore was for operational cost, Rs. 310.00 crore for capital cost and  Rs. 34.00 
crore for rent. At RE stage the allocation was reduced to Rs. 246.00 crore because of slow pace 
of construction of South Asian University Campus and reduction in the operational cost. For the 
year 2019-20, Rs. 317.5 crore has been allocated as p er the requirements projected for building 
works. The Committee note that the construction work of South Asian University campus has 
now gained momentum. One building of Package II has almost been completed and another is 
scheduled to be completed in Febru ary 2020. Under Package III, 6 percent of physical progress 
has been achieved as on September, 2019 and the remaining works are expected to be completed 
by September, 2020. The Committee welcome these achievements. However, the Committee are 
pained to note  that the works on remaining buildings under package IV could not be taken up 
until now due to various land acquisition issues and court cases and the Ministry has provided 
any specific schedule for completion of the work under package IV. The Committee ha ve been 
apprised that the Ministry accords top priority for timely completion of the South Asian 
University project and are making all efforts to ensure all outstanding issues are resolved at the 
earliest. The Committee hope that the Ministry would continu e its efforts with all concerned 
agencies with increased pace of expenditure to complete the remaining works of South Asian 
University in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry would like to update Hon‟ble Committee on the further progress of work in SAU 
construction project. As of December 2019, progress under Package II and Package III has 
reached 85% and 65% respectively. Four buildings under Package II have already been 
completed. One housing block is scheduled for completion in  February 2020. These will be 
habitable after completion certificate/occupancy certificate is granted by the concerned 
authorities. Work under Package III is scheduled to be completed by September 2020. 
As regards Package IV, concerted and sustained effort s are being made for approval of revised 
DPR, clearance of forest land pockets and tree cutting permission from Forest Department and 
expeditious conclusion of court cases. The Ministry is continuously reviewing and monitoring 
the progress with a view to ensure timely completion of the South Asian University project. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
 
 

53 
 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore was provided for Nalanda University 
at BE 2018-19 which was reduced to Rs. 190.00 crore at RE stage. The allocation at BE 2019 -20 
is Rs. 220.00 crore. The Ministry anticipates the expenditure on this project would be close to 
400.00 crore but Rs. 220.00 crore has been allocated deliberately. 
The Committee have been apprised that the actual construction work of this University started in 
May, 2017. The current projection for completion of Nalanda University by the year 2021 -22, 
but the Ministry has not made any projection about the escalation of the cost for completi on of 
the project. Further, contribution to operational and capital costs of Nalanda University from 
other countries are voluntary in nature and no foreign contribution has been received during the 
last three years. Channelizing contribution from other countries has a limited scope. Reduction of 
allocations at RE (2018 -19) stage, ongoing pace of work and providing lesser allocation against 
the anticipated high expenditure during 2019-20, are indicative of a serious lack of determination 
to complete the cons truction of this University by 2021 -22. The delay in completion of Nalanda 
University – an international institution of excellence for pursuit of intellectual, philosophical 
and historical studies is deplorable. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  the 
Government to finalise the revised cost of the proposal to be disbursed during the next two 
financial years so that the project is completed by 2021 -22. The Ministry should also explore the 
possibilities to get contributions from other participating countries to supplement the progress. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken note of Hon‟ble Committee‟s concern regarding the delay in starting the 
construction of the Nalanda University construction project. Ministry would like to assure the 
Hon‟ble Committee that the Ministry is in constant touch with the implementing agencies so that 
adequate fund flow to the project is ensured and momentum of progress in the construction is 
maintained. Based on the progress of the project, allocation at RE stage was increased to Rs. 300 
cr. from Rs. 220 cr. at the BE stage.  
As regards voluntary contribution from the participating countries, the efforts are being made by 
requesting some of the resident Missions of the Nalanda partner countries in India to continue 
their patronage to the institution through voluntary financial contribution. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
The Committee note that the Ministry is planning to introduce a draft Emigration Bill to 
safeguard the rights of Overseas Indians as well as Migrants Working abroad. The Committee 
are perturbed to note that the Bill has been in the public domain for a long  time and inspite of 

54 
 
repeated Recommendations by the Committee, the Ministry has not been able to introduce the 
Emigration Bill till date. The Ministry‟s move to introduce the Bill is a necessary step in the 
current scenario wherein under the Emigration Ac t 1983, the Central Government has limited 
scope of prosecution without the active support of State Governments against cheating recruiting 
agents. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the finalization of the Bill and 
introduce the same  in the Parliament at the earliest. The Committee feel that a helpline in 
multiple languages can be operational 24x7 to help Indian Diaspora in distress like workers who 
have not been paid by their employers abroad, workers whose passport have been taken a way by 
their employers, Indian spouses who have been abandoned by their NRI spouses, etc. The 
Committee further suggest that the Ministry should arrange Shelter Homes for ill -treated Indians 
till the time arrangements are made for their repatriation back t o India. The Committee further 
note that there is a change in Emigration pattern wherein blue collar workers, white collar 
professional employees and also huge number of students are going abroad. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry take pro active steps to bring prosecution charges against recruiting 
agents in the new draft Emigration Bill so that safety of migrants can be ensured. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of valuable suggestions of the Hon‟ble Committee. The key steps 
taken by the Ministry to ensure safe and legal migration are given below.  
The Draft Emigration Bill  has been prepared with a view to provide an enabling institutional 
and legislative framework for an efficient management of emigration. It has been drafted aft er 
extensive consultations with all relevant stakeholders such as federations of Recruitment Agents, 
International Organizations, Think -tanks, Business organizations and Academia, concerned 
Ministries and State Governments and Union Territories. Currently,  the Bill has been put in 
public domain with a view to hold consultation with all stakeholders before finalizing. 
 
24X7 Helpline in Multiple Languages :-A multi-lingual 24X7 Helpline in centre called Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) in New Delhi provides information, guidance and grievance 
redressal on all issues and problems pertaining to overseas employment of Indian nationals in 
several Indian languages viz. Hindi, English, Kannada, Malayalam, Telugu, Tamil, Bengali, 
Punjabi, Odia, Gujarati and Marathi. 
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK ) have been setup at Dubai (UAE), Sharjah 
(UAE), Riyadh, Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur ( Malaysia). PBSKs have 
walk in facilities.  
 
Missions in Emigration Check Required (ECR) countrie s have established 24x7 Toll Free help 
lines in multiple languages for the benefit of Indian workers who seek help. Besides the Missions 
have local employees who are well versed in different languages other than Hindi and English 
whose help are taken in cases of emergency.  
 
Shelter Homes for ill -treated Indians :- Shelter Homes for distressed Indian nationals, 
including women workers, have been set up in Kuwait, Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Oman, 

55 
 
United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. In other Missions where n ecessary, such as, in Iraq, the 
Mission has a designated room in the Chancery as Shelter Home.  
 
Prosecution charges against Recruiting Agents :-In cases of complaints involving emigration 
through an unregistered Agent, the concerned Police Authority in the  State is requested to take 
action as „Law & Order‟ is a subject of State Government(s). Simultaneously, if the emigrant is 
faced with difficulties/distress in the destination country, the concerned Indian Mission abroad is 
requested to take up the issue with the Foreign Employer to resolve the grievance of the emigrant 
as early as possible and if required, to arrange for his/her repatriation – irrespective of the fact 
whether the emigrant went legally or through illegal channel. 
 
As per the laid down proce dure, on receipt of complaints against unregistered Agents, the 
concerned Police Authority investigate the matter and after investigation requests the Central 
Government to grant prosecution sanction under Section 27 of Emigration Act, 1983 to enable 
them to prosecute such unregistered Agent or a person. Sanction is given expeditiously once the 
enquiry report is clear. 
 
Section 27 of Emigration Act, 1983  provides that prosecution shall not be instituted against any 
person in respect of any offence under Emigration Act, 1983 without the previous sanction of the 
Central Government. However, no sanction shall be required when an offence has been 
committed in respect of an emigrant or an intending emigrant and the complaint is filed by such 
emigrant or intending  emigrant, or on behalf of such emigrant or intending emigrant, by the 
father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister or guardian of such emigrant or 
intending emigrant, or if such emigrant or intending emigrant is a member of a joint Hindu 
family, by the manager of that family.   
 
The Government had issued Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to be followed by States on 
receipt of complaints against unregistered/ unscrupulous agents. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
  

56 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 The Committee observe that on one side the Ministry has always got inadequate allocation in 
Budget Estimates including BE 2018-19, and on the other side they did not put forth any demand 
of funds in the First and Third supplementary Demands for Grants in 2018-19. The Committee 
are not convinced with the fact that no supplementary demand was made in the first 
supplementary demands in keeping with the Budget circular of Ministry of Finance, and in the 
third supplementary due to it being the end of the year, besides being unable to face the 
challenge of spending the fund during the short period in hand. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should continuously pursue the genuine fund requirements in each supplementary 
Demand if those are not allocated at BE s tage and stress upon the Ministry of Finance to provide 
the same, it being necessary to fulfill the commitments relating to the projects in friendly 
countries, the Circular of Ministry of Finance notwithstanding. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry will c ontinue to make efforts to convince Ministry of Finance of its budgetary 
demands justified by efficient utilization of funds and objective assessment of anticipated 
expenditures, in line with the Hon‟ble Committee‟s recommendation.  
 
In 2019-20 there were only two Supplementary Demands for Grants. The Ministry of Finance 
budget circular for both the first and the final supplementary demand for grants restricted 
demands for additional funds to only certain cases (i.e. payments against Court decrees, cases 
where advance from Contingency Fund had been drawn, or cases where the Ministry of Finance 
has specifically advised to propose supplementary demand, etc).  
 
In FY 2019 -20, at time of the Final Supplementary, there was an additional reason why 
additional funds could not be requested. MoF conveyed – for this year only - a new reduced 

57 
 
ceiling of 25% of expenditure in the final three months of the financial year, and ceiling of 10% 
in March. Due to these ceilings, even if Ministry of Finance had accepted the request for 
additional funds, it would not have been possible to utilize these because the 25% ceiling would 
have been breached. 
 
However Ministry has taken fu ll note of the recommendation of the Hon‟ble Members. We will 
make full efforts to make a proposal to Ministry of Finance for additional funds in the first 
supplementary demand for grants and at the RE stage for the year 2020-21, based on our realistic 
requirement of funds in 2020-21.  
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020] 
 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE 
(Recommendation No.8) 
The Committee note that the  allocations for Scheme side was Rs. 5985.05 crore at BE 2018 -19 
stage which was increased to Rs. 6466.00 crore at RE stage. During 2019-20 the allocation of Rs. 
8175.79 crore with an increase of Rs. 2190.74 crore in BE allocation vis -à-vis BE 2018 -19 and 
further an increase of Rs. 1709.79 crore in RE allocation of 2018 -19 was noted. Similarly, in the 
Non-Scheme side the BE allocation for 2018 -19 was Rs. 9025.59 crore which was increased to 
Rs. 9116.00 crore at RE stage. The BE allocation during 2019 -20 is Rs. 9708.99 crore which is 
an increase of Rs. 683.04 crore from BE 2018 -19 and Rs. 592.99 crore from RE 2018 -19 stage. 
This enhanced allocation under the Scheme Head was mainly on account of required expenditure 
in respect of MEA‟s assistance projects unde r Aid to Bhutan, Aid to Nepal, Aid to Sri Lanka, 
Aid to Maldives, Aid to Myanmar, Aid to Other Developing countries, Aid to African Countries, 
Investment Promotion and Publicity Programme, Aid to Eurasian Countries, Aid to Afghanistan 
and Loans to Govt. of  Maldives, to ensure that India‟s projects abroad and other international 
commitments were not adversely affected due to lack of funds. 
 
The Committee welcome the increase in allocations under both Scheme and Non -Scheme needs 
during 2019-20 and also the Ministry‟s commitment towards assistance for projects under Aid to 
Foreign countries. The Committee desire that the Ministry should monitor  the  
implementation  of  the  projects  closely  and  take  corrective  measures  to complete them 
within a specified timeline. The Committee may be apprised about the physical and financial 
progress made in each of these projects. 
 
 

59 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble Committee that implementations of the projects are 
being closely monitore d and corrective measures are regularly taken to complete them within a 
specified timeline. Budgetary allocation and Utilization of funds upto third quarter of FY 2019 -
20 in key Aid heads under Schemes are given below: 
Aid Heads BE  
2019-20 
RE  
2019-20 
Actual Expenditure 
upto Dec. 2019 
Aid to Bhutan 2135.79 2048.28 1650.41 
Aid to Nepal 1050.00 1200.00 973.71 
Aid to Sri Lanka 250.00 205.00 152.26 
Aid to Maldives 400.00 150.00 87.34 
Aid to Myanmar 400.00 170.00 90.67 
Aid to Other Developing 
Countries 
150.00 150.00 115.86 
Aid to African Countries 450.00 450.00 354.14 
Investment Promotion 
and Publicity Programme 
300.00 200.00 179.63 
Aid to Eurasian Countries 45.00 45.00 24.91 
Aid to Afghanistan 400.00 400.00 330.41 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No.15) 
The Committee note the budgetary allocation under the minor head, “Entertainment Charges”, 
the allocation of which at BE 2018 -19 was Rs. 70.50 crore. This was reduced to Rs. 46.00 crore 
at RE stage. The actual expenditure was Rs. 45.82 crore. The allocatio n at BE 2019 -20 is Rs. 
367.75 crore. The enhanced allocation in the 2019 -20 is towards allocation for maintenance of 
aircraft of Air India and expenditure on Vice President‟s visits abroad. In view of the 

60 
 
rationalization of the sub heads under other expend iture, a new sub head „high level delegation‟ 
under which expenditure towards maintenance cost of Air craft of Air India for VVIP travel, 
Vice President visit and other special delegation have been opened. Therefore, there is a rise in 
the allocation at BE  2019-20. Further, pertaining to the bills received/settled and amount 
involved in the above mentioned travels during the last three years, the Ministry has informed the 
Committee that the concerned division is in the process of compiling the data because the bills 
accruing annually due to foreign visits of dignitaries run into several hundreds. The Committee 
deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in furnishing the complete information about 
expenditure made under this head despite continuous em phasis by the Committee upon the 
timely submission of bills relating to the visits of dignitaries in order to manage fiscal discipline 
and prudence in the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
The number of bills received/settled and amount involved in the tra nsaction during the last three 
years for the incoming visits of foreign dignitaries have been tabulated as under:  
Year  Number of bills received Number of bills 
processed 
Amount Settled  
(in crores) 
2016-17 970 970 35.19 /- 
2017-18 973 973 32.98 /- 
2018-19 1427 1341 33.04 /- 
 
 
b) With regard to amount involved in the transaction during the last three years for the outgoing 
visits, it is kindly submitted that Ministry settles the expenditure of the Air India chartered 
aircraft only for the overseas visits of Hon‟ble Vice President of India. Details are tabulated as 
under: 
 

61 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2016-17 15.00 15.00 7.54 
2017-18 180.00 150.00 158.27 
2018-19 48.00 48.00 48.24 
 
c) With regard to amount involved in the transaction during the last three years for the 
Maintenance cost of Aircrafts of Air India for VVIP travel, it is kindly submitted that Ministry 
settles the bills of the Air India aircraft towards MEA‟s share for the maintenance cost of 
Aircraft of Air India. Details are tabulated as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2016-17 0.01 100.01 100.00 
2017-18 215.00 215.00 214.85 
2018-19 141.00 420.00 420.00 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
The Committee observe that the aid to Myanmar under BE 2018-19 was Rs. 280.00 crore and the 
same was increased to Rs. 370.00 crore at RE stage. The allocation for BE 2019 -20 has further 
increased to Rs. 400.00 crore. The Committee have been apprised that t he main infrastructure 
projects that require significant funding in BE 2019 -20 are the Kaladan Multimodal Transport 
Project, Trilateral Highway linking India, Myanmar and Thailand, Coastal Surveillance System 
for Myanmar on its Bay of Bengal coast and the Andaman Sea; a Women's Police Training 
College; an ongoing project to support the Myanmar Institute for Information and Technology 
(MIIIT). The Committee, further, note that based on assessment of Myanmar's current capacity 

62 
 
to absorb projects, the stage at which the existing menu of projects has currently reached, and the 
capacity to work with Myanmar's specific rules and regulations, the Ministry believes that the 
allocation currently sought is sufficient to secure India's fundamental strategic interests i n 
Myanmar. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has successfully completed and 
handed over to 250 housing units under the Rakhine State Development Programme. In the 
Kaladan Multi-Modal Project, the waterways component comprising the Sittwe Po rt, the island 
water transport terminals at Sittwe and Paletwa, the navigation channel and six 300 tonne vessels 
have been completed. However, the Committee are constrainted to note the long delay in 
completing the work on the Kaladan-Multi Modal road component which was accorded in March 
2017. The Committee note the reasons attributable to the delay are the worsening security 
situation as a result of Rohingya issues and financial insolvency of the contractors. In this regard, 
the Committee wish to suggest to the Ministry to make sincere efforts to ensure that at the 
tendering stage, the Ministry, along with the line Ministries, to examine the credibility of the 
contractors through a proper tendering process and they should regularly follow the examination 
so that the scarce resources of the Government of India do not get blocked or wasted due to the 
financial insolvency of the contractors. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. The Committee further desire that the Ministry in consu ltation with Myanmar 
Government to draw a road map for completion of the Kaladan -Multi Modal road component to 
ensure smooth and timely completion of the transport corridor. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is vigorously pursuing with the host Government to expedite the completion of 
major infrastructure projects including the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project. W e 
have been trying to expedite the project by starting work from the Northern end, from the 
Zorinpui – Myeikwa end for the 60-109 km stretch of the road component. A Myanmar 
delegation and an inter Ministerial Indian delegation visited the Zorinpui area (Mizoram) in 
December 2019. Men and material are being moved towards the Zorinpui by the contractor to 
start the work of the 60-109 km through Zorinpui. W e have been able to gain some momentum 
in our efforts in moving ahead with the project from the Zorinpui end, with the Government of 
Myanmar starting procedures to give access to the contractors via Zorinpui (Mizoram). 
Meanwhile, India handed over the Sittwe port operations to A to Z Exim on 31 January 2020.  

63 
 
The Ministry in consultation with the Government of Myanmar would frame a roadmap for the 
completion of the project - taking in to account the fact that the project is hampe red due to 
multiple factors including the local adverse security situation, over which even the Government 
of Myanmar does not have full control. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
During examination of the Demands for Grants 2018 -19, the Committee had observed 
considerable ad-hocism in the issue relating to Overseas Indians Affairs. Even after two years of 
merger of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, no separate budget head was 
provided for matter relate d to Overseas Indians. Allocation for the various schemes and 
programmes related to Overseas Indians were being made under the budget head “Other 
Expenditures”. Therefore, the Committee had desired to do away with the odd budgetary practice 
and create a distinct budget head specifically pertaining to Overseas Indians. The Committee are 
pained to note the continuation of the ad -hoc approach in the financial year 2019 -20, which is 
the third year of post merger of the erstwhile MOIA with MEA. In the detailed Demands for 
Grants 2019-20, the schemes/programmes related to Overseas Indian Affairs are covered under 
the sub heads i.e. (i) engagement with Indian Diaspora under the minor head International 
Cooperation and (ii) welfare of Overseas Indian under the mino r head Passport and Emigration. 
The Committee are of the view that this budgetary practice does not reflect the serious attitude of 
the Ministry to look after the Overseas Indians. Therefore, they wish to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to create a separate budget head exclusively dealing with all the 
schemes/programmes related to Overseas Indians. The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee regarding opening of separate heads have been 
duly complied with and the new budget heads have been opened after obtaining necessary 
approval of the Office of the Controller General of Accounts. The Ministry undertook review of 
various schemes and programmes under erstwhile „O ther Expenditure‟ minor head and decided 
to open these two heads as following. 

64 
 
 
All schemes targeted towards welfare of migrant Indians have been placed together by opening a 
new sub-head „welfare of overseas Indians‟. This sub-head is placed under Minor Head „Passport 
& Emigration‟ as all these programmes are for the welfare of Indian citizens who have migrated 
abroad. Due attention has been given to ensure adequate allocation of budgetary resources 
towards these schemes and Allocation in BE 2020 -21 has be en enhanced to Rs 7.27 crore from 
RE 2019-20 allocation of Rs. 3.29 crore. 
On the other hand, all diaspora related schemes and programmes have been placed together 
under newly opened sub -head „Engagement with Indian Diaspora‟ as distinct from schemes for 
Indian citizens abroad. These schemes are placed under „International Cooperation‟ Minor Head 
clearly reflecting the priority attached by the Ministry towards engagement with India‟s diaspora 
community. Due attention has been given to ensure adequate alloca tion of budgetary resources 
towards these schemes and Allocation in BE 2020-21 has been enhanced to Rs 69 crore from RE 
2019-20 allocation of Rs. 38.12 crore. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
  

65 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
The Committee note with dismay that the Ministry has not shown any determination in following 
the overarching principle of zero based budgeting through continuous e valuation and assessment 
of budgetary allocation as against funds utilization in the Ministry‟s budget management. 
Ministry only explains the procedures followed by it like periodic quarterly meetings, review of 
ongoing projects, supplementary demands to b e made etc. The Committee feel that some 
concrete steps should be taken by the Ministry towards the overarching principle of zero based 
budgeting which guides the evaluation and assessment of budgetary allocation with a view to 
improve its management of fi nances in a more business like manner. Furthermore, the Ministry 
should take pre -emptive measures to seek all the necessary clearances before seeking funds for 
international Aid projects. On another note, andnotwithstanding the satisfaction expressed by th e 
Principal witness regarding the adequacy of allocation at BE 2019 -20 stage, the Committee 
would like to inform the Ministry that post globalization and opening of the economy, the 
foreign policy of countries has acquired a deeper meaning than even before . Foreign policy now 
influences a country‟s economic policy in a major way too. The committee, therefore, feel that 
MEA should explore new dimensions and hitherto, unexplored vistas with a view to secure 
India‟s interest in the increasingly globalised matr ix. The Committee expect the Government to 
ensure that there is no shortage of funds for Ministry of External Affairs in its pursuits. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry agrees with Hon‟ble Committee‟s view that post globalization and opening of the 
economy, the foreign policy of countries has acquired a deeper meaning and is more interlinked 
with the economic policy than ever before. The Ministry undertakes c ontinuous monitoring of 
projects under implementation, periodic review of its various commitments and assessment of 
fund utilization as part of its budgetary management exercise while finalizing its requirements. 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon‟ble C ommittee that it would continue to engage with the 

66 
 
Ministry of Finance at all levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in its 
pursuits. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
3.10 The Committee no te that that the budgetary allocation under the Head „Embassies and 
Missions‟ at BE during year 2018 -19 was Rs. 2701.00 crore. At RE stage this has been reduced 
to Rs. 2678.81 crore with actual expenditure being Rs. 2737.69 crore. During the year 2019 -20, 
against the projection of Rs. 3243.22 crore, the allocation at BE stage is Rs. 2748.06 crore, which 
is a paltry increase over last year‟s spending. As India‟s global outreach and influence has 
increased over the years and based on assessment of India‟s geo -political priorities, level of 
bilateral ties, regional factor diaspora connections, commercial developmental, cultural interests 
and reciprocal arrangement with the concerned country, the Ministry has commenced opening 
new Missions in countries where the re is no resident Indian Mission, starting with Africa. The 
Union Cabinet in March, 2018 approved the opening of 18 Missions in Africa in a phased 
manner. 9 Missions have already been operationazed and 3 more Missions will be 
operationalised in next 3 -4 mo nths. In view of the increased budgetary allocations, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to prepare a roadmap and adhere to the timelines in opening the 
remaining Missions/Posts in Africa. They also desire that the Ministry of Finance should be 
impressed up on simultaneously to create adequate number of posts to run the new 
Missions/Posts. 
The Committee have been continuously reminding the Ministry for improvement in monitoring 
of performance and evaluation of existing Missions/Posts abroad. But the web porta l namely 
Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) launched in 2016 is only being used to 
identify the Missions/Posts which need inspection. The Committee hope that the Ministry would 
adhere to the timeline of launching revamped PEMS by December,  2019 which will improve the 
evaluation process of Missions/Posts. The Committee may be apprised of the progress of the 
project and the outcome thereof, in terms of improvement in services, saving of time and 
expenditure. 
 

67 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is sub mitted to the Hon‟ble Committee that the Union Cabinet, in March 2018, approved the 
opening of eighteen Missions in Africa in a phased manner over a period of four years from 
2018-2021. Accordingly, in keeping with this timeline, Missions in the following 9 countries 
have already been operationalized: Republic of Guinea (Conakry), Equatorial Guinea (Malabo), 
Burkina Faso (Ouagadougou), Rwanda (Kigali), Djibouti (Djibouti), Republic of Congo 
(Brazzaville), Kingdom of Eswatini (Mbabne), Eritrea (Asmara) and C ameroon (Youande). 
Three more Missions, in Liberia (Monrovia), Sao Tome and Principe (Sao Tome), Sierra Leone 
(Freetown) are also likely to be operational by the first quarter of next financial year. The 
remaining 6 Missions would be opened subsequently, w ithin the time frame approved by the 
Cabinet. Appropriate budgetary provisions are projected as per the expected timeline of 
operationalization of the Missions, in consultation with the Internal Finance Division of the 
Ministry. Posts at officer and staff level have also been approved by the Ministry of Finance for 
these new Missions.  
Ministry introduced a web -portal namely Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System 
(PEMS) in 2016 using a set of 60 binary questions for use as basis for selection of 
Missions/Posts for onsite inspections. On the basis of this, till date 46 Missions/Posts have been 
inspected so far. However, it was felt that on -site inspection of Missions/Posts is a time 
consuming process and it is not possible to inspect more than 15 -20 Mission/Posts in a year. It 
was thus decided that off -site inspection mechanism may also be put in place. Keeping this in 
mind, it was planned that existing PEMS portal be modified with a view to not only identify 
Missions/Posts for onsite inspection but also  to enable Ministry to undertake off -site inspection 
of all Mission/Posts on the basis of documents submitted/uploaded by them on PEMS portal. 
As this was an innovative step being planned by any Ministry/Department of the Government of 
India, it thus took some time for Ministry to implement. Inputs from several Divisions have 
already been sought to frame suitable questions/queries which would enable the Ministry to 
conclude whether a particular Mission/Posts is in compliance with ministry‟s directions on a 
particular subject/matter. Since, Missions/Posts abroad work with limited work -force, attempt 
has also been made that the submission/upload of documents on revamped PEMS portal by 

68 
 
Missions/Posts do not add to the existing work pressures. The revamped PEMS portal is likely to 
be launched by ministry in the second quarter of 2020. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
The Committee observe that an allocation of Rs. 246.00 crore has been made under the budget 
head “Information Technology” in the financial year 2019 -20 which included an expenditure on 
setting up of POPSKs. The Ministry has apprised the Committee that as the budgetary provision 
under this head is being channelized for setting up of POPSKs, there was no fund constr aint for 
opening up of PSK/POPSKs, and the necessary procurement of IT and non IT related equipment 
for each Kendra during 2018 -19. The Committee note that there is a plan to open more 
PSKs/POPSKs during the current year also.The Committee are of the stron g view that only the 
opening up of PSK/POPSK will not serve the purpose until they are provided with proper and 
adequate IT related infrastructure. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should take 
up this issue with the Ministry of Finance for  allocation of adequate funds for opening of 
Kendras and for procurement of all necessary IT infrastructure in the proposed new 
PSKs/POPSKs. The Committee also desire that in the future, channelizing the allocation for the 
purpose of IT related infrastructure should be avoided. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is working towards providing adequate IT-related infrastructure in every POPSK in 
the country, including laying of Managed Network Services - Multi-Protocol Level Switches 
(MPLS) lines by BSNL. Mi nistry has taken up the issue for allocation of adequate funds for 
procurement of necessary IT infrastructure in the Passport Seva Kendras. Funds allocation under 
IT head in the Revised Estimates 2019 -2020 has been increased to Rs. 331 crores from Rs. 246 
crores sanctioned at the BE stage. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020  

69 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 The second challenge being faced by the Ministry in the expansion of the Passport Sewa Project 
is the shortage of personnel in the Central Passport Organization (CPO), particularly those at the 
superintendent level to function as the granting officers (PGO). There is also a shortage of 
Assistant Superintendent, Senior Passport Assistant (SPA) and Junior Passport Assistant (JPA) 
who function as Verific ations Officers (VO). The total sanctioned strength of the CPO Cadre is 
2697 against which the working strength is 1996 as on 10 May, 2018. The Ministry is facing the 
difficulties in filling up of the vacant Posts, the reasons being attributed to the recru itment Rules. 
The Report of the 4 Member cadre Review Committee for CPO cadre has been rejected and now 
the Ministry has approved the physical inspection and staffing study of the CPO by the Staff 
Inspection Unit, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Fin ance. In view of the tardy progress 
of work relating to filling up of the vacancies and opening up of 424 POPSK in all the 
Parliamentary constituencies and other parts of the country, the Committee are of the strong view 
that the man power constraints will  further aggravate. Therefore, they strongly desire the 
Ministry to impress upon the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure to complete the 
staffing study of CPO at the earliest so that the vacant posts are filled up by DOPT within a fixed 
time framework. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it is being impressed upon the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure to complete the staffing study of CPO at the 
earliest. As regards vacant posts, the Staff S election Commission has been indented to fill the 
vacancies for the posts of 31 Junior Translators, 6 Stenographers (Grade „D‟) and 24 Office 
Assistant (MTS) grade. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
The Committee observe that the aim of opening Post Office Passport Seva Kendras (POPSKs) 
was to make timely and efficient delivery of passport services in all parts of the country. 
However, the Committee note with grave concern that there is no improvement  in the situation 

70 
 
faced during implementation of the Project and the citizens face a tough time in seeking basic 
information, getting appointments, and tracking their application in the POPSKs established in 
different parts of the country. The previous sys tem of providing guidance or support to the 
passport seekers has been suddenly withdrawn, leaving them in jeopardy. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should adopt urgent measures to resolve the problems arising 
at the POPSKs. Moreover, if we compare the number of POPSKs opened during 1 st& 2nd quarter 
of 2019-20 with the figures of 2018-19 we find that only 8 new centres have been opened during 
first six months of the current year against 232 POPSKs in 2018 -19. Therefore, the Committee 
are apprehensive about the achievement of the Ministry‟s ambitious target of having one POPSK 
in each of 543 Parliamentary constituency by 2021. Moreover, the Committee feel that only 
opening a PSK or POPSK in all 543 constituencies is not beneficial until and unless it is fully 
equipped with fully modernized infrastructure and adequate skilled man power. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to take necessary steps to achieve the target of opening of 
POPSKs during 2019-20 equipped with adequate skilled manpower and modern infrastructure. 
Reply of the Government 
As on 19 February 2020, 424 POPSKs have been made operational. There are 517 Passport Seva 
Kendras functioning in the country. 158 POPSKs are operating on full -fledged PSK mode with 
dedicated communication link of 2 Mbps each. MEA is working with BSNL for laying down 
Managed Network Services -Multi-protocol level switches (MPLS) lines for the remaining 
POPSKs as well. The Ministry of External Affairs and the Department of Posts are working 
together to open a POPSK in every Lok Sabha Constituency where there is no PSK or POPSK to 
ensure that there is at least one PSK or POSPK in every Lok Sabha Constituency. By opening 93 
PSK and 424 POPSK, the Ministry has covered 488 Lok Sabha Constituencies whe re there is at 
least one Passport Kendra. The Ministry is working closely with the Department of Posts to 
ensure operationalization of a POPSK in the remaining 55 Lok Sabha Constituencies. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
  

71 
 
(Recommendation No. 32) 
The Committee note that a Pre -Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) is given to potential 
emigrants under the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PKVY) Scheme. The Committee note that 
Rs. 10.00 crore was released to the Ministry of Skill Development and T raining in March, 2017 
and only Rs. 3.00 crore have been utilized till date out of this. Due to this under utilization of 
funds, retionalisation has been done and in BE 2019 -20, an allocation of Rs. 5.5 crore has been 
made. An enhancement is considered bas ed on the progress of work and utilization of earlier 
released funds. The Committee note that the number of emigrant workers imparted training 
under PDOT are the most in city of Mumbai which amount to 38976 trainees followed by New 
Delhi at 18727 trainees. 
The Committee feel that the training centres in Metro politican areas of Mumbai and New Delhi 
are running with full capacity while the smaller towns do not have the same priority. The 
Ministry has informed that new PKVY training centres have been opened i n towns of Jaipur, 
Sikar, Hyderabad, Karim Nagar, Nizamabad, Gaya, Muzaffarpur and Patna. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry of External Affairs to take up the matter of PDOT on a grand scale and 
impart training in the particular domain that the potent ial emigrants want to learn like plumbing, 
carpenter, nursing, technician etc. The Committee also feel that guiding the emigrants against 
potential working hazards like passports being taken away by employers, loss of money through 
fake agents, etc. can al so be part of the PDOT programme. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry to target more towns like Kochi, Chennai, Kolkata, Chandigarh, etc. to open new PDOT 
centres for potential emigrants. The Committee may be apprised of the initiatives taken in this  
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
One day Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) programme has been started in a structured 
manner since January 2018, beginning with two centres each at Mumbai and New Delhi. 
Gradually, number of PDOT Centres has been increased to 21 by the end of 2019. Out of these 
21 centres, 15 new PDOT centres have been opened across various states in India in 2019. 
Presently, PDO Training is being imparted to the prospective emigrant workers under the two 
models i.e. firstly, PDOT centres managed by NSDC empanelled T raining Partners under MOU 

72 
 
between MEA and MSDE on the implementation of PKVY and secondly, through State 
Government agencies. In this regard, MEA has transferred Rs 10 Lakhs each to State 
Government Agency/Department of Rajasthan, Telangana, Tamil Nadu an d Rs 5 Lakhs to 
Andhra Pradesh. 
77,109 emigrant workers have been imparted PDO Training across 21 PDOT centers in the 
country by the end of year 2019 as follows:- 
 
S.No 
 
PDOT Centre 
Agency Year of Opening 
1. Mumbai (Videsh Bhawan)  
NSDC Empanelled Training 
Partners under PKVY 
2018 
2. Mumbai  (Andheri) 2018 
3. Delhi  (Okhla) 2018 
4. Delhi (Mandir Marg) 2018 
5. Kochi  2018 
6. Lucknow 2018 
7. Gorakhpur 2019 
8. Chandigarh 2019 
9. Chennai 2019 
 
10. Jaipur  RSLDC (Rajasthan) 2019 
11. Sikar 2019 
12. Nagaur 2019 
 
13. Hyderabad  TOMCOM 
(Telangana) 
2019 
14. Karimnagar 2019 
15. Nizamabad  2019 

73 
 
 
16. Darbhanga Labour Resource Department, 
Government of Bihar 
2019 
17. Gaya 2019 
18. Muzaffarpur 2019 
19. Patna 2019 
 
20. Vijaywada OMCAP 
(Andhra Pradesh) 
2019 
21. Kadapa 2019 
TOTAL 
In reference to the committee‟s recommendation to deliver domain training for potential 
emigrants, MSDE has conveyed that a pilot program comprising 14 India International Skill 
Centers (IISCs) was launched. Based on the learnings from the pilot, MSDE is revising the 
policy guidelines of IISCs, under which operational guidelines had to be redrafted for 
implementation of IISCs. MEA is yet to receive proposal from MSDE in this regard. 
 
In r eference to the Committee‟s recommendations to target more towns like Kochi, Chennai, 
Kolkata, Chandigarh etc. to open new PDOT Centres for potential emigrants.  Ministry has 
opened PDOT centers in these cities. In January 2019, Ministry has conveyed its a pproval to the 
Labour Department, Government of West Bengal for opening of PDOT centers districts of Nadia, 
South 24 Paraganas, North 24 Paraganas, Murshidabad, Hooghly, Kolkata and Howrah. 
However, opening of the same is still awaited. Ministry is regular ly following-up with the State 
Government on this.  
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/67/2019] dated 12/03/2020 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                   P.P.CHAUDHARY,                                                            
10 February, 2021                                                                                      Chairperson,                                 
21 Magha (Saka),1942                             Standing Committee on External Affairs 

74 
 
 
 
 
 
  

75 
 
Appendix I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 17 DECEMBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 17 December, 2020 from 1230 hrs. to 1255 hrs. in 
Committee Room „D‟ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
3.    Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
4.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
5.    Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
6.    Shri Ritesh Pandey   
7.    Shri N.K. Premachandran 
8.    Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
9.    Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
10.  Shri Rebati Tripura  
Rajya Sabha 
11.   Shri K.J. Alphons 
12.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
 
Secretariat 
  
 
1. Shri Paolienlal Haokip   - Additional Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Report on:  

76 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
First Report of the Committee on External Affairs on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of External Affairs for the year 2019-20. 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

77 
 
 
Appendix II 
 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
 THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                        
(i) Total Number of Recommendations     36                                                              
              
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 
26, 28, 29, 31, 33, 34, 35 and 36 
  
 Total-25 
Percentage:  69.44% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.    3 
Total-01 
 Percentage: 2.78% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 8, 15, 27 and 30 
Total- 04 
 Percentage: 11.12 % 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
 Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 9, 10,11, 12, 13 and 32. 
                                            
Total- 06 
Percentage: 16.66% 