 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2020-21] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
      COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
7 
 

 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
the year 2020-21] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 February 2021 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 11 February 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021 / Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
COEA NO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)         (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION             (iii)     
 
Chapter I Report               1  
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted                             
  by the Government            46  
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies      79 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee        80 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited             84      
  
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 28.01.2021         96     
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs.                                              98  
                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 Lok Sabha   
2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
11.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
12.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
13.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
14.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
15.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
16.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
17.  Shri Navneet Ravi Rana  
18.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
19.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
20.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
21.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
29.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
31.  Shri Brij Lal  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P. C. Koul         –  Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai        –   Director 
3.  Shri Paolienlal Haokip      –   Additional Director  
4. Ms.Smita Singh                  –  Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (20 20-21) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second  Report of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2020-21. 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to the Parliament on 2 January, 2019. The Action Taken 
Replies of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on  4 December, 2019 (English version) and 9 December, 2019 (Hindi version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report on action taken at their Sitting held on  
28.01.2021. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                         P.P.CHAUDHARY                                                      
10 February, 2021                                                                                         Chairperson,                                  
21 Magha (Saka),1942                                                          Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on E xternal Affairs deals with the action t aken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Second Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2020 -21 which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3 March 2020. 
 
2.     The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on al l 
the 40 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, and 39. 
 
Total- 28 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL          
         Total- NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
     Recommendation Nos. 16 and 40       
Total- 2 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos.  3, 5, 8, 9,11, 15, 24, 31, 32, and 35  
Total- 10 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I and 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations. 
ROLE OF MEA IN FACILITATING VISION OF US$ 5 TRILLION ECONOMY 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO.1) 
5. The Committee had noted that since 2015 the Ministry of External Affairs had been 
practicing a purposeful and well defined policy of Diplomacy for Development. They had also 
noted that in the General Budget, 2019 -20, the Government had announced its initiation of 
making India a $5 trillion economy by 2024 -25. When asked about the role of Ministry of 
External Affairs in the scheme of things and steps taken to make this goal a reality the For eign 
Secretary had enumerated several measures the Ministry was taking/intending to took in tandem 
with other ministries/departments of Government of India. Over the years, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has been acting as a facilitator for various Line Ministries in achievement of 
economic targets. Through its development cooperation/ assistance programme and Investment 
Promotion and Publicity Programme, the Ministry had been instrumental in facilitating the cause 
of Indian economic diplomacy abroad. 
 Having extensively considered across the board challenging requirements of the goal 
of becoming a US$ 5 trillion economy by 2024 -25 and the efforts being put by MEA as of then 
as their contribution towards realization of this goal, the Committee had strongly  felt that MEA 
could do more with better allocation of resources in that regard. In the globalised era the foreign 
policy elements and the economic policy elements are two sides of the same coin. What the 
Ministry was required to do immediately was to come  up with a clear -cut foreign policy woven 
with the strands of economic policy. It was but imperative that the Ministry expanded its 
activities in the economic realm and play a proactive and pivotal role in India’s vision of 
becoming a US$ 5 trillion dollar  economy. The Committee understood that it was a challenging 
task which may require strengthening of existing division with appropriate human resources and 
adequate budgetary allocation. 
 

3 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that  Hon’ble 
Parliamentary Standing Committee, in its Recommendation No. 1, has required the Ministry to 
come up with a clear cut foreign policy woven with the strands of economic policy. It further 
states that it is imperative that the Ministry expand its activities in the economic realm and play a 
proactive and pivotal role in India’s vision of becoming a US$ 5 Trillion economy. To this end, 
some of the key initiatives planned to be undertaken by the Ministry in this regard are 
enumerated as below:  
I.  MEA’s Economic Diplomacy for Facilitating Trade and Investments: 
The Ministry of External Affairs will leverage its diplomatic resources for 
achieving the defined trade and investment goals. It will systematically involve the 
missions across the world to reach out to business and economic stakeholders. The 
MEA, in consu ltations with the Line Ministries, will enhance involvement and 
engagement of Missions for increasing trade and investment.  
Coordination and Liaison with DPIIT: The MEA liaises closely with DPIIT for 
success of the GOI’s flagship programs including ‘Make in India’ and ‘Access India’ 
initiatives. The Ministry is also working closely with the DPIIT to formulate a plus one 
strategy, to pitch India as the preferred alternative for low cost manufacturing in the 
region. The Ministry will liaise closely with DPII T and Invest India to disseminate 
opportunities for investment in India, encourage greater collaboration of Indian 
businesses with foreign investors, explore opportunities for technological collaboration 
and work on development and promotion of start-up ecosystems. 
Market Expansion & Investment Promotion Activities:  The Ministry will be 
coordinating with its Missions/Posts, setting short -term and long -term goals for the 
Three Ts highlighted by the PM: Trade, Tourism and Technology. All efforts are made 
to a llocate sufficient budget to this end under MEA’s Market Expansion Activities 
Budget. 
Website and Global Mapping of Resources: The Ministry is also working to 
launch its website “indbiz.gov.in”. The website aims to be a one -stop source of all 
information o n Indian economy and business environment in India for foreign 
enterprises, as well as Indian businesses going abroad and for Indian Missions and Posts. 

4 
 
Public Procurement: The Ministry has been working in close coordination with 
our Missions/Posts abroad to garner detailed information on public procurement policies 
of various countries, to aid the Indian businesses in identifying opportunities for public 
tendering available in different countries. 
Sectoral Group of Secretaries (SGOS): The Ministry of External Affairs is a part 
of the Sectoral Group of Secretaries (SGOS) on Economy and Resources, and is 
participating extensively in ongoing deliberations on the strategies to achieve the GOI’s 
target of a US$ 5 Trillion Economy.  
 
II.  Enhancing Development Partnership: 
Development Partnership with Africa: The MEA will be enhancing the reach and 
magnitude of India’s Development Partnership with Africa, under the Fourth India -
Africa Forum Summit (IAFS-4) through Lines of Credit (LOC), Grant assistance, Small 
Development Projects (SDP), Technical Consultancy, Disaster Relief and Humanitarian 
aid, as well as capacity-building programmes. 
Third Country Development Partnerships:  As a part of its development 
partnerships, the MEA will be partnerin g with countries for projects in third countries, 
between 2019 and 2024. 
Capacity building in Human resources : This will be done through the Africa -
wide online projects (2019-24) in phases, including - Tele medicine and Tele-education: 
e-Vidya Bharati & e-Arogya Bharati.  
 
III.  Increasing Connectivity with Immediate Neighbours:  The Ministry will 
continue to focus on enhancing connectivity with neighboring countries especially 
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan and Nepal, including roads, rail, inland waterways, 
shipping, energy and airlinks. These include: Motor Vehicle Agreement with 
Bangladesh;  Finalization of SOPs for use of Chattogram and Mongla ports for 
movement of Indian goods;  Initiating a coordinated and connected bus service with 
Myanmar from Imphal to Mandalay;  India -Bangladesh Friendship pipeline project;  
early completio n of the Akhaura -Agartala Rail link; completion of work on the 8 
Integrated Check Points to improve border trade facilities with Nepal, Bhutan and 

5 
 
Bangladesh, and; establishment of new Border Haats (Markets) with Bangladesh, 
Myanmar and China. 
IV. Partnering with States for Greater Outreach & Economic Engagement: 
Provide enhanced funding under (a) “State Facilitation Abroad” Fund –  allocated to 
Indian Missions/ Posts abroad for undertaking ‘state specific activities’ to enhance the 
external outreach; and ( b) “State Facilitation Knowledge Support” Fund – that is 
available to Branch Secretariats, Regional Passport Offices and Passport Offices to 
undertake ‘state specific activities’. State -specific promotional strategies have been 
devised and deployed by the Missions to encourage promotion of exports, and inbound 
tourism. 
 
V. Sector-Specific initiatives: Matching Complementarities: Increased push for 
negotiation of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs), Air Services Agreements (ASAs), 
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs) and, Social Security Agreements 
(SSAs). 
 
VI.  Engagement with Multilateral Institutions: India’s multilateral economic 
engagements in G20, BRICS, IBSA, Development Banks etc. are important mechanisms 
for developing common understanding w ith other partner countries on fiscal, monetary, 
financial, taxation, anti-corruption, customs issues. Efforts are also made at these fora to 
reduce the cost of trade, remittances, investments etc. that has positive effect. These 
mechanisms result in strengthening the global financial stability, which, in turn results in 
our economic growth. 
 
VII.       Mitigation of the Economic Impact of COVID -19: As a part of the Aatma 
Nirbhar Bharat Initiative, the MEA has been working in collaboration with its Missions 
to chalk out a detailed strategy to increase exports of India’s goods and services in other 
countries. MEA is working to identify the areas and countries where our manufacturers 
have the potential to emerge as the low -cost preferred alternative for imports. Missions 
are providing us with detailed inputs on the Non -Tariff Barriers being faced by Indian 
exporters in their respective countries of accreditation. The Missions are also worki ng to 

6 
 
identify newer lines of goods and services as well as new destinations where India’s 
exports can be enhanced. In order to identify and plug in the immediate gaps in the 
global supply chains, the Missions, in collaboration with the MEA and DPIIT, are 
already in the process of exploring sourcing and export opportunities in various 
countries and to guide our exporters by putting potential suppliers and buyers in touch 
with our EPCs and Industry and also facilitate B2B meetings for them. The MEA is 
working in close collaboration with the concerned line ministries for expanding our agri-
exports to at least 15 focus countries. For this we are in the process of developing 
‘country-specific export strategies’, based on the inputs received from the Missions in 
the focus countries, as well as the recommendations made by the concerned Ministries 
and Departments”. 
7. Keeping in mind , India’s vision of becoming a US $ 5 trillion economy, the 
Committee had strongly felt that the Ministry of External Affairs should play a 
proactive role as a facilitator of this grand vision. Towards that direction, the Ministry 
was urged to not only spel l out a clear -cut foreign policy interwoven with economic 
policy but also strengthen its existing Division with requisite human and finacial 
resources. The Committee observe that the Ministry has taken significant initiatives  to 
expand its activities in th e economic realm  which inter alia include enhancement of 
Missions/Posts abroad for increasing trade and investment; deepening developmental 
partnership; increasing connectivity with neighbours; partnering with states for greater 
outreach; economic engageme nts with multilateral economic institutions (such as 
BRICS, G20, IBSA, etc); country -specific export strategies. While appreciating these 
initiatives, the Committee also note that the reply of the Ministry has conveniently 
avoided the mention of the policy  dimension of the Recommendation  and its 
commitment to strengthen its existing Division with requisite human and bilateral 
resources. The Committee would , therefore, urge the Ministry to continue making 
steady and pivotal  efforts toward bolstering India’s economic growth and also  
pronounce the exact policy modification to establish its commitment and contribution 
in achieving the GoI’s target of a US$5 trillion economy by 2024 -25. Needless to 
mention the Ministry’s task is cut out with the additional burden  of ongoing COVID-19 
Pandemic.  

7 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO.2 AND 3) 
8. While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the 
year 2020-21, the Committee had observed that as against a demand of Rs 23657.76 crore, an 
allocation of Rs. 17346.71 crore has been made. The given budgetary allocation was 3% less 
than BE 2019 -20 allocation and 0.15% less than RE 2019 -20 allocation. Even in terms of 
percentage, MEA’s share in the total Government of India expenditure had come down to 0.57%. 
In view of the expanding mandate and global footprint of India, the reduction in allocation to 
MEA at both RE 2019 -20 and BE 2020 -21 stage was beyond comprehension. Furthermore, the 
Ministry had apprised the Committee that no reaso n had been furnished by the Ministry of 
Finance for diminished allocation for BE 2020 -21. The Ministry had informed that due to 
reduction in funds disbursal in the last fiscal, the Ministry had to undertake re-assessment of fund 
requirements for various he ads in order to ensure that ongoing projects, schemes and 
programmes are not adversely impacted. 
 In the considered opinion of the Committee, the underfunding of the Ministry of 
External Affairs invariably led to undermining of our foreign policy objective s. Taking a serious 
view of the issue and considering foreign policy as one of the Government’s top priority, the 
Committee had strongly recommended that the Government of India should reconsider and 
enhance the allocation to MEA by at least nearly 20 per cent than what it was being provisioned 
then so that it could be commensurate with India’s burgeoning global outreach and engagement. 
The Ministry of External Affairs was urged to identify priority heads to suitably incorporate the 
enhancement in allocatio n and seek additional requirement of funds at the RE 2020 -21 stage so 
that lack of financial resources does not hinder the conduct of Indian foreign policy. 
9. In its Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No. 2, the Ministry of External Affairs, 
has stated that in reference to the Sitting of the Hon’ble Standing Committee on External Affairs 
on 27 February 2020, the Committee had instructed Ministry to provide a note with justification 
for further increase in the BE 2020 -21 allocation from the allocation of Rs. 17346.71cr 
announced in the Union Budget 2020 -21. Ministry has already submitted the detailed note after 
taking note of the recommendation”. 

8 
 
10. Over the years, the Committee had expressed a deep concern over the persistent 
mismatch between the budgeta ry demand made by the Ministry of External Affairs and actual 
allocations provided by the Ministry of Finance. In its written replies, the Ministry had submitted 
that  the  gap  between  the  amount  demanded  and actual  allocations had reduced over the 
years due to realistic and need based rationalization of various sub heads as well as extensive 
consultations with the Ministry of Finance. The claim of the Ministry that due to their more 
realistic and need based rationalization of various sub -heads the gap between amount demanded 
and actual allocations has reduced over the years was slightly confusing. The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs should continue to pursue with the 
Ministry of Finance about the imperative of provisioning adequate budgetary allocation for 
efficient conduct of our foreign policy and diplomatic outreach so that shortage of funds does not 
lead to compromises in foreign policy objectives in the context of the allocation made during 
BE2020-21. 
 In pursuance of the Committee’s earlier recommendation, the Ministry had informed 
that it had commissioned a inter -ministerial as well as a cross -country comparative study of 
budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments with the mandate of managing forei gn affairs to 
the Research and Information System for Economic Development (RIS). The Committee had 
noted that a preliminary report of the study has been received from RIS and was being examined 
in the Ministry. The Ministry of External Affairs should exam ine the preliminary data on cross -
country study of budgetary allocations and apprise the Committee within two months of 
presentation of the Report. That data can assist the Ministry of External Affairs to bolster their 
case for enhanced allocation during the RE stage. 
 
11. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No.3, 
has stated that it has taken full note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Members and would like 
to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will continue to engage with the Ministry of Finance at all 
levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in its pursuits. The Ministry will 
also continue to make efforts to convince Ministry of Finance of its budgetary demands at the RE 
and supplementary grants stages justified by efficient utilization of funds and objective assessment 
of anticipated expenditures, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation. Ministry will 

9 
 
update the committee on the preliminary study conducted by the Research and Information 
System.” 
12. The under-funding of the Ministry of External Affairs has been a source of constant 
concern for the Committee. An allocation of less than 1 percent for a Ministry entrusted with 
the mandate of managing foreign affairs in a n increasingly inter-connected and globalized 
world is incomprehensible. The Committee had , therefore, strongly urged that an 
enhancement in budgetary allocation to the tune of almost 20 per cent should be made for 
MEA during BE 2021-22. In its Action Taken Reply the Ministry has submitted that a note 
has been submitted for increased allocation. The Ministry of External A ffairs was also 
exhorted to carry out a comparative study of inter -ministerial and cross country budgetary 
allocation to strengthen its case for higher funding. The Committee are dissatisfied with the 
tardy progress of that study and hope to be apprised about the findings of the study and the 
initiatives taken in the light thereof within three months. Recognizing the importance of 
adequate provisioning of finances in conduct of our foreign policy, MEA should continue 
making a compelling case for substantive increase in allocation in the next Fiscal. 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO.5) 
CLASSIFICATION OF MEA 
13. The Committee were aware that after the discontinuation of the Plan and Non - Plan 
classification since 2017-18, budget classifications are being done only in terms of Revenue and 
Capital heads and Scheme and Non -Scheme sections. During the examination of b udget 
documents, the Committee had observed reduced allocation under both the Revenue and Capital 
sections for RE 2019 -20 as well as BE 2020 -21 vis-à-vis BE 2019 -20. The Ministry had 
submitted that the declining trend in both the sections were a reflection of the overall budgetary 
allocation given to MEA and overall BE/RE ceilings. Owing to reduction in allocations, various 
schemes/programmes/activities of the Ministry had to be rationalized during RE 2019 -20 as well 
as BE 2020 -21. On the basis of the replies and justifications furnished by the Ministry of 
External Affairs, the Committee had deduced that the Ministry has accepted this fact of reduced 
allocations and further adjustments as the ceilings given by the Ministry of Finance. Given the 
Committee’s expectations from the MEA in the context of making India a $5 trillion economy by 
2024-25 it was but imperative that the Ministry should think beyond its c onventional 

10 
 
requirement of funds. For an endeavor of such a global magnitude, funds ought not to be a 
constraint for any reason whatsoever. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that a 
compelling rationale must be presented for availability of requisit e funds to MEA through 
engagement with the Ministry of Finance at all levels, focused budgetary planning process and 
usage of comparative facts and figures and with the imperative to bolster India’s standing in the 
comity of nations at the backdrop and the 5 trillion dollar economy target firmly in view. 
 
14. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it has taken 
full note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Members. The Ministry will continue to make 
efforts to convince Ministry of Finance of its budgetary demands justified by efficient utilization of 
funds and objective assessment of anticipated expenditures, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s 
recommendation. The Ministry accepts recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee  that a 
compelling rationale must be presented for availability of requisite funds to the Ministry aided by 
focussed budgetary planning process and usage of comparative facts & figures. The Ministry’s 
efforts in this direction are guided by zero-based budgeting process, effective quarterly expenditure 
patterns of the Ministry and overall foreign policy priorities interwoven with economic objectives of 
the country.” 
15. The Committee had observed that the reduction in Revenue and Capital sections of the 
budget of MEA has led to rationalization of activities of MEA. The Committee had, therefore, 
desired that the Ministry should make persistent efforts to persuade the Ministry of Finance 
about the imperative of adequate provisioning of funds, coupled with focussed budgetary 
planning and effective utilization pattern. In its reply, the Ministry has submitted that 
necessary steps are being taken towards zero-based budgeting process and effective quarterly 
expenditure patterns. The reply of the Ministry appears to be too general. The Committee are 
not satisfied with the way the issue of reduced allocation has been taken up with the Ministry 
of Finance as there has been no improvement in fiscal allocation. The Committee are hopeful 
that the BE 2021-22 will witness an increase in allocation so that the foreign policy objectives 
are not compromised due to shortage of funds. The Ministry is urged to make steady and 
sustained efforts towards putting forth a convincing case for better provisioning of funds and 
also ensure that the budgetary process is well-planned and all parameters of fiscal prudence 
are observed.   

11 
 
SCHEME SECTION 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 6) 
16. The Committee had observed that in terms of distribution, about 43 % of MEA’s budget 
is on Scheme side and about 57 % on the Non -Scheme. The Scheme section primarily comprises 
of Technical and Economic Cooperation with other countries, which is a central plank of our 
diplomatic outreach. The Committee had further observed that there had been a marginal 
decrease in allocation under this head during BE 2019 -20. In its queries on the issue, the 
Ministry has stated that the slightly reduced allocation in BE 2020 -21 (Rs. 7449.65 crores) was 
still much higher than the allocations made in 2018 -19 (Rs. 5985.05 crores) and in previous 
years. The Committee found the justification offered by the Ministry as unconvin cing. The 
Committee had also noted that the expenditure under the Scheme section is closely monitored 
and funds are released on the basis of progress reports of the implementation of programmes and 
schemes. The Ministry had also informed that as a result o f intensive monitoring and review of 
technical aid and development projects in the past year, several new initiatives and projects had 
been identified in consultation with the concerned beneficiary host governments. 
 The Committee were of the considered vi ew that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should continue making persistent efforts to pursue the Ministry of Finance to facilitate a better 
appreciation of our technical and development cooperation and associated fund requirements. 
The Ministry might also apprise the Committee about the various new initiatives and projects 
once it gets crystallized. 
17. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that it accords 
utmost priority towards effective and secure budgetary allocation & utilisation under Technical 
& Economic Cooperation. The budgetary resource prioritization and allocation by the Ministry is 
aligned, both towards Aid commitments by the Government as well as based on efficient 
utilization of the allocated budgetary resources to the Ministry.   The allocations for various Aid 
heads are done through careful prioritization within available resources & with priority that none 
of our developmental work s uffers any setback and all our commitments are implemented 
smoothly and speedily. Reallocations at RE stage are carried out to cater to spending needs based 
on reassessed needs at RE stage based on physical progress by identifying savings, wherever 
possible, after undertaking a realistic spending assessment based on project implementation 

12 
 
cycles, local conditions and physical progress. Hence, budgetary allocation process is 
dynamically reassessed through the financial year with the sole objective of effecti ve & 
outcome-based technical & development cooperation programme. Ministry would like to assure 
the Hon’ble Committee that it would continue to engage with the Ministry of Finance at all 
levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry i n its pursuits and also keep 
Honourable committee apprised about the various new initiatives and projects. 
18. The Committee are aware that a  sizeable portion of MEA’s budget is allocated to 
the ‘Scheme’ section that comprises of Technical and Economic Coo peration with ot her 
countries. The Committee ha ve repetitively recommended that budgetary cuts should not 
be inflicted upon the Scheme section of MEA’s budget as it  directly impinges on our 
bilateral engagements and international image.  The Ministry of External Affairs was 
urged to prevail upon the Ministry of Finance for keeping this section insulated from fiscal 
cuts. However, it appears that these persuasions haven’t yielded desired results. The 
Committee had also expressed their desire to be kept informed about new initiatives and 
projects that are finalized. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has furnished 
assurances about active engagement with the Ministr y of Finance at all levels. As the 
Ministry has not informed about any new initiatives/projects under ‘Technical and 
Economic Cooper ation, the Committee understand  that no such projects have been 
finalized in past six months. The Committ ee, therefore, firm ly recommend  that MEA 
should make a stronger pitch for a predictable and availability of substantial funds during 
BE 2021-22 under the Scheme section. The Committee would appreciate feedback on this 
endeavour of the Ministry.  
INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.  NO. 8) 
19. The Committee had observed that there had been an upward trend in budgetary 
allocation under the sub -head ‘Missions and Embassies’, moving from Rs. 2748.06 crore in BE 
2019-20 to Rs. 2910. 56 crore at RE 2019 -20 stage and to Rs. 2994.06 crore at BE 2020 - 21 
stage. As per the Ministry, the enhanced allocation under the Head was in keeping with the 
growing diplomatic outreach by the Government of India and the need to expand our presence in 
various parts of the world, which are presently represented through c oncurrent accreditations. 

13 
 
The Committee had noted that the establishment of Missions and Posts abroad is guided by six 
factors – assessment of India’s geo -political priorities, level of bilateral ties, regional factors, 
diaspora connections, commercial, de velopmental cultural interests and reciprocal ties with the 
countries concerned. The Committee had also observed that approval has been given for 
establishment of 18 new Missions in Africa. Of these, 9 Missions are already operational in 
Burkina Faso, Repu blic of Congo, Cameroon, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Guinea, 
Rwanda and Kingdom of Eswatini (Swaziland). 
 The Committee were satisfied to note that with increase in the allocation under the 
sub-head ‘Embassies and Mission’ for 2020 -21 the Ministr y had shown determination to open 
new Missions in the countries. However, India still had no resident Missions in 61 UN member 
states, mostly in Africa and Latin America and it was carrying out preparatory work to ascertain 
the feasibility of establishing new Missions in such countries. The Committee had therefore, 
desired that the Ministry should complete the establishment of the remaining 9 Missions in 
Africa in a time -bound manner and after taking into consideration the various factors, prepare a 
roadmap along with timelines for opening up of Missions in remaining countries and apprise the 
Committee about the same. In view of our relations with Latin American countries, the 
Committee had expected the Ministry to accord due priority to setting up of Missio ns/Posts in 
that region. 
 
20. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that India realizes 
its strategic objectives through various means including the expansion of its diplomatic footprint.  
Guided by various factors that govern the opening of new Missions, such as India’s geo -political 
priorities, level of bilateral ties, regional factor, diaspora connections, commercial, developmental, 
cultural interests and reciprocal ties, decisions to open new Missions are evaluated at senior levels 
from time to time. Nine new Missions have already been established in Africa in pursuance of the 
Cabinet decision to open 18 new Missions in Africa during 2018-21. Remaining nine Missions are 
being opened on a time-bound manner. In addition, there is also a plan to open 15 new Missions in 
different parts of the world including in Latin America. 
21. While the Committee find the enhanced allocation made under the budget 
sub-head ‘Embassies and Missions’ satisfying, the uneven diplomatic presenc e of the 
Missions abroad has been worrisome. The Committee are hopeful that the increased 

14 
 
allocation would be utilized suitably to expand our diplomatic outreach, particularly in 
Africa and La tin America. As regards the nine remaining Missions in Africa, the 
Committee, at the cost of sounding repetitive, would like the Ministry to complete the 
task within the stipulated time and cost lines. The Committee also note with satisfaction 
the plan  of the Ministry to open 15 new Missions in different parts of th e world 
including Latin America. The Committee desire that a detailed and well laid out road 
map may immediately be worked out for the purpose by the Ministry and taken to its 
logical conclusion without any further lose of time.  
 
MONITORING OF INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD 
RECOMMENDATION ( SL. NO. 9) 
22. In their previous Report on Demands for Grants, the Committee had been urging the 
Ministry to improve monitoring mechanism of all the Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee 
had observed that the Ministry has resorted to two broad tools i.e General Mechanisms such as 
inspections, annual general report, MEA Performance Smart Board and Specific Mechanisms 
like Political Reports, Economic and Commercial Reports, Annual Consular Report, Cultural 
Outreach etc. to regularly monitor the functioning and performance of  Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad. The Ministry had apprised the Committee that the web -portal namely Performance 
Evaluation and Monitoring Systems (PEMS) was being revamped and would be launched by 
second quarter of 2020. 
 The Committee were pleased to le arn that the combination of tools employed by 
MEA for monitoring the functioning and performance of Indian Missions/Posts abroad with the 
objective of increasing their efficiency and effectiveness had considerably scaled up the activities 
by Missions and Posts and political engagement and bilateral meetings have picked up the pace. 
In this regard, the Committee, however, had suggested that the Ministry should prepare an 
annual data on the overall outcomes of monitoring mechanism of various Missions/Posts ab road 
along with the country-specific challenges faced by them. The Committee had also desired to be 
apprised about the launching of the revamped PEMS portal which has already failed on several 
schedules. 
23. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the Directorate 
General of Inspections (DGI) was set-up in 2014 to streamline the system of inspection of Indian 

15 
 
Missions/Posts abroad. Ministry introduced a web -portal namely Perf ormance Evaluation and 
Monitoring System (PEMS) in 2016 using a set of 60 binary questions to evaluate the 
Missions/Posts. 19 Missions/Posts have been inspected based on PEMS between 2017 - 
2019.However, it was felt that on -site inspection of Missions/Posts  is a time consuming process 
and it is not possible to inspect more than 10 -15 Missions/Posts in a year. It was thus decided 
that off -site inspection mechanism may also be put in place. Keeping this in mind, existing 
PEMS po rtal is being modified with a v iew to not only identify Missions/Posts for onsite 
inspection but also to enable Ministry to undertake off -site inspection of all Missions/Posts on 
the basis of documents submitted/uploaded by them on PEMS portal. This is an innovative step 
being planned by the Ministry, which has become more relevant in this COVID era. Inputs from 
concerned Divisions have been sought to frame suitable questions/queries, which would enable 
the Ministry’s directions on a particular subject/matter. 
24. The Committee note that  the Ministry of External Affairs have employed 
general as well as specific mechanisms for increasing the efficiency of Missions/Posts 
abroad, Further, the Ministry has introduced a web -portal-Performance and 
Evaluation and Monitoring Systems (PEMS) in 201 6. Plans for revamping this portal 
have been on the anvil since long  and it was to be launched by second quarter of 2020. 
However, from the reply it seems that the Ministry has once again failed the scheduled 
launch. The Committee had also recommended that  the Ministry should prepare 
annual data on overall outcomes of various monitoring mechanism of Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad along with country - specific challenges. In its response, the 
Ministry has not mentioned about the status of such an assessment. Th e Committee  
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that based on the outcome of the 
monitoring mechanism, the Ministry should compile annual data about Missions/Posts 
abroad. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the status of launching of 
revamped PEMS portal incorporating the inputs from the concerned Division.  
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
SETTING UP OF VIDESH BHAWANS IN STATE CAPITALS 
RECOMMENDATION ( SL. NO.10) 
25. The Committee had setting up of Videsh Bhawans in all capitals recommended observed 
that the budgetary allocation under the sub -head ‘Passport and Emigration’ has decreased from 
Rs. 1620.95 crore in BE 2019-20 to Rs. 1604.39 crore at RE 2019-20 to Rs. 1348.59 crore during 
BE 2020 -21. The Committee had noted that the sub - head ‘Protector General of Emigrant’ 
(PGoE) has been brought under this head and a new sub -head ‘Welfare of Overseas Indians’ has 
been opened under this head w.e.f. FY2019-20. It was discon certing to find that despite the 
inclusion of two significant sub -heads, namely Protector General of Emigrant and Welfare of 
Overseas Indian Affairs under this minor head, budgetary cuts had been effected. The Committee 
were of the view that the Ministry s hould provide requisite funds under such a critical minor -
head, particularly after the merger of erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and Ministry 
of External Affairs. Moreover, in view of the significant contribution of revenue from the 
passport and visa services to the Consolidated Fund of India, sufficient investment in improving 
passport and visa service delivery was essential. The Committee had, therefore, also 
recommended that the Ministry should seek additional funds for this minor head that  directly 
impinges on public services delivery and welfare of our Overseas Indians. The Committee had 
desired that a Videsh Bhawan may be established in every state capital on the lines of the one set 
up in Mumbai. These Videsh Bhawans should be the umbrel la organization in each state for 
providing public services relating to all activities of MEA. In view of the compelling need of 
such institutions in the states, the Committee had desired that Videsh Bhawans in all state 
capitals might be set up within a period of 18months. 
 
26. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that : -“Built on 
the pillar of cooperative federalism, Videsh Bhawan is conceived as an integrated MEA office 
which houses all MEA offices such as RPO, Branch S ecretariat, POE and ICCR regional office 
in States under one roof.  The offices would have a multi -dimensional approach and serve 
several stakeholders by acting as a bridge between States and foreign Governments; supporting 
local businessmen in furthering their interests abroad;  liaising and extending support to NRIs in 
need etc. The Committee’s recommendation has been duly noted and the Ministry has taken 

17 
 
steps to seek Cabinet approval for setting up Videsh Bhawans in state capitals, within identified 
timelines.  
The current status of the integrated “Videsh Bhawans” is as follows: 
 
City Status 
Mumbai Already Established and Inaugurated 
Bhopal Construction in Progress. Expected to be completed by end 
2020. 
Lucknow, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Bengaluru 
Renovation/ expansion work in progress. Expected to be 
completed in 2020/2021. 
Chennai, 
Kolkata, Ranchi 
Design work completed/ nearing completion 
Hyderabad Boundary wall constructed. 
Amaravati Land Acquired 
Dehradun, 
Srinagar, 
Guwahati 
State Governments requested to allot alternate/ additional 
plot of land 
Remaining 
State/ UT 
capitals 
Request for Land Allotment made 
 
27. Passport and Emigration constitute two crucial aspect of Ministry’s direct public 
delivery services. With the merger of erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(MOIA) and MEA, the ambit of the latter has grown exponentially. Despite the inclusion of 
two important sub -heads, namely ‘Protector General of Emigrant’ (PoE) and ‘Welfare of 
Overseas Indians’, the Committee found the reduction in allocation under this head to be 
disappointing. The Ministry was , therefore, urged to seek additional funds under this 
budget - head during the RE stage. The Ministry has not furnished reply on this aspect. 
The Committee had also desired that Videsh Bhawan s should be established in all state 
capitals as a one stop organization for catering to public services delivery of MEA. The 
Committee are pleased to discern that significant efforts are underway for setting up 

18 
 
Videsh Bhawans in state capitals. The Minist ry should strive to complete the establishment 
of the Videsh Bhawans in all state capitals within fixed timelines. The Committee also 
recommend that the MEA should ensure that adequate finances are provisioned for 
passport and emigration during RE 2020-21 and BE 2021-22.    
 
PASSPORT SEVA PROJECT 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO.11) 
28. The Committee were aware that the Passport Seva Project (PSP) is one of the largest 
citizen-centric project under the National e -Governance Plan. The scale and magnitude of 
passport related services could be gauged from the fact that in 2019, approximately 1.22 crore 
passports were issued in India and abroad. The Committee were happy to learn that there are 93 
Passport Seva Kendras (PSK) and 424 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras (POPS K) that were 
functioning as extended arms of the 36 Passport Offices in the country. There was a proposal of 
opening of PSK/POPSK in every Parliamentary constituency of the country. The Ministry had 
also informed that Passport Seva Programme has been exten ded to Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
in order to provide better and smoother service delivery experience to Indian Diaspora living 
abroad. So far, 54 Indian Missions have been integrated into Passport Seva Project and 
integration in several other Missions/Posts are in progress. The Committee had observed that the 
Ministry maintains a central database called Passport Related Information Data Exchange 
(PRIDE) which contains details of Passports. Moreover, the Committee had also noted that MEA 
has put in place a strengthened Grievance Redressal Mechanism, whereby a Multilingual Call 
Centre with a toll free number (1800 - 258-1800), operating in 17 languages and on 24*7 basis 
caters to dissemination of information about various passport related services.  
 The issuance of passports in a timely, seamless and hassle -free manner is the most 
citizen centric public delivery function performed by the Ministry. The Committee were satisfied 
to know about the slew of initiatives taken by the Ministry to make qualitative and  quantitative 
improvements in the delivery of passport services in the country during 2019-20. The Committee 
had however, desired that initiative should be taken to open up new PSK/POPKs in every 
Parliamentary constituency as per the targets fixed in this regard. The Committee had also 
desired to be apprised about the progress made in integration of remaining Missions/Posts abroad 

19 
 
into the Passport Seva Project. The Ministry should also ensure that the grievance redressal of 
citizens related to passport services is addressed in a time-bound manner. 
29. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted that as on 13 
April 2020, 517 passport Seva Kendras, including 93 PSKs and 424 POPSKs, are functioning in 
the country.  By opening 93 PSK and 424 POPSM, the Ministry has covered 488 Lok Sabha 
Constituencies where there is at least one Passport Kendra.  The Ministry of External Affairs and 
the Department of Posts are working together to ensure operationalization of a POPSK in the 
remaining 55 Lok Sabha Constituencies.  Out of this, POPSK in seven Lok Sabha Constituencies 
are ready for inauguration while availability of requisite space in eight POPSK locations is 
expected to be confirmed by the Department of Posts.  The Ministry of External  Affairs and the 
Department of Posts are working closely to set up a POPSK in the remaining 40 Lok Sabha 
constituencies where requisite space is presently not available.  
As on current date, 59 Missions/Posts have been successfully integrated into the Passport 
Seva Project (PSP). The Ministry has advised 121 Missions/Posts to acquire the necessary IT 
equipment for integration into the PSP system. Of this, 13 Missions/Posts have procured the 
requisite IT equipment and the integration work is currently in progress. 52 Missions/Posts are in 
the process of acquiring the necessary equipment while the Ministry is coordinating with the 56 
other Missions/Posts to expedite the proces s. Once availability of the IT equipment is confirmed 
by the Missions/Posts to the Ministry, the integration will be effected remotely.  
The grievance related to passport services are taken up by the respective Passport Offices 
on real-time basis and redre ssed on priority. Since February 2020, Ministry has moved to the 
upgraded version 7.0 of the Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAMS) mapping thereby the last mile grievance officers to improve grievance redressal 
time and quali ty of disposal. All the Missions/Posts abroad have also been brought on the 
upgraded CPGRAMS providing opportunity to the citizens to reach out to them directly.  
30. Realizing the magnitude and extent of Passport Sewa Project (PSP), the 
Ministry’s outreach has been commendable. With regard to opening up of PSK/PoPSKs 
in every Parliamentary constituency, the Committee were pleased to note that with the  
opening up of 93  PSK and 424 Passport POPSM, 488 Lok Sabha constituencies have 

20 
 
been covered and MEA is working with Department of Posts to open  POPSKs in the 
remaining 55 constituencies. The Ministry has also informed that 59 Missions/Posts have 
been successfully integrat ed into PSP and the 121 Missions/Posts have been advised to 
acquire requisite IT equipment. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
extensive coverage and outreach of the Passport Seva Kendras/Offices is a significant 
achievement by MEA.  The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry would continue its 
strides in opening up of POPSKs in the remaining parliamentary constituencies along 
with effective integration of the Mission/Posts with PSP in a time -bound manner. The 
Committee also desire to be informed at regular intervals about the progress made in 
this regard.  
SHORTAGE OF HUMAN RESOURCE IN CPO 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 12) 
31. The Committee had noted that against a sanctioned strength of 2,697, the actual 
working strength of the Central Passport Office (CPO) cadre is 1,821 as on 1February, 2020. 
Shortage of personnel in CPO has been stated as a constraining factor in expansion o f the 
Passport Seva Project. It was observed that there were 876 posts which were lying vacant in 
various grades in CPO. As per the Ministry, the difficulty in filing up the vacant posts stemmed  
from the extant Recruitment Rules. Direct recruitment is pos sible only in grades of Office 
Assistant, Junior Passport Assistant (JPA) Stenographers, Junior Translator and Assistant 
Superintendent. The Ministry had placed indents for 310 with the Staff Selection Commission 
since 2017 for recruitment in these grades.  Further, the Ministry has engaged 361 Data Entry 
Operators and 60 Office Assistant (MTS) through Outsourced Service Provider. The Committee 
had noticed that a proposal for physical inspection and staffing study of CPO by the Staff 
Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure has been sent to Ministry of Finance in 
November, 2019. 
 The issue of human resource crunch has been a major area of concern and has been 
part of the Committee’s recommendations over the years. Taking serious cognizance of th is 
matter, the Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry should take up that issue 
with Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) at the highest level and ensure that the 

21 
 
vacant positions are filled up in the shortest possible time. The Minist ry should also apprise the 
Committee about the outcomes of the interaction with DoPT. 
32. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that it  has written 
to the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) drawing the attention to  the shortage of 
manpower in the Central Passport Organization (CPO) and requesting them to urgently fill up the 
vacant posts, which have been indented to the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) from time to 
time where direct recruitment is available as per e xtant Recruitment Rules. DoPT has also been 
requested to expedite conduct of Limited Departmental Competitive Examination by SSC to fill 
up the earmarked posts of Junior Passport Assistant (JPA), Senior Passport Assistant (SPA) and 
Assistant Superintendent from the respective feeder posts being one of the modes of recruitment 
as per extant Recruitment Rules. Recently, 87 dossiers were provided by the SSC against the 
indented vacancies of JPA for the year 2017.  Out of these, 28 candidates have since joined the 
CPO and the remaining are expected to join soon.” 
33. The gap between the sanctioned strength and working strength in Central 
Passport Office (CPO) has been a worrisome trend. While noting the efforts made by 
the Ministry to tackle the shortage of staff, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry should take up the matter with Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) 
at the highest level for timely filing up of the vacant posts. The Ministry has replied that 
it has written to DoPT and requested it to expedite the limited Department Competitive 
Examination by SSC to fill the earmarked posts of Junior Passport Assistants (JPA), 
Senior Passport Assistants (SPA) and Assistant S uperintendents. The Committee also 
note that out of 87 dossiers provided by SSC against indented vacancies of JPA, 28 
candidates have already joined the CPO. In the considered opinion of the Committee, 
augmenting of human capital is key to smooth and effective functioning of CPO and the 
Ministry should endeavour to take all necessary steps to bridge the gap between 
sanctioned strength and working strength of CPO in the shortest possible time. 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 15) 
34. The Committee were happy to learn that development cooperation that constitutes a 
significant facet of India’s external engagement had expanded both geographically and sectorally 
in terms of its reach and spread. For BE 2020 -21, just like the trend for MEA ’s budget, the 
proportion of allocation under the sub -head ‘Technical and Economic Co- operation’ had dipped 
from Rs. 7333.79 crore to Rs. 6617.37 (BE 2020 -21). Despite repeated recommendations of the 
Committee to avoid budgetary cuts under this head, the reduced allocations for developmental 
aid and assistance was incomprehensible. 
 The Committee had observed that the budget head catered to India’s aid and 
assistance programmes not only in India’s immediate and extended neighbourhood but also to 
countries in South East Asia, Central Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the 
Indo-Pacific region. The Ministry had informed that allocations for aid heads were based made 
after undertaking a realistic spending assessment based on project implementati on cycles, local 
conditions and physical progress for ongoing projects. On the basis of facts and figures furnished 
by the Ministry, the Committee had observed a disparity between the budgetary demands made 
by MEA and actual allocations given by the Minist ry of Finance as well as between actual 
allocation and utilization of the same by MEA. The Ministry’s assertion regarding the 
provisioning of adequate allocation of funds being taken up with the Ministry of Finance at 
various levels had been noted. Taking a serious view of this matter, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that the uneven utilization 
pattern under this head is reduced to bare minimum and limited only to delays pertaining to 
extraneous factors. Fur thermore, the Committee had also suggested that a study might be 
conducted on the objectives, modalities and implications of our developmental cooperation over 
the years so that more funds allocation may be justified for India’s external engagement. The 
Committee had also to conveyed that while allocating budget under the head ‘Technical and 
Economic Cooperation’, the Ministry of Finance should bear in mind the ramifications of 
budgetary cuts under this head on our bilateral, regional as well as multilateral engagements. 
 
35. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it handles a 
variety of projects in different parts of the world, with each project involving multiple stakeholders 

23 
 
including Indian PSUs/ private companies in  India and in the host countries, and each project 
involves a unique set of issues and challenges in execution.  The Ministry is closely engaged in 
closely monitoring the progress of the respective projects, and regularly updates respective budget 
requirement based on inputs received from the project monitoring/ implementing agencies taking 
into account a realistic assessment of local conditions on the ground, local regulatory framework 
and assurances to be fulfilled by the local authorities etc.  However, some amount of uncertainty 
and unpredictability in the project cycle and our ability to fulfil the physical and financial targets set 
in case of each project is unavoidable since we do not have control over the operating environment.  
However, efforts are made to periodically update and revise our budget projection and requirement 
for the development assistance to other countries taking into account the overall perspective of a 
dynamic and fluid nature.” 
36. In spite of being a centra l plank of our foreign policy, Development 
Cooperation/Technical and Economic Cooperation have been susceptible to budgetary 
cuts. Expressing strong disapproval of such tendencies, the Committee had recommended 
the Ministry to undertake a review study about the objectives, modalities and implications 
of our developmental partnership. The Committee had also suggested that the Ministry of 
Finance should refrain from reducing allocations for Technical and Economic 
Cooperation as it directly impinges on our bilateral engagements. In its Action Taken 
Reply, the Ministry has provided an explanation about the propelling factors, nature and 
challenges faced in development cooperation. It is a matter of regret that the Ministry has 
failed to respond to the Committee’s specific recommendation. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that a thorough review of our developmental 
cooperation should be carried out and the findings of the same may be furnished to the  
Committee within three months of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
 
SEPARATE AID DISBURSAL BODY 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 16) 
37. Expressing concern over the unpredictable and fluctuating budgetary demands and 
allocation under this Head, the Committee in their previous DFG Report had recommended that 
the Ministry should frame a developmental aid/cooperation policy with a clear roadma p for 
developmental assistance to countries in alignment with our national interest. The Committee 

24 
 
had also urged the Ministry to explore the feasibility of establishing an autonomous aid disbursal 
body that strictly caters to planning, execution and imple mentation of the projects in a timely 
manner. The Committee had reiterated its earlier recommendation that a general aid policy must 
be framed and a separate aid disbursal body on the lines of similar bodies in other countries 
(such as USAID, OECD etc) may be established by the Ministry. 
 
38. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has submitted that it  had 
decided to establish Development Partnership Administration in 2012 taking into account the 
unique nature of India’s development partnership, the diversification and growing complexity of 
our assistance programmes and projects and resource and manpower constraints in GOI.  The 
DPA has evolved as an innovative and cost -effective instrument of delivery of a broad -based 
developmental a ssistance to foreign countries encompassing Lines of Credit, projects under 
Grant-in-Aid, capacity building programmes for civilian and defence personnel etc.  The model 
of DPA created in 2012 has served our purpose well as is evident from the robust growt h of our 
projects both under Lines of Credit and Grant.  The Ministry has been constantly monitoring the 
role of DPA in implementation of development projects and to support its work, has inducted 
technical experts from other Ministries.  Currently more th an 50% staff of DPA are 
deputationists with specialized technical expertise.  Further, taking into account the growing 
importance of culture and heritage in our development partnership a new Division has been 
created (DPA-IV) to exclusively focus on cultur al and heritage restoration projects and relevant 
capacity building engagement in this area.  Also, a senior officer of the rank of Additional 
Secretary has been deployed for an effective and close overall supervision and coordination in 
the work of the four Divisions in DPA.  Considering the importance attached by the government 
to our development partnership, the Ministry would continue to monitor and introduce suitable 
reforms and innovations in the DPA as required for its efficient and effective performance.” 
39. In order to ensure a reasonable amount of budgetary certainty under the head 
‘Technical and Economic Cooperation’, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry should frame a general aid policy and also establish a separate aid disbursal 
body on lines o f international bodies (such as USAID, OECD). The reply furnished by 
the Ministry, as in the past , has simply focused on its Development Partnership 
Administration (DPA) launched in 2012. Had DPA been serving its desired purpose, the 

25 
 
Committee would not have made the instant recommendations. Unfortunately, however, 
the Ministry has time and again, without giving any cogent reason tended to take a call 
on the Committee’s recommendations. With a view to take a final view on this important 
issue, the Committee desire that the Ministry ought to come up with a detailed review of 
DPA with facts and figures including the outcomes during last 8 years of its existence at 
the earliest.    
 
DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION  
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 17) 
40. On the basis of data furnished by the Ministry, the Committee had observed a decline 
in allocation under the head ‘Technical and Economic Cooperation’ pertaining to our 
neighbourhood. Barring two sub -heads i.e. ‘Aid to Bangladesh’ and ‘Aid to Nepal’, there  had 
been a reduction in allocation for development cooperation to South Asian countries. Such a 
situation was all the more appalling in the light of increasing Chinese presence in providing 
assistance and undertaking development projects in various countr ies under the ‘Belt and Road 
Initiative’. The Committee had noted that in order to deal with that challenge, the Ministry had 
been extending GoI Lines of Credit (LoC) on concessional terms to 64 countries of Asia, Africa, 
Latin America, Caribbean, Oceania and Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). While 
appreciating such extensive LoCs, the Committee were of the view that much more needs to be 
done for positioning India as an emerging economic power. The Committee had therefore urged 
the Ministry to re -visit the development cooperation, particularly with our neighbours so as to 
enable long-term partnerships with careful assessment of projects, adequate disposal of funds 
and efficient implementation. 
 
41. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that t he 
Development Partnership Administration (DPA) in MEA is entrusted with implementing India’s 
development cooperation initiatives with partner countries.  Some projects, especially 
infrastructure projects have a longer gestation time and the budget appropriated in that financial 
year is commensurate with the project cycle based on physical and financial progress. The 
budgetary requirements for the financial year are projected after taking into account specific 
status and anticipat ed utilization for various projects and initiatives in these countries. This 

26 
 
causes a year -on-year variations in the budgetary allocation under a particular aid head. The 
Government remains committed to stronger development cooperation with our neighbourin g 
countries based on bilateral imperatives and larger policy thrusts such as Neighbourhood First 
and Act East policy. The neighbourhood remains the largest recipient of Indian developmental 
assistance. 
42. The Ministry further submitted that development assistance under Lines of Credit (LOCs) 
is extended in accordance with the Indian Development and Economic Assistance Scheme 
(IDEAS) guidelines issued by Department of Economic Affairs. So far, 302 LOCs aggregating to 
US$ 30.66 billion have been extended to 64 countries covering projects in different sectors such 
as connectivity, energy, hydro power, roads, agriculture, civil infrastructure, capacity building, 
training, humanitarian assistance and health care etc. Of the US$ 15.90 billion that has been 
committed under GoI LOCs to Asian countries, the largest value of commitments have been 
made in the India’s immediate neighbourhood: Bangladesh (US$ 7.862 billion), Sri Lanka (US$ 
2.02 billion), Nepal (US$ 1.65 billion), Mauritius (US$ 964.80 million), Maldives ( US$ 840 
million), Myanmar (US$ 538.90 million), Seychelles (US$ 128 million).There is a specific focus 
on regional connectivity initiatives in the neighbourhood  under GoI LOCs.  A total of 98 
connectivity projects (44 completed) in 5 countries in the neighbourhood for USD 6.93 billion (INR 
49,200 Crore) under GoI Lines of Credit (LOCs). Our LOCs are financing some of critical 
infrastructure projects of the partner countries.” 
43. Technical and Economic Cooperation can prove to be a po tent force in boosting 
regional connectivity and cooperation. Looking at the budgetary allocation under this 
head particularly to our South Asian neighbours, the Committee had noted  that the 
Ministry has not utilized this instrument effectively. The amount  of allocation and 
subsequent implementation of developmental projects in our immediate neighbourhood is 
a reflection of our foreign policy priorities. The Committee had, therefore, urged the 
Ministry to revisit the development partnership with our neighbouring countries with the 
greater objective of establishing deeper bilateral relations through timely implementation 
of projects. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, have merely highlighted the broader 
policy and the rationale behind variations in budg etary requirements under different 
country heads. The reply, however, is silent about the concrete measures taken to optimize 

27 
 
aid and assistance projects for strengthening of bilateral ties with our neighbourhood. The 
Committee expect the same to be submitted to them at the soonest. They would also like to 
reiterate that the Ministry should continue its endeavour to foster stronger development 
cooperation with our neighbouring countries by exploring more connectivity projects with 
them.   
AID TO AFRICAN COUNTRIES 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 24) 
44. It was disconcerting for the Committee to note decline in allocation under the sub- 
head ‘Aid to African countries’ from Rs. 450 crore in BE 2019 -20 to Rs. 300 crore in BE 2020 -
21. Delayed execution of projects leading to under -utilization of earmarked funds seemed to be 
the cause of that reduction. Justifying the delay in completion of p rojects under India -Africa 
Forum Summit (IAFS), the Ministry had stated that considerable challenges, including lack of 
funds and manpower from the Indian side, were faced in the implementation of the proposals to 
set up institutions in Africa. Moreover, I AFS-IV is scheduled to take place this year. The 
Committee were concerned to note that over the years, there had been slow progress in 
implementation of projects under India Africa Forum Summits I, II and III. The Committee had 
noted that a regular and high-level review of projects undertaken under various IAFS was carried 
out in consultation with all concerned stakeholders and policy decisions are taken accordingly. 
The Committee have noted that so far 15 African countries - Benin, Republic of Guinea, Zambia, 
Malawi, Ghana, Democratic Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritius, Uganda, 
Mozambique, Comoros, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Mali and Eritrea - have signed MoUs with TCIL 
for participating in the Pan Africa e-network Project (PaeNP). 
 Given the significance  of the African region, the drooping allocation and the slow 
pace of progress in projects there was disappointing. The Committee had therefore, strongly 
recommended that MEA should accord due importance to Africa in our foreign policy and 
developmental coo peration should clearly reflect it. The Committee were hopeful that the 
Ministry would actively engage with the host countries, the concerned Indian Missions, 
Implementing Agencies and the line Ministries for timely implementation of the projects. In that 
regard, India’s experience in development cooperation over the years should come handy in 
extending our outreach in Africa. The Committee had strongly recommended that enhanced 

28 
 
allocation must be provisioned for this head and based on a feasibility study, physical and 
financial targets should be established for completion of all ongoing projects in Africa. The 
Committee had further, urged that the Ministry should take suitable measures to ensure the 
timely handover of the Pan African e-Network Project and apprise the Committee about the same 
at regular intervals. 
45. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it has 
sincerely noted the concerns and recommendations of the Committee. The Ministry would like to 
reassure the Hon’ble Committee that Africa is receiving very high priority by the Government.  
1. Prime Minister enunciated 10 guiding principles in Uganda in 2018, which will guide 
India-Africa relations and take our engagement to the next level. These guiding 
principles have given “top priority” to a range of areas including digital & IT, especially 
for people -centric projects, agriculture, trade & investment, development partnership, 
enhance local capacity and assist African youth, capacity building, climate change, 
cooperation in terrorism & maritime issues, international cooperation for representat ive 
world order etc. The Ministry is in the process of taking these elements forward in a 
focused manner. This is reflected in the range of important events completed and/or 
planned between India and Africa in the run up to India-Africa Forum Summit-IV.  
 
2. With regard to the e -VBAB Network Project for Tele -Education and Tele -Medicine 
in Africa, after signing of the MoU between Director, TCIL and High Commissioner of 
Republic of The Gambia on 9th March, 2020 in New Delhi, the number of countries 
participating in the Project stands at 16.Subsequent to signing of Agreements by TCIL 
with four Indian Universities recognized by UGC for offering programmes through 
online mode, enrolments were completed for the first academic semester of six degree 
and diploma pro grammes in March 2020. A total of 23 students from 6 African 
countries qualified for scholarships. With regard to tele -medicine, the first live tele -
consultation took place on 17th March, 2020 on the e -Sanjeevani platform between 
faculty from the Universit y Teaching Hospital, Zambia and Post Graduate Institute of 
Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh. 
 

29 
 
3. We would like to reassure the Hon’ble Committee that this high priority and 
importance accorded to Africa in our Foreign Policy is sought to be reflect ed in the 
development cooperation context. In this context, the Ministry would also like to inter 
alia mention that regular review of the various projects is being conducted and 
coordinated to monitor the implementation and speed up, where necessary. The r evision 
of India Development Assistance Scheme (IDEAS) Guidelines in 2015 is already 
making a difference to the pace of implementation and we are keeping it under review to 
enhance this further. Our effort to enhance our close bilateral links with African 
countries and to further enhance our development partnership has been appreciated by 
African countries.  
 
4. The Ministry has taken a note of all the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee 
and will seek to address them suitably.  
 
46. Concerned about the reduction in budgetary allocation and slow progress in 
implementation of projects in Africa, the Committee had urged the Ministry to ensure 
that adequate funds are provisioned under this sub -head and projects are implemented 
in line wit h stipulated physical and financial targets. The Committee had also 
recommended that the Pan African e -Network Project be handed over in a time -bound 
manner. The Committee  also took note of the ten areas of fo cus (such as agriculture, 
trade & investment, c apacity building, climate change, maritime issues, people -centric 
projects etc.) shaping our engagement with Africa. In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Ministry has assured the Committee about according high priority to Africa in India’s 
foreign policy. The Mi nistry has also informed that the various projects in Africa are 
reviewed regularly. The Committee have also take n note of  the progress made with 
regard to the e-VBAB Network Project for Tele-education and Tele-Medicine in Africa. 
In the considered opinion  of the Committee, the Action Taken Replies should mention 
specific follow-up action taken by the Ministry in pursuance of their recommendation. 
Mere noting of Committee’s recommendation is equivalent to no action. The Committee 
once again desire that Afri ca should find adequate fiscal space and significance in our 

30 
 
development cooperation. They would also like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard at the earliest.  
AID TO AFGHANISTAN 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 25) 
47. The Committee were aware that despite daunting logistical and security challenges, 
India has been providing wide -ranging developmental assistance to Afghanistan. Allocation 
under that sub head had been kept unchanged for the ongoing and next fiscals. The Committee 
were pleased to see optimum utilization of funds under this head for the past two years. The 
Foreign Secretary has stated that India was providing small and medium projects development 
assistance in all 34 provinces of Afghanistan and large scale projects were in the planning stage. 
The Committee had, therefore, desired that the satisfactory experience gained from completion 
of large infrastructural projects in Afghanistan should be applied to all our developmental 
cooperation projects elsewhere. The Ministry sh ould ensure that requisite funds are available for 
smooth functioning of all our small and medium sized projects in Afghanistan. The Committee 
also wanted to be kept informed about the large developmental projects in Afghanistan once 
finalized. 
 
48. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that it noted the 
recommendations made by the esteemed committee for compliance. All efforts are continuously 
made for optimal budgetary allocation under Aid to Afghanistan, in line with “Ne ighbourhood 
First Policy”. The recommendation of the Committee on learnings from our experiences of 
developmental projects in Afghanistan, elsewhere has been noted.  The implementation of the 
development partnership programme of India is premised on learnin gs of best practices both in -
house & elsewhere. The Development Partnership Administration vertical in MEA led by 
Additional Secretary-officer provides for holistic & integrative conceptualization, assessment & 
monitoring of our Development Partnership program.  
49. While appreciating the completion of important infrastructural projects in 
Afghanistan, the Committee had recommended that lessons learnt from this experience 
should be suitably utilized in carrying out developmental projects elsewhere. The 
Committee had also desired to be apprised about additional fund requirements for 

31 
 
carrying out small, medium as well as large developmental projects in Afghanistan. The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry has once again given an incomplete 
reply without any updated information on status of new large scale projects and initiatives 
being taken for timely availability of funds in projects in Afghanistan. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that complete and updated repl y should be furnished on each point of 
recommendation so that a clear picture emerges and a better assessment of Ministry’s 
performance is facilitated. 
  
AUGMENTATION OF HUMAN CAPITAL IN MEA 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO.29) 
50. The Committee were aware of the persistent human resource crunch in the Ministry 
of External Affairs over the years. The Committee had noted that the sanctioned strength of the 
Ministry is 8951, while the working strength was  6859. The huge gap between the sanctioned 
and actual strength in the Ministry of External Affairs had led to vacancies in vital departments 
of the Ministry. Time and again, the Ministry had furnished the same justification that the gap 
was due to delay in  recruitment, which was beyond its control. In order to tide over this 
challenge of shortage in staff, the Ministry had taken various steps such as increasing indent with 
UPSC, reinforcing technical capacity by taking officers with domain expertise on depu tation 
from Line Ministries and Departments of Governments, engaging Consultants with expertise in 
various fields and placing indent with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC). 
 Taking serious cognizance of the vacant posts in the Ministry, the Committee found 
the steps taken by the Ministry as inadequate and half -hearted. In view of the increasing rate of 
diplomatic endeavours in development and economy and the pivotal role MEA has to play in our 
efforts to be a $5 trillion economy by 2024 -25, the Committ ee had exhorted upon the 
Government at the highest levels to consider the human resource requirements of MEA 
favourably and also direct Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) to fill up the enhanced number of direct rec ruitments on top priority basis. 
The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry should continue to create cadre/ induct 
expertise from other Ministries, academia, think tanks and the private sector, as needed to 
augment human resource with relevant domain expertise. 

32 
 
51. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has responded that 
augmentation of manpower in the Ministry is being undertaken in a concerted and systematic 
fashion through a combination of recruitment, promotion, deputation, outsourcing and placing 
indents with SSC/UPSC. In terms of recruitment, average annual intake of IFS officers through the 
Civil Services Exam increased by 16% during 2015 -18 in comparison with 2011 -14. (While 32 
officers were recruited annually on an average during 2011-14, the corresponding number for 2015-
18 was 37). Similarly, the average number of Assistant Section officers who joined the Ministry 
during the period 2013-14 almost doubled from 63 to 124 in 2015-17. Enhancement of manpower is 
also done through promotions from feeder cadres across levels and deputation of experts. At 
present, there are 48 officers from various Ministries in MEA on deputation who are deployed in 
different Divisions. 
52. Concerned about the persistent shortage of staff in the Ministry of External Affairs, 
the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should continue inducting expertise 
creating cadre from other Ministries, academia, think tanks and private sector. The 
Committee note that through a combination of recruitment, promotion, deputation, 
outsourcing and placing indents with SSC/UPSC the Ministry has undertaken concerted 
action on reducing the vacant posts. As recommended  previously, the Ministry should 
ensure that adequate and well -trained human resources are available for smooth 
functioning of the Ministry through a mix of these methods.   
 
PROTECTOR GENERAL OF EMIGRANTS (PGOE) 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 31) 
53. The Committee had note d that Protector General of Emigrant (PGoE) through 12 
Protector of Emigrant (PoE) Offices administers all operational matters related to emigration, 
provision of emigration services to emigrants and enforcement of Emigrant Act 1983. As a 
statutory authori ty under the Emigration Act 1983, the PGoE is primarily responsible for the 
welfare and protection of emigrant workers falling in the Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) 
category. With such a vast and critical mandate to fulfill, a measly allocation of Rs.  20.08 crore 
has been earmarked for BE 2020-21. The Committee had taken a serious view of the low priority 
being accorded to PGoE, post merger, as evident in the insignificant budgetary allocation. The 

33 
 
Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry p ay attention to PGoE and its offices by 
provisioning of adequate funds and human capital. The Ministry might also chalk out a roadmap 
with timelines for setting up more PoE offices and apprise the Committee about the progress 
made in his regard within three months. 
54. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that it would like to 
mention that thirteenth Protector of Emigrant (PoE) Office in Guwahati is in the process of being 
fully operationalised with the joining of acting Protector of Emigrants there. For opening of more 
PoE offices across all over the India, in state where PoE offices do not exist at present, Ministry 
has regularly conveyed its intention of opening of PoE offices in States/Union Territories. Till 
date, Odisha and Tripura have conveyed their consent for opening of PoE office in their states 
while Chhattisgarh and Arunachal Pradesh have replied that opening of a PoE office in their 
States is not felt necessary at present. The Standi ng Committee will be inform ed about further 
progress in this regard. 
55. As a consequence of the merger of erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(MoIA) with MEA, the office of the Protector General of Emigrant (P GoE) has become the 
responsibility of the latter. Based on the under-funding and under -staffing of Protector of 
Emigrant offices (PoEs) , the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to pay requisite 
attention to these offices through provisioning of adequate funds and human capital. The 
Committee had also asked the Ministry to draw a roadmap with fixed timelines for 
establishing more PoE offices. The Committee note that thirteenth PoE office  has been 
operationalized and states like Odisha and Tripura have shown interest in opening of PoE 
office in their respective states. The Ministry has , however,  remained silent on the 
Committee’s recommendation relating to augmentation of financial and human resources 
of PoE offices. The Committee once again urge the Ministry to desist from furnishing 
partial replies as it constrains their oversight functioning. The Committee, therefore, desire 
to be apprised about their earlier recommendation regarding measures for strengthening 
of PoE offices and progress made with regard to opening of PoE offices at the earliest.  
 
 
 

34 
 
WELFARE OF OVERSEAS INDIANS 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 32) 
56. The Committee were aware that various schemes and programmes are undertaken by 
the Ministry for protection and welfare of Overseas Indians. It was observed that schemes like 
India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF-OI), Study India Programme, Overseas 
Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) and Tracing the Roots Scheme had been closed between 2014 
and 2018. The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) acted as an effective instrument for engagement 
with our Diaspora. Th e Ministry had informed that in order to leverage the soft power of Indian 
Diaspora,it has been working to design appropriate and well -calibrated institutional responses. 
While tendering evidence before the Committee, the Foreign Secretary spelt out the ‘4  C’s 
approach of Government of India for engagement with the Indian Diaspora. These included 
Connect with India, Care for the safety and security, Celebrate with Diaspora and Contribute to 
India’s Development. 
 Keeping in mind the size, magnitude and depth  of our Diaspora across the globe, the 
Committee felt that the allocations made to various schemes and programmes for the welfare of 
Overseas Indians was uneven and inadequate. The Committee were hopeful that following the 
merger of MoIA and MEA, the engag ement with Overseas Indians would receive due impetus. 
Upon a close scrutiny of the schemes, programmes and activities relating to Overseas Indians, 
the Committee found that the Ministry’s assertion that highest priority had been given to 
Overseas Indian A ffairs, post merger, did not find corresponding resonance in the budgetary 
allocation. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the Ministry should 
constitute a working group to assess all schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians 
and apprise them about its outcome within six months. The Ministry should also ensure that 
requisite institutional, administrative and fiscal arrangements are made so that the objectives 
behind merger of the Ministries are achieved. 
 
57. The Ministry of  External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as per the 
Committee’s recommendation that Ministry should constitute a working group to assess all 
schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians and apprise them about its outcome 
within six months is duly noted. It is submitted that all schemes and program mes for welfare of 

35 
 
overseas Indians are regularly reviewed at the level of the Minister -in-Charge and necessary 
action taken to optimise their functioning. Some examples are: 
(i)  Study India Programme (SIP) was closed in 2016 given the similarity of SIP w ith 
KIP (Know India Programme); 
(ii)  The format of the PBD Convention was changed from annual to once in two 
years after 2015. PBD conferences were held in the interval between two conventions 
and their deliberations fed into the plenary sessions of the P BD Convention. This was 
done to make the convention more meaningful and give the diaspora a voice in policy 
making in Government of India; 
(iii) Videsh Sampark programme was started from the year 2017 as a part of MEA’s 
state outreach programme to promote in-depth dialogue between the Ministry and 
State Governments to design appropriate and well -calibrated institutional responses 
for Diaspora engagement and migration management; 
(iv) Modality of implementation of Media Campaign programme was changed from 
showing ads on various television channels, to roping in prominent personalities in 
different languages to promote safe and legal migration on social media; 
(v) Global Indian Students Portal is being developed to provide complete and 
comprehensive informatio n on educational facilities abroad to Indian Students 
wishing to pursue studies abroad; 
(vi) Know India Programme was revamped during FY 2015 -16 along with enhancing 
the budget allocation for the scheme. The enhancement of budget was made on 
account of increasing the number of KIP visits to India to 6 during one FY and due to 
addition of new element of Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY) as a special KIP. 
Besides, some new elements were also added in the KIP programme, like - Provide T-
Shirt to KIP Particip ants; Visit to Kingdom of Dreams, Gurgaon (Theme Park); 
Showcasing a Bollywood Movie and a visit to Film City, Noida for the participants.  
(vii) India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF -OI) was closed in 
March 31, 2018 to avoid duplication of  work and to enhance the efficiency of other 
schemes; 

36 
 
(viii) Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) was closed down with Cabinet 
approval on 30.3.2017 after functions related to promotion of investments by 
overseas Indians shifted to Department for Pro motion of Industry and Internal Trade 
(DPIIT) following merger of MOIA with MEA; 
(ix) Tracing the Roots Scheme was reviewed in 2016 -17 and closed down with 
EAM’s approval after it was observed that performance of the scheme was 
unsatisfactory with only 18 applications in 8 years; 
Thus it may be seen that Ministry is constantly assessing the performance, reviewing 
and carrying out necessary changes to all schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas 
Indians. This review is carried out at the level of the Minister-in-Charge through existing 
institutional, administrative and fiscal arrangements which are sufficient for the purpose. 
Thus, it is felt that creation of a parallel authority to carry out the same functions as are 
already being carried out by Minis try is not necessary, but rather would entail duplication of 
work. 
58. Upon examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2020 -21, the 
Committee discerned a pattern, wherein, budgetary allocation to most 
schemes/programmes related to welfare of  Overseas Indians has witnessed a 
progressive decline. After the merger of erstwhile MoIA with MEA, instead of 
according importance to this aspect, the Ministry has considerably downsized budgtary 
allocation to schemes/programmes directly impinging on welf are of overseas Indians.  
The Committee had , therefore,  recommended that the Ministry should constitute a 
working group to assess all schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians 
and apprise them about the outcome of its assessment  within six mon ths. In its Action 
Taken Reply, the Ministry has informed that all schemes and programmes for the 
welfare of overseas Indians are regularly reviewed at the level of the Minister -in-
Charge and necessary action is taken to optimize their functioning. The Min istry has 
also submitted that the creation of a parallel authority to carry out the same functions 
as are already being carried out by Ministry would entail duplication of work. In the 
view of the Committee, the Working Group is not a parallel authority but a mechanism 
within the Ministry to facilitate a comprehensive assessment . Hence an  assessment 

37 
 
study done by  such Group is not the duplication  of work rather it will only help in 
reorienting the focus of the schemes and programmes  for overseas Indians . The 
Ministry may , therefore, conduct an assessment study by a Working Group for a 
thorough review of all schemes and programmes and based on its outcome , make a 
compelling case for enhanced allocation under this head for the next Fiscal.  
AWARENESS/MEDIA CAMPAIGN 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 35) 
59. The Committee were displeased to note that the allocation under this head  has  been 
reduced from Rs. 11 crore in 2019-20 (BE) to Rs. 5 crore in 2020-21 (BE).  The budget under the 
sub-head had been almost halved at  a time when renewed efforts are required to spread 
awareness about safe and legal migration. The Committee had expressed their strong disapproval 
of the reduction being effected in such an important area of emigration. The Committee had 
noted that various  personalities have been approached for greater outreach of media awareness 
campaigns and shooting of the ads would commence during financial year 2020 -21. The 
involvement of famous personalities in the ad campaigns was a welcome step and the Ministry 
should seek funds at the RE stage for the advertisements. The Committee had also urged that the 
Ministry should carry out an impact assessment study of the awareness campaign and in the light 
of its findings, establish a formal mechanism for continuous monitor ing and evaluation of these 
campaigns. The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry proactively engage with the 
State Governments to deepen the impact of information and awareness campaigns. 
 
60. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Take n Reply, has stated that it carried out 
media campaign on safe and legal migration by bringing out ads on safe and legal migration on 
various TV Channels and newspaper ads.  The   ads were also disseminated on social media by 
using twitter and facebook. Fo llowing a directive, the ads were sent to the Advertisement 
Approval Cell (AAC) which had observed that ads could be prepared by involving prominent 
personalities in regional languages and disseminated through social media at minimum 
expenditure. Thereafte r, Ministry approached various prominent personalities in Hindi and 
regional languages for their support on gratis basis.  Prominent persons have already agreed for 
their support in Hindi and Five regional languages for Media Awareness Campaign on gratis 

38 
 
basis.  This resulted in economy of expenditure with due realisation of objective involving 
regional personalities to run an effective awareness campaign.   
61. The Ministry also stated that it is carrying out impact assessment study of the media 
awareness through Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), including its campaigns 
on social media.  The Recommendation of the Committee have been duly noted to establish a 
formal mechanism for continuous monitoring and evaluation of media awareness campaigns,  
after findings of the media assessment study by IIMC. Ministry has already engaged with 
State Governments to disseminate media awareness programme through electronic and print 
media either free or at the cost of the State Government.  Many State Governmen ts are doing 
the programme successfully to deepen the impact of information and awareness campaigns. 
The Ministry is following up with other States to disseminate media awareness programme.” 
 
62. Recognizing the importance of awareness campaign s in spreading awareness 
about safe and legal migration, the Committee had asked the Ministry to conduct an 
assessment study of the awareness campaigns and on the basis of its outcome, establish a 
formal monitoring and evaluation mechanism. The Committee ar e pleased to learn that 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) is conducting an impact assessment 
study of the media awareness including social media. The Ministry was also asked to 
actively engage with State Governments for dissemination of awarene ss programme s 
through electronic and print media. The Ministry  in this context has furnished a generic 
reply only. The Committee desire to be apprised about the findings of the assessment 
study once completed. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry  prepare a 
document on the specific measures taken by State Government s on awareness 
campaigns and furnish the same to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 37 ) 
ICCR’S  REGIONAL OFFICES 
63. The Committee were aware that ICCR is the nodal organization for the projection of 
India’s soft power abroad, and ever since its establishment in 1950, it has emerged as the 
principal governmental organization for our cultural engagement with the world and  for 

39 
 
promoting our culture in all its magnificence through various activities. The Committee were 
pleased to note that in BE 2020 -21, Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) had been 
provided with an enhanced allocation of Rs. 290 crore. The Ministry had specified that the 
increased allocation has been provisioned for opening of 3 Indian Cultural Centres at 
Washington, Tel Aviv, and Paris, expenditure on the deployment of Hindi Chairs abroad, 
Conference & Seminars and Celebration of IDY. It is hearteni ng to discern that there has been 
efficient utilization of funds by ICCR for the past three years. On a query raised by the 
Committee, the Ministry has informed that it is exploring the possibility of Partnership and PPP 
Models for ICCR where the partners also put in resources for executing projects. As a pre -
eminent organization of the Ministry of External Affairs, ICCR’s activities are spread across the 
globe ranging from providing scholarships to organizing exhibitions to performing arts and 
visuals arts  programme. In the opinion of the Committee, even the increased budgetary 
allocation provisioned to ICCR is not in consonance with its wide -ranging activities. It is 
understandable that as a not for profit and 100 percent grantee organization under the Min istry of 
External Affairs, there exist limits for ICCR’s ability to raise extra -budgetary resources to cater 
to its expansive activities. 
 Given the increasing salience of soft power projection in our Foreign Policy and the 
ICCR’s critical role in it, the Committee were of the considered view that the latter should have 
augmented financial and manpower resources. It was, therefore, recommended that the Ministry 
should prepare an annual roadmap for activities/programmes to be organized by ICCR along 
with the enhanced number of scholars and the role of ICCR within MEA in the pursuit of the $5 
trillion economy and on the basis of it seek additional financial allocation at the RE stage. The 
Committee had also desire that the Ministry should revisit the necessity  of having ICCR 
Regional Offices when Zonal Cultural Centres are in existence. 
64. In its Action Taken Reply the Ministry replied that ICCR has prepared its Annual Plan of 
Action for financial year 2020 -21 based on proposals received from Missions, Posts a nd ICCs 
overseas as well as programme/activities planned at ICCR headquarters and Regional offices. As 
recommended by Standing Committee, based on increased number of programmes / activities, as 
planned, Ministry strive for sufficient funds at RE 2020 -21 s tage based on robust quarterly 
expenditure patterns Mandates of Zonal Cultural Centres of the Ministry of Culture (MoC) and 
Regional Offices of ICCR are not same, reason why existence of Regional Offices was 

40 
 
necessitated. While mandate of MoC’s Zonal Cultural Centres is to promote culture within India, 
identify the artists and artisans and promote their work, create data -base of the cultural wealth 
available in India, mandate of ICCR’s Regional Offices is primarily (a) to ensure smooth 
implementation of ICC R administered scholarship schemes and (b) promote cultural exchange 
between India and other countries. Both these functions are not part of mandate of MoC’s Zonal 
Cultural Centres. 
 It is also pointed out that originally ICCR was under the administrative control the then 
Ministry of Education and was/is the nodal organization for attending to matters related to welfare 
of the foreign students studying in India, for which originally the Regional Offices were 
established. ICCR was transferred to Ministry of External Affairs primarily because its mandate 
included focus on exchange between India and other countries and fostering and strengthening 
relations between India and other countries through cultural and educational exchanges. Role of 
ICCR’s Regional Offi ces was necessitated for taking the outreach of this exchange beyond Delhi 
to all parts of India and taking the cultural wealth of various parts of India to the world. 
65. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the allocation made to ICCR were 
not in proportion to its expansive mandate and activities. The Committee had , therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry should take appropriate steps to augment its financial and 
human resources.  The Ministry was also asked to revisit the necessity of having both ICCR 
Regional Offices and Zonal Cultural Centres. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has 
submitted that ICCR has prepared Annual Plan of Action for financial year 202 0-21 based 
on proposals received from Missions, Posts and ICCs overseas as well as 
programme/activities planned at ICCR headquarters and r egional offices. The Committee 
note that the mandate of Ministry of Culture’s Zonal Cultural Centres and ICCR’s 
Regional Offices is distinct. While the former seeks to promote culture within India, 
identify the artists and artisans and promote their work, create data -base of the cul tural 
wealth available in India, the  mandate of ICCR’s R egional Offices is primarily concerned 
with promoting cultural exchange between India and other countries.  Noting the distinct 
mandate of the Regional Offices and Zonal Councils, the Committee would urge the 
Ministry to undertake an impact assessment study of these two mech anisms and also work 
on chalking out an annual plan of activities that can intensify India’s soft power outreach 
to other countries. 

41 
 
ICCR CULTURAL CENTRES 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.38) 
66. The Committee had observed that with the larger objective of promoting awareness 
and appreciation of India’s rich cultural heritage, the ICCR currently operates 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres across the globe. These Centres were instruments of India’s cultural outreach abroad and 
project our soft power through a wide range of cul tural, academic and intellectual activities. The 
Committee were satisfied to learn that after the much delayed establishment of cultural Centres 
in two significant places like Washington and Paris both the Centres were expected to be 
completed and become operational by the middle of financial year 2020 -21. The Committee had 
therefore desired that the Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are operationalized positively 
this year and a Cultural Centre of ICCR should be opened in Gulf region. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the developments in that regard. 
 
67. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has furnished the following 
information in this regard as under:- 
“Renovation of U-Street property, Washington 
 Being a heritage building, permission of local authorities is required for undertaking 
renovations in the property. The completion of work is expected till June 2021. 
Renovation of SVCC, Paris 
 The renovation work was to be undertaken through separate contractors for various 
works awarded in May 2018. In February 2019, Mission was informed that one of the 
contractors, M/s. Lacroix, entrusted with civil works was declared bankrupt. Since other 
contractors’ work would follow the civil works, in absence of civil works, the work at the 
site stopped. Judicial Administrator ordered M/s. SPID to undertake the remaining work of 
M/s. Lacroix. The proposal is under active consideration of the Ministry. 
 
68. ICCR’s cultural Centres are the principal instruments of India’s institutional 
cultural outreach. Notwithstanding this fact, the absence of Cultural Centres in two global 
cultural hubs – Washington and Paris – and the Gulf region is intriguing. Regarding the 
status of Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris , the Ministry has informed that 
renovation of the property in the former is expected to be completed by June 2021 while 

42 
 
the renovation of SVCC, Paris has been halted due to bankruptcy of contractor and the 
proposal for completion of  civil works by another contractor is still under consideration 
of the Ministry . The Ministry has not responded on issue of opening up of Cultural 
Centres in the Gulf region. The Committee strongly recommend that the renovation work 
of Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris should not be further delayed and completed 
expeditiously. The Ministry should also chalk out a plan for opening of Cultural Centres 
in the Gulf region with fixed timelines and apprise the Committee about the same.  
FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGY 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 40) 
69. In the light of our deepening bilateral, regional and multilateral engagements, the 
Committee felt that the absence of a formalized policy document covering all aspects of our 
foreign policy was surprising. The Ministry had asserted that t he practice of diplomacy required 
flexibility in order to respond to rapid shifts and unexpected developments in the global foreign 
policy environment. The Committee had noted that the Policy Planning and Research Division of 
the Ministry along with its ne twork of autonomous bodies like Indian Council of World Affairs 
and Research and Information Systems, think tanks and academic collaborations provided a well 
organized mechanism for the purpose of Policy Planning and Research in foreign affairs. Over 
the y ears the Committee had been exhorting the Ministry to spell out India’s grand strategy 
encapsulating the dynamism in short term, medium term and long term objectives of our foreign 
policy. The Committee were of the considered view that the grand foreign po licy strategy would 
also bolster the case for enhanced allocation by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee had, 
therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
take all requisite institutional as well intellectual steps to spell out a coherent and balanced Grand 
Foreign Policy strategy for India on priority basis. 
 
70. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that while no 
single overarching and formalized policy document can capture all aspects of India’s foreign 
policy, the underlying principles of India’s diplomatic strategy are long -established and 
enduring. These include safeguarding India’s sovereignty and security, enabling India’s domestic 
economic transformation, and building influence in global forums through bilateral, multilateral 
and regional efforts.  

43 
 
Indian foreign policy and diplomatic actions must also be agile and responsive to the 
imperatives of the time and to changing circumstances. India is today an emerging power and a 
large economy with an impressive track record of growth. Aligning our actions with the national 
objectives of promoting 3 Ts - Trade, Tourism and Technology is one of our major obj ectives. 
This has been broken down to specific tactical measures that promote diversification of supply 
chains, foreign investment flows, Indian exports (some thrust areas being: agri products, 
automobiles, textiles, garments, consumer durable industries, e-commerce, yoga and AYUSH), 
virtual tourism, frontline technologies (some thrust areas being: tele -education, tele -medicine) 
and link up start-ups with foreign markets.  
A number of other strategic objectives guide executive action. Strengthening and expa nding 
connectivity in the neighbourhood, which acts as force multipliers to accelerate regional growth 
and development, promote people -to-people contact and encourage trade and commerce, is one 
such strategic goal. Other strategic goals include supporting Indian companies through 
leveraging  Indian developmental assistance projects, generation of employment opportunities 
abroad especially in health care and digital domains, supporting the  pharma  and healthcare 
sectors with their competitive advantages in generics, APIs, biologics, clinical research and 
equipment, enhance global energy partnerships in renewable energy, clean tech, energy 
efficiency, and petroleum and natural gas, promoting India as preferred destination of higher 
learning, promotion of Indi a digital platforms and working with state governments to develop 
export strategies based on its sector competitiveness and material and human resource strengths.  
The pandemic, which is the greatest shock to the international system since World War II, 
has created severe disruptions. The Ministry of External Affairs is at the forefront of the 
management of the external aspects of this crisis. It has tried to align its response to the well -
established parameters of its long -term diplomatic strategy and to t he more contemporary 
compulsions of the pandemic.  Some of these long -term objectives include assisting like minded 
nations through development assistance in the form of medical aid or pharmaceutical supplies; 
enhancing our global economic profile as a man ufacturer by exporting critical medications; and 
tending to the needs of overseas Indians and the diaspora through initiatives such as Vande 
Bharat. 

44 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs, through Vande Bharat, has worked on the return of over 5 
lakh Indians in an extremely complex and demanding logistical operation by land, sea and air. 
This operation involved multiple agencies including Air India, the Navy, foreign carriers, 
chartered flight carriers land movement authorities. The Ministry has also delivered CO VID 
related medical supplies to over 100 countries and deployed Rapid Response Teams to 8 nations 
by leveraging its global network.  
Diplomatic activity has adapted to changing times by using virtual and digital platforms. 
Prime Minister and External Affai rs have initiated and participated in a very large number of 
multilateral and bilateral digital interactions.  
The Government continuously  assesses and refines its diplomatic stance and policies in 
response to evolving global challenges and opportunities w hich have a bearing on India’s short, 
medium and long term interests. In the last 5 years, India’s proactive diplomacy and rising global 
stature has been reflected in its pivotal role in shaping the global agenda on an array of issues. 
Relations with our neighbours have been given the highest priority (Neighbourhood First policy), 
with emphasis on greater connectivity, stronger cooperation and broader contacts. Ministry’s 
external outreach has been aligned with Indian developmental priorities. The objective s of 
attracting foreign investment, including for infrastructure development and infusion of 
technology and best practices for advancing India’s development programmes such as Make in 
India, Skill India, Digital India, Smart Cities, Swachh Bharat, Namami G ange, AMRUT, have 
been at the forefront of all high-level exchanges.  
Indian diplomatic strategy, both in response to contemporary realities and more long -term 
trends is articulated, in accordance with custom, precedent, law and parliamentary rules, in 
documents that are available in the public domain. The Annual Report of the Ministry that 
contains a comprehensive statement of policies followed in the diplomatic sphere and their 
implementation is tabled in Parliament. Public statements by the Minister of External Affairs, the 
Ministers of State in the Ministry and officials of the Ministry of External Affairs which are 
collated on the website of the Ministry of External Affairs are also utilized to articulate Indian 
diplomatic and foreign policy objectives.  This is supplemented by other diplomatic documents 
which contain public expression of foreign policy priorities. This is in accordance with 
international practice as followed by the foreign offices of major powers.  

45 
 
The Government policy of simultaneous e ngagement with all major powers; new and more 
intensive orientation towards the Indo-Pacific, strengthening in relations with West Asia, Central 
Asia and Gulf regions and upgradation in the scale of India’s vision for relations with African, 
Latin American and East European countries are all reflective of a more energetic, directed and 
focused approach.  
The Government continues to proactively reach out and rescue Indians stranded in situations 
of crises and conflict across different regions. The outreach t o the Indian diaspora, rekindling 
their sense of belonging to India and enlisting their support to achieving national objectives, also 
continues. 
It has to be kept in mind that the practice of diplomacy requires to be flexible. The current 
global foreign policy environment is characterized by rapid shifts and unexpected developments, 
that transcend boundaries of land and water. Agility, in policy terms, is required to respond to 
these swift developments.  
It is again submitted that the current practice of a rticulating strategies as described above 
allows the articulation of foreign policy within the parameters set by law, practice and the rules 
of parliamentary democracy while allowing clarity, consistency and, where necessary, the 
required flexibility. 
71.  Over the years in their DFG Reports, the Committee have been strongly urging 
that the Ministry should articul ate a cogent and comprehensive g rand foreign policy 
strategy as a guiding framework for our bilateral, regional and multilateral 
engagements. The Ministry in its action taken replies have justified the absence of an 
overarching framework on grounds of imparting flexibility and fluidity to our foreign 
policy. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the Ministry’s response has been  
too general. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should conduct a comparative study of countries’ grand strategy . Based on 
such a study, the Ministry should justify the ra tionale for not spelling out a g rand 
foreign policy d ocument/strategy. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
outcome of such a study at the earliest.   
  

46 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee note that since 2015 the Ministry of External Affairs has been 
practicing a purposeful and well defined policy of Diplomacy for Development. They also note 
that in the General Budget, 2019 -20, the Government has announced its initiation of making 
India a $5 trillion economy by 202 4-25. The Foreign Secretary when asked about the role of 
Ministry of External Affairs in the scheme of things and steps taken to make this goal a reality, 
enumerated several measures the Ministry is taking/intending to take in tandem with other 
ministries/departments of Government of India. Over the years, the Ministry of External Affairs 
has been acting as a facilitator for various Line Ministries in achievement of economic targets. 
Through its development cooperation/ assistance programme and Investment P romotion and 
Publicity Programme, the Ministry has been instrumental in facilitating the cause of Indian 
economic diplomacy abroad. 
 Having extensively considered across the board challenging requirements of the goal 
of becoming a US$ 5 trillion economy by  2024-25 and the efforts being put by MEA as of now 
as their contribution towards realization of this goal, the Committee strongly feel that MEA 
could do more with better allocation of resources in this regard. In the globalised era the foreign 
policy elem ents and the economic policy elements are two sides of the same coin. What the 
Ministry is required to do immediately is to come up with a clear -cut foreign policy woven with 
the strands of economic policy. It is but imperative that the Ministry expand its  activities in the 
economic realm and play a proactive and pivotal role in India’s vision of becoming a US$ 5 
trillion dollar economy. The Committee understand that it is a challenging task which may 
require strengthening of existing division with appropri ate human resources and adequate 
budgetary allocation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing Committee, in its Recommendation No. 1, has required 
the Ministry to come up with a clear cut foreign policy woven with the strands of economic 
policy. It further states that it is imperative that the Ministry expand its activities in the economic 
realm and play a proactive and pivotal role in India’s vision of becoming a US$ 5 Trillion 
economy. To this end, some of the key initiatives planned to be under taken by the Ministry in 
this regard are enumerated as below.  
 
 
 

47 
 
 
I.  MEA’s Economic Diplomacy for Facilitating Trade and Investments: 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs will leverage its diplomatic resources for achieving the defined 
trade and investment goals. It will systematically involve the missions across the world to reach 
out to business and economic stakeholders. The MEA, in consu ltations with the Line Ministries, 
will enhance involvement and engagement of Missions for increasing trade and investment.  
 
Coordination and Liaison with DPIIT: The MEA liaises closely with DPIIT for success of the 
GOI’s flagship programs including ‘Make  in India’ and ‘Access India’ initiatives. The Ministry 
is also working closely with the DPIIT to formulate a plus one strategy, to pitch India as the 
preferred alternative for low cost manufacturing in the region. The Ministry will liaise closely 
with DPI IT and Invest India to disseminate opportunities for investment in India, encourage 
greater collaboration of Indian businesses with foreign investors, explore opportunities for 
technological collaboration and work on development and promotion of start-up ecosystems. 
 
Market Expansion & Investment Promotion Activities:  The Ministry will be coordinating 
with its Missions/Posts, setting short -term and long -term goals for the Three Ts highlighted by 
the PM: Trade, Tourism and Technology. All efforts are made to  allocate sufficient budget to 
this end under MEA’s Market Expansion Activities Budget. 
 
Website and Global Mapping of Resources: The Ministry is also working to launch its website 
“indbiz.gov.in”. The website aims to be a one -stop source of all information on Indian economy 
and business environment in India for foreign enterprises, as well as Indian businesses going 
abroad and for Indian Missions and Posts. 
 
Public Proc urement: The Ministry has been working in close coordination with our 
Missions/Posts abroad to garner detailed information on public procurement policies of various 
countries, to aid the Indian businesses in identifying opportunities for public tendering a vailable 
in different countries. 
 
Sectoral Group of Secretaries (SGOS): The Ministry of External Affairs is a part of the 
Sectoral Group of Secretaries (SGOS) on Economy and Resources, and is participating 
extensively in ongoing deliberations on the strate gies to achieve the GOI’s target of a US$ 5 
Trillion Economy.  
 
II.  Enhancing Development Partnership: 
 
Development Partnership with Africa: The MEA will be enhancing the reach and magnitude 
of India’s Development Partnership with Africa, under the Fourth  India-Africa Forum Summit 
(IAFS-4) through Lines of Credit (LOC), Grant assistance, Small Development Projects (SDP), 
Technical Consultancy, Disaster Relief and Humanitarian aid, as well as capacity -building 
programmes. 
 
Third Country Development Partnerships: As a part of its development partnerships, the 
MEA will be partnering with countries for projects in third countries, between 2019 and 2024. 

48 
 
 
Capacity building in Human resources : This will be done through the Africa -wide online 
projects (2019-24) in phases, including - Tele medicine and Tele -education: e-Vidya Bharati & 
e-Arogya Bharati.  
 
III.  Increasing Connectivity with Immediate Neighbours:  The Ministry will continue to 
focus on enhancing connectivity with neighboring countries especially Bangladesh, Myanmar, 
Bhutan and Nepal, including roads, rail, inland waterways, shipping, energy and airlinks. These 
include: Motor Vehicle Agreement with Bangladesh;  Finalization of SOPs for use of 
Chattogram and Mongla ports for movement of Indian goods;  Initiating a coordinated and 
connected bus service with Myanmar from Imphal to Mandalay;  India -Bangladesh Friendship 
pipeline project;  early completion of the Akhaura-Agartala Rail link; completion of work on the 
8 Integrated Check Points to improve border trade facilities with Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh, 
and; establishment of new Border Haats (Markets) with Bangladesh, Myanmar and China. 
 
IV. Partnering with States for Greater Outreach & Economic Engagement: Provide 
enhanced funding under (a) “State Facilitation Abroad” Fund –  allocated to Indian Missions/ 
Posts abroad for undertaking ‘state specific activities’ to enhance the external outreach; and (b) 
“State Facilitation Knowledge Support” Fund – that is available to Branch Secretariats, Regional 
Passport Offices and Passport Offices to undertake ‘state specific activities’. State -specific 
promotional strategies have been devised and deployed by the  Missions to encourage promotion 
of exports, and inbound tourism. 
 
V. Sector-Specific initiatives: Matching Complementarities: Increased push for 
negotiation of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs), Air Services Agreements (ASAs), Double 
Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs) and, Social Security Agreements (SSAs). 
 
VI.  Engagement with Multilateral Institutions: India’s multilateral economic engagements in 
G20, BRICS, IBSA, Development Banks etc. are important mechanisms for developing common 
understanding with other partner countries on fiscal, monetary, financial, taxation, anti -
corruption, customs issues. Efforts are also made at these fora to reduce the cost of trade, 
remittances, investments etc. that has positive effect. These mechanisms result in stre ngthening 
the global financial stability, which, in turn results in our economic growth. 
 
VII.       Mitigation of the Economic Impact of COVID -19: As a part of the Aatma Nirbhar 
Bharat Initiative, the MEA has been working in collaboration with its Missions to chalk out a 
detailed strategy to increase exports of India’s goods and services in other countries. MEA is 
working to identify the areas and countries where our manufacturers have the potential to emerge 
as the low -cost preferred alternative for imports. Missions are providing us with detailed inputs 
on the Non -Tariff Barriers being faced by Indian exporters in their respective countries of 
accreditation. The Missions are also worki ng to identify newer lines of goods and services as 
well as new destinations where India’s exports can be enhanced. In order to identify and plug in 
the immediate gaps in the global supply chains, the Missions, in collaboration with the MEA and 
DPIIT, are already in the process of exploring sourcing and export opportunities in various 
countries and to guide our exporters by putting potential suppliers and buyers in touch with our 
EPCs and Industry and also facilitate B2B meetings for them. The MEA is workin g in close 

49 
 
collaboration with the concerned line ministries for expanding our agri -exports to at least 15 
focus countries. For this we are in the process of developing ‘country -specific export strategies’, 
based on the inputs received from the Missions in the focus countries, as well as the 
recommendations made by the concerned Ministries and Departments. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the 
year 2020 -21, the Committee observe that as against a demand of Rs 23657.76 crore, an 
allocation of Rs. 17346.71 crore has been made. The given budgetary allocation is 3% less than 
BE 2019-20 allocation and 0.15% less than RE 2019 -20allocation. Even in terms of percenta ge, 
MEA’s share in the total Government of India expenditure has come down to 0.57%. In view of 
the expanding mandate and global footprint of India, the reduction in allocation to MEA at both 
RE 2019 -20 and BE 2020 -21 stage is beyond comprehension. Further more, the Ministry has 
apprised the Committee that no reason has been furnished by the Ministry of Finance for 
diminished allocation for BE 2020 -21. The Ministry has informed that due to reduction in funds 
disbursal in the last fiscal, the Ministry had to undertake re-assessment of fund requirements for 
various heads in order to ensure that ongoing projects, schemes and programmes are not 
adversely impacted. 
 In the considered opinion of the Committee, the underfunding of the Ministry of 
External Affairs wi ll invariably lead to undermining of our foreign policy objectives. Taking a 
serious view of this issue and considering foreign policy as one of the Government’s top priority, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Government of India should reconsider and enhance 
the allocation to MEA by at least nearly 20 per cent than what it is being provisioned now so that 
it can be commensurate with India’s burgeoning global outreach and engagement. The Ministry 
of External Affairs is urged to identify priority hea ds to suitably incorporate the enhancement in 
allocation and seek additional requirement of funds at the RE 2020 -21 stage so that lack of 
financial resources does not hinder the conduct of Indian foreign policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In reference to the  Sitting of the Hon’ble Standing Committee on External Affairs on 27 
February 2020, the Committee had instructed Ministry to provide a note with justification for 
further increase in the BE 2020-21 allocation from the allocation of Rs. 17346.71cr announced in 
the Union Budget 2020 -21. Ministry has already submitted the detailed note after taking note of 
the recommendation.  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 

50 
 
 (Recommendation No 4) 
 In their previous Demand for Grants Reports, the Committee had exhorted the 
Ministry to incorporate the idea of zero -based budgeting for drawal of budgetary demands. The 
Committee note that the overarching principles of zero -based budgeting is a guiding factor in the 
continuous evaluation and assessment of budgetary allocation as against fund utilization in 
Ministry’s budget management. The Committee are happy to learn and appreciate about the 
development of a rigorous mechanism of Quarterly Budget Management Meetings, where 
detailed exercise for head-wise evaluation of projects and evolving needs under various heads of 
Technical and Economic Cooperation as well as on the Non -Scheme section are undertaken. 
Furthermore, the Ministry has been scrupulously adhering to all instructions contained in various 
Circulars of Ministry of Finan ce relating to economy measures, rationalization of expenditure, 
etc and as a result, annual budget utilization has improved significantly. A fact that needs to be 
appreciated. However, despite the existence of a credible and meticulous budgetary planning 
process undertaken by the MEA and almost perfect spending of the allocated budget, the 
persistent mismatch between budgetary demand and budgetary allocation appears puzzling. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should continue making sust ained efforts 
towards projecting a rigorous, objective and realistic demand by incorporating the idea of zero 
based budgeting and on this basis make a positive case before the Ministry of Finance for 
provisioning of requisite funds at the RE and supplementary grants stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has taken full note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Members.  The 
principle of zero -based budgeting continues to guide the continuous evaluation and assessment 
of budgetary requirements under different heads, including our development partnership projects. 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it would continue to engage with the 
Ministry of Finance at all levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in its 
pursuits. The Ministry will also continue to make efforts to convince Ministry of Finance of its 
budgetary demands at the RE and supplementary grants stages justified by efficient utilization of 
funds and objective assessment of anticipated expenditures, in line with the Hon’ble 
Committee’s recommendation. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 6) 
 The Committee observe that in terms of distribution, about 43 % of MEA’s budget is on 
Scheme side and about 57 % on the Non -Scheme. The Scheme section primarily comprises of 
Technical and Economic Cooperation with other countries, which is a central plank of our 
diplomatic outreach. The Committee further observe that there has been a marginal decrease in 
allocation under this head during BE 2019 -20. In its queries on the issue, the Ministry has stated 

51 
 
that the slightly reduced allocation in BE 2020 -21 (Rs. 7449.65 crores) is still much higher than 
the allocations made in 2018-19 (Rs. 5985.05 crores) and in previous years. The Committee find 
the justification offered by the Ministry unconvincing. The Committee also note that the 
expenditure under the Scheme s ection  is closely monitored and funds are released on the basis 
of progress reports of the implementation of programmes and schemes. The Ministry has also 
informed that as a result of intensive monitoring and review of technical aid and development 
projects in the past year, several new initiatives and projects have been identified in consultation 
with the concerned beneficiary host governments. 
 The Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should continue making persistent efforts to pursue the Ministry of Finance to facilitate a better 
appreciation of our technical and development cooperation and associated fund requirements. 
The Ministry may also apprise the Committee about the various new initiatives and projects once 
it gets crystallized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry accords utmost priority towards effective and secure budgetary allocation & 
utilisation under Technical & Economic Cooperation. The budgetary resource prioritization and 
allocation by the Ministry is aligned, both towards Aid commitments by the Government as well 
as based on efficient utilization of the allocated budgetary resources to the Ministry.   The 
allocations for various Aid heads are done through careful prioritization within avail able 
resources & with priority that none of our developmental work suffers any setback and all our 
commitments are implemented smoothly and speedily. Reallocations at RE stage are carried out 
to cater to spending needs based on reassessed needs at RE stage  based on physical progress by 
identifying savings, wherever possible, after undertaking a realistic spending assessment based 
on project implementation cycles, local conditions and physical progress. Hence, budgetary 
allocation process is dynamically reassessed through the financial year with the sole objective of 
effective & outcome-based technical & development cooperation programme. 
 
 Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it would continue to engage 
with the Ministry of Finance at all  levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the 
Ministry in its pursuits and also keep Honourable committee apprised about the various new 
initiatives and projects. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 7)  
 The Committee are pleased to note the optimal and even expenditure pattern of MEA 
for the financial year 2019 -20. On a thorough scrutiny of the utilization pattern of budgetary 
allocation during 2019-20, the Committee found that the Ministry has already ut ilized 83.77% of 
RE 2019-20 allocation. The Committee note that with continuous persuasion by the Committee 

52 
 
the Ministry has developed a mechanism to ensure optimal utilization of budgetary resources 
during each quarter of the financial year and the expend iture is being closely and regularly 
monitored by the Financial Advisor in consultation with Divisional Heads, through quarterly 
expenditure review meetings. The Ministry has also informed the Committee about new 
instructions issued by the Ministry of Fina nce regarding limiting of expenditure in the last 
quarter to only 25% of BE. Further the March spending has also been curtailed to a maximum 
10% from the previous ceiling of 15%. The Committee are happy to learn that due to timely 
utilization and re -appropriation the Ministry will be able to present a convincing result sheet 
before the Ministry of Finance for a better appreciation of their future requirement of funds. The 
Committee also hope that the Ministry will also abide by the new ceiling of 10% for Ma rch 
spending. 
 The Committee are appreciative of the balanced and prudent utilization pattern of 
MEA for RE 2019-20 and urge that it should keep up the good performance in the last quarter of 
2019-20 and in the new financial year. Such an expenditure trend  will yield three benefits, that 
is, lead to timely progress of physical projects and targets, assist in making a strong case for 
increased allocation and also bolster our international credibility. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry appreciates the positive response of the committee and will continue to 
make more efforts in this direction to realize credible budgetary demands justified by past 
efficient utilization of funds and objective assessment of anticipated expendit ures based on 
implementation progress, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to further 
improve budgetary assessment, management and utilization. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation under the sub -head ‘Passport 
and Emigration’ has decreased from Rs. 1620.95 crore in BE 2019-20 to Rs. 1604.39 crore at RE 
2019-20 to Rs. 1348.59 crore during BE 2020 -21. The Committee note that the sub - head 
‘Protector General of Emigrant’ (PGoE) has been brought under this head and a new sub -head 
‘Welfare of Overseas Indians’ has been opened under this head w.e.f. FY2019-20. It is 
disconcerting to find that despite the inclusion of two significant sub -heads, namely Protector 
General of Emigrant and Welfare of Overseas Indian Affairs under this minor head, budgetary 
cuts have been effected. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should provide 
requisite funds under such a critical minor -head, part icularly after the merger of erstwhile 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and Ministry of External Affairs. Moreover, in view of the 
significant contribution of revenue from the passport and visa services to the Consolidated Fund 
of India, sufficient inve stment in improving passport and visa service delivery is essential. The 
Committee, therefore, also recommend that the Ministry should seek additional funds for this 

53 
 
minor head that directly impinges on public services delivery and welfare of our Overseas 
Indians. The Committee desire that a Videsh Bhawan may be established in every state capital on 
the lines of the one set up in Mumbai. These Videsh Bhawans should be the umbrella 
organization in each state for providing public services relating to all acti vities of MEA. In view 
of the compelling need of such institutions in the states, the Committee desire that Videsh 
Bhawans in all state capitals may be set up within a period of 18months. 
Reply of the Government 
Built on the pillar of cooperative federalis m, Videsh Bhawan is conceived as an 
integrated MEA office which houses all MEA offices such as RPO, Branch Secretariat, POE and 
ICCR regional office in States under one roof.  The offices would have a multi -dimensional 
approach and serve several stakeholde rs by acting as a bridge between States and foreign 
Governments; supporting local businessmen in furthering their interests abroad;  liaising and 
extending support to NRIs in need etc. The Committee’s recommendation has been duly noted 
and the Ministry has taken steps to seek Cabinet approval for setting up Videsh Bhawans in state 
capitals, within identified timelines.  
 
The current status of the integrated “Videsh Bhawans” is as follows: 
 
City Status 
Mumbai Already Established and Inaugurated 
Bhopal Construction in Progress. Expected to be completed by end 2020. 
Lucknow, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Bengaluru 
Renovation/ expansion work in progress. Expected to be completed in 
2020/2021. 
Chennai, Kolkata, 
Ranchi 
Design work completed/ nearing completion 
Hyderabad Boundary wall constructed. 
Amaravati Land Acquired 
Dehradun, 
Srinagar, Guwahati 
State Governments requested to allot alternate/ additional plot of land 

54 
 
Remaining State/ 
UT capitals 
Request for Land Allotment made 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 12) 
 The Committee note that against a sanctioned strength of 2,697, the actual working 
strength of the Central Passport Office (CPO) cadre is 1,821 as on 1February, 2020. Shortage of 
personnel in CPO has been stated as a constraining fa ctor in expansion of the Passport Seva 
Project. It is observed that there are 876 posts which are lying vacant in various grades in CPO. 
As per the Ministry, the difficulty in filing up the vacant posts stems from the extant Recruitment 
Rules. Direct recruitment is possible only in grades of Office Assistant, Junior Passport Assistant 
(JPA) Stenographers, Junior Translator and Assistant Superintendent. The Ministry has placed 
indents for 310 with the Staff Selection Commission since 2017 for recruitment in these grades. 
Further, the Ministry has engaged 361 Data Entry Operators and 60 Office Assistant (MTS) 
through Outsourced Service Provider. The Committee notice that a proposal for physical 
inspection and staffing study of CPO by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of 
Expenditure has been sent to Ministry of Finance in November, 2019. 
 The issue of human resource crunch has been a major area of concern and has been 
part of the Committee’s recommendations over the years. Taking serious cognizance of this 
matter, the Committee would strongly recommend that the Ministry should take up this issue 
with Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) at the highest level and ensure that the 
vacant positions are filled up in the shortest possible time. The Ministry should also apprise the 
Committee about the outcomes of the interaction with DoPT. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As advised by the Committee, the Ministry has written to Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT) drawing the attention to th e shortage of manpower in the Central Passport 
Organization (CPO) and requesting them to urgently fill up the vacant posts, which have been 
indented to the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) from time to time where direct recruitment is 
available as per exta nt Recruitment Rules. DoPT has also been requested to expedite conduct of 
Limited Departmental Competitive Examination by SSC to fill up the earmarked posts of Junior 
Passport Assistant (JPA), Senior Passport Assistant (SPA) and Assistant Superintendent from the 
respective feeder posts being one of the modes of recruitment as per extant Recruitment Rules.  
 Recently, 87 dossiers were provided by the SSC against the indented vacancies of JPA 
for the year 2017.  Out of these, 28 candidates have since joined t he CPO and the remaining are 
expected to join soon. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 

55 
 
(Recommendation No 13) 
 The Committee observe that the allocation for construction of South Asian University 
(SAU) has been kept at Rs. 325 crore for BE 2020 -21 which is less than BE 2019- 20 allocation 
and more than RE 2019 -20 allocation. The Committee note that there are two budget heads that 
cater to SAU, namely Operational Expenditure and Capital Expenditure. While the operational 
expenditure part of the budget is met through contributions from the Member States, the capital 
budget is met fully by the Government of India. The Committee observe that except India, no 
country has made any contribution for SAU under Phase II. Regarding the construction of the 
SAU campus, th e Committee note that Package I has been completed; Package II and Package 
III are expected to be completed by 2020 and clearances relating to Package IV are under 
process. 
 Expressing disapproval and disappointment with the undue delay in the construction  
work of South Asian University Campus, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
should accord highest priority for timely construction and completion of the South Asian 
University project by ensuring that Package II and III are completed by 2020  and necessary 
clearances for Package IV are obtained at the earliest. The Committee also desire to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard at regular intervals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Package I has been completed.  Packages II and III are expected to be completed  by 
December 2020. 
 
 As regards Package IV, concerted and sustained efforts are being made by the university as 
well as the Ministry for approval of revised DPR, clearance of forest land pockets and tree 
cutting permission from For est Department and expeditious conclusion of court cases. The 
construction project is handled by the university itself. Ministry provides the finances and 
monitors the project through regular meetings with the university authorities.  The Ministry 
accords high priority for timely completion of the South Asian University project. 
 
 Quarterly Progress Reports on SAU construction project are being sent to the LS 
Secretariat regularly for updating the esteemed Committee on the progress of work. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 12) 
 After the approval of Nalanda University Act, 2010 by the Parliament, the Cabinet 
Committee for Economic Affairs has approved financial support of Rs. 2727.10 crore for 
Nalanda University. Despite the time overr un in the initial stage, the Ministry has submitted that 
there is steady progress both in terms of physical structure of the campus as well as academic 
programmes. It is observed that a Project Monitoring Committee has been established to monitor 

56 
 
and evalu ate project progress and quality of construction. It is disheartening to know that no 
contributions have been received from the partner countries during the past three years. The 
Ministry has informed that the matter of voluntary financial contributions ha ve been taken up 
with respective Governments through concerned Indian Missions abroad. 
 
As an international institution of national importance for pursuit of intellectual, philosophical 
and historical studies, the Committee find that the inordinate delay in completion of Nalanda 
University is highly unfortunate. The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
draw a clear roadmap with fixed timelines for completion of the project and adhere to the same. 
The Ministry should also pro -actively pursue the issue of foreign voluntary contributions with 
partner countries at all levels. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendations of the esteemed Committee have been noted. The academic and 
administrative wings of the university have since moved to the new campus and functioning from 
there. All efforts are being made to ensure that Packages still under constructions are completed by 
their targeted dates. The matter regarding voluntary foreign contribution is being pursued. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 17) 
 On the basis of data furnished by the Ministry, the Committee observe a decline in 
allocation under the head ‘Technical and Economic Cooperation’ pertaining to our 
neighbourhood. Barring two sub -heads i.e. ‘Aid to Bangladesh’ and ‘A id to Nepal’, there has 
been a reduction in allocation for development cooperation to South Asian countries. Such a 
situation is all the more appalling in the light of increasing Chinese presence in providing 
assistance and undertaking development projects  in various countries under the ‘Belt and Road 
Initiative’. The Committee note that in order to deal with this challenge, the Ministry has been 
extending GoI Lines of Credit (LoC) on concessional terms to 64 countries of Asia, Africa, Latin 
America, Caribb ean, Oceania and Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). While 
appreciating such extensive LoCs, the Committee are of the view that much more needs to be 
done for positioning India as an emerging economic power. The Committee therefore would urge 
the Ministry to re -visit the development cooperation, particularly with our neighbours so as to 
enable long-term partnerships with careful assessment of projects, adequate disposal of funds 
and efficient implementation. 
Reply of the Government 
The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) in MEA is entrusted with 
implementing India’s development cooperation initiatives with partner countries.  Some projects, 
especially infrastructure projects have a longer gestation time and the budget approp riated in that 

57 
 
financial year is commensurate with the project cycle based on physical and financial progress. 
The budgetary requirements for the financial year are projected after taking into account specific 
status and anticipated utilization for various  projects and initiatives in these countries. This 
causes a year -on-year variations in the budgetary allocation under a particular aid head. The 
Government remains committed to stronger development cooperation with our neighbouring 
countries based on bilat eral imperatives and larger policy thrusts such as Neighbourhood First 
and Act East policy. The neighbourhood remains the largest recipient of Indian developmental 
assistance. 
 
 Development assistance under Lines of Credit (LOCs) is extended in accordance with the 
Indian Development and Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS) guidelines issued by 
Department of Economic Affairs. So far, 302 LOCs aggregating to US$ 30.66 billion have been 
extended to 64 countries covering projects in different sectors such as conn ectivity, energy, 
hydro power, roads, agriculture, civil infrastructure, capacity building, training, humanitarian 
assistance and health care etc. 
 
 Of the US$ 15.90 billion that has been committed under GoI LOCs to Asian countries, 
the largest value of co mmitments have been made in the India’s immediate neighbourhood: 
Bangladesh (US$ 7.862 billion), Sri Lanka (US$ 2.02 billion), Nepal (US$ 1.65 billion), 
Mauritius (US$ 964.80 million), Maldives (US$ 840 million), Myanmar (US$ 538.90 million), 
Seychelles (US$ 128 million). 
 There is a specific focus on regional connectivity initiatives in the neighbourhood 
under GoI LOCs.  A total of 98 connectivity projects ( 44 completed) in 5 countries in the 
neighbourhood for USD 6.93 billion (INR 49,200 Crore) under GoI Lines of Credit (LOCs). Our 
LOCs are financing some of critical infrastructure projects of the partner countries. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 18) 
 The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 200 crore has been provisioned as aid to 
Bangladesh for BE 2020 -21 which is more than the allocation Rs. 175 crore during BE 2019 -20 
and RE 2019 -20 stage. The enhanced allocation has been provisioned in anticipation of new 
HICDP projects in the areas of education, health, water, culture , urban development, disaster 
management etc. in the coming Fiscal Year. The Committee observe that physical progress of 
29.5% and financial progress of 28.65% has been achieved on the Akhaura -Agartala Rail Link 
Project. Timely completion of infrastructure  projects is key for our expanding development 
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all possible measures should be taken to 
ensure the completion of Akhaura -Agartala Rail Link Project by September 2020. Moreover, 
additional fund requirements should be sought at the RE stage for implementation of all ongoing 
projects in Bangladesh. 

58 
 
 
Reply of the Goverment 
 
All possible measures would be taken to ensure the completion of Akhaura Agartala Rail 
Link Project. Moreover, additional fund requirements  would be sought at the RE stage for 
implementation of all ongoing projects in Bangladesh. The point has been noted for compliance. 
However, COVID 19 will have some impact on the Demand for Grants scenario in the  BE 2020-
21 considering the lockdown imposed  since March 24, 2020 thereby affecting the speed of 
execution of new projects. 
 
 The Bangladesh portion of the Akhaura-Agartala project has been progressing slowly and 
is currently aimed for completion by September 2020. The project is being monitored 
intensively. Both the Consultant (IRCON) and the Contractor have been asked to expedite the 
project work. The Ministry will keep close watch on the developing status with respect to this 
project. The Indian segment is under execution by Ministry of Railway s, IRCON and funded by 
the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 (Recommendation No 19) 
 The Committee note that Bhutan has traditionally been the largest recipient of India’s 
aid and assistance programmes and budgetary allocation to them are provided under Revenue 
and Capital Heads. The Committee note that while there has been a decrease under the aid 
components, the loans and advances component has witnessed an increase. The Foreign 
Secretary has informed that  about 72 large and intermediate and 359 Small Development 
Projects have already been implemented. These projects cover all areas of socio -economic 
development ranging from agriculture, infrastructure, information and communication 
technology, health, educ ation, capacity building and culture. The Committee are happy to learn 
that Mangdechhu Hydroelectric Power Project was inaugurated in August 2019. Due to 
geological factors, construction of Punatsangchhu – I and Punastsangchhu – II Hydroelectric 
Power Proj ects may need revision. The Committee note that the physical progress of 
Punatsangchhu – I, Punatsangchhu – II is 86.65% and 86.32%. Foreign Secretary has also 
apprised the Committee that talks on financing and management structure for the Sankosh 
Hydroelectric Power Project is ongoing. The Committee note with satisfaction the performance 
of the Ministry in spite of several constraints and are confident that the Ministry would leave no 
stone unturned towards its commitment in Bhutan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India has extensive development partnership with Bhutan, based on Bhutan’s 
priorities. For the current 12 th Five Year Plan (2018 -23) of the Royal Government of Bhutan, 
GoI has committed Rs. 4,500 crores towards Programme Grant, Project Tied Assistance and 

59 
 
Small Development Projects, besides providing INR 400 Cr as transitional trade Support 
Facility. About 72 l arge and intermediate, and 359 Small Development Projects are at various 
stages of implementation. These projects virtually cover all areas of socio -economic 
development, ranging from agriculture, infrastructure, ICT, health, education, capacity building 
and culture. 
 
Updated status of hydropower projects: 
 
S. 
No. 
Project/ Scheme  Approved Value Scheduled date of 
completion 
Current 
Status 
1. Mangdechhu (720 
MW HEP) 
INR 5012.63 Cr (As 
approved in 3rd RCE in 
March 2019) Final cost 
of completion is being 
examined by the 
Ministry in consultation 
with Ministry of Power. 
Project has been 
commissioned. It was 
inaugurated in Aug 2019 
by PMs of India and 
Bhutan.  
Project has 
been 
commissioned. 
Fund releases 
so far: INR 
5012.63 Cr 
 
2. Punatsangchhu-I 
(1200 MW HEP) 
RCE of INR 9375.58  
Cr  (Approved in July 
2015) 
June 2019 Physical 
progress-
86.84%  (as of 
March 2020); 
Fund released 
so far: INR 
8045.3796 Cr 
 
*The project 
has been 
delayed due to 
geological 
surprises. 
3. Punatsangchhu-II 
(1020 MW HEP) 
RCE of INR 7290.62 Cr 
(Approved in July 2016) 
 
Proposal for 2nd RCE of 
Puna-II at January 2020 
Price Level is being 
vetted by CEA. 
 
2018-19 Physical 
progress-87%  
(as of March 
2020); Fund 
released so far: 
INR 6718.723 
Cr 
 
*The project 
has been 
delayed due to 
geological 
surprises. 

60 
 
4. Kholongchhu (600 
MW HEP) 
INR 3868.870 Cr (DPR 
completion cost) 
 
Pre-construction 
activities in progress. 
 
INR 166.2817 
Cr has been 
released by 
MEA towards 
DGPC’s 
equity till date. 
 
 
 
 Punatsangchhu-I and II hydroelectric projects have been delayed due to severe geological 
challenges encountered at the project site. With significant technical efforts, Puna -II HEP is by 
and large back on track and project management is implementing remedial measures based on 
technical recommendations. Technical experts from both countries are working constantly to 
resolve the geological challenges encountered by Punatsangchhu-I.  
 Regarding Sankosh Reservoir HEP, discussions are ongoing between both the sides 
for finalizing the implementation modalities involving Financing Modality and Governance 
Structure. Last Talks were held on 21 October 2019.  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 20) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to 
Nepal’ has decreased from Rs. 1200 crore at RE 2019 -20 stage to Rs. 800 crore at BE 2020 - 21 
stage. The main reason cited for increase in allocation during RE 2019-20 was the requirement of 
additional funds for pending payments and supplies relating to Operation Maitri. During the last 
financial year, construction of Integrated Check Post at Biratnagar, Motihari - Amlekhgunj 
Petroleum Products Pipeline and about 90% of post -earthquake housing project has been 
completed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should continue making 
concerted efforts towards expeditious and timely completion of ongoin g bilateral projects in 
Nepal. The Ministry should also obtain enhanced allocation at the RE stage to initiate the new 
work on aid commitments. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry continues to follow up closely with relevant agencies on the Indian side as 
well as with the Government of Nepal to ensure expeditious implementation of all the major 
ongoing development projects. Going forward, the key focus of the Government of India is to 
ensure expeditious delivery of projects through close coordination and  partnership with relevant 
stakeholders on the Indian side as well as with the Government of Nepal. 
 

61 
 
 The allocation of Rs. 800 crore for BE 2020 -21 will be utilized for several ongoing 
projects, including reimbursement to the Government of Nepal and payment to the respective 
consultants and contractors to ensure smooth implementation of the projects. Ministry remains 
committed to the expeditious implementation of ongoing bilateral projects in Nepal. 
Requirement for additional funds will be considered at the revised estimates stage. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 21) 
 The Committee observe a downward trend in budgetary allocation under the sub - 
head ‘Aid to Sri Lanka’ from Rs. 250 crore in BE 2019-20 to Rs. 200 crore in BE 2020-21 owing 
to the deceleration in pace of progress of Hi -Impact Community Development Project d ue to 
April 21, 2019 terrorist attacks, Presidential elections, and the impending Parliament election in 
April/May 2020. The Committee are delighted to discern two notable developments in India -Sri 
Lanka i.e. resumption of flights between Chennai and Jaffn a and the establishment of cultural 
centre in Jaffna with Indian assistance. During oral evidence, the Foreign Secretary apprised the 
Committee about the implementation of ongoing high profile projects such as Island -wide 
expansion of Emergency Ambulance S ervices in Sri Lanka, implementation of third phase of 
Indian Housing Projects. The Committee are of the considered view that the ongoing projects in 
Sri Lanka will invariably require more funds and the Ministry should ensure that underfunding 
does not lea d to delay in their implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should prepare a roadmap for completion of the ongoing projects in Sri Lanka and seek 
additional finances for the same at the RE Stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry attaches highest priority to smooth execution and timely completion of the 
ongoing projects in Sri Lanka and has been, through the Indian High Commission in Colombo, 
closely following up with the Government of Sri Lanka for expediting the project 
implementation. 
 
 Based on the recommendation of the Standing Committee, an updated sheet on the likely 
completion of the ongoing projects in Sri Lanka has been prepared and attached in Annexure A. 
It may be mentioned that due to Covid 19 pandemic and the resultant lockdown including in Sri 
Lanka, the progress of ongoing projects in Sri Lanka has slowed down. Depending upon the 
progress of the projects, Ministry will seek additional finances, if required, at the RE Stage. 
Annexure A 
S. 
No Name of the ongoing Project in Sri Lanka Start Date 
Expected 
Completion 
Date 

62 
 
01 Housing project- Phase 3- (4000 houses for estate 
workers / Indian Origin Tamils) January 2017 December 2020 
02 Renovation of 27 Schools in Northern Province May 2017 December  
2020 
03 Construction of 2889 units Rain Water Harvesting 
system in Jaffna District April 2018 Sep - 2021 
04 Construction of Multi-Ethnic Tri-Lingual School in 
Polonnaruwa January 2018 March 2021 
05 153 houses and infrastructure facilities in Sobitha 
Thero Village in Anuradhapura  July 2018 March 2021 
06 Upgrading Saraswathy Central College in 
Pusselawa, Kandy  Aug 2018 September 
2020 
07 
Setting up of a Training School for Dalada 
Maligawa, Pallekele, Kandy (Dalada Maligawa 
Cultural Heritage Project)  
May 2018 September 
2020 
08 
Construction of Surgical unit and Supply of 
Medical equipments to Teaching Hospital, 
Batticaloa. 
June 2019 December- 
2020 
09 Construction of 5000 MT cold storage in 
Dambulla, Central Province  Aug 2019 September 
2020 
10 Model Village Housing Project in 25 district in Sri 
Lanka  
 
March 2018 Dec 2020 
11 Grama Shakthi housing Project - I in Southern 
Province June 2018 June 2021 
12 Grama Shakthi Model Village Housing Project –II 
Southern Province  Aug 2019 Aug 2021 
13 Grama Shakti Model village Housing Project – 
Northern Province  Aug 2019 Aug 2021 
14 
Construction of Auditorium and multipurpose 
complex for Thondaman vocational Training 
Center  
January 2020 April 2021 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No.22) 
 The Committee notice that the budgetary allocation under the head ‘Aid to Maldives’, 
has been reduced from Rs. 400 crore at BE 2019 -20 stage to Rs.300 crore at BE 2020 -21 stage. 
The Committee have noted the assertion of the Ministry that there have been delays in certain 

63 
 
projects because of capacity constraints on Maldivian side. It is heartening to know that with an 
improved political situation in Maldives, several ongoing projects are stated to achieve 
significant progress and substantial new commitments are also in the pipeline under both grant 
and LoC assistance. The Mini stry has also informed that the construction of the much delayed 
Institute for Security and Law Enforcement Studies (ISLES) is proceeding at a good pace and is 
expected to be completed in2020. 
 
 In view of the upswing in bilateral relations, the Committee are hopeful that there will 
be a renewed focus on completing ongoing projects and undertaking new projects of mutual 
interest. The Ministry should ensure smooth, expeditious and timely execution of various 
ongoing projects in Maldives. The Committee desire  that the long standing projects construction 
of Police Academy and construction of Institute for Security and Law Enforcement Studies is 
completed as per the agreed timeline of 2020. 
 
Reply of the Government 
GoI Lines of Credit worth $840 million have been extended to Maldives for various 
development and infrastructure projects. Under the umbrella LOC of $800 million sanctioned in 
2019, 12 projects have already been identified by Government of Maldives. Six priority projects 
under it are already at various stages of implementation. A large connectivity project in Maldives 
is also under discussion for possible funding under GoI LoC. 
 
 Outstanding bottlenecks related to the host Government for the Institute for Security and 
Law Enforcement Studies (ISLES) project have been resolved and the project is progressing at 
steady pace. Current physical progress is 76% and the Ministry is closely following up the 
project progress to ensure its scheduled completion in the second half of this year. 
 
 The Ministry take s note of the Committee’s appreciation on significant progress in 
several ongoing projects and new commitments made under both grant and LoC assistance. In 
cooperation with the Government of Maldives, the Ministry will strive to implement various 
projects as per the agreed timelines.  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 23) 
 The Committee are concerned to note the sagging budgetary allocation made under 
the sub -head ‘Aid to Myanmar’ and this reduction as per the Ministry is on account of slow 

64 
 
spending rate in 2019 -20. The Committee also note that extraneous factors such as del ay in 
getting clearances, adverse security situation in Myanmar, legal hurdles were some of the 
prominent reasons behind the slow utilization of allocated funds. The Committee, however, feel 
that the current allocation is not congruent with the ongoing str ategic projects in Myanmar such 
as Kaladan Multimodal And Coastal Surveillance System. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should take adequate steps to ensure that the allocated amount is utilized optimally 
for completion of the ongoing pro jects so that enhanced allocation can be provided at the RE 
stage. The Committee also desire that the Ministry in consultation with the concerned 
stakeholder in Myanmar draw a roadmap for completion of the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit 
Transport Project to ensure its completion in 2020. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With respect to the road segment of the Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project, 
status is being closely monitored in consultation with other stakeholders, including the 
Department of Heavy Industries, which is the parent Department of the Engineering  Project 
(India) Limited (EPIL) that forms part of the Joint Venture implementing the project. The 
implementation of the Project is subject to the uncertain security situation at the project site and 
progress achieved by the Contractor.   
 
 Adequate steps have been planned for FY 2020-21 to ensure that the allocated amount is 
utilized optimally for completion of the ongoing projects and enhanced allocation would be sought 
at the RE Stage. However, global COVID 19 spread and its adverse impact on global/local supply 
chains & operations on the ground will likely impact the pace of the project & expenditure progress 
thereby. Also, the current infighting between the Government Forces and the insurgent groups in 
Myanmar would affect the progress of  the project. In addition, Ministry has taken note of the 
committee recommendation regarding a road map for implementation of the Kaladan Project with 
concerned stakeholders. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 25) 
 The Committee are aware that despite daunting logistical and security challenges, India 
has been providing wide-ranging developmental assistance to Afghanistan. Allocation under this 
sub head has been kept unchanged for the ongoing and next fiscals. The Co mmittee are pleased 
to see optimum utilization of funds under this head for the past two years. The Foreign Secretary 
has stated that India is providing small and medium projects development assistance in all 34 
provinces of Afghanistan and large scale pro jects are in the planning stage. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the satisfactory experience gained from completion of large infrastructural 
projects in Afghanistan should be applied to all our developmental cooperation projects 

65 
 
elsewhere. The Minist ry should ensure that requisite funds are available for smooth functioning 
of all our small and medium sized projects in Afghanistan. The Committee also want to be kept 
informed about the large developmental projects in Afghanistan once finalized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has noted the recommendations made by the esteemed committee for compliance. 
All efforts are continuously made for optimal budgetary allocation under Aid to Afghanistan, in line with 
“Neighbourhood First Policy”. The recommendation of the Committee on learnings from our experiences of 
developmental projects in Afghanistan, elsewhere has been noted. The implementation of the development 
partnership programme of India is premised on learnings of best practices both in-house & elsewhere. The 
Development Partnership Administration vertical in MEA led by Additional Secretary-officer provides for 
holistic & integrative conceptualization, assessment & monitoring of our Development Partnership program. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 26) 
 The Committee are aware that Latin America and Caribbean region comprises of 33 
countries occupying two large landmasses of North and South America as well as the islands of 
the neighbouring Caribbean Sea. Ministry has informed that  India’s development partnership in 
Latin America is not limited to bilateral aid cooperation projects, but also in capacity building 
such as ITEC courses, Lines of Credits for industrial development as well as providing 
humanitarian assistance during disa sters. Keeping in mind the geographical extent and 
magnitude of developmental cooperation with Latin America, the Committee are surprised to 
note a paltry allocation of Rs.20 crore to Latin America for BE 2020 -21. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recomme nd that the budgetary allocation should be reflective of the 
importance India attaches to this region and bolster a mutually beneficial partnership with 
concerned countries in the region. Accordingly, the Committee desire that aid allocation to such 
a huge region should be improved by allocating more fund at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India’s LOCs are demand -driven, and cater to specific requests from friendly countries.  
Thirty two Lines of Credit worth $ 738.53 million have been extended to seven countries in 
Latin America and Carribean region. GoI has decided to extend a new LOC of U SD 35.80 
million to the Government of Suriname for undertaking the project ‘Rural Electrification through 
Solar DG hybrid PV systems in 50 remote villages of Suriname on 14 November 2019. GoI has 
also decided to extend a new LOC of USD 100 million to under take Development Projects 
proposed by the Government of Bolivia on 14 November 2019. 
 

66 
 
 We take note of the Committee’s recommendation that the aid allocation and all efforts 
will be made for effective allocation & utilisation of budget under Aid to LAC.  The Ministry has 
strived for 100 percent utilization of the allocated total budget of 15 crores for the Financial Year 
2019-2020 under the budget head “Aid to LAC countries”, with actual expenditure till 31st 
March 2020 being 12.16 crores.   Impact of global COVID 19 spread on logistics supply chains 
may likely impact the pace of the project & expenditure progress thereby. We have duly noted the 
Committee’s recommendations and will strive to do so as directed. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 27) 
 The Committee notice that the erstwhile budget sub head ‘ASEAN Multilateral’ has been 
discontinued and new head ‘Indo -Pacific Cooperation’ has been opened w.e.f. FY 2019-20. An 
allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore was made under the Head during BE 2019-20 and the same has 
been retained during BE 2020 -21. A new Division on Indo -Pacific was also created in April 
2019 by integrating ASEAN -Multilateral (AML) Division and the Indian Ocean Rim 
Association (IORA) from IOR Division. 
 The Committee are appre ciative of the policy emphasis being placed to the Indo - 
Pacific region through amendment in existing budget head and creation of a separate Division in 
the Ministry. Since it is a new development, the Committee are hopeful that this step will lead to 
multi-faceted engagement with all countries in the region and evolve to become an effective 
counter strategy to deal with China’s Belt and Road Initiative. The Committee desire to be 
apprised about the various projects that are being planned as well as implemented under this sub-
head in three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DETAILS OF PROJECTS IN THE NEXT THREE MONTHS 
 
 Ministry is implementing Quick Impact Projects in CLMV countries (Cambodia, Lao 
PDR, Myanmar and Vietnam). 
 
 The emphasis of QIPs is on short  gestation high visibility projects, with a normal 
gestation period of up to one year that would directly benefit the local communities with results 
that are immediate and visible. 
 
 A total of 42 QIP projects have been implemented since their inception in  2015. Out of 
42 QIP projects, 28 projects have been completed and 14 are under implementation. Of the 42 
QIP projects, 26 have been implemented in Cambodia, 13 in Vietnam and 3 in Lao PDR. 
 
A list of projects that are being planned as well as implemented in three months is as follows: 
 

67 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Country Project Description Status with Expected date of 
completion  
 
1 Cambodia Supporting Community Based Eco -
tourism and Livelihood Opportunity 
(SEBET) for Tu Tuek Pos 
Community Protected Area in Oral 
Wildlife Sanctuary, Kampong Speu 
Province 
 
 
 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
2 Cambodia Capacity Building of caregivers and 
professionals to empower children 
and adolescents with multiple 
disabilities and their families in 
Cambodia 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
3 Cambodia Installation of hand pumps in 
Sambor Prei Kuk area, Kampong 
Thom Province. 
 
 
4 Cambodia Contributing to the acceleration of 
Malaria elimination through 
intensifying the case detection, 
treatment and tracking in Kampong 
Speu province  
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
5 Cambodia Intensifying the community and 
school-based source reduction and 
prevention for dengue control 
among the population living in high 
risk areas in Takeo 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
6 Cambodia To eliminate the Arsenic Element in 
Drinking Water around the Tonle 
Sap Lake  
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
7 Cambodia Integrated community development 
through hygiene and sanitation and 
vocational training in Kampong 
Chhnang province 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
8 Cambodia Transforming villages to open 
Defecation Free(ODF) and safe 
Hygiene behaviour in Samaki 
Meanchey district, Kampong 
Chhnang province  
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 

68 
 
9 Cambodia Construction of a  3-classroom 
building for grade 1 to 3 pupils at 
Wat Purthisat Primary School 
 
10 Cambodia Construction of a 3 -classroom 
building for grade 4 to 6 pupils at 
Wat Purthisat Primary School 
 
11 Cambodia Building Capacity on Digital Public 
Services Implementation and Cyber 
Security for Government Agencies 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
12 Cambodia Child Online risks Awareness 
Campaign in Cambodia 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
13 Cambodia Operation and Maintenance of 
Tumnup Daun Ath project 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
14 Cambodia Operation and Maintenance of Pring 
Reservoir Project 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
15 Cambodia Environmental Protection through 
Eliminating of Contaminant in 
Environmental Media 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
16 Cambodia Reaching the unreached: last mile 
TB care delivery in rural & peri 
urban Cambodia 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
17 Cambodia Toward the reduction in dengue 
morbidity and mortality among 
children through intensifying 
integrated-vector management and 
strengthening the capacity of case 
management among doctors and 
nurses at public health facilities in 
Cambodia. 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
18 Cambodia Reducing the malaria burden and 
the potential spread of anti -malarial 
drug resistance among mobile and 
migrant population in the multi drug 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2020-21 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 

69 
 
resistant areas in Stung Treng 
province 
19 Vietnam Construction of Hau Bong 
Kindergarten, Hau Bong Commune, 
Ha Hoa District 
 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
20 Vietnam Construction of infield canal in Tan 
An Ward, Nghi Lo town, Yen Bai 
Province 
 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
21 Vietnam Construction of Housing block for 
the elderly and handicapped people 
at Centre for Social Assistance of 
Quang Ninh province at Nam Khe 
Ward, Uong Bi city, Quang Ninh 
 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
22 Vietnam Building six classrooms of level III 
for Hoa Po Lang kindergarten at Phi 
Di Ja village, Krong No commune, 
Lak district, Dak Lak province. 
 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
23 Vietnam Upgradation and repair of overpass 
bridge at Tan Long village, Xuan 
Son Nam Commune,. Dong Xuan 
District, Phu Yen Province 
 
The project has been sanctioned in 
FY 2019-20 and it is expected to be 
completed in 2020-21  
 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 28) 
 The Committee note that by virtue of its extensive capacity -building and training 
programmes in 160 partner countries from Asia, Africa, East Europe, Latin America, the 
Caribbean as well as Pacific and Small Island countries, the Indian Technical and Econo mic 
Cooperation (ITEC) has emerged as a visible symbol of India’s South -South cooperation. The 
Committee, however, observe that a similar allocation of Rs. 220 crore has been provided under 
this sub -head for BE 2019 -20 as well as as BE 2020 -21. In pursuanc e of the Committee’s 
recommendation, the Ministry has carried out a comprehensive review of the ITEC programmes 
and its partner institutions and based on its various systemic and policy level modifications have 
been made. There has been an expansion in the  scope and outreach of these programmes and 
various new initiatives have begun including new modalities like e -ITEC, ITEC - Onsite and 
ITEC Executive to enhance its effectiveness and impact. The Committee are happy to learn 

70 
 
about the inclusion of premier institutes like IITs and IIMs as partner institutes and the existence 
of a robust feedback mechanism under these programmes. The Committee, however also desire 
that t he Ministry should enhance the budget allocation positively to align the programme with 
the requirements of partner ITEC countries and our foreign policy priorities. 
 
Reply of the Goverment 
 
 The Ministry has been constantly monitoring the Indian Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (ITEC) programme and introducing new programmes and innovative modalities for 
delivery of capacity building to other countries.  The Ministry had conducted a thorough  review 
of the ITEC programme to align the content and structure of the courses offered with the 
requirements and priorities of partner countries and our foreign policy interests. All efforts will 
be made to prioritise budgetary allocation under the head based on effective utilisation pattern.  
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 29) 
 The Committee are aware of the persistent human resource crunch in the Ministry of 
External Affairs over the years. The Committee note that the sanctioned strength of the Ministry 
is 8951, while the working strength is 6859. This huge gap between the sanctioned and actual 
strength in the Ministry of External Affairs has led to vacancies in vital departments of the 
Ministry. Time and again, the Ministry has f urnished the same justification that the gap is due to 
delay in recruitment, which is beyond its control. In order to tide over this challenge of shortage 
in staff, the Ministry has taken various steps such as increasing indent with UPSC, reinforcing 
technical capacity by taking officers with domain expertise on deputation from Line Ministries 
and Departments of Governments, engaging Consultants with expertise in various fields and 
placing indent with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC). 
 
 Taking serious cognizance of the vacant posts in the Ministry, the Committee find the 
steps taken by the Ministry as inadequate and half -hearted. In view of the increasing rate of 
diplomatic endeavours in development and economy and the pivotal role MEA has to play in our  
efforts to be a $5 trillion economy by 2024 -25, the Committee exhort upon the Government at 
the highest levels to consider the human resource requirements of MEA favourably and also 
direct Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and Union Public Service Commissi on (UPSC) to fill 
up the enhanced number of direct recruitments on top priority basis. The Committee would also 
recommend that the Ministry should continue to create cadre/ induct expertise from other 
Ministries, academia, think tanks and the private secto r, as needed to augment human resource 
with relevant domain expertise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

71 
 
Augmentation of manpower in the Ministry is being undertaken in a concerted and 
systematic fashion through a combination of recruitment, promotion, deputation, outsourcing and 
placing indents with SSC/UPSC. In terms of recruitment, average annual intake of IFS officers 
through the Civil Services Exam increased by 16% during 2015 -18 in comparison with 2011-14. 
(While 32 officers were recruited annually on an aver age during 2011 -14, the corresponding 
number for 2015 -18 was 37). Similarly, the average number of Assistant Section officers who 
joined the Ministry during the period 2013 -14 almost doubled from 63 to 124 in 2015 -
17. Enhancement of manpower is also done t hrough promotions from feeder cadres across levels 
and deputation of experts. At present, there are 48 officers from various Ministries in MEA on 
deputation who are deployed in different Divisions. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 30) 
 The Committee note with appreciation that the Foreign Service Institute, renamed as 
Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS), conducts in service training for Indian 
Foreign Service (IFS) officers and other MEA personnel, courses for foreign diplomats and other 
professional training course. The Committee observe that the expenditure on training has 
increased substantially in recent times due to increasing demand for training programmes both 
for Indian diplomat/civil servants/others and for foreign  diplomats. However, tt is a matter of 
concern that despite the rising requirement of training, there has been shortfall in utilization of 
funds under this budget head for past three years and accordingly budget allocation has remained 
stagnant at the same  level.  The Committee would strongly urge the Ministry to observe strict 
fiscal prudence by optimum utilization of available funds. The Committee also desire that a 
continuous system of evaluation be established so that the inputs and feedback received from the 
trainees are duly incorporated at regular intervals for value addition of the training programmes 
and accordingly the number of training programmes should also be enhanced with desired 
budget allocation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Utilisation of funds by SSIFS has steadily increased from Rs. 9.76 crores in 2016 -17 to 
Rs. 25.11 crores in 2019-20 observing strict fiscal prudence.  
 MEA personnel from all levels from MTS to Joint Secretaries undergo training at SSIFS. 
In 2019 -20, SSIFS  has introduced new training programmes for both Indian and foreign 
diplomats such as for MEA’s Interpreters Cadre, stenography test for MEA officials and a 
thematic fellowship programme on environment and climate change for foreign diplomats. The 
number of training programmes for foreign diplomats has increased from 3 in 2016 to 9 in 2017 
to 15 in 2018 to 36 in 2019. SSIFS has also introduced workshops on topics such as RTI.   
 SSIFS regularly takes feedback for every course. Feedback forms are circulated to the 

72 
 
participants to get written feedback on speakers, content of course and logistical arrangements. 
Dean (SSIFS) chairs a feedback session at the end of course to take oral feedback of participants. 
These feedbacks are taken into consideration for improving future training courses.  
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 33) 
 The Committee are aware that the Know India Programme (KIP) is a flagship initiative of 
MEA to reconnect young persons of Indian -origin with their roots and give them an exposure to 
various aspects of Indian life, cultural heritage, art and contemporary India. It is observed that 
with time, the frequency and duration of the programme has enhan ced. An allocation of Rs. 6 
crore was made under this programme during BE 2019 -20 which has been increased to Rs. 8 
crore for BE 2020-21. In order to make it dynamic and for a better connect, the Ministry is in the 
process of launching its logo in the next  financial year. The Committee find it incomprehensible 
as to how within the limited finances, will the Ministry manage such ambitious plans for 
expansion and branding of KIP? The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should with a view to spread awareness about the programme allocate additional 
funds for Know India Programmes which have been received very warmly by the Indian 
Diaspora. Additional requirements for funds should be placed before the Ministry of Finance 
during the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has been organizing 06 editions of Know India Programme (KIP) and 02 
editions of Pravasi Teerth Darshan yojana (PTDY) every year. 
 
 The PTDY was introduced in FY 2018 -19 on KIP lines for 45 -65 age group of people 
from 07 Girmitiya’s countries who belong of lower income group and are unable to afford a visit 
to India.  Expenditure of PTDY is also incurred from KIP head of budget.  Appro ximately an 
amount of Rs. 01 crore is incurred on organizing one edition of the programme excluding the 
state leg of the programme.  Expenditure on state leg programme is normally borne by the 
respective State Government.  Further, the expenditure incurred on meetings with dignitaries and 
on visit to various departments/organizations are borne by the respective 
departments/organizations.   
 
 Besides, the KIP LOGO design contest was launched digitally and it was decided that the 
final winner would be awarded with the grand prize of government sponsored 25 days visit to 
India under the KIP programme as one of the KIP participants.  Ministry has taken note of the 
suggestions of the esteemed Committee.  All efforts will be made for optimal budgetary 
allocation to the KIP head at the RE stage based on effective utilization pattern.  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 

73 
 
 
(Recommendation No 34) 
 The Committee note that Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) scheme 
was launched in 2005 to nourish and strengthen the cultural bonds between India and its 
diaspora. Under this scheme the Ministry releases grant to the Indian Mission abroad which then 
works together with Diaspora Associations in organizing India-specific events. It is disheartening 
to note that for the past three years a token amount of Rs 2 crore is being provided for this 
scheme. The Ministry has apprised that an amount of Rs. 1,69,82,000/- has been allocated during 
the financial year 2019 -20 to 54 Missions/Posts abroad under this scheme. Further, a financial 
grant of Rs 18.58 lakhs has been given as third installment for setting up Diaspora Research and 
Resources center (DRRC) to Antar - Rashtriya Sahyog Parishad in New Delhi. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should impart necessary vigour to such a significant scheme through 
enhanced budgetary provisions and outreach to various Missions/Posts. The Commit tee also 
desire to be apprised about the progress made in setting up Diaspora Research and Resources 
Center (DRRC). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MEA has adopted multi -pronged strategy for cultural & economic diplomacy and 
leverage the soft power of the Indian  Diaspora.  Promotion of culture is done by organzing 
various activites from the funding received from MEA, as well as through other Ministries such 
as Culture and Tourism. 
 
 Ministry, in addition, supports diaspora to organise cultural events under the Pr omotion 
of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) scheme with an aim to showcase Indian culture and  new 
initiatives &  developments of modern India. The scheme aims to nourish and strengthen the 
cultural bonds between India and its diaspora. The projected out come of the scheme is to 
reinforce the cultural identity of the persons of Indian origin.  The Scheme of PCTD has been 
able to attain its objective.  The funds of Rs. 2 crore allocated are specifically   given to   the 
Missions   and   Posts   abroad   for  Promotion of Cultural Ties. The Recommendation of the 
Committee has been duly noted to impart necessary vigour to PCTD.  
 
 The Diaspora Research & Resource Centre (DRRC) was set up with the financial 
support from Ministry of External Affairs in 2017 by Antar Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad (ARSP), in 
New Delhi.   A  financial  grant of Rs. 50,57,270/-  has  been   given  to ARSP  spread   over   three  
years,  including  third  instalment  of  Rs. 17,75,132/ -  released   in Financial year 2019-20 after 
receipt of utilisation certificate and outcomes generated. DRRC has fulfilled the widely felt need for 
a dedicated institute for studies on PIO and Girmitya issues. The Centre has emerged as a resource 
and networking hub on Diaspora matters for scholars and researchers working in this field, both 
from India and abroad. The Centre’s work has provided valuable input for policy making and also 

74 
 
supplemented the Government’s initiatives for more broad -based engagement with the Indian 
Diaspora. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 36) 
 The Committee are aware about the rising incidence of frauds and marital disputes in 
NRI marriages. In the absence of a separate  budget  head  for  providing  legal assistance to 
woman facing problems in overseas marriages, the Committee observe that the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) to assist Overseas Indian nationals in times of dist ress and 
emergency in the ‘most deserving cases’ on a ‘means tested basis’ is being utilized for the 
purpose. For the Financial Year 2019 -20, 1057 grievances were received in the Ministry on NRI 
marital Disputes. The Committee note that MEA has addressed t hese grievances by way of 
providing them counseling, guidance and information about procedures, mechanisms for serving 
judicial summons on the Overseas Indian spouse, filing a case in India, issuing Look Out 
Circulars, impounding and revocation of Indian p assport of the spouse, getting access to lawyers 
and NGOs empanelled with Indian Missions, etc. 18 cases have been provided financial 
assistance as per the ICWF guidelines on case merit basis so far in FY 2019 -20. The Integrated 
Nodal Agency (INA) under th e Ministry of Women and Child Development has also not got 
much success in providing timely solution to the problems of Indian citizens married to Overseas 
Indian spouses. The Committee are dismayed to see the casual attitude of the Ministry toward 
such a sensitive issue and hope that the problems faced in NRI marriages will engage more 
attention of the Ministry henceforth. Adequate budgetary allocation will be provided to each 
Indian woman in distress due to disputes in marriages and an awareness drive sho uld be 
launched to ensure that such a gender specific scheme does not get lost under the ICWF which 
caters to multiple issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of External Affairs is cognizant of the importance of the issue of NRI Marital 
disputes and has taken various steps to proactively address them. The Ministry has addressed the 
complaints of distressed Indian nationals deserted by their NRI spouses  by way of providing 
them counselling, guidance and information about procedures, mechanisms for serving judicial 
summons on the Overseas Indian spouse, filing a case in India, issuing Look Out Circulars, 
impounding and revocation of Indian passport of the spouse, getting access to lawyers and NGOs 
empanelled with Indian Missions etc.  
 
 Besides, relevant Missions/ Posts provide temporary shelter to the deserted Indian wives 
and in some cases pay for the repatriation of the Indian women to India. 
 
 Furthermore, with an aim to provide financial and legal assistance to distressed Indian 

75 
 
women married to NRI spouses, the Indian ‘Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) Guidelines’ were 
amended to enhance the amount  and scope of legal & financial assistance. The a mount of 
financial assistance has been raised to USD 4000 per case, since September, 2017, and is now 
applicable to all Indian Missions/Posts abroad. In addition to the assistance provided under the 
scheme, Indian Missions/Consulates abroad also guide and counsel the petitioners, provide them 
shelter and in some cases pay for the repatriation of the Indian women to India. Besides, the 
Heads of Missions/Posts have been delegated powers to provide the legal and financial 
assistance to the distressed Indian wo men married to NRI/PIOs through empanelled legal 
counsel of the applicant or Indian Community Association/Women’s Org./NGO concerned to 
assist the woman in documentation and preparatory work for filing the case. The assistance is 
released to the empanelled  legal counsel of the applicant or Indian Community 
Association/Women’s Organization/NGO concerned to enable it to take steps to assist the 
woman in documentation and preparatory work for filing the case.  
 
 Furthermore, with an aim to provide online consu lar assistance expeditiously to Indian 
nationals who are in distress abroad (including marital dispute), MADAD portal – an online 
Consular Grievances Monitoring System - was launched in 2015 and a module “Marital 
Disputes” was added to the portal to provide  digital platform to the distressed Indian nationals 
married to NRIs. 
 
 This Ministry also has a robust grievance redressal mechanism which was strengthened 
by launching Version 7.0, an online monitoring system, CPGRAMS in February 2020. Ministry 
has been part of the CPGRAMS portal since its inception in 2006. 
 
 A Consular Helpline is being run in 11 Indian languages including Hindi and English. 
Twitter Sewa @MEAMADAD was also launched in March 2020 to monitor and respond to 
grievances received on Twitter. 
 
 In addition, the Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 2019 was also 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha by former External Affairs Minister, late Smt. Sushma Swaraj on 
11 February 2019 for creating more accountability and offering more protect ion against 
exploitation of Indian women by their NRI spouses. 
 
 Ministry is also taking steps to create greater awareness about this issue in the diaspora. 
Many Indian Missions have designated ‘Open House’ meetings during which any distressed 
Indian natio nal including women can approach Mission for assistance and guidance. The 
Ministry has also posted Nodal/Welfare officers in the Missions/Posts abroad who have the 
ability to speak to majority of Indians residing in the country and where required, interpre ters are 
hired by Missions/Posts at the cost of Government of India to provide necessary assistance.  
 

76 
 
 Besides, Ministry of External Affairs has prepared comprehensive FAQs bilingually, 
information about legal provisions prevailing in foreign countries, d ata base of Organisations / 
NGOs / lawyers registered / empanelled with the Indian Missions/Posts abroad, with respect to 
various issues faced by aggrieved Indian women and how they can be addressed.  The available 
information is also placed on the official website of the Ministry. 
 
 Besides, under the Videsh Sampark Series initiated by this Ministry, outreach events are 
held in partnership with State Government with an aim to brief the State Governments and the 
stakeholders about the programmes/schemes and welfare measures taken by the Ministry for the 
community and their cooperation is sought to disseminate information. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 37) 
 The Committee are aware that ICCR is the nodal organization for the projection of 
India’s soft power abroad, and ever since its establishment in 1950, it has emerged as the 
principal governmental organization for our cultural engagement with the world and for 
promoting our culture in all its magnificence through various activities. The Committee are 
pleased to note that in BE 2020 -21, Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) has been 
provided with an enhanced allocation of Rs. 290 crore. The Ministry has specified that the 
increased allocation has been provisioned for opening of 3 In dian Cultural Centres at 
Washington, Tel Aviv, and Paris, expenditure on the deployment of Hindi Chairs abroad, 
Conference & Seminars and Celebration of IDY. It is heartening to discern that there has been 
efficient utilization of funds by ICCR for the pas t three years. On a query raised by the 
Committee, the Ministry has informed that it is exploring the possibility of Partnership and PPP 
Models for ICCR where the partners also put in resources for executing projects. As a pre -
eminent organization of the M inistry of External Affairs, ICCR’s activities are spread across the 
globe ranging from providing scholarships to organizing exhibitions to performing arts and 
visuals arts programme. In the opinion of the Committee, even the increased budgetary 
allocation provisioned to ICCR is not in consonance with its wide -ranging activities. It is 
understandable that as a not for profit and 100 percent grantee organization under the Ministry of 
External Affairs, there exist limits for ICCR’s ability to raise extra -budgetary resources to cater 
to its expansive activities. 
 
 Given the increasing salience of soft power projection in our Foreign Policy and the 
ICCR’s critical role in it, the Committee are of the considered view that the latter should have 
augmented financial and manpower resources. It is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry 
should prepare an annual roadmap for activities/programmes to be organized by ICCR along 
with the enhanced number of scholars and the role of ICCR within MEA in the pursuit of the $5  
trillion economy and on the basis of it seek additional financial allocation at the RE stage. The 

77 
 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should revisit the necessity of having ICCR Regional 
Offices when Zonal Cultural Centres are in existence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     ICCR has prepared its Annual Plan of Action for financial year 2020 -21 based on proposals 
received from Missions, Posts and ICCs overseas as well as programme/activities planned at 
ICCR headquarters and Regional offices.  
     As recommended by Standing Committee, based on increased number of programmes / 
activities, as planned, Ministry strive for sufficient funds at RE 2020 -21 stage based on robust 
quarterly expenditure patterns  
 Mandates of Zonal Cultural Centres of the Ministry of Culture (MoC) and Regional Offices 
of ICCR are not same, reason why existence of Regional Offices was necessitated. While mandate 
of MoC’s Zonal Cultural Centres is to promote culture within India, identify the artists and artisans 
and promote  their work, create data -base of the cultural wealth available in India, mandate of 
ICCR’s Regional Offices is primarily (a) to ensure smooth implementation of ICCR administered 
scholarship schemes and (b) promote cultural exchange between India and other countries. Both 
these functions are not part of mandate of MoC’s Zonal Cultural Centres. 
 It is also pointed out that originally ICCR was under the administrative control the then 
Ministry of Education and was/is the nodal organization for attending to matters related to welfare 
of the foreign students studying in India, for which originally the Regional Offices were 
established. ICCR was transferred to Ministry of External Affairs primarily because its mandate 
included focus on exchange between India an d other countries and fostering and strengthening 
relations between India and other countries through cultural and educational exchanges. Role of 
ICCR’s Regional Offices was necessitated for taking the outreach of this exchange beyond Delhi 
to all parts of India and taking the cultural wealth of various parts of India to the world. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 38) 
 The Committee observe that with the larger objective of promoting awareness and 
appreciation of India’s rich cultural herit age, the ICCR currently operates 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres across the globe. These Centres are instruments of India’s cultural outreach abroad and 
project our soft power through a wide range of cultural, academic and intellectual activities. The 
Committee are satisfied to learn that after the much delayed establishment of cultural Centres in 
two significant places like Washington and Paris both the Centres are expected to be completed 
and become operational by the middle of financial year 2020 -21. The Comm ittee would 
therefore like that the Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are operationalized positively 
this year and a Cultural Centre of ICCR should be opened in Gulf region. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the developments in this regard. 
 

78 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Renovation of U-Street property, Washington 
 
 Being a heritage building, permission of local authorities is required for undertaking 
renovations in the property. The completion of work is expected till June 2021. 
 
Renovation of SVCC, Paris 
 
The renovation work was to be undertaken through separate contractors for various works awarded 
in May 2018. In February 2019, Mission was informed that one of the contractors, M/s. Lacroix, 
entrusted with civil works was declared bankrupt. Since other contractors’ work would follow the 
civil works, in absence of civil works, the work at the site stopped. Judicial Administrator ordered 
M/s. SPID to undertake the remaining work of M/s. Lacroix. The proposal is under active 
consideration of the Ministry. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
(Recommendation No 39) 
 The Committee are aware that Section 13 of the ICWA Act enlists seven basic objectives 
of ICWA namely study of Indian and International Affairs; promote India’s relations with other 
countries ; to serve as a clearing house of information and knowledge; to publish books and 
journals, review papers; to establish contacts with organisations promoting objects mentioned 
earlier; to arrange conferences and seminars; and to undertake such ot her activities for the 
promotion of ideas and attainment of the objectives listed above. The Committee also note that 
the Ministry’s role is to guide and assist ICWA to meet its objectives within the broad 
framework of financial autonomy provided to it by the Parliament. With such an enormous 
mandate of undertaking research activities across the spectrum of international affairs, ICWA 
has been organizing conferences, Sapru House Lectures  conferences  and  conducting  track -two  
interactions.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
accord requisite importance to research activities undertaken by ICWA by provision of adequate 
funds and channelizing the inputs emanating from their research activities in the formulation  of 
foreign policy agenda. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has taken note of the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation and would 
accord requisite importance to research activities undertaken by ICWA by provision of adequate 
funds and channelizing the inputs emanating from their research activities in the formulation of 
foreign policy agenda. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 

79 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT”S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

80 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation No 16) 
 Expressing concern over the unpredictable and fluctuating budgetary demands and 
allocation under this Head, the Committee in their previous DFG Report had recommended that 
the Ministry should frame a developmental aid/cooperation policy with a clear roadmap for 
developmental assistance to countries in alignment with our national interest. The Committe e 
had also urged the Ministry to explore the feasibility of establishing an autonomous aid disbursal 
body that strictly caters to planning, execution and implementation of the projects in a timely 
manner. The Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation that a general aid policy must be 
framed and a separate aid disbursal body on the lines of similar bodies in other countries (such as 
USAID, OECD etc) may be established by the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of External Affairs had decided to  establish Development Partnership 
Administration in 2012 taking into account the unique nature of India’s development partnership, 
the diversification and growing complexity of our assistance programmes and projects and 
resource and manpower constraints i n GOI.  The DPA has evolved as an innovative and cost -
effective instrument of delivery of a broad -based developmental assistance to foreign countries 
encompassing Lines of Credit, projects under Grant -in-Aid, capacity building programmes for 
civilian and d efence personnel etc.  The model of DPA created in 2012 has served our purpose 
well as is evident from the robust growth of our projects both under Lines of Credit and Grant.  
The Ministry has been constantly monitoring the role of DPA in implementation of  development 
projects and to support its work, has inducted technical experts from other Ministries.  Currently 
more than 50% staff of DPA are deputationists with specialized technical expertise.  Further, 
taking into account the growing importance of cult ure and heritage in our development 
partnership a new Division has been created (DPA -IV) to exclusively focus on cultural and 
heritage restoration projects and relevant capacity building engagement in this area.  Also, a 
senior officer of the rank of Addit ional Secretary has been deployed for an effective and close 
overall supervision and coordination in the work of the four Divisions in DPA.  Considering the 
importance attached by the government to our development partnership, the Ministry would 
continue to monitor and introduce suitable reforms and innovations in the DPA as required for its 
efficient and effective performance. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
  

81 
 
(Recommendation No 40) 
 In the light of our deepening bilateral, regional and multilateral engagements, the 
Committee feel that the absence of a formalized policy document covering all aspects of our 
foreign policy is surprising. The Ministry has asserted that the practice of diplomacy requires 
flexibility in order to respond to rapid shifts and  unexpected developments in the global foreign 
policy environment. The Committee note that the Policy Planning and Research Division of the 
Ministry along with its network of autonomous bodies like Indian Council of World Affairs and 
Research and Informati on Systems, think tanks and academic collaborations provide a well 
organized mechanism for the purpose of Policy Planning and Research in foreign affairs. Over 
the years the Committee has been exhorting the Ministry to spell out India’s grand strategy 
encapsulating the dynamism in short term, medium term and long term objectives of our foreign 
policy. The Committee are of the considered view that the grand foreign policy strategy will also 
bolster the case for enhanced allocation by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of External Affairs take all requisite 
institutional as well intellectual steps to spell out a coherent and balanced Grand Foreign Policy 
strategy for India on priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
While no single overarching and formalized policy document can capture all aspects of 
India’s foreign policy, the underlying principles of India’s diplomatic strategy are long -
established and enduring. These include safeguarding India’s sovereignty and sec urity, enabling 
India’s domestic economic transformation, and building influence in global forums through 
bilateral, multilateral and regional efforts.  
 
 Indian foreign policy and diplomatic actions must also be agile and responsive to the 
imperatives of the time and to changing circumstances. India is today an emerging power and a 
large economy with an impressive track record of growth. Aligning our actions with the national 
objectives of promoting 3 Ts - Trade, Tourism and Technology is one of our major o bjectives. 
This has been broken down to specific tactical measures that promote diversification of supply 
chains, foreign investment flows, Indian exports (some thrust areas being: agri products, 
automobiles, textiles, garments, consumer durable industries , e-commerce, yoga and AYUSH), 
virtual tourism,  frontline technologies (some thrust areas being: tele -education, tele-medicine) 
and link up start-ups with foreign markets.  
 
 A number of other strategic objectives guide executive action. Strengthening and 
expanding connectivity in the neighbourhood, which acts as force multipliers to accelerate 
regional growth and development, promote people -to-people contact and encourage trad e and 
commerce, is one such strategic goal. Other strategic goals include supporting Indian companies 
through leveraging  Indian developmental assistance projects, generation of employment 

82 
 
opportunities abroad especially in health care and digital domains,  supporting the  pharma  and 
healthcare sectors with their competitive advantages in generics, APIs, biologics, clinical 
research and equipment, enhance global energy partnerships in renewable energy, clean tech, 
energy efficiency, and petroleum and natura l gas, promoting India as preferred destination of 
higher learning, promotion of India digital platforms and working with state governments to 
develop export strategies based on its sector competitiveness and material and human resource 
strengths.  
 
 The pandemic, which is the greatest shock to the international system since World War II, 
has created severe disruptions. The Ministry of External Affairs is at the forefront of the 
management of the external aspects of this crisis. It has tried to align i ts response to the well -
established parameters of its long -term diplomatic strategy and to the more contemporary 
compulsions of the pandemic.  Some of these long -term objectives include assisting like minded 
nations through development assistance in the fo rm of medical aid or pharmaceutical supplies; 
enhancing our global economic profile as a manufacturer by exporting critical medications; and 
tending to the needs of overseas Indians and the diaspora through initiatives such as Vande 
Bharat.  
 
 The Ministry of External Affairs, through Vande Bharat, has worked on the return of over 
5 lakh Indians in an extremely complex and demanding logistical operation by land, sea and air. 
This operation involved multiple agencies including Air India, the Navy, foreign ca rriers, 
chartered flight carriers land movement authorities. The Ministry has also delivered COVID 
related medical supplies to over 100 countries and deployed Rapid Response Teams to 8 nations 
by leveraging its global network.  
 
 Diplomatic activity has ad apted to changing times by using virtual and digital platforms. 
Prime Minister and External Affairs have initiated and participated in a very large number of 
multilateral and bilateral digital interactions.  
 
 The Government continually assesses and refine s its diplomatic stance and policies in 
response to evolving global challenges and opportunities which have a bearing on India’s short, 
medium and long term interests. In the last 5 years, India’s proactive diplomacy and rising global 
stature has been refl ected in its pivotal role in shaping the global agenda on an array of issues. 
Relations with our neighbours have been given the highest priority (Neighbourhood First policy), 
with emphasis on greater connectivity, stronger cooperation and broader contacts.  Ministry’s 
external outreach has been aligned with Indian developmental priorities. The objectives of 
attracting foreign investment, including for infrastructure development and infusion of 
technology and best practices for advancing India’s development p rogrammes such as Make in 
India, Skill India, Digital India, Smart Cities, Swachh Bharat, Namami Gange, AMRUT, have 
been at the forefront of all high-level exchanges.  
 

83 
 
 Indian diplomatic strategy, both in response to contemporary realities and more long-term 
trends is articulated, in accordance with custom, precedent, law and parliamentary rules, in 
documents that are available in the public domain. The Annual Report of the Ministry that 
contains a comprehensive statement of policies followed in the diplom atic sphere and their 
implementation is tabled in Parliament. Public statements by the Minister of External Affairs, the 
Ministers of State in the Ministry and officials of the Ministry of External Affairs which are 
collated on the website of the Ministry of External Affairs are also utilized to articulate Indian 
diplomatic and foreign policy objectives. This is supplemented by other diplomatic documents 
which contain public expression of foreign policy priorities. This is in accordance with 
international practice as followed by the foreign offices of major powers.  
 
 The Government policy of simultaneous engagement with all major powers; new and 
more intensive orientation towards the Indo -Pacific, strengthening in relations with West Asia, 
Central Asia and Gulf regions and upgradation in the scale of India’s vision for relations with 
African, Latin American and East European countries are all reflective of a more energetic, 
directed and focused approach.  
 
 The Government continues to proactively reach out a nd rescue Indians stranded in 
situations of crises and conflict across different regions. The outreach to the Indian diaspora, 
rekindling their sense of belonging to India and enlisting their support to achieving national 
objectives, also continues. 
  
 It has to be kept in mind that the practice of diplomacy requires to be flexible. The 
current global foreign policy environment is characterized by rapid shifts and unexpected 
developments, that transcend boundaries of land and water. Agility, in policy terms , is required 
to respond to these swift developments.  
 
 It is again submitted that the current practice of articulating strategies as described above 
allows the articulation of foreign policy within the parameters set by law, practice and the rules 
of par liamentary democracy while allowing clarity, consistency and, where necessary, the 
required flexibility. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
  

84 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No 3) 
 Over the years, the Committee have expressed a deep concern over the persistent 
mismatch between the budgetary demand made by the Ministry of External Affairs and actual 
allocations provided by the Ministry of Finance. In its written  replies, the Ministry has submitted 
that  the  gap  between  the  amount  demanded  and actual  allocations has reduced over the 
years due to realistic and need based rationalization of various sub heads as well as extensive 
consultations with the Ministr y of Finance. The claim of the Ministry that due to their more 
realistic and need based rationalization of various sub -heads the gap between amount demanded 
and actual allocations has reduced over the years is slightly confusing. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should continue to pursue with the Ministry of 
Finance about the imperative of provisioning adequate budgetary allocation for efficient conduct 
of our foreign policy and diplomatic outreach so that shortage o f funds does not lead to 
compromises in foreign policy objectives in the context of the allocation made during BE2020 -
21. 
 In pursuance of the Committee’s earlier recommendation, the Ministry has informed 
that it has commissioned a inter -ministerial as wel l as a cross -country comparative study of 
budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments with the mandate of managing foreign affairs to 
the Research and Information System for Economic Development (RIS). The Committee note 
that a preliminary report of th e study has been received from RIS and is being examined in the 
Ministry. The Ministry of External Affairs should examine the preliminary data on cross -country 
study of budgetary allocations and apprise the Committee within two months of presentation of 
this Report. This data can assist the Ministry of External Affairs to bolster their case for 
enhanced allocation during the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has taken full note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Members and would like 
to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will continue to engage with the Ministry of Finance at all 
levels to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in its pursuits. The Ministry will 
also continue to make efforts to convince Ministry of Finance of its budgetary demands at the RE 
and supplementary grants stages justified by efficient utilization of funds and objective assessment 
of anticipated expenditures, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation. Ministry will 
update the committee on the preliminary study conducted by the Research and Information System. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 

85 
 
(Recommendation No 5) 
 The Committee are aware that after the discontinuation of the Plan and Non - Plan 
classification since 2017 -18, budget classifications are done only in terms of Revenue and 
Capital heads and Scheme and Non -Scheme sections. During the examination of budget 
documents, the Committee observe reduced allocation under both the Revenue and Capital 
sections for RE 2019 -20 as well as BE 2020 -21 vis-à-vis BE 2019 -20. The Ministry has 
submitted that the declining trend in both the sections is a reflection of the overall budgetary 
allocation given to MEA and overall BE/RE ceilings. Owing to reduction in allocations, various 
schemes/programmes/activities of the Ministry had to be rationalized during RE 2019 -20 as well 
as BE 2020 -21. On the basis of the replies and j ustifications furnished by the Ministry of 
External Affairs, the Committee deduce that the Ministry has accepted this fact of reduced 
allocations and further adjustments as the ceilings given by the Ministry of Finance. Given the 
Committee’s expectations from the MEA in the context of making India a $5 trillion economy by 
2024-25 it is but imperative that the Ministry thinks beyond its conventional requirement of 
funds. For an endeavor of such a global magnitude, funds ought not be a constraint for any 
reason whatsoever. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a compelling rationale must be 
presented for availability of requisite funds to MEA through engagement with the Ministry of 
Finance at all levels, focused budgetary planning process and usage of compa rative facts and 
figures and with the imperative to bolster India’s standing in the comity of nations at the 
backdrop and the 5 trillion dollar economy target firmly in view. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has taken full note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Members. The 
Ministry will continue to make efforts to convince Ministry of Finance of its budgetary demands 
justified by efficient utilization of funds and objective assessment of anticipated expenditures, in 
line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation. The Ministry accepts recommendation of the 
Hon’ble Committee that a compelling rationale must be presented for availability of requisite funds 
to the Ministry aided by focussed budgetary planning process and usage of comparative facts & 
figures. The Ministry’s efforts in this direction are guided by zero -based budgeting process, 
effective quarterly expenditure patterns of the Ministry and overall foreign policy priorities 
interwoven with economic objectives of the country.  
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
  
(Recommendation No 8) 
The Committee observe that there has been an upward trend in budgetary allocation 
under the sub-head ‘Missions and Embassies’, moving from Rs. 2748.06 crore in BE 2019 -20 to 
Rs. 2910. 56 crore at RE 2019 -20 stage and to Rs. 2994.06 crore at BE 2020 - 21 stage. As per 
the Ministry, the enhanced allocation under this Head is in keeping with the growing diplomatic 

86 
 
outreach by the Government of India and the need to expand our presence in various parts of the 
world, which are presently represented through concur rent accreditations. The Committee note 
that the establishment of Missions and Posts abroad is guided by six factors – assessment of 
India’s geo -political priorities, level of bilateral ties, regional factors, diaspora connections, 
commercial, developmenta l cultural interests and reciprocal ties with the countries concerned. 
The Committee also observe that approval has been given for establishment of 18 new Missions 
in Africa. Of these, 9 Missions are already operational in Burkina Faso, Republic of Congo, 
Cameroon, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Guinea, Rwanda and Kingdom of Eswatini 
(Swaziland). 
 The Committee are satisfied to note that with increase in the allocation under the sub -
head ‘Embassies and Mission’ for 2020 -21 the Ministry has shown determination to open new 
Missions in the countries. However, India still has no resident Missions in 61 UN member states, 
mostly in Africa and Latin America and it is carrying out preparatory work to ascertain the 
feasibility of establishing new Missions in such countries. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should complete the establishment of the remaining 9 Missions in Africa in a time -
bound manner and after taking into consideration the various factors, prepare a roadmap along 
with timel ines for opening up of Missions in remaining countries and apprise the Committee 
about the same. In view of our relations with Latin American countries, the Committee expect 
the Ministry to accord due priority to setting up of Missions/Posts in that region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India realizes its strategic objectives through various means including the expansion of 
its diplomatic footprint.  Guided by various factors that govern the opening of new Missions, such 
as India’s geo -political priorities, level of bilateral ties, regional factor, diaspora connections, 
commercial, developmental, cultural interests and reciprocal ties, decisions to open new Missions 
are evaluated at senior levels from time to time. Nine new Missions have already been established in 
Africa in pursuance of the Cabinet decision to open 18 new Missions in Africa during 2018 -21. 
Remaining nine Missions are being opened on a time-bound manner. In addition, there is also a plan 
to open 15 new Missions in different parts of the world including in Latin America. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 9) 
 In their previous Report on Demands for Grants, the Committee have been urging the 
Ministry to improve monitoring mechanism of all the Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee 
observe that the Ministry has resorted to two broad tools i.e General Mechanisms suc h as 
inspections, annual general report, MEA Performance Smart Board and Specific Mechanisms 
like Political Reports, Economic and Commercial Reports, Annual Consular Report, Cultural 
Outreach etc. to regularly monitor the functioning and performance of Ind ian Missions and Posts 

87 
 
abroad. The Ministry has apprised the Committee that the web -portal namely Performance 
Evaluation and Monitoring Systems (PEMS) is being revamped and will be launched by second 
quarter of 2020. 
 The Committee are pleased to learn tha t the combination of tools employed by MEA 
for monitoring the functioning and performance of Indian Missions/Posts abroad with the 
objective of increasing their efficiency and effectiveness has considerably scaled up the activities 
by Missions and Posts an d political engagement and bilateral meetings have picked up the pace. 
In this regard, the Committee, however, would suggest that the Ministry should prepare an 
annual data on the overall outcomes of monitoring mechanism of various Missions/Posts abroad 
along with the country -specific challenges faced by them. The Committee also desire to be 
apprised about the launching of the revamped PEMS portal which has already failed on several 
schedules. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Directorate General of Inspections (DGI) was set -up in 2014 to streamline the 
system of inspection of Indian Missions/Posts abroad. Ministry introduced a web -portal namely 
Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) in 2016 using a set of 60 binary 
questions to evaluate the Missions/Posts. 19 Missions/Posts have been inspected based on PEMS 
between 2017- 2019. 
 However, it was felt that on -site inspection of Missions/Posts is a time consuming 
process and it is not possible to inspect more than 10 -15 Missions/Posts in a y ear. It was thus 
decided that off -site inspection mechanism may also be put in place. Keeping this in mind, 
existing PEMS postal is being modified with a view to not only identify Missions/Posts for 
onsite inspection but also to enable Ministry to undertak e off -site inspection of all 
Missions/Posts on the basis of documents submitted/uploaded by them on PEMS portal. 
 This is an innovative step being planned by the Ministry which has become more 
relevant in this COVID era. Inputs from concerned Divisions hav e been sought to frame suitable 
questions/queries which would enable the Ministry’s directions on a particular subject/matter. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 (Recommendation No 11) 
The Committee are aware that the Passport Seva Project (PSP) is one of the largest citizen -
centric project under the National e -Governance Plan. The scale and magnitude of passport 
related services can be gauged from the fact that in 2019, approximately 1. 22 crore passports 
were issued in India and abroad. The Committee are happy to learn that there are 93 Passport 
Seva Kendras (PSK) and 424 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras (POPSK) that are functioning 
as extended arms of the 36 Passport Offices in the cou ntry. There is a proposal of opening of 
PSK/POPSK in every Parliamentary constituency of the country. The Ministry has also informed 

88 
 
that Passport Seva Programme has been extended to Indian Missions/Posts abroad in order to 
provide better and smoother service delivery experience to Indian Diaspora living abroad. So far, 
54 Indian Missions have been integrated into Passport Seva Project and integration in several 
other Missions/Posts is in progress. The Committee observe that the Ministry maintains a central  
database called Passport Related Information Data Exchange (PRIDE) which contains details of 
Passports. Moreover, the Committee also note that MEA has put in place a strengthened 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism, whereby a Multilingual Call Centre with a tol l free number 
(1800- 258-1800), operating  in 17 languages and on 24*7 basis caters to dissemination of 
information about various passport related services. 
 
 The issuance of passports in a timely, seamless and hassle -free manner is the most 
citizen centric public delivery function performed by the Ministry. The Committee are satisfied 
to know about the slew of initiatives taken by the Ministry to make qualitative and quantitative 
improvements in the delivery of passport services in the country during 2019 -20. The 
Committee, however, desire that initiative should be taken to open up new PSK/POPKs in every 
Parliamentary constituency as per the targets fixed in this regard. The Committee also desire to 
be apprised about the progress made in integration of remai ning Missions/Posts abroad into the 
Passport Seva Project. The Ministry should also ensure that the grievance redressal of citizens 
related to passport services is addressed in a time-bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As on 13 April 2020, 517 Passport Seva Kendras, including 93 PSKs and 424 POPSKs, 
are functioning in the country. By opening 93 PSK and 424 POPSK, the Ministry has covered 
488 Lok Sabha Constituencies where there is at least one Passport Kendra. The Minist ry of 
External Affairs and the Department of Posts are working together to ensure operationalization 
of a POPSK in the remaining 55 Lok Sabha Constituencies. Out of this, POPSK in seven Lok 
Sabha Constituencies are ready for inauguration while availability  of requisite space in eight 
POPSK locations is expected to be confirmed by the Department of Posts. The Ministry of 
External Affairs and the Department of Posts are working closely to set up a POPSK in the 
remaining 40 Lok Sabha constituencies where requisite space is presently not available.  
As on current date, 59 Missions/Posts have been successfully integrated into the Passport 
Seva Project (PSP). The Ministry has advised 121 Missions/Posts to acquire the necessary IT 
equipment for integration into the PSP system. Of this, 13 Missions/Posts have procured the 
requisite IT equipment and the integration work is currently in progress. 52 Missions/Posts are in 
the process of acquiring the necessary equipment while the Ministry is coordinating with the 56 
other Missions/Posts to expedite the proces s. Once availability of the IT equipment is confirmed 
by the Missions/Posts to the Ministry, the integration will be effected remotely.  

89 
 
 The grievance related to passport services are taken up by the respective Passport Offices 
on real-time basis and redr essed on priority. Since February 2020, Ministry has moved to the 
upgraded version 7.0 of the Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAMS) mapping thereby the last mile grievance officers to improve grievance redressal 
time and qual ity of disposal. All the Missions/Posts abroad have also been brought on the 
upgraded CPGRAMS providing opportunity to the citizens to reach out to them directly.  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
(Recommendation No 15) 
 The Committee are happy to learn that development cooperation that constitutes a 
significant facet of India’s external engagement has expanded both geographically and sectorally 
in terms of its reach and spread. For BE 2020 -21, just like the trend for MEA’ s budget, the 
proportion of allocation under the sub -head ‘Technical and Economic Co - operation’ has dipped 
from Rs. 7333.79 crore to Rs. 6617.37 (BE 2020 -21). Despite repeated recommendations of the 
Committee to avoid budgetary cuts under this head, the r educed allocations for developmental 
aid and assistance is incomprehensible. 
 
 The Committee observe that this budget head caters to India’s aid and assistance 
programmes not only in India’s immediate and extended neighbourhood but also to countries in 
South East Asia, Central Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Indo -Pacific 
region. The Ministry has informed that allocations for aid heads are based made after 
undertaking a realistic spending assessment based on project implementation cycl es, local 
conditions and physical progress for ongoing projects. On the basis of facts and figures furnished 
by the Ministry, the Committee observe a disparity between the budgetary demands made by 
MEA and actual allocations given by the Ministry of Financ e as well as between actual 
allocation and utilization of the same by MEA. The Ministry’s assertion regarding the 
provisioning of adequate allocation of funds being taken up with the Ministry of Finance at 
various levels has been noted. Taking a serious vi ew of this matter, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry of External Affairs should ensure that the uneven utilization pattern under this 
head is reduced to bare minimum and limited only to delays pertaining to extraneous factors. 
Furthermore, the Comm ittee also suggest that a study may be conducted on the objectives, 
modalities and implications of our developmental cooperation over the years so that more funds 
allocation may be justified for India’s external engagement. The Committee would also like to  
convey that while allocating budget under the head ‘Technical and Economic Cooperation’, the 
Ministry of Finance should bear in mind the ramifications of budgetary cuts under this head on 
our bilateral, regional as well as multilateral engagements. 
 
 

90 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of External Affairs handles a variety of projects in different parts of the world, 
with each project involving multiple stakeholders including Indian PSUs/ private companies in 
India and in the host countries, and each pr oject involves a unique set of issues and challenges in 
execution.  The Ministry is closely engaged in closely monitoring the progress of the respective 
projects, and regularly updates respective budget requirement based on inputs received from the 
project monitoring/ implementing agencies taking into account a realistic assessment of local 
conditions on the ground, local regulatory framework and assurances to be fulfilled by the local 
authorities etc.  However, some amount of uncertainty and unpredictability in the project cycle and 
our ability to fulfil the physical and financial targets set in case of each project is unavoidable since 
we do not have control over the operating environment.  However, efforts are made to periodically 
update and revise our bu dget projection and requirement for the development assistance to other 
countries taking into account the overall perspective of a dynamic and fluid nature.   
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 (Recommendation No 24) 
It is disconcerting for the Committee to note decline in allocation under the sub- head ‘Aid to 
African countries’ from Rs. 450 crore in BE 2019 -20 to Rs. 300 crore in BE 2020 -21. Delayed 
execution of projects leading to under -utilization of earmarked fund s seems to be the cause of 
this reduction. Justifying the delay in completion of projects under India -Africa Forum Summit 
(IAFS), the Ministry has stated that considerable challenges, including lack of funds and 
manpower from the Indian side, were faced in  the implementation of the proposals to set up 
institutions in Africa. Moreover, IAFS -IV is scheduled to take place this year. The Committee 
are concerned to note that over the years, there has been slow progress in implementation of 
projects under India A frica Forum Summits I, II and III. The Committee note that a regular and 
high-level review of projects undertaken under various IAFS is carried out in consultation with 
all concerned stakeholders and policy decisions are taken accordingly. The Committee ha ve 
noted that so far 15 African countries - Benin, Republic of Guinea, Zambia, Malawi, Ghana, 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritius, Uganda, Mozambique, Comoros, 
Sierra Leone, Sudan, Mali and Eritrea - have signed MoUs with TCIL for participating in the Pan 
Africa e-network Project (PaeNP). 
 
 Given the significance of the African region, the drooping allocation and the slow 
pace of progress in projects there is disappointing. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that MEA should accord due importance to Africa in our foreign policy and 
developmental cooperation should clearly reflect it. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry 
will actively engage with the host countries, the concerned Indian Missions, Implementing 
Agencies and the line Ministries for timely implementation of the proj ects. In this regard, India’s 

91 
 
experience in development cooperation over the years should come handy in extending our 
outreach in Africa. The Committee, strongly recommend that enhanced allocation must be 
provisioned for this head and based on a feasibilit y study, physical and financial targets should 
be established for completion of all ongoing projects in Africa. The Committee, further, urge that 
the Ministry should take suitable measures to ensure the timely handover of the Pan African e -
Network Project and apprise the Committee about the same at regular intervals. 
 
Reply of the Goverenment 
 
The Ministry has sincerely noted the concerns and recommendations of the Committee. 
The Ministry would like to reassure the Hon’ble Committee that Africa is receiving very high 
priority by the Government.  
 
 Prime Minister enunciated 10 guiding principles in Uganda in 2018, which will guide 
India-Africa relations and take our engagement to the next level. These guiding principles have 
given “top priority” to a range of areas including digital & IT, especially for people -centric 
projects, agriculture, trade & investment, development partnership, enhance local capacity and 
assist African youth, capacity building, climate change, cooperation in terrorism & maritime 
issues, international cooperation for representative world order etc. The Ministry is in the process 
of taking these elements forward in a focused manner. This is reflected in the range of important 
events completed and/or planned between India and Africa in the run up to India -Africa Forum 
Summit-IV.  
 
 With regard to the e -VBAB Network Project for T ele-Education and Tele -Medicine in 
Africa, after signing of the MoU between Director, TCIL and High Commissioner of Republic of 
The Gambia on 9th March, 2020 in New Delhi, the number of countries participating in the 
Project stands at 16.Subsequent to sign ing of Agreements by TCIL with four Indian Universities 
recognized by UGC for offering programmes through online mode, enrolments were completed 
for the first academic semester of six degree and diploma programmes in March 2020. A total of 
23 students from 6 African countries qualified for scholarships. With regard to tele-medicine, the 
first live tele-consultation took place on 17th March, 2020 on the e -Sanjeevani platform between 
faculty from the University Teaching Hospital, Zambia and Post Graduate Inst itute of Medical 
Education & Research, Chandigarh. 
 
 We would like to reassure the Hon’ble Committee that this high priority and importance 
accorded to Africa in our Foreign Policy is sought to be reflected in the development cooperation 
context. In this c ontext, the Ministry would also like to inter alia mention that regular review of 
the various projects is being conducted and coordinated to monitor the implementation and speed 
up, where necessary. The revision of India Development Assistance Scheme (IDEA S) 
Guidelines in 2015 is already making a difference to the pace of implementation and we are 
keeping it under review to enhance this further. Our effort to enhance our close bilateral links 

92 
 
with African countries and to further enhance our development par tnership has been appreciated 
by African countries.  
 
 The Ministry has taken a note of all the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee and 
will seek to address them suitably. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 (Recommendation No 31) 
The Committee note that Protector General of Emigrant (PGoE) through 12 Protector of 
Emigrant (PoE) Offices administers all operational matters related to emigration, provision of 
emigration services to emigrants and enforcement of Emigrant Act 1983. As a statutory authority  
under the Emigration Act 1983, the PGoE is primarily responsible for the welfare and protection 
of emigrant workers falling in the Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) category. With such a 
vast and critical mandate to fulfill, an measly allocation of Rs. 20.08 crore has been earmarked 
for BE 2020-21. The Committee have taken a serious view of the low priority being accorded to 
PGoE, post merger, as evident in the insignificant budgetary allocation. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry ought t o pay attention to PGoE and its offices by provisioning of 
adequate funds and human capital.. The Ministry may also chalk out a roadmap with timelines 
for setting up more PoE offices and apprise the Committee about the progress made in his regard 
within three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of External Affairs would like to mention that thirteenth Protector of 
Emigrant (PoE) Office in Guwahati is in the process of being fully operationalised with the 
joining of acting Protector of Emigrants there. For opening of more PoE offices acro ss all over 
the India, in state where PoE offices do not exist at present, Ministry has regularly conveyed its 
intention of opening of PoE offices in States/Union Territories. Till date, Odisha and Tripura 
have conveyed their consent for opening of PoE off ice in their states while Chhattisgarh and 
Arunachal Pradesh have replied that opening of a PoE office in their States is not felt necessary 
at present. The Standing Committee will be informed about further progress in this regard.  
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 (Recommendation No 32) 
The Committee are aware that various schemes and programmes are undertaken by the 
Ministry for protection and welfare of Overseas Indians. It is observed that schemes like India 
Development Foundation of Overse as Indians (IDF -OI), Study India Programme, Overseas 
Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) and Tracing the Roots Scheme have been closed between 2014 

93 
 
and 2018. The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) acts as an effective instrument for engagement 
with our Diaspora. The Ministry has informed that in order to leverage the soft power of Indian 
Diaspora,it has been working to design appropriate and well -calibrated institutional responses. 
While tendering evidence before the Committee, the Foreign Secretary spelt out the ‘4 C’s 
approach of Government of India for engagement with the Indian Diaspora. These include 
Connect with India, Care for the safety and security, Celebrate with Diaspora and Contribute to 
India’s Development. 
 
 Keeping in mind the size, magnitude and depth of our Diaspora across the globe, the 
Committee feel that the allocations made to various schemes and programmes for the welfare of 
Overseas Indians is uneven and inadequate. The Committee were hopeful that following the 
merger of MoIA and MEA, the e ngagement with Overseas Indians would receive due impetus. 
Upon a close scrutiny of the schemes, programmes and activities relating to Overseas Indians, 
the Committee find that the Ministry’s assertion that highest priority has been given to Overseas 
Indian Affairs, post merger, does not find corresponding resonance in the budgetary allocation. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should constitute a working 
group to assess all schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians  and apprise them 
about its outcome within six months. The Ministry should ensure that requisite institutional, 
administrative and fiscal arrangements are made so that the objectives behind merger of the 
Ministries are achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Committee’s recommendation that Ministry should constitute a working group to assess 
all schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians and apprise them about its outcome 
within six months is duly noted. It is submitted that all schemes and program mes for welfare of 
overseas Indians are regularly reviewed at the level of the Minister -in-Charge and necessary 
action taken to optimise their functioning. Some examples are: 
 
(i)  Study India Programme (SIP) was closed in 2016 given the similarity of SIP with KIP (Know 
India Programme); 
 
(ii)  The format of the PBD Convention was changed from annual to once in two years after 
2015. PBD conferences were held in the interval between two conventions and their 
deliberations fed into the plenary sessions of the  PBD Convention. This was done to make the 
convention more meaningful and give the diaspora a voice in policy making in Government of 
India; 
 
(iii) Videsh Sampark programme was started from the year 2017 as a part of MEA’s state 
outreach programme to promo te in-depth dialogue between the Ministry and State Governments 
to design appropriate and well -calibrated institutional responses for Diaspora engagement and 
migration management; 
 

94 
 
(iv) Modality of implementation of Media Campaign programme was changed fro m showing ads 
on various television channels, to roping in prominent personalities in different languages to 
promote safe and legal migration on social media; 
 
(v) Global Indian Students Portal is being developed to provide complete and comprehensive 
information on educational facilities abroad to Indian Students wishing to pursue studies abroad; 
 
(vi) Know India Programme was revamped during FY 2015 -16 along with enhancing the budget 
allocation for the scheme. The enhancement of budget was made on account of increasing the 
number of KIP visits to India to 6 during one FY and due to addition of new element of Pravasi 
Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY) as a special KIP. Besides, some new elements were also added 
in the KIP programme, like - Provide T-Shirt to KIP Pa rticipants; Visit to Kingdom of Dreams, 
Gurgaon (Theme Park); Showcasing a Bollywood Movie and a visit to Film City, Noida for the 
participants.  
 
(vii) India Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF-OI) was closed in March 31, 2018 
to avoid duplication of work and to enhance the efficiency of other schemes; 
 
(viii) Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) was closed down with Cabinet approval on 
30.3.2017 after functions related to promotion of investments by overseas Indians shifted to 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) following merger of MOIA 
with MEA; 
 
(ix) Tracing the Roots Scheme was reviewed in 2016 -17 and closed down with EAM’s approval 
after it was observed that performance of the scheme was unsatisfactory with  only 18 
applications in 8 years; 
 
Thus it may be seen that Ministry is constantly assessing the performance, reviewing and 
carrying out necessary changes to all schemes and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians. 
This review is carried out at the leve l of the Minister -in-Charge through existing institutional, 
administrative and fiscal arrangements which are sufficient for the purpose. Thus, it is felt that 
creation of a parallel authority to carry out the same functions as are already being carried out  by 
Ministry is not necessary, but rather would entail duplication of work. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
  
(Recommendation No 35) 
The Committee are displeased to note that the allocation  under  this head  has  been 
reduced from Rs. 11 crore in 2019 -20 (BE) to Rs. 5 crore in 2020 -21 (BE).  The  budget under 
this sub -head has been almost halved at a time when renewed efforts are requi red to spread 
awareness about safe and legal migration. The Committee express their strong disapproval of the 
reduction being effected in such an important area of emigration. The Committee note that 
various personalities have been approached for greater o utreach of media awareness campaigns 

95 
 
and shooting of the ads will commence during financial year 2020 -21. The involvement of 
famous personalities in the ad campaigns is a welcome step and the Ministry should seek funds 
at the RE stage for the advertisement s. The Committee also urge that the Ministry carry out an 
impact assessment study of the awareness campaign and in the light of its findings, establish a 
formal mechanism for continuous monitoring and evaluation of these campaigns. The Committee 
also recommend that the Ministry proactively engage with the State Governments to deepen the 
impact of information and awareness campaigns. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry carried out media campaign on safe and legal migration by bringing out ads on 
safe and legal migration on various TV Channels and newspaper ads.  The   ads were also 
disseminated on social media by using twitter and facebook. Following a directive , the ads were 
sent to the Advertisement Approval Cell (AAC) which had observed that ads could be prepared 
by involving prominent personalities in regional languages and disseminated through social 
media at minimum expenditure. Thereafter, Ministry approached various prominent personalities 
in Hindi and regional languages for their support on gratis basis.  Prominent persons have 
already agreed for their support in Hindi and Five regional languages for Media Awareness 
Campaign on gratis basis.  This resulte d in economy of expenditure with due realisation of 
objective involving regional personalities to run an effective awareness campaign.   
 
 The Ministry is carrying out impact assessment study of the media awareness through 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC), including its campaigns on social media.  The 
Recommendation of the Committee have been duly noted to establish a formal mech anism for 
continuous monitoring and evaluation of media awareness campaigns, after findings of the media 
assessment study by IIMC.  
  
 Ministry has already engaged with State Governments to disseminate media awareness 
programme through electronic and print media either free or at the cost of the State Government.  
Many State Governments are doing the programme successfully to deepen the impact of 
information and awareness campaigns. The Ministry is following up with other States to 
disseminate media awareness programme.  
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

96 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 28 JANUARY, 2021 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 28 January, 2021 from 1630 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Block ‘A’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
3.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
4.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
5.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
6.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
7.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
8.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
10.  Shri Brij Lal 
 
Secretariat 
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
 2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Additional Director  
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the  draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the 
year 2020-21. 

97 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to  offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Report with the minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

98 
 
APPENDIX- I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, and 39. 
Total- 28 
Percentage: 70% 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL          
         Total- Nil 
Percentage: 0 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
     Recommendation Nos. 16 and 40       
Total- 2 
Percentage: 5% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in  respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos.  3, 5, 8, 9,11, 15, 24, 31, 32, and 35  
Total- 10 
Percentage: 25% 
  