 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE OF NON-RESIDENT 
INDIAN BILL, 2019 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH 2020/PHALGUNA, 1941 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-2020) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 03 

 
THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-2020) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
THE REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE OF                            
NON-RESIDENT INDIAN BILL, 2019 
 
 
                             
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 March, 2020 
          Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 13 March, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH 2020/PHALGUNA, 1941 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2020 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
      PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2018-2019…………………………………             (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2019-2020…………………………………             (iii) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………….. (iv) 
REPORT 
 
Chapter I Introductory…………………………………………………………….. 01     
 
Chapter II  Chapter-wise and Clause-wise Examination of the Registration of Marriage 27 
 of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019   …………………        
 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
Annexure-I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 01.03.2019 ……….. 46 
Annexure-II Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 18.11.2019 ……….. 48 
Annexure-III Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 02.12.2019………… 51 
Annexure-IV    Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27.01.2020………. 54 
Annexure-V    Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on12.03.2020.………. 57 
Annexure-VI The Registration of the Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2018-19) 
 
  
1. Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
       Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Sirajuddin Ajmal 
 3. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
 4. Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose 
 5. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
 6. Shri Ramen Deka 
 7. Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
 8. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 9.  Prof. Richard Hay 
 10. Shri Raghav Lakhanpal 
 11. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
12. Shri P.R. Senthilnathan 
 13. Shri A. Anwhar Raajhaa 
 14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
 15. Shri Venakateswara Rao (Babu) Magantti  
 16. Shri Mohammad Salim 
 17. Prof. (Dr.) Mamtaz Sanghamita  
 18. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
 19. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
 20. Shri Sharad Tripathi 
 21. Vacant 
        Rajya Sabha 
 22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Jose K. Mani 
24. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
25. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
26. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
27. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
28. Smt. Kanimozhi 
29. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
30. Shri V. Muraleedharan 
 31. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
  Lok Sabha   
  
2.   Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
3.  Shri Margani Bharat   
4.   Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
5.   Shri Jayadev Galla 
6.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.   Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8.   Shri Pakauri Lal Kol   
9.   Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.   Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.   Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.   Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha   
13.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.   Shri Soyam Babu Rao  
16.   Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
17.   Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
18.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan  
19.   Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20.   Shri Rebati Tripura 
21.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
  
Rajya Sabha  
  
22.   Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.   Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.   Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.   Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.   Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel  
28.   Shri Sharad Pawar  
29.   Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas$  
30.   Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.   Shri Abdul Wahab  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Mohd. Taimoor   - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
$      Shri Neeraj Shekhar, Member, Rajya Sabha had resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 31.1.2020 and  Shri Shamsher 
Singh Manhas,Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 4.2.2020. 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Co mmittee on External Affairs (20 19-2020) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019”. 
 
2. „The Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 2019‟ was introduced in the Ra jya 
Sabha on 11 February 2019.   It was referred by the Speaker ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) to t he Committee on 
External Affairs (2018-19) on 19 February, 2019 for examination and Report.  After constitution of 
Seventeenth Lok Sabha, the Bill was re-referred by the Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Committee on External 
Affairs (2019-20) on 4 October, 2019 for examination and Report.  
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, t he erstwhile Committee on External Affairs (2018-19) 
took preliminary briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 01.03.2019. When 
the Bill was re-referred, the Committee on External Affair (2019 -20) took briefing by the representatives 
of Ministries of External Affairs, Women and Child Development, Home Affairs and  Ministry Law & 
Justice (Department of Legal Affairs ) on 18.11.2019. Further, the Committee took oral evide nce of 
representatives of the se Ministries and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) on 
02.12.2019 and 27.01.2020. The Committee also sought written responses on various aspects of the Bill 
from the Ministry of External Affairs.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Re port at their Sitting held on 12 March, 2020. The 
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of Ministries o f External 
Affairs, Women and Child Development, Home Affairs and Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of 
Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) who appeared and  placed their considered views before the 
Committee and also for furnishing written notes a nd information as desired by the Committee  in 
connection with the examination of the Bill.   
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the Observations and R ecommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
12 March, 2020                                                             Chairperson, 
   22  Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)                                     Committee on External Affairs 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
Introductory 
 „The Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 2019 ‟ was introduced in the Raya 
Sabha on 11 February 2019 . It was referred by the Speaker ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) to the Committee 
on External Affairs (2018-19) on 19 February, 2019 for examination and Report .  After formation of 
Seventeenth Lok Sabha , t he Bill  was re -referred by the Speaker, Lok Sabha  to the Committee on 
External Affairs (2019-20) on 4 October, 2019 for examination and Report.  
1.2 The Bill seeks to provide for registration of marriage of Non -Resident Indian and further to 
amend the Passport Act, 1967 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons in the Bill inter-alia reads as under: 
“There have been several reports of Indian women being trapped in fraudulent marriages with 
Non-Resident Indians. This has indeed emphasised the persistent need to build safeguards in 
order to protect those spouses from such situations. Therefore, it is necessary that the marriage 
solemnized or otherwise in India or outside India shall be registered within a period of thirty 
days from the date of marriage. It has been decided to bring in legislation to provide for 
compulsory reg istration of marriage for better enforcement of right of the deserted spouse 
under various family laws. 
2. Accordingly, The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019 proposes 
to provide for compulsory registration of marriage by a non Resi dent Indian within a period 
thirty days from the date of marriage. It also seeks to amend the Passport Act, 1967 and the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
3. The proposed amendment of the Passport Act, 1967 empowers the passport authority 
to impound or cau se to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel document of a Non -
Resident Indian, if it is brought to his notice that the Non -Resident Indian has not registered 
his marriage within a period of thirty days from the date of marriage. 
4. The proposed amend ments to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 would also 
empower the Courts for issuance of summons, warrants through the specifically designated 
website of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India. It further provides for 
attachment of the properties, both movable and immovable, belonging to a proclaimed 
offender. 
5. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.” 
 
 
 
Background  
 
 1.4 As regards the background work done in the context of bringing this legislative proposal , the 
Ministry informed the Committee that an Expert Committee headed by retired Judge, Mr. Justice 

2 
 
Arvind Kumar, was set up in May 2017 to identify legal and regulatory hurdles faced by Indian 
women married to NRIs and to propose amendments in the existing Acts, registration process,  or new 
policies, laws and regulations.  In its report on 23 August 2017, the Expert Committee had inter alia 
recommended several measures including:-  
(i) To make the registration of marriages compulsory by amending the Registr ation of Births and 
Deaths Act 1969; 
(ii) The creation of an integrated nodal agency within the Union Government with branch nodal 
agencies and missions abroad; 
(iii) Empowering family courts to issue lookout circulars;  
(iv) Revocation or impounding of passport;  
(v) To create a website for NRI marriages that might be linked to the port of MEA and the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development;  
(vi) For making appropriate amendments with regard to service of summons, warrants or  
proclamations in the relevant provisions of the CPC and the Criminal Procedure Code.  
1.5 When asked whether the recommendations of the Expert Committee have been accepted in 
toto, Foreign Secretary during the course of briefing on 18 November, 2019 submitted: 
“Most of the recommendations have been accepted and some of them have already been 
implemented. There are some other recommendations which are still being examined and 
which we hope to implement in the coming period of time". 
 
1.6 The details of recommendations made by the Expert Committee are given below: 
i) Make the registration of marriages compulsory by amending The Registration of Births & 
Deaths Act, 1969. 
- Heavy fine, punitive and imprisonment for violation / non registration of marriage.       
- Special columns for registration of  marriages where any of the spouse is an NRI   
- Amendments in other relevant statutes regarding the registration of marriage of 
Christian, Parsis, Sikhs etc. with focus on consequences of non-registration.  
ii) Creation of Integ rated Nodal Agency -INA with officials of Ministry of External Affairs, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Women  & Child Development alongwith 
representative of National Commission for Women.  
- Branch Nodal Agencies – BNA  to be set up in Indian Embassy/ High Commission  

3 
 
iii) Training modules/ sensitization of local police station / women cells and incorporation in 
their induction / refresher courses. 
iv) Training courses/ modules for Judicial Officers, particularly family courts. 
v) It is recommended that the amount of said assistance may be enhanced from US $ 4000 to 
US $5000. 
vi) To take up the issue with reciprocal countries incorporate special category of visas in 
Bilateral Treaties to extend the stay of wif e in foreign country in the event of sponsorship/ 
withdrawal by the husband.  
vii) Convention with foreign countries – with an idea to sensitize them regarding the issue & 
seeking cooperation to address the malice.  
viii) Empowering family courts to issue LOC. 
ix) Revocation/ impounding of passport 
x) Deportation 
xi) Extradition-provisional arrest and Red Corner Notice  
xii) Improvising / incorporating provisions to re -writing specially deal with such cases – NRI 
Marriage disputes and the concessions/ visa extension etc. to be made a vailable to the NRI 
bride in MLATs/ bilateral treaties – including video conferencing and facilitation of 
attachment of movable/ immovable property of the delinquent husband/ accused.  
xiii) Awareness campaigns of various forms particularly colleges and Panchaya ts taking 
assistance of histrionics / theatre.  
xiv) Helplines to be made available at Nodal agencies i.e. INA and BNA. 
xv) To create website for NRI marriages and that of INA alongwith desired links on the 
website of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, etc. and vise-versa.  
xvi) For making appropriate amendments with regard to service of summons/ warrants / 
proclamation in the relevant provisions i.e. Order 5 CPC and Chapter IV of Cr.P.C. 
1.7 During the course of briefing, Foreign Secretary on 18 November, 2019 also submitted: 
“The 155th Report of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Petitions, praying for the solutions for the 
problems arising out of the marriage of Indian women with NRIs presented on the 28 
December, 2018, also made recommendations of similar nature. Likewise, a recent petition was 
filed in the Supreme Court in September, 2018, has made similar requests seeking protection of 
the fundamental rights of women abandoned by NRI husbands. This has strengthened the 
Ministry‟s view that legislation is required to address this problem.” 

4 
 
1.8 The draft Bill was prepared keeping in view the recommendations made by an Expert 
Committee, the recommendations of Petitions Committee, Rajya Sabha and request made in PIL in 
Supreme Court. 
1.9 The 15th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs of the Fifteenth  Lok Sabha had 
also made recommendations regarding the “Schemes for providing legal and financial assistance and 
rehabilitation to the Indian women deserted by their overseas Indian spouses”, which interalia include: 
 To make  concerted efforts to address the NRI marital issues and develop an effective single 
window timely solution to the NRI marital problems,  
 Make available the comprehensive guidelines and information relating to NRI marriages on 
the websites of the Ministry, 
 Provide sufficient staff as well as funds in NRI Cell of NCW for the assistance of distressed 
women,  
 Create awareness and sensitize the youth regarding the NRI marital issues,  
 States to ensure NRI marriage certificates to inc lude security number, passport number and 
brief relevant details of the foreign home of the NRI husband, and photocopy of the passport 
of the NRI husband to be pasted in marriage register maintained by the authorities before 
issuing the marriage certificat e and to paste certificate of marriage on wife‟s passport to 
provide proof of her marriage on being abandoned. States to also ensure physical presence of 
the bride and the groom for registration of marriage solemnized in India and finalize a 
uniform registration proforma in this regard,  
 Early implementation of the decision to register FIRs in NRI marital dispute cases without 
delay by the States,  
 Expedite the process of making the serving of notices, summons and enforcement of 
maintenance orders as part of the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLAT)  especially with 
US, UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, 
 Extending financial and legal assistance and rehabilitation to deserted women by the 
Missions/Posts, 
 Set up counselling desks in the Missions/Posts,  
 Preparation of information brochures,  
 Publish awareness material in all major regional languages and publicize awareness of 
cultural, social and legal aspects of NRI marriages via media outlets,  
 Make preparations towards joining the Hague convention etc. 

5 
 
 
1.10 The Committee were surprised to note that the Ministry did not even find it necessary to either 
consider the recommendations made by the Committee on External Affairs in their 1 5th Report of 15th 
Lok Sabha or keep the Draft Bill on website to invite  the views of public and experts before 
introduction of the Bill to Parliament. In response thereto, the Ministry in written reply submitted that 
the Ministry would like to convey sincere regret for the inadvertent omission of the reference to the 
Report of the Standing Committee in the 15 th Lok Sabha in their background notes of the proposed 
Bill.  The Report of the Standing Committee of the 15 th Lok Sabha had made recommendations 
regarding the “Schemes for providing legal and financial assistance and reha bilitation to the Indian 
women deserted by their overseas Indian spouses”. The Ministry had carefully considered the 
recommendations of Report of the Standing Committee in the 15 th Lok Sabha and many 
recommendations were implemented such as the  setting up  of Integrated Nodal agency (INA) as an 
effective single window timely solution to the NRI marital problems, making available the 
comprehensive guidelines and information relating to NRI marriages on the websites of the Ministry, 
extending financial and le gal assistance and rehabilitation to deserted women by the Missions/Posts, 
set up counselling desks in the Missions/Posts etc. 
Problems relating to NRI Marriages 
 
1.11 The Bill has been brought to build safeguards in order to protect the spouses trapped in 
fraudulent marriages with NRIs.  The Ministry of External Affairs in its background note has 
furnished the following typical instances/issues which arise in NRI marriages:- 
(i) Abandonment of wife in India after Marriage: The wife is abandoned  in India after the 
marriage and honeymoon, while the NRI spouse returns to the country of his residence. He promises 
to arrange her visa and ticket to join him in the foreign country, however, he never files for her visa, 
and not have any further contact with his wife in India. 
 (ii) Whereabouts of spouse unknown and Marriage not registered: Abandoned Indian woman 
has no way to contact her spouse abroad, as she does not have his telephone number, passport details, 
address, occupational details, etc. She registers a complaint in t he Indian police station but they 

6 
 
cannot investigate or coordinate with Interpol due to lack of information. Many times, the NRI spouse 
deliberately does not get the marriage registered in the Registrar‟s Office in India. 
 (iii) Visa denied: When the Indian national prepares her visa application to join her spouse abroad, 
even if she has details of her spouse her application is incomplete due to lack of marriage certificate 
since the marriage is not registered in the Registrar‟s Office in India. Her spouse denies that the 
marriage took place. 
 (iv) NRI Spouse already married:  When the Indian national joins her NRI spouse in the foreign 
country she learns that her spouse was already married or has a live -in relationship/partner outside 
marriage.  The Indian national is asked either to continue in the same household or left to f end for 
herself.  In these circumstances, not knowing anyone, being unfamiliar with legal framework, and 
fearing social stigma in India of being abandoned by spouse, she continues in the same household 
often without any rights or status as a wife. Sometime s, the NRI spouse asks his wife to move out of 
the house so that he can marry another woman or bring in his partner. His wife is stranded (sometimes 
with her child) in the foreign country, with no financial means to take care of her and her child‟s basic 
needs. 
  (v) Harassment by spouse and in -law family: The Indian national who joins her spouse in the 
foreign country is subjected to ill -treatment; and abuse (mental and physical) by her spouse and 
family. Under these circumstances, she either leaves the re sidence of her spouse or is sent back to 
India. 
 (vi)  False information about NRI spouse’s job and salary:  On arrival in the foreign country the 
Indian national discovers that her spouse had given false information about his job, immigration 
status, income, property, and other particulars. 
(vii)  Sent back to India:  Indian national reaches the foreign country on a dependent    visa and 
when her visa expires, her spouse doesn‟t renew her visa. She is taken back to India and left there 
without her passport o r a valid visa for the foreign country. There is no further communication from 
her spouse and he does not come back to India to meet her. 
(viii)  Custody of children: The Indian national is not allowed to take her children with her when 
she returns to Indi a. Sometimes children are forcibly taken away by her NRI spouse. She files for 
custody of children and child support, or to bring the children back with her to India. Sometimes she 
has to face her spouse‟s charges that she has abducted her children. Even i f the Indian court passes a 
decree in her favour with reference to child custody the NRI spouse files a counter case in the foreign 
court. 
 Elaborating further on the challenges faced by aggrieved women in the Indian legal system, 
the Ministry submitted as under:- 
 (a) Spouse not responding to summons:  Indian woman files a case in India under criminal law 
for issues pertaining to dowry demands and/or, matrimonial cruelty. The trial cannot proceed as the 
spouse does not attend court proceedings or respond to  summons/warrant of arrest or a Look Out 
Circular issued by Indian authority against him following a case filed by the wife. 

7 
 
 (b) Denial of maintenance in India: Indian nationals divorced from their overseas Indian 
spouses are denied maintenance in India on pretext that the marriage had been dissolved by the spouse 
who is abroad. 
 (c) Obstacles in getting maintenance or divorce: Women who approach the Indian court for 
maintenance or divorce, face issues related to jurisdiction of courts, service of notices or orders, or 
enforcement of orders. Sometimes the NRI spouse commences retaliatory legal proceedings in the 
other country to make her legal actions null and void. 
 (d) High legal costs: Indian national has to incur substantial legal costs while filing for  
maintenance or divorce. Lawyers in India are not keen to take up cases against Overseas Indians due 
to slim chances of winning a case. 
 
 Similarly, the challenges faced by such women in foreign courts, the Ministry submitted the 
follows details:- 
  
 (a) Immigration issues: In case of a conflict, NRI spouse files a complaint against the wife with 
Foreign Immigration authorities or withdraws his sponsorship for wife. As a result the wife‟s visa 
application or renewal is rejected. The wife is stuck in India and the husband remarries. 
  
 (b) Difficulties in countering judicial action: NRI spouse takes advantage of wife‟s ignorance 
about laws in the country and files for divorce abroad. Sometimes the woman does not even know 
about divorce proceedings or she has no money or visa to counter the judicial proceedings. 
  
 (c) Visa issues:  The NRI spouse threatens his wife with cancellation of her visa or Permanent 
Residence Pass or Dependent Pass if she complaints or does not withdraw her complaints about him 
or about abuse. 
  
 (d) Privacy laws: In many developed countries, there are strict privacy laws. The Indian national 
cannot obtain any information (his address or contact details) from the foreign government about her 
spouse without his written consent. 
  
 (e) More lenient divorce grounds in foreign countries: NRI spouse take advantage of lenient 
divorce grounds in foreign legal systems and obtain ex -parte decree of divorce in the foreign country 
through wrongful representation of facts or without her knowledge.  The ex -parte decree is often 
without paying alimony or maintenance. 
 
Number of Cases Reported 
1.12 When enquired about the maintenance of data pertaining to the  above mentioned issues, the 
Ministry of External Affairs in a written reply submitted that the above mentioned grievances are 
interlinked to each other  and that  they do not maintain a category wise and case -wise database. 
However, the Ministry further informed that they have received 5298 petitions/complaints related to 
NRI Marital Grievances in the last four years  and addressed them .  The year -wise details  of 
complaints received by the Ministry from 1 January 2016 to 31 October, 2019 are given in the table 
below:-   

8 
 
Year Number of complaints 
received  
Numbers of complaints addressed 
upto 31 October 2019 
2016 1,510 1,510 
2017 1,498 1,498 
2018 1,299 1,299 
1 Jan to 31   Oct 
2019 
991 991 
Total 5,298 5,298 
 
1.13 When asked about state -wise complaints received and resolved by the Ministry of External 
Affairs and the Ministry of Women and Child Development, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
provided data as mentioned below :- 
State-wise list 
Sl. No. State Name 2016 2017 2018 1st Jan  
2016 to 
31stOct 
2019 
Total 
1. Andhra Pradesh 40 42 31 64 177 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 03 01 01 0 05 
3. Assam 09 02 03 01 15 
4. Bihar 23 27 19 06 75 
5. Chhattisgarh 21 23 20 22 86 
6. NCT of Delhi 110 116 102 108 436 
7. Goa 06 07 04 01 18 
8. Gujarat 46 56 51 55 208 
9. Haryana 80 73 69 66 288 
10. Himachal Pradesh 26 24 21 03 74 
11. Jammu & Kashmir 16 13 10 02 41 
12. Jharkhand 29 23 21 01 74 

9 
 
13. Karnataka 95 91 80 75 341 
14. Kerala 94 80 45 70 289 
15. Madhya Pradesh 80 75 62 32 249 
16. Maharashtra 127 117 106 118 468 
17. Manipur 0 0 0 0 0 
18. Meghalaya 0 0 01 0 01 
19. Mizoram 0 0 0 0 0 
20. Nagaland 0 0 0 0 0 
21. Odisha 17 15 18 13 63 
22. Puducherry 03 01 0 0 04 
23. Punjab 207 225 210 121 763 
24. Rajasthan 131 117 105 18 371 
25. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 
26. Tripura 0 01 0 0 01 
27. Tamil Nadu 95 92 100 34 321 
28. Telangana 33 37 28 47 145 
29. Uttarkhand 11 19 16 15 61 
30. Uttar Pradesh 151 155 125 70 501 
31. West Bengal 57 66 51 22 196 
 Others 0 0 0 27 27 
Total  1510 1498 1299 991 5298 
 

10 
 
1.14 Most of the complaints pertain to issues such as abandonment, harassment, cheating, domestic 
violence by their spouses residing abroad, to ascertain whereabouts of NRI spouses, request for 
extradition, deportation of spouse to India, request for maintenance, support, divorce or child custody 
and request for legal and financial assistance to file a case against the NRI spouse. 
1.15 Upon enquiry as to the country from  which most  complaints relating to NRI marriages  
originate, the Foreign Secretary during the course of briefing on 18 November, 2019 submitted: 
"..We do not have a specific country-wise figure but our records show that the majority 
have come from English -speaking Western countries, namely, the United States, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. F rom the Gulf, there are relatively few 
complaints of  this nature". 
Measures Taken to Redress complaints of Distressed Spouses 
1.16 The Ministry has apprised t he Committee  that they have tried to redress complain ts of 
distressed Indian citizens who have been deserted by the NRI spouses by providing the aggrieved 
spouses with counselling, guidance and also information  about the procedures and mechanisms  such 
as serving judicial summons to the overseas Indian spouse by issuing lookout circulars, by 
impounding or revoking the Indian passport of the husband, by facilitating access to lawyers and 
NGOs empanelled in Indian Missions and even on occasions by providing temporary shelter in some 
cases.  Moreover, the financial assistance up to US $ 4000 in each case is also being provided by all 
missions and posts under the Indian Community Welfare Fund to empanelled legal couns el or to 
Indian Community Welfare Associations abroad to assist the distressed individuals to prepare 
documentation for filing the legal case.   
1.17 When asked about the features of the revised guidelines (2017) for providing Financial and 
Legal Assistance to distressed Indian nationals married to NRI spouses, the Ministry of External 
Affairs in a written reply state d  that the Indian Community Welfare Funds guideli nes were revised 
in September, 2017 to expand the scope of welfare measures which inter-alia includes financial and 
legal assistance to d istressed Indian women married to NRI or a foreigner. Under the revised 
guidelines, the Mission and Posts have been empowered to extend assistance of upto USD 4000 per 
case, provided: 
 The woman is an Indian passport holder: 
  The woman is deserted in India or overseas within seven years of the marriage; or  

11 
 
 Divorce proceedings are initiated wit hin seven years of marriage by her overseas Indian / 
foreigner husband; or  
 An ex -parte divorce has been obtained by t he overseas Indian / foreigner husband within 
seven years of marriage and a case for maintenance and alimony is to be filed by her; 
 Having no criminal case decided a gainst her, however a criminal charge of Parental Child 
Abduction shall not be a bar if the  custody of the child has not yet been adj udicated upon by a 
competent Court. 
The assistance under the scheme will be re leased to the empanelled legal counsel  of the 
applicant or Indian Community Association/Women‟s organization/NGO concerned to enable it to 
take steps to assist the woman in documentation and preparatory work for filing the case provided. 
  
1.18  When asked about the role of the National Commission for Women and other 
Commission/NGOs and the type of inter-ministry coordination for reaching out to women in distress 
due to NRI marriages, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development is the nodal ministry in this regard. The other stakeholder ministries include Ministry of 
External affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law & Justice. An Integrated Nodal 
Agency (INA), as recommended by the Expert Committee on NRI marital disputes, has also been 
constituted. It is aimed to be an effective mechanism to provide a single window timely solution to the 
problems of affected women and there would be a better monitoring of the welfare measures being 
undertaken in this regard. The INA is headed by Ministry of Women and Child Development with 
senior officials from Ministries of External A ffairs, Home Affairs and Law and Justice as its 
members. The INA has already held sixteen mee tings and has issued eight Look Out Circulars as a 
deterrent measure. National Commission for Women was tasked as the National Coordinating Agency 
by the Governmen t of India in April, 2009 for coordinating the efforts by different stakeholders in 
dealing with the issues arising out of NRI marriages. 
1.19   When queried about  the issuance of only very few number of Look Out Circular s, Foreign 
Secretary during the course of briefing on 18 November, 2019 submitted: 
 “One important reason for this is the absence of passport details of NRIs who are alleged 
to have deserted or maltreated their spouses.  The draft legislation will make it easier to 
issue the Look Out Circulars (LOCs) since that information will now be availab le with 
the Government and with the integrated nodal agency.  

12 
 
 
 
1.20 Elaborating on the role of Missions/Posts in assisting distressed spouses in India and abroad to 
protect the rights of such spouses as well as bringing the guilty spouses to a court of law, the Foreign 
Secretary during the course of briefing on 18 November, 2019 submitted: 
“..Role of the India n Mission and Posts abroad ha s actually been critical in this 
whole process. It is, in fact, the inputs which came from Missions  and Posts, t hat 
essentially set into motion the whole process of the Government recognising that 
this is a major problem that is being faced in the country.  It resulted in the inter -
ministerial consultations in the establishment of a separate sub -digital platform 
under the MADAD portal and in the critical decision of the Government that we 
will now provide some financial assistance on a case to case basis to help and 
prepare the legal basis for the distressed spouse and so on.  
Sir, Missions and Posts abroad and our Heads o f Mission and Heads of Post are 
fully seized of this matter particularly in some countries where we find a high 
incidence of such cases.  Those are Canada, United States, Australia, New Zealand 
and the UK and we take special care in ensuring that any complaints that have come 
are immediately attended to.  If they require shelter, we do have some arrangement 
temporarily to house them if they are abroad.  But we find that a very large number 
of cases are actually those of deserted spouses who have never left our shores.  
There are very few cases where deserted spouses are deserted after they have 
followed their husband abroad.  Therefore, the role of Indian Missions and Posts 
comes only in such cases.” 
  
1.21   During the course of briefing on 18 November, 201 9, Foreign Secretary while apprising the 
Committee about the online grievance monitoring system for distressed spouses submitted: 
“The Ministry‟s MADAD Portal , which is an online grievance monitorin g system, was 
launched in 2015 and has proved to be useful for distressed spouses to seek Ministry‟s 
assistance and a module for marital disputes was specially added to the MADAD Portal to 
provide a digital platform for this purpose.  The increase in the number of such petitions 
supports th e Ministry‟s contention that the current measures initiated by our Ministry 
while important may not be entirely sufficient in resolving the problem. “  
1.22 Further, in regard to publishing draft Bill on Ministry‟s website to invite views of public and 
experts, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the Draft Bill was not put up on the website to 
seek views of the public as it was decided by the Stakeholder Ministries that the Bill may be urgently 
put up in Parliament to ameliorate the problems face d by Indian citizens married to NRI spouses.  No 
views of the State Government were considered in this case. However, before setting up of the 

13 
 
Committee for NRI marriages, a meeting of all State Marriage Registrars was organized by Ministry 
of Women and Child Development. 
1.23 When justification was sought for not obtaining view of general public and State 
Governments, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the deliberations of the Expert 
Committee, 155th Report of the Rajya Sabha and the hearing on the PIL filed in the Supreme Court 
were based on wider stakeholders consultations which included government officials, legal experts, 
civil society members, women organizations, etc. 
1.24 In this context, the Ministry further submitted that several meetings at the level of Ministers 
and Senior Officers of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Women and Child 
Development and Law and Justice were held where issues pertaining to distressed Indian  Citizens 
were discussed and deliberated upon.  On the basis of the  discussions in these meetings, a draft Bill 
was prepared. 
1.25 Further, when asked whether aggrieved women and members of civil society were involved in 
these deliberations meetings, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the aggrieved women and 
members of civil society were not part of these meetings. 
1.26 While describing the further process for finalisation and introduction of Bill, the Ministry 
submitted in a writt en reply that t he proposed legislation was discussed and approved in a meeting 
chaired by the Home Minister and attended by Minister of External Affairs, Minister of Women and 
Child Development, Minister of Law & Justice and approved unanimously. With the approval of 
Prime Minister under Rule 12 of Government of Indian (Transaction of Business) 1961, a bill titled 
“The Registration of of Marriage of Non -Resident India, Bill, 2019” was introduced in Rajya Sabha 
on February 11, 2019.  
Components of the Bill 
1.27 The Components of the Bill are as under: 

14 
 
(i)  Registration of Marriages by Non-Resident Indian; 
(ii) Amendment to the Passport Act 1967 and 
(iii) Amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. 
1.28 The Committee desire d that the proposed legislatio n be made more comprehensive to also 
cover issues relating to divorce, maintenance and child support by the NRI for the deserted spouse. In 
this context, Foreign Secretary during the briefing on 18 November, 2019 informed the Committee: 
“The major objectiv e of this legislation is to locate the NRI who has duped and then 
deserted his spouse since the current challenge is to know his whereabouts.  Until we have 
this critical information, we can neither revoke, nor impound his passport, nor serve 
summons or wa rrants to the individual.  Furthermore, it is felt that the current legal 
provisions in Chapter 4 in the Consular Manual, 1983 dealing with marriage and in the 
Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 adequately address the issues of divorce, maintenance and 
child support.” 
Registration of Marriages by Non-Resident Indian 
 
1.29 The Committee are informed that when there is a problem in NRI marriage, the Indian 
national generally registers a complaint in an Indian police station. The police cannot investigate or 
coordinate with Interpol due to lack of information. Further, the NRI spouse , deliberately in some 
instances, avoid marriage registration in the Registrar‟s Office in India. Sometimes, the NRI spouse  
denies that the marriage took place. Furthermore, due to strict privacy laws in many developed 
countries, the Indian national cannot obtain any information (his address or contact details) from the 
foreign government about her spouse without his written c onsent. Due to unavailability of such 
details, the distressed spouse is unable to exercise her rights to grant of compensation or damages.  
1.30 Elaborating the purpose  of the mandatory registration of NRI marriages within 30 days from 
the date of marri age proposed in the bill , Foreign Secretary during the course of briefing on 18 
November, 2019 submitted: 
“The purpose of making it mandatory to register the marriage within 30 days of the 
marriage in India or abroad is to secure the details of the travel documents or passport as 
well as the details of the visa, the Permanent Resident Card and the permanent resi dential 
address in a foreign country of the Non -Resident Indian.  In so doing, the Ministry will 

15 
 
have the requisite information to trace the NRI and to enable legal action to be taken for 
enforcement of rights of the abandoned spouse under various family laws.” 
 
1.31  The Committee are informed that s ince maximum number of NRI marriages are conducted in 
India, the registration of marriages is  done through the Registrars of the State Governments, and this 
data is further collected and compiled by the State r egistration authorities, efforts would also be made 
to disseminate the information about the provisions of the bill and undertake awareness campaign in 
the public through the  Ministry of Women & Child Development, National Commission of Women, 
State Governments and the State Commissions for Women.   
1.32 When asked about the details of provisions for registration of NRI marriages in various 
Central Acts and in State laws and provision of punishment in the State laws in case marriage is not 
registered during any specific time , and justification for possibility of duplicacy of law only for the 
purpose of registration of marriages, the Ministry in a written reply stated that the relevant provisions 
of the existing Central legislation on Registration/ Comp ulsory Registrations of Marriages are as 
under:-  
 
 
 
Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 
 
Part IV of the Act (Sections 27 -37) contains provisions for registration of marriages 
solemnised by Ministers and Clergymen.  
Part V of the Act (Sections 38 -59) provides rules for solemnisation -cum registration of 
marriages directly by Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act. 
Part VI (Sections 60-65) relates to marriages of “Indian Christians” and provides rules for 
certification. There are provisions in the A ct for the transmission of records of registration 
of various categories of marriage to the Registrar -General of Births, Deaths and Marriages 
(Sec.81). 
The Anand Marriage Act, 1909 
Section 6 of the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 contains the provisions for regis tration of 
marriages. 
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 

16 
 
Under section 6 of the Act, the priests are required to periodically transmit their records to 
Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act. A priest who neglects to certify a marriage 
or to tra nsmit its copy to the Marriage Registrar will be guilty of an offence punishable 
with simple imprisonment up to three months, or with fine up to a hundred rupees, or with 
both (Section 12). Further, the Marriage Registrars are to be appointed by the State 
Government for various areas and they are required to transmit their records to the 
Registrar- General of Births, Deaths and Marriages under Section 9 of the Act(Sections 6 
to 9). 
The Special Marriage Act, 1954 
Marriages are registered under section 15 of the Act by the Marriage Officer specially 
appointed for the purpose.  
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
 Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 lays down for registration of marriages. 
The Foreign Marriage Act 1969 
Under section 3 of the Act, Marriage Officers are to be appointed by the Central 
Government for this purpose, in its Diplomatic Missions abroad. Section 4 provides 
conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages and section 17 of the Act 
provides for Registration of foreign marriages solemnized under other laws.  
Registration of NRI Marriages is not covered in any of the above laws. 
The objective of the proposed bill is to make the registration of marriages of NRIs 
compulsory and collect all the r elevant information about the NRI spouse to enable the 
government to bring him back to face the Courts and to enable the Courts to serve 
summons upon him/her. These provisions are not available in other State laws."   
1.33 When the Committee desire d to know whether there was a union law or a national law for 
compulsory registration of marriages, Foreign Secretary during the oral evidenc e on 2 December, 
2019 submitted: 
“At present there is no union law for compulsory registration of marriage.  The reg istration 
of marriage is therefore dependent on various State laws and personal laws of various 
communities.  The Hon. Supreme Court of India vide its judgement dated 14 th of February, 
2006 in Seema vs. Ashwani Kumar had, inter alia , directed the State Gov ernments that 
marriages of all persons who are citizens of India belonging to various religious 
denominations should be made compulsorily registrable in their respective States where 
such marriages are solemnized.  Accordingly, as per our information, 25 S tates and 6 
Union Territories have thus so far made appropriate legislations in this regard.” 
1.34 The proposed bill will make the registration of marriages of an NRI with an Indian citizen 
compulsory. Further, the Ministry of Women & Child Development has  developed a marriage 

17 
 
registration proforma and a website portal for marriage registration which is linked to all the 
Registrars of Marriages in India. 
1.35 On being enquired about the status of implementation of the directions of the Hon. Supreme 
Court in regard to compulsory registration of marriages in all States, the Minist ry in a written reply 
submitted that under the directions of Hon‟ble Supreme Court 25 States and 6 Union Territories have 
already enacted a law making registration of marriag e compulsory. According to the information 
provided by Ministry of Law & Justice, the following State Governments and Union Territories have 
made provisions for compulsory registration of marriages:  State Governments - Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Ass am, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat,  Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,  
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal;  Union 
Territories- Chandigarh Administration, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep 
and Puducherry. Once the Central legislation is passed by the Parliament, this will be brought to the 
notice of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. 
1.36 Further, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the States and Union territories which 
have not enacted such law consists of 3 States- Jharkhand, Nagaland and Uttar Pradesh; and, 3 UTs- 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. 
1.37 On Committee‟s observation, w hether the provision of compulsory registration of marriage in 
the proposed Bill could clash with existing State Acts o n the subject, Foreign Secretary during the 
course of oral eviden ce on 2 December, 2019 clarified that  under the present scheme of the 
Constitution, the power to make laws governing marriage and divorce falls under entry 5 of the 
Concurrent list of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  Therefore, this Bill will not be 
derogation of any provision of any existing Act dealing with compuls ory registration of marriages 
because in view of the provisions of Article 254 of the Constitution, any law enacted by a State which 
is in force on the date of commencement of this Bill, if it is passed to become an Act and is not in 
consonance and in conformity with this Act, shall be void to that extent. 
1.38 In this context, the Ministry in a written reply further submitted that NRI is an Indian Citizen 
and his/her marriage can be registered similar to any other Indian Citizen under the various Central 
and State laws. However, there is no law which specifically covers registration of NRI marriages. 
1.39 Further elaborating, Law Secretary during the course of oral evidenc e on 2 December, 2019 
submitted: 
“So far as the formulation of the State laws is concerned, it dates back to a judgement of 
the Hon. Supreme Court in the year 2006. Pursuant to the aforesaid directions, perhaps the 

18 
 
States and the UTs have come up with a legislation. That is the Ashwini Kuma r 
judgement. I think certain parameters were also laid down that those States which do not 
come up with a legislation in this regard, they would be governed by some sort of orders 
which were passed by the hon. Supreme Court itself. The only point that I wo uld like to 
raise is that the Central legislation has a completely different objective.” 
 
1.40 In this context, Law Secretary further submitted: 
“Sir, as far as my understanding is concerned, according to Article 254, in case a State 
law has been passed after obtaining the assent of the President, then that law has to 
prevail irrespective of the fact that there is a Union legislation in this regard . That is the 
basic point.”  
 
Amendment to the Passport Act 1967 
 
1.41 The Committee were informed that the amendment to the Passport Act, which would empower 
the passport authority to impound or revoke the passport of the NRI if it is brought to his notice that 
the NRI has not registered his marriage within 30 days, will be helpful in preventing the erring spouse 
from leaving the country or in subsequently suspending or revoking the passport if he has already 
travelled abroad as the first step towards  having him repatriated. In order to provide ultimate relief 
and justice to the deserted spouse, it is also deemed import that the NRI spouse should face legal 
consequences and trial.  
1.42 When asked, whether revocation/impounding of Passport of NRI spous e only on the basis of 
not registering marriages in India and abroad with 30 days is an appropriate initiative, the Ministry in 
a written reply submitted that the m ajor objective of the proposed B ill is to locate the erring NRI 
spouse and bring him/her bac k to India to face justice. Through compulsory registration of marriage 
within thirty days of marriage in India or abroad, the details of the travel documents or passport as 
well as visa or permanent resident card and the permanent resident address in the foreign country of 
the Non-Resident Indian  spouse would be compiled which would help create a database of the NRI 
marriages for better enforcement of rights under various family laws that grant and provide to protect 
the various rights of the deserted spouse within a marriage. 
Amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 
1.43 The Committee were also informed that s erving judicial summons on overseas Indians abroad 
is a challenge for Indian Missions as in most cases, address given abroad is incorrect, not known or 
the overseas Indian has deliberately moved residence to another place. Further, even after Court 
Summons or Show Cause Notice is issued, the NRI spouse does not appear in the court in India and 
refuses to respond. The Amendments to CrPC, 1973  would empower the Courts for issuance of 

19 
 
summons, warrants through the specially designated website of the Ministry o f External Affairs, 
which would be considered as deemed served & would force the NRI spouse to attend the Court 
Process. It also provides provisions for attachment of properties belonging to the NRI, if he does not 
appear before the Court and is declared as Proclaimed Offender by the Court. This would put pressure 
on the family members and the individual NRI to come back to India to face the legal consequences 
whether civil, criminal or matrimonial of his overt and covert acts. 
1.44 When asked about the sco pe of bring ing fraudulent spouses back under the existing laws of 
other countries and the  exercise done to synchronise our proposal with their laws, the Ministry of 
External Affairs in a written reply stated that the Ministry has signed Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 
(MLAT) with 42 countries which helps the Court to serve Summons/Notices to errant NRI spouses 
and this is done in coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs. India is also a signatory to the 
Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of J udicial and Extra Judicial Documents in Civil or 
Commercial Matters, 1965.  Besides, the Ministry takes assistance for service of documents on 
Assurances of Reciprocity in case of other countries. In respect of maintenance orders , which are 
served upon individuals, enforcement of Indian orders in foreign countries depends upon the domestic 
law in that foreign country. To sensitize the foreign governments, NRI marital issues are taken up 
during bilateral meetings / Consular Dialogues held with the foreign co untries.    The sharing of 
information about the NRIs, however comes under the protection of privacy laws of each sovereign 
country. The Government would continue to raise this issue bilaterally with these countries in order to 
workout firm mutual understanding. 
 
1.45 On being asked whether MLAT enable the Government to catch and bring back the NRI 
marriage offenders back to India to face the Courts, the Ministry in a written submitted that  the 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLAT) are for the purpose of collecting evidence during 
investigation and prosecution. The evidence in the foreign country can be taken on record through a 
MLAT or LR. If the NRI marriage offender is residing outside India and a warrant has been issued for 
producing him before the cou rt then the person can be brought back to India through the process of 
extradition. 
 

20 
 
 1.46 When asked about implications of the Bill on NRI spouse who take advantage of lenient 
divorce ground in foreign legal system and get ex -parte decree of divorce in the foreign country 
through wrongful representation of facts, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that Indian courts 
do not recognize the divorces of Indian citizens (including NRIs) obtained under the local laws of host 
countries where the marriage was solemnized in India. As per Chapter 4 of Consular Manual, 
“Divorce obtained by persons who are domiciled in India and married according to Indian laws, from 
any court other than an Indian Court will not be recognized in India. A person marrying again a fter 
obtaining such a divorce during the life time of his wife in India will be liable to prosecution in India. 
At present, we are unable to serve the summons to the accused NRI spouse who conveniently avoids 
facing the judicial trials by evading court sum mons. The proposed bill would help to locate and bring 
the culprit NRI spouse to face justice. 
 
1.47 Asked further about the procedure being followed to issue a look out Circular against an erring 
NRI Overseas Indian spouse under the proposed law, the Ministry in a written response submitted that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs vide its OM No. 25016/31/2010 -Imm dated 27.1 0.2010 empowers 
Originating Agencies to make request for opening a Look Out Circular to Dy. Director, Bureau of 
Immigration in a prescribed proforma against an individual. It may, however, be noted that “ Recourse 
to LOC is to be taken in cognizable offences under IPC and other penal laws.” In cases where there is 
no cognizable offence under IPC or other penal laws, the LOC subject cannot be detained/ arrested or 
prevented from leaving the country. In such cases, the originating agency can only request that they 
be informed about the arrival/departure of the subject. In addition to it, Ministry of Home Affairs vide 
its OM No. 25016/10/2017-Imm(Pt.) dated 24.01.2018 empowered the Convener of Integrated Nodal 
Agency to make requests for opening a  Look Out Circular to Dy. Director, Bureau of Immigration in 
a prescribed proforma. The decision, whether to open a LOC or not, rests with the originating agency 

21 
 
only. Ministry of Home Affairs/ Bureau of Immigration is required to act as per the request/ text of 
the LOC sent by the originator in the prescribed proforma.  
1.48 On being queried as to how the over-lapping between civil and criminal nature of cases will be 
taken care of  considering marriage is a civil matter, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that 
marriage is a civil matter. However, at time the deserted spouses files a criminal case against NRI 
spouses, the service of summons are thus handled by Ministry of Home  Affairs in criminal cases and 
Ministry of Law and Justice in civil cases.   
1.49 The Committee observe  from the data placed before them by the Ministry of External 
Affairs that there is a continuous increase in the number of complaints/ petitions related to NRI 
marital grievances/disputes .  Most of the complaints pertain to women on issues such as 
abandonment, harassment, cheating and domestic violence by their Indian spouses residing 
abroad. The Committee also  find that Government of India have been tryi ng to provide 
financial assistance upto US $ 4000, in each case to the aggrieved women in other countries  
through empanelled legal counsel, Indian Community Association, Women’s organization and 
NGOs, apart from providing counselling and guidance to them in this regard. In India, an 
Integrated Nodal Agency (INA) which involves senior officials from Min istries of Women and 
Child Development, External Affairs, Home Affairs  and Law and Justice has been constituted  
to provide a single window, timely solution to the problems of affected women in NRI marriages 
and for  better monitoring of the welfare measures being undertaken in this regard.  After 
constitution of INA, so far only eight Look  Out Circulars have been issued and only one person 
has been intercepted by the immigration authorities and brought before the Court. However, all 
these measures have not been able to provide viable and practicable safeguard to legal rights of 
the Indian citizens abandoned by NRI  spouses. Given the inadequacies of the extant  measures, 
the Government has introduced ‘The Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 
2019 with the objective to locate and bring the culprit NRI spouse to face the Court in India by 
making  the registration of NRI marriage compulsory and a mendments to the Passport s Act, 

22 
 
1967 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  The latter two would enable revoking and 
impounding of passport of the delinquent individual, legalising  service of e -summons for these 
cases and for attachment of property of the delinquent individual. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
1.50 The Committee note with satisfaction that this serious matter , after engaging  attention 
for more than a decade and after a lot of hue and cry ,  has been taken to its logical culmination 
by the Ministry and a legislative proposal has been brought  to overcome legal and procedural 
shortcomings, bilateral hurdles , apart from regulatory mechanism in order to restrain the 
proliferation of this menace.   The Committee, however, find that after several years  of 
discussion and  deliberation on various issues  relating to problems in NRI marriages , the 
Government has come out with a Bill  which will only serve the purpose of creating pressure on 
accused NRI spouse to present self before the  legal authorities/Courts. In the Committee’s view, 
the Bill does not come upto  the expectations of the E xpert Committee, 15 th Report of the  
Committee on External Affairs  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) , 155 th Report of R ajya Sabha and 
directions of the Supreme Court  regarding registration of marriages in States . The Committee 
also have taken note of the fact that no pubic consultations were held while  drafting the Bill.   
The Bill env isages Registration of Marriage  by Non -Resident Indian, amendment to the 
Passports Act, 1967 and amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 .  In Committee’s 
views there is a need to bring a comprehensive legislation which can adequately address all the 
issues relating to such fraudulent marriages , including the complex issues of divorce settlement, 
maintenance and custody of the child involving  NRI spouses.  The Committee consider this Bill 

23 
 
as a first step in this direction and desire that the Government should  consider whether, after 
getting the whereabouts of the accused NRI spouses, the current legal provisions in chapter 4 in 
the Consular Ma nual, 1983 , dealing with marriage s and provision in Foreign Marriage Act , 
adequately address the issues of divorce , maintenance and child support  in such marriages .  If 
not, the Committee strongly recommend  that the Ministry of External Affairs enact a 
comprehensive legislation to tackle the problems relating  to NRI marriages incorporating other 
provisions, including addressing the challenges in Indian legal system and foreign courts in such 
matters. Amending current laws/rules and regulations only would help the deserted spouses of 
NRI marriages to reclaim their legal rights to property, equality in marriages, the protection of 
family and above  all their dignity. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
1.51 The Committee note that the legislation involves amendment in Passports Act, 1967. The 
proposed amendment in Passports Act empowers the Passport Authority to impound or revoke 
the Passport of erring spouse in order to bring ultimate relief and justice to the deserted 
spouses. The Bill also seeks amendment to the Code  of Criminal Procedure , 1973. The CrPC 
provides for Court Summons or Show Cause Notices. The Committee are apprised  that even 
after Court Summons or Show Cause Notice is issued, the NRI spouse does not appear in the 
court in India and refuse s to respond, and that the amendment to CrPC, 1973 would empower 
agencies to serve Summons/Notice through the specially designated website of the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Committee, however feel that the deserted women face typical challenges 

24 
 
in foreign countri es particularly the difficulty in countering j udicial action, privacy laws,  more 
lenient divorce grounds and visa and immigration issues.  The Committee strongly desire that 
provisions to support women in distress , including concessions/visa extension s, should be made 
in Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT)/bilateral treaties  with various countries , including 
video conferencing and facilitation of attachment of movable/immovable property of the 
delinquent husband/accused.   The Committee have been apprised that India is  a signatory to 
Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extra Judicial Documents in Civil or 
Commercial Matters, 1965. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the efforts 
must be intensified to establish better coordi nation with the member countries of Hague 
Convention and to take up the issues of NRI marital disputes during bilateral meetings and 
Consular Dialogue with foreign countries continually. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Chapter-wise and Clause-wise Examination of The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident 
Indian Bill, 2019 
 
 The Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 2019 contains four Chapters which 
envisage Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indians, Amendments to the Passports Act, 1967 
and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Clause 1:  Short title, Extent and Commencement 
 
2.1 This clause refers to Short title, extent and commencement of the Bill and reads as under: 
 
 (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Marriage of Non-  
 Resident Indian Act, 2019. 
 (2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and  Kashmir.  
  (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government   may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
 
2.2 In view of recent abrogation of Article 370 in the State of Jammu and Kashmir  and making of 
J&K and Ladhak the Union Territor ies, w hen the Committee asked about the need to  remove the 
expression, 'except the state of Jammu and Kashmir from clause 1, sub -clause (2) of the legislation,  
Foreign Secretary during the course of evidence on 2 December, 2019 responded in the affirmative. 
 
2.3 The Committee observe that clause 1(2) of the Bill reads that the Act shall extend to the 
whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  Keeping in mind the recent abrogation 
of Article 370 of the constitution of India, this clause needs modification. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the extant clause 1(2) which stipulates ‘It shall extend to the whole of 
India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir’  may be substituted with the words  'It shall 
extend to whole of India'. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 

26 
 
 
Clause 2: Definition of Non-Resident Indian 
2.4  This clause deals with the definitions of Non-Resident of India and reads as under: 
 
For the purposes of this Act, "Non-Resident Indian" means a citizen of India who resides 
out of India. 
 
2.5. While dwelling on the definition of an NRI during the course of briefing, Foreign Secretary on 
19 November, 2018 submitted: 
“At the moment, the only definition otherwise, is in the Income Tax Act and that specifies 
an NRI.” 
2.6 On question raised by the Committee on the definition of NRI in the Income Tax Act, Foreign 
Secretary further responded: 
“The IT Act defines an NRI as an Indian citizen who resides for more than 182 days 
outside the country. However, the proposed Bill defines the NRI as an Indian citizen who 
resides out of India, in order to bring the scope of outreach of this legislation to all those 
Indian citizens who ordinarily reside abroad and marry an Indian citizen.  
It is felt that limiting the definition of an NRI on the basis of the duration of his/her stay 
outside India might lead to the exclusion of a large number of NRI marital g rievances 
where the NRI spouse is residing abroad for a period of less than 182 days.   
Hence, defining the duration of stay of the NRI outside India might narrow the scope of 
the Bill and provide legal loopholes to the erring NRI‟s spouses to escape the a mbit of the 
provisions of the Bill. The issue was deliberated in the Inter -Ministerial consultations and 
it was felt by members that the definition of NRI as per the IT Act would leave legal 
loopholes for people to evade the law, once the Bill is enacted. But we would be grateful 
for the guidance of the hon. Standing Committee on this matter.”  
 
2.7 When the Committee desired to know the definition of NRI in Passport Act, the witness during 
the course of oral evidence on 27 January, 2020 submitted: 
 “There is no definition there”. 
 
2.8 When the Committee desired to know the parameter on which a new legislation is brought 
rather than an amendment in existing legislation(s) if the criterion for „NRI‟ is not clearly established 
in the proposed bill, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that in the proposed bill, NRI had been 
defined as an Indian Citizen who resides out of India and this would ensure to maximize the sc ope of 

27 
 
the bill and cover all cases including those where the NRI spouse has resided for less than 182 days in 
the foreign country. 
 
2.9 When opinion of the Ministry was sought on the differences between the definition of an NRI 
in Draft Bill and Income Tax Act, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the main objective of 
the proposed Bill is to locate the erring NRI spouse and bring him back to face the judicial trials. The 
Income Tax Act defines an NRI as an Indian citizen who resides for more than 182 days in a foreign 
country. This definition is for the purpose of levying the Income Tax on an Indian citizen who is 
residing abroad. However, the purpose of the proposed bill is different from the IT Act and hence it 
defines an NRI as an Indian ci tizen who resides out of India. The Ministry has also stated that the 
definition of the NRI in the proposed Bill has been arrived at after due consultations with the Ministry 
of Women & Child Development, Ministry of Law & Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs.  
2.10 When the Committee desired to know the difficulty to import the definition of NRI from 
Income Tax Act, the, Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs during the course of oral evidence on 27 
January 2020 submitted: 
”That is a very good suggestion because with lack of definition, people will not register. 
Therefore, it should be defined. Now the question is what is to be defined. I understand the 
State of Punjab has an Act on this matter in which they have talked in  similar terms – 
resides overseas – but they have not defined the term. The Punjab Act, of course, provides 
for both NRIs as well as PIOs. Our Bill is, of course, pertaining to NRIs. I think it is very 
important that we have a definition. In any case, if a  person is coming back ahead of those 
182 days, as provided for in the Income Tax Act, he can be acted upon within the domestic 
laws.” 
 
2.11 In this context, Secretary, Ministry of External affairs clarified further: 
 “I would like to submit that our intention through this Bill should be that the Act should 
be respected. If there is lack of clarity about what is an NRI, then everybody will be in that 
ambiguous state, nobody will register. So, we must be very clear as to what it is. I think 
the problem with the Punjab Bill has also been the same. We must make sure that the 
definition of NRI is unambiguous that everybody who is an NRI has to register. I would 
suspect that if a person is here for 182 days, which is a normal resident of India, then he 
should be treated under domestic laws.” 
 
 
2.12 With respect to the observation by the Committee, whether the Bill covers People of Indian 
Origin, Foreign Secretary during the oral evidence on 2 December, 2019 submitted: 

28 
 
“PIOs, that is, people who are of Indian origin but have foreign passports and foreign 
nationality, we wish to state that the proposed Bill is applicable only to Indian citizens. In 
other words, where an Indian citizen is married to a non -resident Indian citizen, the Bill 
does not cover Indian ci tizens who are married to foreign citizens or who a re married to 
Persons of Indian  Origin because such individuals are covered by the laws of their own 
countries and the Indian law would not automatically apply to them. However, such cases 
are also being r egularly taken up with foreign countries concerned through Consular 
dialogues and through diplomatic channels.” 
 
2.13 The Committee note that c lause 2 deals with the definition of Non -Resident Indian and 
reads as ‘For the purposes of this Act, Non -Resident Indian’ means a citizen of India who 
resides out of India. The Committee felt that such too general and ambiguous  definition of NRI 
in the Bill would easily help the accused to evade the law and  be brought before  the C ourts.  
More so, when ‘NRI’ has been legally defined under Income Tax Act, 1961 and FEMA Act as 
per requirements. The main objective of the proposed Bill is to locate all the erring NRI spouses 
and bring  them back to face the judicial trials . The Committee also felt that to  accept the 
definition of ‘NRI’ as per t he Income Tax Act , 1961  that an NRI is an Indian ’ citizen who 
resides for more than 182 days in a foreign country , might lead to the exclusion of a large 
number of NRI marital grievances where the NRI spouse s have  been resi ding abroad for a 
period of less than 182 days.  With a view to ensure the inclusion of maximum number of people 
residing overseas under the purview of the Bill, t he Committee desire that the Ministry should 
consider to define the ‘NRI’ in the Bill as ‘Non-Resident Indian means a citizen of India who 
resides outside India for any purpose whatsoever, save tourism. 
(Recommendation No.5) 

29 
 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE OF NON-RESIDENT INDIAN 
 
 
Clause 3: Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian 
2.14 This clause calls for compulsory registration of marriage of Non -Resident Indian within 30 
days of marriage in India or abroad and reads as under: 
 (1) Every Non-Resident Indian who marries a citizen of India shall get his marriage 
registered in India under any law for the time being in force (including State Act) within a 
period of thirty days from the date of his marriage. 
 (2)  Every Non -Resident Indian who marries a citizen of India, or any other Non -
Resident Indian, out of India shall get his marriage registered within a period of thirty days 
from the date of his marriage with the Marriage Officer appointed under section 3 of the 
Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 within whose jurisdiction the marriage has taken place or 
solemnized in any manner at the choice of the parties to the marriage. 
2.15 Through compulsory registration of marriage within thirty days of marriage in India or 
abroad, the details of the travel documents or passport as well as visa or permanent resident card 
and the permanent resident address in the foreign country of the Non -Resident Indian (NRI) 
would be compiled whic h would help create a database of the NRI marriages for better 
enforcement of rights under various family laws that grant and provide to protect the various 
rights of the deserted spouse within a marriage. 
 
2.16 Elaborating the purpose the mandatory regist ration of NRI marriages, Foreign Secretary 
during the course of briefing on 18 November, 2019 further submitted: 
“The purpose of making it mandatory to register the marriage within 30 days of the 
marriage in India or abroad is to secure the details of the travel documents or passport as 
well as the details of the visa, the Permanent Resident Card and the permanent residential 
address in a foreign country of the Non-Resident Indian.  In so doing, the Ministry will have 
the requisite information to trace the NRI and to enable legal action to be taken for 
enforcement of rights of the abandoned spouse under various family laws.” 
 
2.17 The Committee were apprised that the Bill has a simple provision of Registration of NRI 
marriages within 30 days like other marri ages and it does not make any specific provision about the 
contents to be included in the marriage certificate like security number, passport number and relevant 

30 
 
details of foreign house of NRI husband. In this context, the ministry in a written reply subm itted that 
the major objective of the proposed bill is to locate the NRI spouse abroad and ensure his/her 
appearance before the Court. They further stated that t hrough compulsory registration of NRI 
marriages, they will be able to collect and collate the i nformation about the whereabouts and other 
details of the NRI spouse, such as, details of passport, visa or permanent resident card and permanent 
resident address in the foreign country of the NRI.  Also that t his will enable them to locate the NRI 
spouse abroad and deliver the summons upon the NRI spouse abroad. Further, the Bill provides for 
attachment of properties belonging to the NRI, only if he/she does not appear before the Court and is 
declared as Proclaimed Offender by the Court. The proposed bill a ims at only giving a legal 
framework to the Court and it is upto the Court to declare the erring NRI spouse as proclaimed 
offender and attach the property as per the details available with them.  
2.18 When asked to justify the limitation of 30 days for registration of NRI marriage from the date 
of marriage and its sync with the normal provision for registration of marriages in various States , the 
Ministry in a written reply submitted that it was initially proposed to allow a period of 15 days for the 
registration of marriage by an NRI. This period was increased to 30 days by the Committee of 
Secretaries during their meeting chaired by Cabinet Secretary dated 6 Feb 2019. It is felt that the 
period of 30 days will give sufficient time to an NRI spouse to register his/her marriage 
accommodating any personal exigencies which may not have been addressed otherwise. A 
registration period of more than 30 days would dilute the purpose of this bill by reducing the pressure 
on the NRI spouse to regist er the marriage in case his/her intention is to abandon the spouse after 
marriage.   
2.19 Asked if  more period of time for registration  of marriage  on sufficient ground  can be 
considered, Foreign Secretary during the course of oral evidence on 2 December, 2019 clarified: 
“Our concern here was that allowing such kind of a flexibility gives a certain kind of 
discretion. The main contention for this Bill is that registration of marriage should be an 
important thing that needs to be done and that a 30 -day period is adequate for registration 
of a marriage. If we feel that this is an inadequate period of time, then giving a discretion 
would allow many people to come forth with many excuses as to why they could not 
register the marriage and would also allo w the person who intends not to register the 
marriage a longer period before it is discovered that he/she has fled the country.”  
 
 

31 
 
2.20 The Ministry in a  written reply also submitted that the Bill provides  for prospective 
application once it is passed and hence will cover marriage which are solemnized after it is enacted 
and it does not have a retrospective application.  
2.21 Elaborating on the prospective effect of enactment of Act, Law Secretary during the course of 
briefing on 18 November, 2019 clarified  
“It cannot be made as retrospective because there are penal consequences. So, any Act 
which earlier had penal consequences and that was not an offence, cannot be relegated to 
the same position. It has to  be prospective only in case the penal provision has been 
provided. 
2.22 It is observed that Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 defin ed marriage and everything, not only the 
registration of marriage but other related issues including the matrimonial rights of a pe rson outside 
India. 
2.23 On being enquired about incorporation of provision of mandatory registration o f a marriage of 
an NRI outside India under  the Foreign Marriage Act instead of bringing a new legislation, the  
Ministry in a written reply submitted that the main objective of the proposed bill is to locate the erring 
NRI spouse and ensure his/her appearance before the Court. The proposed bill does not intend to 
change the existing process of Registration of Marriages but to ensure that Marriage is regist ered 
under the already existing Acts to provide for information about the NRI spouse and to enable the 
Courts to deliver summons to the erring NRI spouse. None of the existing Acts, including the Foreign 
Marriage Act provide for the information of the NRI spouse and delivery of summons.  
2.24 Clarifying the provisions of Clause s 3 (1) and Clause 3(2), Law Secretary during the oral 
evidence on 2 December, 2019 submitted: 
“Apparently, there is no conflict between Clause 3 (1) and Clause 3 (2). In Clause 3 (1), 
the marriages which take place in India, it is only with this objective. Though both are 
citizens of India, one is likely to be qualified as Non -Resident Indian, that is, one who is 
going to come down to India and get married to the Indian citizen. Th is is regarding 
Clause 3 (1). On the other hand, there are marriages which may take place wherein both 
are the Non -Resident Indians. They are definitely the citizens of India but both may be 
having the status of Non-Resident Indians when they will marry outside. It is still feasible 
that one may be a Non-Resident Indian and the other may be a citizen who may not be an 
NRI but moves over there for the purpose of marriage. So, Clause 3 (2) is for enabling 
those kinds of marriages. The objective of the Act is for „Non -Resident Indian‟. So, 
apparently, the Scheme is completely into this.” 

32 
 
 
2.25 When the Committee desired to know who is the competent authority to register the marriage, 
Law Secretary, during the course of briefing on 2 December, 2019 submitted: 
 
“We will have to see again in complete detail. Sir, those two lines are material. They have 
said that the materials on record would indicate that most of the States barring a few have 
framed suitable legislations. In any event in terms of the order dated 15 .4.2005 such of the 
States that have not framed legislation will be governed by the direction contained in the 
order dated 14.2.2006.” 
2.26 Further, on being asked about the Marriage Officer/Registrar of Marriage not figuring in 
Clause 3(1) for NRI marriage solemnised in India, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that this 
information can be given after studying the process of registration in the State/UTs. It is presumed that 
the States/UTs that have enacted laws to make registration of marriages compulsory would have 
provided the process for its registration including designated officers who would be empowered to 
carry out the registration process. 
 
2.27 The Committee note that clauses 3 (1) and 3(2) seek compulsory registration of marriage 
of Non-Resident Indian with in 30 days of marriage in India or abroad respectively. The 
Committee further note that the core objective of the mandatory registration of NRI marriage 
is to secure the details of the travel documents  or passport  as well the deta ils of the visa, the 
Permanent Resident Card and the permanent residential address in a foreign country of an NRI 
to enable the Government to bring him/her back to face the courts and to serve summons upon 
him/her.  These provisions are available in none o f the existing Act s, including the Foreign 
Marriage Act, 1969 and there is no Central Legislation on Registration/compulsory Registration 
of NRI marriages.   The Committee note that the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
has developed a Marriage Registration proforma and separate website portal for registration of  
NRI marriages which is proposed to be linked to all the Registrars of Marriage s in India.  The 
Committee, however, find that the exi sting format of marriage registrations does not provid e 

33 
 
complete details about NRI groom and bride.  The proposed proforma for r egistration of NRI 
marriages seeks for very general type of information  to be filled in  which is not comprehensive 
viz. it  does not have a column for present address and details in foreign country. The erring 
spouse may provide wrong information also if it is submitted without proof.  Moreover, there is 
no provision of updation of information s particularly about residential address in this 
proforma.  In such cases, the proposed proforma for registration may fail to serve the purpose 
of locating the erring spouses, service of summons and attachment of property by the court once 
she/he is declared proclaimed offender by the Court.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
proforma for R egistration of NRI marriage should be amended to make it exhaustive 
incorporating all the germane details related to passport, visa or Permanent Resident Card and 
address in foreign country with proof . The Committee, further desire that there should be 
provision for updating of the address online at any point of time. This should be done after 
creation of a s eparate Central  NRI Marriage  Registry uploading the uniform proforma for 
Registration of NRI marriage with facility of u pdation of address.   The Committee also 
recommend that the proforma  must be made a s a  schedule to the Bill and for this purpose  
accordingly, a suitable provision may be inserted in Clause 3 of the Bill. Further, the Committee 
recommend that suitable amendments may be enacted requiring all NRIs to update their 
address of residence in foreign country and employment details compulsorily.  The MEA 
website may also be updated accordingly , to facilitate monitor ing of compliance by all NRIs 
who marry after enactment of this law.  
(Recommendation No.6) 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT TO THE PASSPORT ACT, 1967 
Clause 4: Amendment of Section 10 
 
2.28 The clause 4 calls for amendment of section 10 of Passport Act 1967 .The amendment to the 
Passport Act would empower the Passport Authority to impound or revoke the passport or travel 

34 
 
document of a non-resident Indian who has married an Indian National or NRI, if the marriage is not 
registered within 30 days of marriage.  
 
The Clause reads as i n the Passport Act, 1967, in section 10, in sub -section (3), after 
clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: – 
„(i) if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that the holder of the passport or 
travel document is a Non -Resident Indian who has married a citizen of India or a Non -
Resident Indian and not registered within a period of thirty days of his marriage under any 
law for the time being in force; 
Explanation. – For the purposes of this clause, “Non -Resident Indian” means a citizen of 
India who resides out of India.‟ 
 
2.29 When clarification was sought for insertion of phrase „ for the purposes of this clause, the 
Ministry in a written reply submitted that Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the Amendment of the 
Passport Act 1967 where a new clause is inserted in section 10, in sub -section (3) – which allows the 
passport authority to impound / revoke the passport of the erring NRI spouse if he/she fails to register 
the marriage within 30 days of marriage. The Explanation - “For the purposes of this clause, “Non -
Resident Indian” means a citizen of India who resides out of India‟ is a part of this new clause and 
will be inserted along with it in Section 10(3) of the Passport Act. The Explanation for the purpose of 
this clause is part of the sentence which will be inserted into the Passport Act. 
2.30 During the course of oral evidence, F oreign Secretary on 2 December, 2019 submitted that 
presently the passport of the erring NRI spouse is being revoked or impound ed under the Section 
10(3) (h) of the Passport Act, 1967. This section States:  
“The passport authority may impound or cause to b e impounded or revoke a passport or 
travel document - if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a warrant or 
summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the arrest, of the holder of the passport or 
travel document has been issued by a court under any law for the time being in force or if 
an order prohibiting the departure from India of the holder of the passport or other travel 
document has been made by any such court and the passport authority is satisfied that a 
warrant or summons has been so issued or an order has been so made.” 
 
2.31 When asked whether Clause 4(i) clearly and automatically empowers the Passport Authority 
to impound/revoke the Passport of an erring NRI spouse, the Ministry in a written reply submitted 
that the proposed Bill does not empower the Passport Authority to aut omatically impound/revoke the 
passport of the erring NRI spouse. Whereas when it is brought into notice that the accused ha s not 

35 
 
registered the marriage within a period of thirty days of his marriage, the Passport Authority can 
initiate the due process to impound/revoke the passport as defined in the section 10(3) of the Passport 
Act, 1967. 
 
2.32 On being enquired about the need of this Clause when there is already a provision of 
impounding of Passport under section 10(3) of the Passport Act, 1967 , the Mini stry in written reply  
submitted that The objective of the Bill is to make registration of the marriage by NRI compulsory 
within specified number of days. Non -registration of marriage by NRI will attract certain 
consequences, which is being provided by making amendments to the Passport Act.   
2.33 When asked to clarify position about impounding the passport of many couples who would not 
get their marriage registered but face a complaint, the Ministry in a written reply submitted that t he 
provisions of the proposed Bill allow the Passport Issuing Authority to impound/ revoke the passport 
of the erring NRI  spouse, if it is brought to its  notice that the erring NRI spouse has not registered 
his/her marriage within thirty days. The Passport issuing Authority wi ll follow the due process of law 
before exercising power to impound/revoke the passport. 
2.34 On being  asked whether the Bill covers those person s whose marriages have already been 
soleminized before the coming into force of this Bill/Act and to provide some more time for them to 
register their marriage with any provision s of punishment, the Ministry in a written reply submitted 
the Bill provides for prospective application once it is passed and hence will cover marriages which 
are solemnized after it is enacted. It doesn‟t have a retrospective application. 
 
2.35 When the Committee desired to know about the work ability of imposing fine as to deterrent  
instead of impounding a Passport, Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal 
Affairs during the course of oral evidence on 27 January, 2020 submitted  that it can be exemplary 
also, instead of a token fine in the case of NRIs. 

36 
 
 
2.36 The Committee note that clause 4 seeks amendment of Section 10 of the Passport s Act, 
1967 misspelt as ‘Passport Act, 1967  in this clause.  Section 10 (3)  of the Passports Act, 1967 
mentions the conditions under which the passport may  be  impounded or cause to be 
impounded or a passport or travel documents be revoked.  The Bill proposes to insert a clause (i) 
after clause (h ) in the Section 10 sub -section (3)  of the Passports Act, 1967 .   The proposed 
clause allows the passport authority to impound/revoke the passport of the erring NRI spouse 
on failure of registration of marriage within 30 days of marriage. The Committee find that there 
is  already a provision in the Act to impound or revoke a passport under various conditions 
when passport authority is satisfied with the wrong committed by an individual or  when it is 
brought to the not ice of the authority that warrants or summons fo r the appearance or a 
warrant of arrest of the holder of passport or travel document has been issued by a court under 
any law or any  order prohibiting the departure from India has been issued by the court.  
Therefore, the Committee find that the provision of direct impounding or revoking the passport 
of a NRI who has married a citizen of India or a NRI only if it is brought to the notice of 
passport authority that she/he has not registered her/his marriage wi thin 30 days of his 
marriage seems to be disproportionate and stringent action  which is likely to be misused .  
Moreover, with such provision, the passport authorities are being authorized suo moto or of the 
basis of on any complaint  to take action without determining whether marriage has been 
solemnized or not as this can be decided by the  concerned competent authority  only and 
thereafter, only the action is required.  If the marriage is regi stered then passport authority  

37 
 
may not take any such action without the instructions of the court  under any litigation . The 
Law Ministry was also not very sure about some of the provisions in Clause 4.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should seriously think about makin g a 
provision of issuing show cause  notice, imposition of exemplary fine, issue of a Look Out Notice 
etc. prior to impounding of Passport of an NRI on failure to register her/his marriage within the 
stipulated time limit.   The Explanation of Non -Resident Indian in  this Chapter may also be 
amended as recommended by the Committee in Chapter I. 
 (Recommendation No. 7) 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
 
Clause 5: Insertion of New Section 86A in CrPC 
2.37 This clause provides for  Insertion new section 86A in  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
which contains six sub -clause to include Service of summons, warrants through website and 
attachment of property  and reads as, In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, after section 86, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely: – 
“86A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any other law for the time 
being in force, where a person summoned by a Court under this Code and the Court is 
satisfied that the summons  issued could  not be served, the Court may issue summons 
along with the substance of the information by uploading on the specially designated 
website of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India and such uploading 
of the summons shall be conclusive ev idence that the summons has been served against 
that person. 
(2) Where the person summoned under sub -section (1) fails to appear before the Court at 
specified place and time required by the summons, either personally or through his duly 
authorised agent, the Court may, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit, issue a warrant 
for arrest of such person and upload the warrant along with the substance of the 
information against the person to be arrested along with the details of summons issued 
under sub -section (1) on the specially designated website of the Ministry of External 
Affairs of the Government of India. 
(3) Where the person fails to appear before the Court at the time and place mentioned in 
the warrant uploaded on the website under sub -section (2), the Court may, after making 

38 
 
such enquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and upload a 
declaration to that effect on the specially designated website of the Ministry of External 
Affairs of the Government of India. 
(4) After uploading a proclamation under sub -section (3), if the accused fails to appear 
before the Court issuing such proclamation, a statement in writing by the Court issuing the 
proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly uploaded on the specially 
designated website of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India shall be 
conclusive evidence that the warrant has been issued against accused person and shall be 
deemed to have been duly served. 
(5) The Court issuing a proclamation under sub -section (3) may, for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order t he attachment of 
any property, movable or immovable, or both belonging to the proclaimed offender. 
(6) Where the property attached under sub -section (5) consists of the share or interest of 
the proclaimed offender in the property jointly belonging to him and other co-owner or co-
sharers, such attachment shall have effect only with regard to such share or interest of the 
proclaimed offender. 
 
2.38 The Amendments to CrPC, 1973  would empower the Courts for issuance of summons, 
warrants through the specially designated website of the Ministry of External Affairs, which would be 
considered as deemed served & would force the NRI spouse to attend the Court Process. It also 
provides provisions for attachment of properties belonging to the NRI, if he does not appear  before 
the Court and is declared as Proclaimed Offender by the Court. This would put pressure on the family 
members and the individual NRI to come back to India to face the legal consequences whether civil, 
criminal or matrimonial of his overt and covert acts. 
2.39 When asked as to how summons and notices on the website can withstand judicial scrutiny, 
the Ministry in a written reply submitted that the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 allows for service 
of summons through proclamation via publishing in Newspapers which is in the public domain. In the 
present time of digital revolution across the social and cultural spectrum of the world, a substanti al 
proportion of the population reads newspapers online including information websites and e -
Newspapers as well. The service of summons via publishing on websites should thus hold parity to 
the service of summons via publishing in newspapers.  
 

39 
 
2.40 When asked to justify the provision to attach the property of spouse when there is no provision 
to get the details of property of the spouse alongwith the marriage registration and no information 
about the whereabouts and details of properties of the spouse in a ny document, the Ministry in a 
written reply submitted that the major objective of the proposed bill is to locate and bring the culprit 
NRI spouse to face justice. Through compulsory registration of marriage within thirty days of 
marriage in India or abroa d, the details of the travel documents or passport as well as visa or 
permanent resident card and the permanent resident address in the foreign country of the Non -
Resident Indian (NRI) would be compiled which would help create a database of the NRI marriag es 
for better enforcement of rights under various family laws that grant and provide to protect the various 
rights of the deserted spouse within a marriage.  This data can be further used for attachment of 
property of erring NRI spouse, once he is declared Proclaimed Offender by the Courts. 
 
2.41 Justifying the attach of property by the Court in case there is no property in the name of erring 
spouse  or ancestral property  and identification of „family‟, the Ministry in a written reply submitted 
that the cl ause 5(5) of the proposed Bill provides for the attachment of movable or immovable 
property belonging to the proclaimed offender.  The clause 5(6) of the Bill further defines that where 
the property is jointly owned or shared by him and other co -owners or co-sharers, the attachment of 
property will relate to only the share or interest of the proclaimed offender. The Proposed Bill is 
aimed to give a legal framework to the Indian Courts for attachment of property of accused NRI 
spouse in cases of NRI Marital grievances. It is for the Courts to interpret the “family” as per the 
existing legal provisions of the time on case to case basis.   
 
 2.42 It is observed that a Person of Indian Origin (PIO) has certain entry rights, right of property 
and various others things. In this regard, when the Committee desire d to know about attachment of 
PIO‟s property, Foreign Secretary during the course of oral evidence on 18  November, 2019 
submitted as under:- 
“I would not speak to that because that is a legal issue. I do not  know whether my 
colleagues on the Law Department will speak to that. But effectively, he/she will have an 
Overseas Citizen of India card if they wish. That is also if they are PIOs. If they are 
entirely foreign nationals, then they do not even have that. But essentially, Sir, it is a 
question of deciding whether to have a law to help some Indians or not to have any law 
because the law as it is currently framed cannot deal both with an erring spouse who is 
Indian, and an erring spouse who is foreign er. They would be treated differently under the 
law. 

40 
 
For instance, you are very right about the Privacy Act. We cannot get information 
relating to an American citizen. But the Government of India has every right to demand 
information from an Indian citizen that the Indian citizen being in India registering his 
marriage cannot deny. Being an Indian citizen, where he is living abroad, what his visa 
number is, what his passport number, these he cannot deny. An American citizen would be 
able to deny that because he w ould claim privacy laws of his country. That is why we had 
to draw this distinction. We went through this discussion. The Ministers went through this 
discussion because we were aware that there are a lot of Persons of Indian Origin who are 
marrying Indian woman, who might be abandoning them. But the view was that we cannot 
deal with NRI and the PIO together. It has to be dealt separately. This is not to say that we 
will not deal with the other issue but the current law cannot cover Persons of Indian Origin 
who hold foreign passports. 
 So far as the issue of divorce, alimony and maintenance was concerned, Sir, in my 
statement, we had indicated that the primary objective of this law is to be able to locate 
this individual and that there are already other laws in the country dealing with divorce, 
maintenance and alimony which we felt were adequate to deal with the situation.” 
2.43  When the Committee desire d to know whether serving of summon  via specially designated 
website would withstand judicial scrutiny, Law Secretary during the oral evidenc e on 2 December, 
clarified: 
“What I would also like to seek an understanding on concept is that the Bill envisages 
registration of marriage of Non -Resident Indian within30 days. That is the first bas ic 
which we understand. The second thing is that in case a person f ails to register within a 
period of 30 days as required, we come to amendment of the Passport Act, which says so 
that the action may be taken in terms of Section(10)(3). That is one part, which could be 
taken.  
Now, Sir, the third stage, the amendment of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, I 
would like to understand from the administrative department is that the service of 
summons would be in what context. Is it a general context we are taking in this Bill or is it 
with reference to some action to be taken in reference to the proceedings under this Bill? It 
is because in this Bill, it talks of registration of marriage within 30 days. In case, it is non -
complied with, an action that is postulated is under Section 4, Section 10 sub-Section 3.”  
 
2.44 When the Committee desired the portal and website to be maintained by the Ministry of 
External Affairs, Secretary, MEA during the course of oral evidence on 27 January 2020 submitted as 
under:- 
“In article 5(iv) we have said that we will have a designated website of the ME A for all 
these purposes. So, the entire portal should be complete in itself so that it addresses the 
entire issue of registration implementation.” 
 
 

41 
 
2.45 On being enquired about procedure for issuing summons through e-mail, Law Secretary during 
the oral evidence on 2 December, 2019 inter-alia submitted: 
“I would like to draw attention to Section 61 and 62 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. Section 62 of the Cr.P.C. says how the summons have  to be served. In this, Sir, 
specifically, at the moment, there is no provision for service of e-summons.” 
 
2.46 Explaining the justification of amendment in Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, representative 
of Ministry of Women and Child Development during the oral evidence on 2 December, 2019 inter-
alia submitted: 
“My submission is that the CPC provides for posting notices of summons or warrants on 
the website. This provision is not there in CrPC.” 
 
2.47  The Committee note that sub clauses  5(1) to 5(6) seek amendment to the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 to empower the Courts for issuing of summons and warrants through 
designated website of the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee observe that currently 
there is no provision  in Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for issuing summons or warrants on 
the Website. The Committee agree with the provision to be made in the proposed legislation in 
CrPC to service of  summons through website which will be conclusive evidence that the 
summons have been served against that person.  If the person fails to appear before the court 
after serving the summons, then the court may issue an arrest warrant for offender on the MEA 
website & process of impounding passport can also be exercised   subsequently, even after issue 
of warrant of arrest if the person does not appear then a declaration will be uploaded on the 
designated website. The Committee find that the provision of attachment of property after issue 
of proclamation is not only a stringent step but also perhaps in the domain of the Court who is 
seized of the concerned matter.  Clause 5 of the Bill, therefore, ought to be restricted only to the 
point of facilitating service of summons and court orders.  The punitive measures that  may 
follow ought to be left to be decided by the concerned court on a case to case basis. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
2.48 The Committee, therefore, approve ‘The Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident 
Indian Bill, 2019 subject to appropriate inclusion of suggestions/recommendations made by the 
Committee in the preceding paragraphs in the current Bill or through other appropriate 
methods. 

42 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
 
   NEW DELHI                                                          P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
12 March, 2020                                                            Chairperson, 
   22  Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)                                Committee on External Affairs 
  

43 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2018-19) HELD ON 1 MARCH, 2019 
The Committee sat on Friday, 1 March, 2019  from 1400hrs to 1445 hrs in Committee Room 
„C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor –   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Arka Keshari Deo 
3. Prof. Richard Hay 
4. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
5. Shri Magannti Venakateshwara Rao 
6. Mohammad Salim 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
8. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
11. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnyamayi Sinha  - Additional Director  
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri Sanjiv Arora   - Secretary (CPV& OIA) 
2. Dr. Manoj Kumar Mohpatra  -  Additional Secretary (AD) 
3.         Shri Manpreet Vohra   - Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
4. Shri Robert Shetkintong  - Joint Secretary (OIA-II) 
  
 
 

44 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to the Sitting of the Committee convened to 
have a briefing on the „Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019‟. The Chairperson 
also drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings.  
3. Taking cues from the opening remarks of the Chairperson, the representa tives of the Ministry 
of External Affairs delved upon general and specific issues related to the Bill viz, immediate context 
of introducing the Bill; consultations with concerned stakeholders prior to the finalization of the Bill; 
compulsory registration of marriages; existing legal and institutional framework for addressing issues 
related to NRI marriages; intended amendments to Passport Act 1967 and Code of Criminal 
Procedure 1973 and so on.  
4.  Thereafter, the Members raised pertinent queries impinging on issues like maintenance of 
database on NRI marriages; omission of the Committee‟s Recommendations contained in Fifteen 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on the problems relating to Overseas Indian Marriages; awareness and 
information dissemination about intended changes; creation of a separate website marital exploitation 
and discord etc.  
5. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the concerns raised by the 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written 
replies to the points raised by the members of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

45 
 
Annexure-II 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-20) HELD ON 18 NOVEMBER, 2019 
The Committee sat on Monday, 18 November, 2019  from 1500hrs to 1 645hrs in Committee 
Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  –   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Margani Bharat 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Jayadev Galla 
5. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
7. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
8. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
9. Dr. K.C. Patel 
10. Shri Achyutnanda Samanta 
11. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alais Ravi Kishan 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
13. Shri Rebati Tripura 
14. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15. Shri K.J. Alphons 
16. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
17. Shri Sharad Pawar 
18. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C.Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnyamayi Sinha  - Additional Director  
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name      Designation 
1. Shri Vijay Gokhale   - Foreign Secretary  

46 
 
2. Shri Dinesh K. Patnaik  - Additional Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
3. Ms. Uma Sekhar   - Additonal Secretary (L&T) 
 
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
1. Shri Ashish Srivastava  - Joint Secretary (Legal) 
2. Shri Asholi Chalai   - Joint Secretary (NCW, MWCD) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Sri Prakash   - Joint Secretary (Judicial) 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
1. Shri Anoop Kumar Mendiratta -  Law Secretary 
2.  Shri S.R. Mishra   -  Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana    - JS (Legal Advisor) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Government to the Sitting of the Committee convened to have a brief ing on the 
„Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 2019‟ . The Chairperson in his opening 
remarks underlined the provisions of the Bill and specifically desired to know the impact of these 
provisions on regularization of registration of NRI m arriages on all India basis and in bringing back 
the defaulting NRI spouses and their family members for legal proceedings in India particularly those 
who take advantage of the lenient divorce laws in some countries. He further enquired about the status 
of inclusion of the recommendations of the Expert Committee in the Bill and the role of Missions and 
Posts in protecting the right of distressed spouses. The Chairperson then drew the attention of all the 
representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining the 
confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses about the provisions 
of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. Thereafter, Foreign Secretary delved upon a wi de range of issues which necessitated the 
introduction of the legislation comprising provisions for compulsory registration of marriage by NRIs, 
amendment to Passport Act, 1967 and Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 for impounding or revocation 
of Passports of NRIs and provision for attachment of property belonging to NRIs. This included the 
legal and regulatory hurdles faced by Indians married to NRIs, need to build safeguards in order to 
protect the spouses suffering due to fraudulent NRI marriages, existing s ystem for counseling, 
guidance and assistance to NRI spouses, empanelment of legal counsels, MADAD Portal, etc. 

47 
 
 4.  During the course of discussion, the Chairperson and the Members raised a number of queries 
about the number of applications/complaints rec eived from NRI spouses from different countries, 
status of complaints, revocation of Passports, specific provisions for impounding passports under the 
Passport Act, judicial scrutiny of impounded passports, availability of International Helpline Facility, 
jurisdiction of various Ministries in framing the legislation, privacy laws in western countries, 
provisions for alimony or maintenance in ex -parte divorce cases, custody of children, registration of 
marriage solemnized abroad under Indian Laws and provisi ons to provide assistance to OCI/PIO card 
holders for revocation of visa and property, resolution of cases related to marriages of Indian citizens 
with foreigners, impact of absence of laws for registration of the marriage in several States and other 
associated issues.  
5. The representatives of the Government responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
points raised by the members of the Committee and  to the supplementary List of Points to be sent by 
the Secretariat within ten days. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

48 
 
Annexure-III 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-20) HELD ON 02 DECEMBER, 2019 
The Committee sat on Monday, 02 December, 2019 from 1530hrs to 1730hrs in Committee 
Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  –   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Jayadev Galla 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
5. Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha 
6. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri Achyutnanda Samanta 
9. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
10. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
11. Shri Rebati Tripura 
12. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri K.J. Alphons 
14. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
15. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
16. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C.Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
3. Smt. Jyochanmayi Sinha  - Director  
 
                                                 WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 

49 
 
1. Shri Vijay Gokhale   - Foreign Secretary  
2. Shri Vikas Swarup   - Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
3.  Shri Dinesh K. Patnaik  - Additional Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
4. Shri Manish    -  Joint Secretary (OIA-II) 
5. Shri Robert Shetkintong  - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
  
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
1. Shri Rabindra Panwar   -  Secretary 
2.  Shri Ashish Srivastava  - Joint Secretary (Legal) 
3. Shri Asholi Chalai   - Joint Secretary (NCW, MWCD) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Nagendra Nath Sinha   - Secretary (BM) 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
1. Shri Anoop Kumar Mendiratta -  Law Secretary 
2.  Dr. Anju Rathi Rana   -  Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri K. Biswal -  Additional Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, the Ministry of Women and Child Development, 
the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs & 
Legislative Department)  to the Sitting of the Committee convened to have oral evidence on the  
„Registration of Marriage of Non -Resident Indian Bill, 2019‟ . After giving cue of the discussion, the 
Chairperson drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also 
apprised the witnesses about the provision of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. Thereafter, Foreign Secretary briefed about the issues related to the proposed Bill that were 
raised during the last Sitting of the Committee held  on 18.11.2019 and the objectives of th e proposed 
Bill.  
4.  After some deliberation on general issues pertaining to the Bill, the Committee took up clause-
by-clause discussion with the representatives of Ministries/Departments concerned. The major issues 
discussed during the oral evidence inte r-alia included provision to cover registration of marriages 

50 
 
solemnized before enactment of proposed legislation, relaxation in time period for registration of 
marriages, direction of Supreme Court for compulsory registration of marriages in States, legisl ative 
jurisdiction of States under the concurrent list, development of portal for registration of marriage, 
process of registration of marriage under Special Marriage Act, 1954, purview of registration under 
Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, definition of NRI in  the Act, competent authority  for revocation of 
passport and the proposed provision under the Act for deciding aggrieved party, insertion of section 
86A in the code of criminal procedure, 1973, procedure for serving the summons and court orders 
through specially designated website of MEA and other related issues.  
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministries/Departments responded to the queries raised 
by the Members at length.  
6.  The Committee decided to have another deliberation on the Bill in du e course. Before the 
Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points 
raised by the Members of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

51 
 
Annexure-IV 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-20) HELD ON 27 JANUARY, 2020 
The Committee sat on Monday, 27 January, 2020 from 1100 hrs to 1335 hrs in Committee 
Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  –   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi  
4. Shri P.C. Mohan 
5. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
6. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
7. Shri Rebati Tripura 
8. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri K.J. Alphons 
10. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C.Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   -  Director 
       
                                        
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Bhattacharya  -  Secretary (CPV & OIA)  
2. Shri Dinesh K. Patnaik  - Additional Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
3.  Ms. Uma Sekhar    - Additional Secretary (L&T) 
4. Shri Manish    -  Joint Secretary (OIA-II) 
  
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
1.  Shri Ashish Srivastava  - Joint Secretary (Legal) 

52 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Anil Malik   - Additional Secretary  
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
1. Shri Anoop Kumar Mendiratta -  Law Secretary 
2.  Dr. Anju Rathi Rana   -  Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
1. Shri K. Biswal    -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Jayakrishnan  - Legislative Counsel 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee an d the 
representatives of the Government to the Sitting of the Committee convened for taking oral evidence 
on the „Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019‟. Thereafter, the Chairperson drew 
the attention of all the representatives to Dire ction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in 
order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses 
about the provision of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. He also highlighted t he 
points on which the Committee needed clarifications. 
3. The Secretary of Ministry of External Affairs was then directed to clarify the Ministry‟s point 
of view on the issues related to the proposed Bill that were raised during the Sittings of the Committee 
held on 18.11.2019 and 02.12.2019 respectively.  
4.  After a brief deliberation on the status of Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 
and some other existing Acts to ascertain the need of coming up with a standalone legislative proposal 
by MEA, the Committee took up the Bill for a clause by clause discussion. The major issues 
discussed during the oral evidence inter -alia included statement of objects and reasons of the Bill, 
provision of impounding or revocation of passport, serving of su mmon and warrants, uploading 
proforma of NRI Marriage Registration on website, role of Government in civil matter, lack of 
provision for renewal/updation of the addresses of NRI couples in proforma for registration, inclusion 
of foreign residential address  of NRI in passport and in marriage proforma, , directions of Supreme 
Court for enactment of law for compulsory registration of marriage, law for compulsory registration 
of marriage in States and Union Territories, provision for registration of a marriage outside respective 
States, formulation of an uniform proforma for marriage registration, incorporation of marital status in 
passports, alternate provisions such as fine, serving notice, Look Out Notice etc. instead of 

53 
 
impounding passport, Registration of M arriage under Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, amendment in 
provision of CrPc for uploading summons on website, parameter for determination of registration of 
marriage and centralization of website for serving notice among others. The representatives of the 
Government responded to the queries raised by the Members at length.  
5.  Before concluding, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
points raised by the Members of the Committee and additional supplementary List of Points to be sent 
by the Secretariat at the earliest.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

54 
 
Annexure-V 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-20) HELD ON 12 MARCH, 2020 
   
The Committee sat on Thursday, 12 March, 2020 from 1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Committee 
Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  –  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
3.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
4. Shri P.C. Mohan 
5.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
6.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
7.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
  
Rajya Sabha 
  
8.   Shri K. J. Alphons  
9.   Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
10.   Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
11.   Shri Abdul Wahab  
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.C Koul   - Joint Secretary (PC) 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai               - Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on ‘the Registration of Marriage of 
Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019‟ of the Ministry of External Affairs.  

55 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the 
draft Report. The members suggested some minor modification s. After deliberations the Committee 
adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

Annexure-VI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XII of 2019 
 
 
THE REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE OF NON-RESIDENT 
INDIAN BILL, 2019 
A 
BILL 
to provide for registration of marriage of Non -Resident Indian and further to amend the 
Passports Act, 1967 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian 
5 Act, 2019. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
 
 
56
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 

 
Definition. 2. For the purposes of this Act, “Non-Resident Indian” means a citizen of India who 
resides out of India. 
 
 
 
 
Registration 
of marriage of 
Non-Resident 
Indian.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
86A. 
Service of 
summons, 
warrants 
through 
website and 
attachment of 
property. 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE OF NON-RESIDENT INDIAN 
3. (1) Every Non-Resident Indian who marries a citizen of India shall get his marriage 
registered in India under any law for the time being in force (including State Act) within a 
period of thirty days from the date of his marriage. 
(2) Every Non-Resident Indian who marries a citizen of India, or any other Non-Resident 
Indian, out of India shall get his marriage registered within a period of thirty days from the 
date of his marriage with the Marriage Officer appointed under section 3 of the Foreign 
Marriage Act, 1969 within whose jurisdiction the marriage has taken place or solemnized in 
any manner at the choice of the parties to the marriage. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT TO THE PASSPORT ACT, 1967 
4. In the Passport Act, 1967, in section 10, in sub -section (3), after clause (h), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
„(i) if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that the holder of the 
passport or travel document is a Non -Resident Indian who has married a citizen of 
India or a Non-Resident Indian and not registered within a period of thirty days of his 
marriage under any law for the time being in force; 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “Non -Resident Indian” means 
a citizen of India who resides out of India.‟. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
5. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, after section 86, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
 
“86A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any other law for 
the time being in force, where a person summoned by a Court under this Code and the 
Court is satisfied that the summons issued could not be served, the Court may issue 
summons along with the substance of the information by uploading on the specially 
designated website of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India and 
such uploading of the summons shall be conclusive evidence that the summons has 
been served against that person. 
 
(2) Where the person summoned under sub -section (1) fails to appear before 
the Court at specified place and time required by the summons, either personally or 
through his duly authorised agent, the Court may, after making such enquiry as it 
thinks fit, issue a warrant for arrest of such person and upload the warrant along with 
the substance of the information a gainst the person to be arrested along with the 
details of summons issued under sub-section (1) on the specially designated website 
of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India. 
 
(3) Where the person fails to appear before the Court at the time and place 
mentioned in the warrant uploaded on the website under sub -section (2), the Court 
may, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender 
and upload a declaration to that effect on the specially designated website of the 
Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India. 
 
 
57
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
33  of 1969.  
 
 
 
 
 
15   15  of 1967.  
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 

 
(4) After uploading a proclamation under sub-section (3), if the accused fails to 
appear before the Court issuing such proclamation, a statement in writing by the Court 
issuing the proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly uploaded on the 
specially designated website of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of 
5 India shall be conclusive evidence that the warrant has been issued against accused 
person and shall be deemed to have been duly served. 
 
(5) The Court issuing a proclamation under sub-section (3) may, for the reasons 
to be recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order the 
attachment of any property, movable or immovable, or both belonging to the proclaimed 
10 offender. 
 
(6) Where the property attached under sub -section (5) consists of the share or 
interest of the proclaimed offender in the property jointly belonging to him and other 
co-owner or co -sharers, such attachment shall have effect only with regard to such 
share or interest of the proclaimed offender. 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There have been several reports of Indian women being trapped in fraudulent 
marriages with Non -Resident Indians. This has indeed emphasised the persistent need to 
build safeguards in order to protect those spouses from such situations. Therefore, it is 
necessary that the marriage solemnized or otherwise in India or outside India shall be 
registered within a period of thirty days from the date of marriage. It has been decide d to 
bring in a legislation to provide for compulsory registration of marriage for better enforcement 
of rights of the deserted spouses under various family laws. 
2. Accordingly, the Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019 proposes 
to provide for compulsory registration of marriage by a Non-Resident Indian within a period 
of thirty days from the date of marriage. It also seeks to amend the Passport Act, 1967 and the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
3. The proposed amendment of the Passport Act, 1967 empowers the passport 
authority to impound or cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel document of 
a Non-Resident Indian, if it is brought to his notice that the Non -Resident Indian has not 
registered his marriage within a period of thirty days from the date of marriage. 
4. The proposed amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 would also 
empower the Courts for issuance of summons, warrants through the specifically designated 
website of the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India. It further provides for 
attachment of the properties, both movable and immovable, belonging to a proclaimed offender. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; SUSHMA SWARAJ. 
The 8th February, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
to provide for registration of marriage of Non -Resident Indian and further to amend the 
Passports Act, 1967 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Smt. Sushma Swaraj, Minister of External Affairs) 
 
 
MGIPMRND—3763RS(S3)—08-02-2019. 
59 