 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Second Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘India’s 
Neighbourhood First Policy’] 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
30
9 
 

 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the 
subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’] 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 07 February, 2024 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07 February, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)……............................................................  (ii)                            
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………….1  
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government………………………………....................................................... 27  
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...………………………………… 79  
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  81 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………………………… 85 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee held on 05 February, 2024……...  90                                                          
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………....   92   
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2023-24) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
    Lok Sabha  
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
    Rajya Sabha  
 22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1.      Shri Anjani Kumar    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
  
 
 
 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirtieth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report of the  Committee 
on the subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’. 
2. The Twenty Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 25 July, 2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 10 October, 
2023 (English Version) and 25 October, 2023 (Hindi Version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting 
held on    05  February, 2024. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given 
at Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Committee 
on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
_05 February, 2024                                                                                           Chairperson,                                 
16_Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                              Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
        This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Second Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘India’s 
Neighbourhood First Policy’ which was presented to the Lok Sabha and also laid 
on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 25.07.2023.  
2.      The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the 62 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 59, 60  and 62  
Total-51  
Chapter-II 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 
Recommendation Nos. 55 and 58                             
        Total- 2 
Chapter-III 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and  require 
reiteration: - 
 
Recommendation  Nos. 8, 17 and 27 
                                                                                                                           
                                          Total-3   
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final  replies of 
the Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos. 5, 22, 26, 41, 53 and 61 
Total-6  
Chapter-V 
  
3.      The Committee desire that final replies to the comments and 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and 
recommendations included in Chapter V may be furnished to the Committee 
within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
  
PARLIAMENTARY EXCHANGES BETWEEN INDIA AND 
NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES 
                                     
                                    Recommendation No. 5  
  
5.      The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 

3 
 
  
        ‘The Committee find that there aren’t enough Parliamentary exchanges 
between India and its neighbourhood countries and there has been only one 
Parliamentary visit from the People’s Majlis of Maldives in the recent years. The 
Committee are of the strong view that regular Parliamentary Exchanges with 
neighbouring partners can also play a pivotal role in the implementation of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to utilize 
the  Parliamentary forum in a better way by facilitating more and more 
Parliamentary exchanges between India and its neighbouring countries for better 
interaction between Parliamentarians of India and the countries in the 
neighbourhood so that the philosophy of the  Neighbourhood First is widely shared 
and upheld in its true spirit’. 
6.      In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has stated as under: 
“Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee  and 
would strive to work out a plan for structured interaction with the 
 Parliamentarians from foreign countries, including from the 
 neighbourhood”. 
  
7.      The Committee had urged the Ministry to facilitate more and more 
Parliamentary exchanges between India and its neighbouring countries for 
better interaction among Parliamentarians. While noting the 
recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry has stated that it would 
strive to work out a plan for structured interaction with the Parliamentarians 
from foreign countries, including from the neighbourhood. The Committee 
desire that the action plan for structured interaction with the 
Parliamentarians, especially from the neighbourhood should be worked out at 
the earliest to facilitate more parliamentary exchanges so that the philosophy 
of the Neighbourhood First is widely shared and upheld in its true spirit. 

4 
 
REGIONAL INFRASTRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT OF BORDER 
AREAS  
Recommendation No. 8 
  
8.      The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
  ‘The Committee observe that India’s Neighbourhood First Policy has  
achieved over the years benefits like greater regional connectivity, improved 
infrastructure, and stronger development cooperation in  various sectors, 
enhanced security and broader people-to people contacts with our immediate 
neighbours. Further, regular assessments are being done and the impact on 
the ground is  measured in a real way. The Committee while 
acknowledging the  efforts of the Ministry are of the view that more 
needs to be done,  especially, addressing the huge deficiency in our border 
 infrastructure. The Committee find that   the deficiency relates to the 
 way our border districts are developed   compared to those facing the 
districts across the country. As our   border areas are pivotal in  unlocking 
the potential of our engagements  with our neighbours, the need to stabilize 
and develop the border   regions have become critical. So, for more effective 
engagement with our immediate neighbours, connectivity infrastructure like 
cross-border roads, railways, inland waterways and ports, energy, 
telecommunication  and digital links, etc. needs to be enhanced. The 
Committee,  therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
take it up with various Central Ministries, Departments and agencies 
concerned the need for regional infrastructure development of the border 
areas through increased allocation/investment, pooling of resources and 
above all, convergence of everybody’s interest and focus. The Committee 
also desire that the feasibility of setting up a regional development fund for 
connectivity infrastructure under  regional frameworks like BIMSTEC may 
also be explored’.  
  

5 
 
9.      In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has stated as under: 
    “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is noted for compliance. 
Under India’s ‘Neighbourhood First policy’, Government of India has 
focused on enhancing development of border areas. Issues  pertaining to 
development of the border areas are taken up regularly with concerned line 
Ministries by the Ministry of  External Affairs. 
Further, BIMSTEC member states have successfully negotiated an 
Agreement on Maritime Transport Cooperation. Member states are also 
negotiating BIMSTEC Motor Vehicle Agreement on priority. Member states 
are also negotiating the next steps toward implementation of the BIMSTEC 
Master Plan on Transport Connectivity which was adopted  by the Leaders 
during the 5th  BIMSTEC Summit in Colombo”. 
  
10.    The Committee had felt the need for regional infrastructure 
development of the border areas through increased allocation/investment, 
pooling of resources and above all, convergence of everybody’s interest  and 
had desired that the Ministry of External Affairs   should take it up with 
various Central Ministries, Departments and agencies concerned. It was also 
desired that the feasibility of setting up a regional development fund for 
connectivity infrastructure under regional frameworks like BIMSTEC may 
be explored. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that issues 
pertaining to development of the border areas are taken up regularly with 
concerned line Ministries. However, it is silent on setting up a regional 
development fund under BIMSTEC. The Committee are of the view that 
regional infrastructure development in border areas is critical for border 
safety, enhanced trade, investment and broader engagement with our 
immediate neighbours. The Committee, hence, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for increased allocation/investment, pooling of resources and 
convergence of interest/focus of Central Ministries, Departments and agencies 

6 
 
for regional infrastructural development of border areas under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and establishing a regional development fund 
under BIMSTEC or other regional frameworks. 
 
 
                          UPGRADATION OF BORDER SECURITY 
  
Recommendation No. 9 
  
11.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
        ‘The Committee are also seized of the fact that India is facing 
continuing threats from cross-border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling 
of fake currency and contrabands, trafficking in drugs and weapons, etc. and 
find it imperative to enhance security infrastructure at the borders. The 
Committee had also discussed the issue of border safety and security with 
the representatives of MEA, MHA and MoD during their meetings as well as 
during on-the-spot study visits. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government to take comprehensive measures for upgrading border security 
apparatus and bridge connectivity gaps at the borders under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee also desire that Demographic 
changes through illegal migration in the bordering areas may also be 
monitored vigilantly and the Committee be apprised accordingly in this 
regard’.  
  
12.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
 “The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. Steps for better border 
management in the neighbourhood are continuously being taken by 
Government of India through improved border infrastructure and enhanced 
security cooperation. The Ministry of Home Affairs is the lead agency for 
development of border security apparatus to curb  illegal migration, 

7 
 
smuggling and cross-border terrorism. MEA continues to assist MHA in 
these endeavors”.  
  
13.  The Committee had urged the Government to take comprehensive 
measures for upgrading border security apparatus and bridge connectivity 
gaps at the borders under the Neighbourhood First Policy and had also 
desired vigilant monitoring of demographic changes through illegal migration 
in the bordering areas. While taking note of the recommendation of the 
Committee for compliance, the Ministry has stated that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs is the lead agency for development of border security apparatus to 
curb illegal migration, smuggling and cross-border terrorism. MEA continues 
to assist MHA in these endeavors. The Committee understand that priority 
has been attached to border safety and security under the Neighbourhood 
First Policy and desire that the MEA should improve its coordination with the 
MHA for periodic upgradation of border security apparatus, 
bridging  connectivity gaps through infrastructural development and 
preventing illegal migration, cross border smuggling and terrorist infiltration.  
  
 
                          
                          ROADMAP FOR TRADE CONNECTIVITY 
  
Recommendation No. 13 
  
14.    In their Twenty Second Report, the Committee had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
            ‘The Committee note that under the Neighbourhood First Policy, India’s 
engagement with its neighbours range from connectivity projects including 
economic, energy and digital connectivity to cultural projects; education and 
health care; developmental and technological cooperation; cooperation in 

8 
 
maritime security to humanitarian and disaster relief. It is seen that massive 
investment in infrastructure has improved physical connectivity in the 
neighbourhood. In the field of energy connectivity, India is promoting easier 
movement of hydrocarbons across the region and as a part of this, cross-
border pipelines including the India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline have 
been constructed. In the electricity sector, grid interconnection with our 
neighbouring countries is being augmented. The Committee find that India is 
also working on wind energy projects, renewable energy projects and solar 
power projects with some of the neighbouring countries. In the field of 
technology, the South Asia Satellite was   launched in May 2017 and the 
India-Bhutan Satellite in November 2022. Tele-learning and telemedicine 
have emerged as new areas for assistance to our neighbours. Further, India is 
the educational hub and  health care hub for the neighbourhood. On the 
economic front, 24 bilateral trade with our neighbouring countries have 
improved and there has been a quantum jump from USD 3.27 billion in 2014 
to USD 14.7 billion in 2020 in India’s Lines of Credit to its neighbours. In 
fact, almost 50% of our global soft-lending goes to our partners in the 
neighbourhood. Maritime security in the region has been expanded and the 
security capacities and capabilities of some of our neighbours upgraded 
through India’s efforts. Above all, India is the first responder during many 
humanitarian disasters in the region. The Committee acknowledge the 
efforts and initiatives taken so far, however, in view   of the incontrovertible 
importance of the region to India and the potential of our country to 
contribute towards building a safe, secure, prosperous and well-connected 
South Asia, the Committee urge the Ministry to continue to uphold the “non-
reciprocal policy” towards its  smaller neighbours in the sub-continent and 
its immediate perimeter in the fields of capacity building, cooperation in 
information and digital technologies, space, cyber security, etc. Moreover, 
the Committee would like that a clear roadmap should be prepared for 
promoting  trade connectivity and contact among people of neighbouring 
countries so that India can achieve global role through defined role and 
contribution of these countries’. 
  
  

9 
 
15.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
“The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. In line 
with the recommendation, promoting Connectivity and People-to- People 
contact is a central focus of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy. This 
encompasses all dimensions of connectivity  including in new areas like 
cooperation in digital technologies, ICT,  Outer Space and Cyber 
security, etc., apart from improving connectivity in rail, road, air, 
and     financial connectivity. Pilgrimage  to religious shrines in the 
neighbourhood is also facilitated by the Government. 
  
      Capacity building has remained a priority area of cooperation to 
assist   the people, especially youth through various training programs under 
ITEC. India has also extended assistance to our neighboring countries in 
setting up institutions for higher learning and research, industrial   training 
centers, etc”. 
  
  
16.    The Committee note that in line with its recommendation, promoting 
connectivity and people-to-people contact is a central focus of India’s 
Neighbourhood First Policy. This encompasses all dimensions of connectivity 
including facilitating pilgrimage to religious shrines in the neighbourhood. 
The Ministry has also stated that assistance has been extended to our 
neighboring countries in capacity building under ITEC, setting up institutions 
for higher learning and research, industrial training centers, etc. However, 
there is no mention of a clear roadmap for promoting trade connectivity. The 
Committee, hence, desire that initiatives may be taken by the Ministry in this 
regard under the Neighbourhood First Policy for overall social and economic 
development of the country. 
   

10 
 
 
NEGOTIATIONS ON CEPA 
Recommendation No. 17 
  
17.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
        ‘The Committee note that India and Bangladesh enjoy a robust partnership 
and 2021 saw their diplomatic relations  completing 50 years. Acknowledging 
the importance of leveraging the  potential of new and emerging areas of 
cooperation, India and Bangladesh have agreed to collaborate in new areas of 
cooperation, such as, environment, climate change, cyber  security, ICT, 
space technology, green energy and blue economy. Presently, both countries are 
looking forward to strengthening  their trade and economic ties through a 
bilateral Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement. As per the Ministry, a 
Joint Study Report on the Agreement has been finalized and the negotiations 
would be commencing soon. The Committee, hence, desire that the 
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement with Bangladesh, be finalized 
at the earliest and commence negotiations on the same for its early implementation 
within a time  frame’. 
18.    In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has stated as under: 
        “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. India  and 
Bangladesh finalized a Joint Study in 2022 for starting the negotiations on CEPA. 
Ministry of Commerce is the lead Ministry on negotiations for CEPA”. 
  
19.    The Committee had desired that the Comprehensive Economic 
Cooperation Agreement between India and Bangladesh should be finalized at 
the earliest and negotiations on the same should commence for an early 
implementation within a time-frame. In its Action taken Reply, the Ministry 

11 
 
has stated that a Joint Study Report on the Agreement has been finalized and 
the negotiations would be commencing soon, at the same time, adding that the 
Ministry of Commerce is the lead Ministry on negotiations for the CEPA. The 
Committee are of the view that the said Agreement, has the potential to 
strengthen trade and economic ties between the countries and reiterate their 
earlier recommendation for commencing the negotiations for its early 
implementation within a time-frame. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
actively coordinate with the Department of Commerce in this regard and 
facilitate negotiations on the CEPA for its early conclusion and 
operationalization. 
  
STRENGTHENING OF BILATERAL MECHANISMS FOR 
MANAGEMENT OF INDO-BANGLADESH BORDER 
  
Recommendation No. 18 
20.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
        ‘The Committee note that with the exchange of Instruments of Ratification of 
the India-Bangladesh Land Boundary Agreement on 6 June 2015, the land 
boundary between India and Bangladesh have been settled. Mechanisms for the 
peaceful and cooperative management of the 4,096 kms long international border 
are also actively focused on border fencing, joint inspection of boundary pillars, 
joint boundary demarcation including of riverine boundaries, among others. The 
Committee feel that there should be better management of the Indo-Bangladesh 
Border to prevent infiltration, cross-border smuggling, etc. and desire that the 
 bilateral echanisms for management of this long border should be 

12 
 
strengthened. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the status of border 
fencingand the demarcation of riverine boundaries between India and Bangladesh’.  
21.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
          “The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. Ministry of Home Affairs is the lead Ministry for border fencing and 
related issues of infiltration, cross-border smuggling etc. for the management of the 
India-Bangladesh border”.  
  
22.    The Committee had desired that the bilateral mechanisms for 
management of the long Indo-Bangladesh border should be strengthened and 
be apprised of the status of border fencing and demarcation of riverine 
boundaries between India and Bangladesh. In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Ministry had noted the recommendations of the Committee for compliance 
while stating that Ministry of Home Affairs is the lead Ministry for border 
fencing and related issues of infiltration, cross-border smuggling etc. The 
Committee acknowledge the involvement of multiple stakeholders for the 
management of the said border and urge the Government to improve its 
coordination with all the Ministries/Departments/Agencies concerned for 
effective management of the long Indo-Bangladesh border for peace, security 
and development.  
                  OPENING OF MORE ICPs and BORDER HAATS 
                                    Recommendation No. 22 
23.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  

13 
 
        ‘The Committee observe that efforts are being undertaken to strengthen the 
border infrastructure by opening and upgrading Integrated Check Posts 
(ICPs)/Land Customs Stations (LCS) and border haats at India-Bangladesh border. 
They also understand that infrastructural capacity constraints and procedural issues 
at border are discussed under the mechanisms of Sub-group on Infrastructure 
of   ICPs/LCS, Commerce Secretary Level Talks (CSLT) and Joint Group on 
Customs (JGC) meetings. Presently, the work for upgradation of 6 more LCSs to 
ICPs on the India-Bangladesh border is on. In view of the importance of 
strengthening the infrastructure at the India-Bangladesh border from security and 
economic/trade perspective, the Committee urge the Government to open more 
ICPs/LCS as well as border haats, wherever required and  upgrade the existing 
ones.Bilateral working mechanisms to discuss infrastructural and capacity 
constraints and procedural issues at border may also be strengthened’. 
24.    In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has submitted as under: 
        “The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted. Up-    
 gradation of border infrastructure is discussed between India and 
 Bangladesh under the Sub Group on Infrastructure. Currently five  
 Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) are operational on India-Bangladesh  
 border, namely ICP Petrapole, ICP Agartala, ICP Sutarkandi, ICP 
 Dawki   and ICP Srimantapur. Government of India plans to upgrade 
 seven  more of the existing Land Customs Stations into ICPs to  boost 
 bilateral  trade and commerce namely Sabroom, Kawrpuichhuah, 
 Fulbari, Ghojandanga, Mahadipur, Hilli, and Changrabandha.  
        Currently, six Border Haats in states of Meghalaya and Tripura are functional 
between both countries. Work is ongoing to establish more Border Haats in 
Assam, West Bengal and Mizoram. Proposal for the expansion of the Border 
Haats is currently under consideration of the Department of Commerce”.   
25.    Keeping in view the importance of strengthening the infrastructure at 
the India-Bangladesh border from security and economic/trade perspective, 
the Committee had urged the Government to open more ICPs/LCS as well as 
Border Haats, wherever required, upgrade the existing ones and strengthen 

14 
 
the bilateral working mechanisms to discuss infrastructural and capacity 
constraints and procedural issues at border.  In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Ministry has informed that currently five ICPs are operational on India-
Bangladesh border and the Government plans to upgrade seven more of the 
existing Land Customs Stations into ICPs. Proposal for the expansion of the 
Border Haats is currently under consideration of the Department of 
Commerce. The Committee are of the view that bilateral trade and commerce 
between India and Bangladesh would get a boost through opening of more 
ICPs/upgradation of LCS to ICPs and establishment of Border Haats and 
urge the Government to finalize its plans in this regard for an early 
implementation. The Committee also urge the MEA to pursue the Department 
of Commerce for the expansion of Border Haats.  
  
 
 
EXPANSION OF SCOPE OF SCHOLARSHIPS AND CUSTOMIZED 
TRAINING PROGRAMMES FOR BHUTAN 
  
Recommendation No. 27 
  
26.    In their Twenty Second Report, the Committee had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
      ‘Presently, India offers seven major scholarships to Bhutan, including the well 
known Ambassador’s Scholarship, prestigious  Nehru Wangchuck Scholarship, 
Five-Year Plan project-tied assistance based Undergraduate Scholarship, Nalanda 

15 
 
University Scholarship, ICCR Undergraduate Engineering scholarships,IIT Kanpur 
scholarship and AYUSH scholarships. Over 1100 Bhutanese students benefit from 
these scholarships, making it an important aspect of our bilateral relationship. A 
large number of Bhutanese civil servants and professionals   from private sector 
and others undertake ITEC training programmes administered by 
the     Development Partnership Administration Division of the Ministry of 
External Affairs. In recent  times, the focus has been on developing 
customized ITEC programmes specifically for Bhutanese nationals. In 2021-22 
alone, 340 Bhutanese nationals benefited from the e-ITEC training programmes 
whereas in 2020-2021, it was 250.In 2022, GoI also customised special ITEC 
progammes for training 100 Bhutanese young entrepreneurs at the prestigious 
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, Ahmedabad and   30 
entrepreneurs at the Indian Institute of Packaging. Going  by this track record, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to  further expand the scope of scholarships and 
customized training programmes in the coming years to accommodate more 
number students, Government officials and professionals’. 
27.    The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
  
        “The recommendation is duly noted for compliance”. 
  
28.    The Committee had urged the Ministry to further expand the scope of 
scholarships and customized training   programmes being run for Bhutan for 
the coming years to accommodate more number of students, Government 
officials and professionals. The Ministry had noted the recommendation of 
the Committee for compliance, however, the fresh initiatives taken/likely to 
be taken in this regard, have not been mentioned. The Committee, hence, 
desire that the Ministry should identify the projects/schemes that can be 
launched for expansion of the scope of scholarships and customized training 
programmes, conduct proper assessment of the increased/expected coverage 

16 
 
of beneficiaries and apprise the Committee of the progress made so far in this 
regard. 
  
                  EFFECTIVE MONITORING OF PROJECTS IN NEPAL 
Recommendation No. 35 
  
  
29.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
  
          ‘The Committee note that India’s bilateral relations with Nepal has expanded 
to new initiatives in agriculture, inland waterways and   power sector cooperation. 
The ‘India Nepal New Partnership’ in Agriculture which focuses on collaborative 
projects in agriculture education and R&D was launched in April 2018. The Inland 
waterways connectivity between India and Nepal with four multi- modal 
transportation routes via Jharkhand, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh  was announced in 
2019. Two of the terminals at Varanasi and Sahibgunj have already been 
completed and work is underway for the remaining terminals. India and Nepal 
have also unveiled a Joint Vision Statement on Power Sector Cooperation in April 
2022. Indian   companies are currently developing large Hydro Electric Projects in 
Nepal including Arun III (900 MW), Lower Arun (679 MW), Arun-4   (490 MW), 
West Seti and SR-6 (1200MW) and Upper Karnali (900   MW). Under Lines of 
Credit, 44 road projects; 7 projects in hydropower and transmission lines and 
several others in housing and  reconstruction spread all across Nepal have been 
financed and a large number of these projects are either completed or are 
nearing  completion. The Committee desire that the Government should give 
focused attention to collaborative projects in agriculture education and R&D as it 
would give a boost to the rural economy of both the countries. The remaining 
inland waterway terminals for the multi- modal transportation routes may be 
completed at the earliest. The Committee are aware that India would greatly 
benefit from the commissioning of large hydro electric projects currently being 
developed by Indian companies in Nepal by way of power export and urge the 

17 
 
Government to monitor the progress of work effectively so that these hydro-
electric projects are completed and operationalized without time and cost overruns. 
The Committee also desire that all  the ongoing and pending projects under Lines 
of Credit, including housing and reconstruction projects, should be completed at 
the earliest’.  
  
 
30.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
  
            “The recommendation is noted for compliance”. 
  
31. The Committee take note of the fact that the Ministry has noted their 
recommendations regarding focused attention to collaborative projects in 
Nepal in agriculture education and R&D, completion of remaining inland 
waterway terminals for the multi-modal transportation routes, monitoring of 
hydro-electric projects, early completion of ongoing and pending projects, 
etc.  for compliance. The Committee hope that in order to give focused 
attention for implementing the recommendations of the Committee, the 
Ministry would strengthen its monitoring mechanism and take concrete steps 
to achieve the  said objectives.  
                           
                          RESUMPTION OF TALKS ON ETCA 
Recommendation No. 44 
  
32.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 

18 
 
  
        ‘The Committee note that Sri Lanka is one of our major development 
assistance partners. Under the Indian Housing Project, 60,000 houses are being 
built and numerous people-oriented High Impact Projects in sectors like 
agriculture, health, child and women empowerment, education and livelihood 
generation are under implementation. Several       projects under Lines of Credit 
are under discussion. Implementation of the USD 100 million Solar project is 
expected to bolster cooperation in     the renewable energy sector between India 
and Sri Lanka. The Committee further note that eleven rounds of negotiations on 
an Economic and Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) covering goods 
and services have been completed as far back as in September 2018 and the Sri 
Lankan side has now conveyed its willingness to resume the said negotiations. The 
Committee understand that the said ETCA would broaden the scope of Free Trade 
Agreement between India and Sri Lanka strengthening economic, trade, investment 
and technology cooperation and therefore, desire that the negotiations should be 
resumed for its early and successful conclusion. It should also be the endeavour of 
the Government to complete all the ongoing projects in various sectors 
expeditiously while taking up new initiatives for cooperation in capacity building 
and skill development’.  
33.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted as 
under: 
        “India has been carrying out people-oriented development projects   across Sri 
Lanka in accordance with the priorities of the Government and people of Sri 
Lanka. These projects cut across sectors such as infrastructure, housing, health, 
livelihood and  rehabilitation, education,industrial development 
etc. IndianHousing Programme is the largest housing project undertaken by  India 
abroad. The project commenced in 2012 and close to 50,000 houses have since 
been completed in three different phases. Sri Lanka wide operations of the 1990 
Emergency Ambulance Service prove to be of great utility across the island 
particularly during COVID-19. In addition, India has completed numerous projects 
in diverse areas including railway infrastructure and integrated water supply 
plants.  

19 
 
        During the visit of the President of Sri Lanka to India in July 2023, 
the     Governments of India and Sri Lanka have agreed to undertake discussions 
on Economic and Technology Cooperation Agreement with new and priority areas. 
Accordingly, both sides are discussing suitablemutually convenient dates for 
resumption of talks”.  
  
34.    The Committee had desired that negotiations on an Economic and 
Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) between India and Sri Lanka 
should be resumed for its early and successful conclusion. The Ministry, in its 
Action Taken Reply has stated that  the Governments of India and Sri Lanka 
have agreed to undertake discussions on ETCA with new and priority areas 
and firm up mutually convenient dates for resumption of talks. The 
Committee urge the Government to maintain close coordination with the 
Government of Sri Lanka so that the talks on the ETCA commence without 
further delay. 
  
                  PERMANENT SOLUTION TO FISHERMEN ISSUES 
Recommendation No. 46 
  
  
35.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
         ‘The Committee are aware of the long pending fishermen  issue   between 
India and Sri Lanka. The Ministry has informed that in the 5th   Joint Working 
Group Meeting on Fisheries held in March 2022, both countries have agreed on the 
need to work out a long term solution to the fishermen issue. In view of Indian 
fishermen getting arrested and   their boats being seized by Sri Lankan Navy every 
now and then, the Committee urge the Ministry to consistently engage with the 

20 
 
Sri  Lankan Government through meaningful dialogues so that a  permanent 
solution to the issue of fishermen and their livelihoods is  worked out in a 
humanitarian manner. The  Committee desire that the  Ministry should also 
take  initiatives for maritime domain awareness in its extended neighbourhood’.  
  
36.    In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has submitted as under: 
  
        “In respect of the arrest of Indian fishermen and boats, as on date,  no 
Indian fishermen are under Sri Lankan custody. With  sustained  diplomatic 
efforts, Government of India secured  release of all 2,934   fishermen, who were 
arrested by Sri Lankan  authorities since 2014 and repatriated them to India. In 
case of  boats, 112 boats out of 139   boats under Sri Lankan custody.  
  
       India has been regularly taking up the matter at the highest levels  in   the 
Government of Sri Lanka through diplomatic channels.  India  continues to 
remain engaged with Sri Lanka at all levels on its  efforts   to protect the interests 
of our fishing community.  
During the Virtual Bilateral Summit between India and Sri Lanka on 
26   September 2020, the two Prime Ministers “agreed to 
continue   engagement to address the issues related to fishermen through 
regular consultation and bilateral channels according to the 
existing  frameworks and shared goals including the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals”. Further, Regular meetings of Joint Working Group 
Meeting on Fisheries and High-Level Meetings  between the Coast 
Guards are being held. The 5th Meeting of India - Sri Lanka Joint Working 
Group on fisheries took place in  March 2022 in a virtual format. These 
mechanisms act as a communication channel for   discussions on ways to 
improve the  fisheries order and pursue fisheries cooperation between India 
and Sri Lanka”. 

21 
 
  
37.    On the Committee’s recommendation to consistently engage with the Sri 
Lankan Government through meaningful dialogues so that a permanent 
solution to the issue of fishermen and their livelihoods is worked out in a 
humanitarian manner, the Ministry has stated that  mechanisms like virtual 
bilateral summit, Joint Working Group meeting on Fisheries, High-level 
meetings between Coastguards  etc.  act as communication channels for 
discussions on ways to improve the fisheries order and pursue fisheries 
cooperation between India and Sri Lanka. The Committee desire that these 
mechanisms should be strengthened and India should also strive for evolving 
a joint strategy with Sri Lanka for improved cooperation and working out a 
permanent solution to the issue of fishermen and their livelihoods. 
                                    INCREASED ROLE OF BIMSTEC 
Recommendation No. 60 
  
38.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‘Over the years, BIMSTEC has proven to be a key body for  regional 
cooperation serving as a unique link between South Asia and South East 
Asia. Activities under BIMSTEC have served as a visible input into our 
‘Neighbourhood First Policy’ and ‘Act East  Policy’.Several lateral 
initiatives announced by India including  BIMSTEC Military Exercise 
(MILEX) and Army Chiefs’ Conclave; BIMSTEC Ministerial Conclave at 
India Mobile Congress 2018;  BIMSTEC Disaster Management Exercise; 
Scholarships to students from BIMSTEC countries at NalandaUniversity and 
some capacity building programmes have been implemented while work is 
in progress on other initiatives. In view of the pivotal role of BIMSTEC in 
regional cooperation, the Committee desire that work in progress on other 

22 
 
initiatives may be implemented speedily. BIMSTEC being a unique regional 
organization focusing on India’s core concerns in the region and thus 
fulfilling India’s key foreign policy priorities of ‘Neighborhood First’ and 
‘Act East Policy’, the Committee urge the Ministry to take fresh initiatives 
to nurture and re-energize the organization to make it more outcome 
oriented. Inputs derived from India’s engagement with BIMSTEC may also 
 be optimally utilized in our foreign policy agenda’. 
  
  
39.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
     “During the 5th BIMSTEC Summit, in line with India’s commitment  towards 
strengthening BIMSTEC, Prime Minister announced initiatives  which have 
been implemented: (i) A one  time grant of USD 1 million to  the 
operational budget of the Secretariat to complete institution   building tasks; 
(ii) 1st capacity  building program by ICRIER in collaboration with ADB 
on Trade Facilitation was organized in May   2023; (iii) The scope of the 
 BIMSTEC Nalanda Scholarship Scheme was   expanded. Initiatives 
announced by the Prime Minister at the Summit  namely on the 
 establishment of networking scheme among institutes  of Marine 
Sciences in the BIMSTEC region and a Study by RIS on creating regional 
value chains on value added agricultural products in   the BIMSTEC region 
are under various stages of implementation”. 
     In addition, India also organized: a training programme for  law   enforcement 
officers from BIMSTEC countries on issues  pertaining to Cyber Security, Counter 
Terrorism, Transnational  Organized Crimes, De-radicalization and other Law 
Enforcement  Challenges; BIMSTEC   Business Conclave in Kolkata in June 
2023; A  symposium on BIMSTEC:  A Vehicle for Growth and Development 
 in 2021; An ISCS-MEA Collaborative 2nd Conference on “BIMSTEC: 25 
 Years of Driving Force Behind Neighbourhood Cooperation” in 2023; 
 a BIMSTEC Literary festival in Bhopal in January 2023; and  announced 

23 
 
PG and PhD scholarships in Agriculture, which emphasize  India’s 
commitment to    strengthen cooperation in different areas  for the larger 
benefit of the  people in the BIMSTEC region”.  
  
40.    The Committee had urged the Ministry to take fresh initiatives to 
nurture and re-energize BIMSTEC to make it more outcome oriented and 
utilize inputs derived from India’s engagement with BIMSTEC optimally in 
our foreign policy agenda. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has 
informed about various initiatives taken and training programmes organized 
for BIMSTEC countries but is silent on the aspect regarding optimum 
utilization of inputs derived from India’s engagement with BIMSTEC in our 
foreign policy agenda. The Committee, hence, reiterate this aspect of their 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take concrete steps in this regard.  
                           INITIATIVES FOR BIMSTEC REGION 
                                    Recommendation No. 61 
  
41.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
   ‘The Committee note that India is currently leading 
BIMSTEC   cooperation in four priority sectors, namely, Counter Terrorism 
& Trans-national Crime, Transport & Communication, Tourism 
and  Environmental & Disaster Management. Besides, initiatives including 
HADR exercises, start-up conclaves and hackathons; capacity building; 
cooperation in science, technology and space; and establishment of 

24 
 
Parliamentary forum have also been announced in 2018. The Committee 
welcome these  initiatives as active collaboration and hope that mutual 
assistance  on matters of common interest in the   economic, social, 
technical and scientific fields would be promoted. Moreover, establishment 
of Parliamentary forum will facilitate interaction and discussion on common 
areas of interests, key areas of concern and also serve as a forum for building 
consensus. The Committee, therefore, desire that the new initiatives 
announced for the BIMSTEC region including establishment of 
Parliamentary forums should be realised at the earliest’.  
  
42.    The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as 
under: 
        “The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted  for 
compliance. The establishment of a BIMSTEC Parliamentary Forum is    under 
process”. 
  
43.    The Committee had desired that the new initiatives announced for the 
BIMSTEC region in 2018 such as, HADR exercises, start-up conclaves and 
hackathons; capacity building; cooperation in science, technology and space; 
and establishment of Parliamentary forum should be realised at the earliest. 
The Ministry, while noting the recommendation of the Committee for 
compliance, has stated that the establishment of a BIMSTEC Parliamentary 
Forum is under process. The Committee are of the view that collaborations 
between India and BIMSTEC countries in various fields are mutually 
beneficial and should be promoted. The Committee, hence, urge the Ministry 
to  make further efforts for implementation of all the initiatives announced in 
2018 and completion of the process for  establishment of a BIMSTEC 
Parliamentary Forum at the earliest. 

25 
 
        BIMSTEC MASTER PLAN FOR TRANSPORT CONNECTIVITY 
Recommendation No. 62 
  
  
44.    The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
  
      ‘The Committee find that BIMSTEC member States have also 
 recently   finalized a ‘Master Plan for Transport Connectivity’ that  would 
lay down   a long term roadmap for even closer connectivity in  the BIMSTEC 
sub-  region. Implementation of the Master Plan would  improve connectivity  of 
India’s North East and beyond. In the  opinion of the Committee, improved 
connectivity in the North  Eastern Region of India will greatly contribute to the 
socio-economic  development of the region and by virtue of the region’s close 
 proximity to Myanmar which acts as a  bridge for ASEAN, would be 
 instrumental in the success of the Act East Policy. The Committee, 
 therefore, desire that the BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport 
 Connectivity should be implemented at the earliest and   urge the 
 Government to make coordinated efforts in this regard. 
  
45.    In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has stated as under: 
      “The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted 
 for  compliance. Through the BIMSTEC Working Group on  Transport 
 Connectivity, member states are regularly discussing ways to 
 improve  connectivity including the implementation of the  BIMSTEC 
 Master Plan for Transport Connectivity”. 
  

26 
 
46.    The Committee had desired that the BIMSTEC Master Plan   for 
Transport Connectivity should be implemented at the earliest and have urged 
the Government to make coordinated efforts in this regard. The Ministry had 
noted the recommendation of the Committee for compliance and has also 
informed that through the BIMSTEC Working Group on Transport 
Connectivity, member States are regularly discussing ways to improve 
connectivity including the implementation of the BIMSTEC Master Plan for 
Transport Connectivity. The Committee desire that the BIMSTEC Master 
Plan for Transport Connectivity should be finalized and implemented at the 
earliest for the socio-economic development of the region and greater success 
of India’s Act East Policy.  
  

27 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that India’s Neighbourhood First Policy as a concept came 
about in 2008 and after 2014, it has got more focus and salience. Conceived in 
order to forge strong neighbourhood relations based on a consultative, non-
reciprocal and outcome-oriented approach among the priority countries viz., 
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri 
Lanka, the Neighbourhood First Policy has emerged as a Central pillar of India’s 
foreign policy in recent years. Our immediate neighbourhood forms the first circle 
of priority in India’s relations with the world. The Committee further note that the 
Neighbourhood First Policy has been a cardinal component of India’s foreign 
policy and involves the entire Government machinery so that all other Ministries 
and Departments approach their engagement with the neighbourhood with a 
similar proactive perspective. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the 
Ministry as they recognize that optimal management of bilateral relations with our 
immediate neighbours is a strategic foreign policy requirement and not just a 
domestic security and economic imperative. The real impact of the Neighbourhood 
First Policy would, however, depend on how far mainstreaming of the Policy is 
successful and the extent to which the Ministry is able to coordinate across all the 
relevant arms of the Government – Ministries, Departments and agencies 
concerned to achieve its objectives. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
create and maintain an effective coordination mechanism with all the Ministries, 
Departments and agencies of the Central and State Governments for 
implementation of the Neighbourhood First Policy in letter and spirit. MEA being 
the nodal Ministry for implementation of the Neighbourhood First Policy should 
establish a Cell to identify specific initiatives, projects and programmes that can be 
taken up by the various Ministries and Departments with our neighbouring 
countries and bring about convergence in the implementation of such initiatives, 
projects and programmes for greater impact. 
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government of India’s efforts to deliver benefits like greater connectivity, 
stronger inter-linkages and greater people-to-people connect under India’s 
Neighbourhood First policy takes place through a whole-of-government approach 
with coordination involving various Ministries, Departments and agencies of GOI 
and of concerned State governments. 
 
In line with the esteemed Committee’s recommendation, Inter-Ministerial 
coordination mechanisms have been established on various issues. Where 
necessary, mechanisms such as the Joint Task Force at Joint Secretary Level and 
Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group at Secretary Level for better coordination 
between different Ministries and agencies have been established for steering 
specific initiatives, projects and programs. The Ministry takes notes of the 
esteemed Committee’s thrust on effective coordination mechanism among various 
Ministries, Departments, agencies and Center and State Governments.  
 
Coordination at Union government level is carried out through e-Samiksha portal, 
regular meetings of the Sectoral Group of Secretaries level. Coordination with NE 
Council is also carried out from time to time. 
 
The guidance of committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that high-level mechanisms and Joint Working Groups exist 
for optimal management of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbors. In 
addition, there are Joint Project Monitoring Committees, Oversight Mechanism, 
Regional Border Committee Meetings, Boundary Working Group Talks and Staff 
Talks between the defence services. India’s engagement with its neighbours is also 
driven by multilateral and regional mechanisms such as SAARC, BIMSTEC and 
BBIN. While acknowledging the initiatives undertaken through the said 
mechanisms/platforms, particularly in recent years, the Committee feel that the 

29 
 
impact of the Neighbourhood First Policy should be felt on the ground in a more 
effective and extensive manner. This calls for strengthening of the institutional and 
multilateral/regional mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
conduct periodic review of its bilateral and multilateral/regional relationship 
framework on the basis of contemporary realities and upgrade, strengthen and 
energize these mechanisms on a continuous basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The esteemed Committee’s recommendation is duly noted. There are multiple 
institutional mechanisms for reviewing bilateral cooperation in different areas with 
neighboring countries. Periodic meetings of the various bilateral institutional 
mechanisms such as Foreign Office Consultations (FOC), Joint Commissions (JM), 
Ministerial and HoG-level meetings  are held regularly to discuss the progress on 
all  issues in an institutional manner. Further, new bilateral mechanisms have also 
been constituted to enhance our partnership in new sectors. The scope of the 
bilateral mechanisms is reviewed and revised as per the requirement from time to 
time. Further, India’s engagement with SAARC and BIMSTEC are important 
elements of the Government’s “Neighbourhood First Policy”.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee observe that in keeping with Neighbourhood First Policy, India 
desires normal neighbourly relations with all neighbouring countries free of terror, 
hostility and violence. However, for more than three decades the country has been 
facing threats and continuous tension, instability and heightened possibility of 
terrorist and militant attacks from our immediate neighbourhood. The Committee 
fully endorse the changed approach of the Government to quell the threats posed 
by cross-border terrorism in a pre-emptive manner as well as maintaining a tough 
stand that bilateral relations with our neighbours can only be held in an atmosphere 
free from terror, hostility and violence. The Committee, therefore, desire that India 
should work towards more closer cooperation amongst the member States in the 
region to create an environment where all neighbouring countries speak in one 

30 
 
voice against the countries engaged in such activities and take proactive steps to 
counter the menace of terrorism and help to achieve the goal of lasting peace, 
stability and prosperity in the region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There are institutional mechanisms through which regular dialogue with several 
neighbouring countries on the issues of terrorism and insurgency is held. There are 
institutional mechanisms also, at various levels and involving senior officials and 
experts from various Ministries/Departments and agencies, to discuss cooperation 
in security, defense and border management related issues.  
 
Sharing of information on contraband smuggling, drugs, fake Indian currency, 
trafficking and on activities of various groups and organizations are undertaken on 
regular basis. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that the philosophy of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy are 
regularly shared through high-level bilateral interactions and Foreign Office 
Consultations with the neighbouring States and through the platforms of SAARC, 
BIMSTEC, videoconferencing, dialogues, etc. However, in Committee’s view, a 
successful implementation of the Policy can only convey the best and convince our 
neighbours and requires concerted efforts, such as, timely execution of 
development projects and enhancing mutually beneficial cooperation. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure that development projects 
undertaken in the neighbourhood are executed within a timeframe by strengthening 
the Joint Project Monitoring Committees and Oversight Mechanisms for 
monitoring the progress of various development assistance projects for their timely 
execution. The scope of mutually beneficial cooperation with our neighbours may 
also be enhanced with fresh initiatives. 
 

31 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The points pertaining to need for successful implementation of 
Neighbourhood First Policy based on timely execution of development projects are 
duly noted. 
 
India-assisted development projects, including those in the neighbourhood, are 
subject to multi-layered monitoring and oversight by the Government. First, within 
the Ministry, there are periodic reviews with direct stakeholders at different levels. 
Second, there are inter-Ministerial reviews under various processes that monitor 
project delivery. Third, the Ministry engages at the bilateral level with the host 
Governments concerned to provide oversight and facilitation to development 
projects under instituted dialogue mechanisms and/or project-specific Joint Project 
Monitoring Committees (JPMCs). The aforementioned Governmental monitoring 
efforts are over and above the day-to-day management and monitoring provided by 
the Project Management Consultants (PMCs).  
 
With regard to fresh initiatives, in line with the esteemed Committee’s 
recommendation, India is sharing its own developmental experience in the full 
spectrum of activities, including in infrastructure development such as railway 
links, roads & bridges, waterways, border-related infrastructure, transmission lines, 
power generation, hydropower etc. In addition, India is also enhancing the scope of 
mutually beneficial projects through new initiatives such as by sharing India’s 
development experience in Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI), agriculture, inland 
waterways, power sector cooperation, digital connectivity, financial connectivity, 
space cooperation, health, education, etc. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
  

32 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
While considering the principles and objectives of ‘Neighbourhood First Policy’ 
and ‘Act East Policy’, the Committee note that the Neighbourhood First Policy 
exclusively focuses on India’s immediate neighbourhood while the Act East Policy 
focuses on the extended neighbourhood in the Asia-Pacific region. Both 
Neighbourhood First and Act East Policies focus on creating a stable and 
prosperous neighbourhood through continued engagement at bilateral, regional and 
multilateral levels. The Act East Policy can also be seen as a logical extension of 
the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee further note that enhanced 
connectivity with our Asian neighbourhood, which is one of the strategic priorities 
under Act East Policy, holds immense potential to bring about a significant positive 
developmental impact on the North-Eastern Region. The Committee feel that 
economic development of the North-Eastern Region which shares land borders 
with many of the neighbouring countries is also integral to the success of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and would impact the successful implementation of 
the Act East Policy. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to maintain a 
synergy between these two important foreign policies as it holds significant 
potential to bring about connectivity, economic development and security of the 
North-Eastern Region and apprise the Committee about the outcome accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted. The coming 
together of the “Act East” and the “Neighbourhood First” policies has an enormous 
reinforcing impact for the development of India’s North East. Enhanced 
connectivity of the North-East with India’s neigbhbours- including restoration of 
historical cross-border rail links, development of Land Customs Stations and 
Integrated Check Posts, roads, as well as multimodal corridor, namely the Kaladan 
Multimodal Transit Transport Corridor are being developed. Negotiations are also 
underway to operationalise the BBIN Motor Vehicle Agreement to ensure seamless 
vehicular movement. Agreements for moving of goods into and from the North 
East through ports in Bangladesh are also being worked out. Border haats are being 
developed in various North-Eastern states to facilitate local exchange of goods.  

33 
 
In addition, digital, power, and energy connectivity is also being strengthened in 
the region. India is also supporting the development of the India-Myanmar-
Thailand trilateral highway project. Through the BIMSTEC Working Group on 
Transport Connectivity, member states are regularly discussing ways to improve 
connectivity including the implementation of the BIMSTEC Master Plan for 
Transport Connectivity. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that ICCR being the cultural institution under the MEA 
mandated to cultivate the elements of soft power for furthering India’s international 
relations by earning goodwill, has been running Indian Cultural Centres in Nepal, 
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Afghanistan, Maldives and Myanmar. These 
cultural centres are the nodal points for promoting our cultural relations in these 
countries. In view of the importance of cultural engagement in our Neighbourhood 
First Policy, the Committee desire that the Ministry should make an assessment of 
the adequacy of such centres in our neighbouring countries and strengthen the 
existing ones in a balanced manner. The academic cooperation, special 
scholarships schemes and exchanges in the fields of performing/fine arts 
undertaken by ICCR may be scaled up in consultation with the Ministry so that 
increased participation in the said activities strengthen our neighbourhood relations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is noted for compliance. 
ICCR contributes towards promotion of Indian culture abroad through its wide 
range of activities which include inter-alia, teaching of Yoga, Dance & Music, 
scholarship schemes and exchange of cultural delegations. Under this strategy, the 
ICCR has also been making all efforts for strengthening the relations with its 
neighbouring countries, particularly Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Afghanistan, Maldives and Myanmar in consultation and cooperation with the 
Ministry and the Indian Missions/Posts concerned.  
 

34 
 
In order to closely engage with the neighbouring countries the ICCR has opened its 
centers  in Sri Lanka  (1998), Nepal (2007), Afghanistan (2007), Bangladesh 
(2010), Bhutan (2010), Myanmar (2010) and Maldives (2011).  
 
In line with the recommendation of the esteemed Committee, ICCR is also 
increasing scholarship slots under different scholarship schemes for countries in 
the neighbourhood. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee are also seized of the fact that India is facing continuing threats 
from cross-border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and 
contrabands, trafficking in drugs and weapons, etc. and find it imperative to 
enhance security infrastructure at the borders. The Committee had also discussed 
the issue of border safety and security with the representatives of MEA, MHA and 
MoD during their meetings as well as during on-the-spot study visits. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to take comprehensive measures for 
upgrading border security apparatus and bridge connectivity gaps at the borders 
under the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee also desire that 
Demographic changes through illegal migration in the bordering areas may also be 
monitored vigilantly and the Committee be apprised accordingly in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. Steps for better border 
management in the neighbourhood are continuously being taken by Government of 
India through improved border infrastructure and enhanced security cooperation. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs is the lead agency for development of border 
security apparatus to curb illegal migration, smuggling and cross-border terrorism. 
MEA continues to assist MHA in these endeavors.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 

35 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that the dividends of the Neighbourhood First Policy have 
translated into strong support for India in various multilateral fora such as the UN, 
NAM, Commonwealth, SAARC and BIMSTEC. India works in close cooperation 
with its neighbouring partners in these groupings towards ensuring the security and 
growth for all in the region. The Committee desire that the Government should not 
be complacent but be ever vigilant of the new developments in the neighbourhood 
and the region to leverage the support and cooperation from all countries in various 
multilateral fora in the coming years. The Committee urge the Ministry to remain 
focused on building closer relationships as a strong regional player while 
positioning itself as supporting the growing aspirations of its smaller neighbours. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
India’s Neighbourhood First Policy is a dynamic policy that adjusts to our renewed 
interests in the region while evolving according to regional circumstances. Being 
aware of China’s Belt and Road vision and America’s Indo-Pacific vision, the 
Committee are of the considered view that it is in India’s strategic interests and 
foreign policy requirements to focus on wider engagements and deepening of ties 
with smaller neighbours. The Committee also desire that the opportunities 
presented by an open and competitive South Asian market may also be grasped and 
consolidated from both security and economic perspectives. 
 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee observe that unlike India’s relationship with other countries in the 
neighbourhood, bilateral relations with Pakistan and China has been plagued by 
contentious issues. One of the core concerns with Pakistan is terrorism emanating 
from territories under its control. The Ministry has stated that the onus is on 
Pakistan to ensure a conducive atmosphere for any meaningful dialogue. The 
Committee have also been informed that as a result of proactive outreach with the 
international community, India has successfully thwarted Pakistan’s attempt to 
present an alarmist situation of the region; interfere in its internal affairs and 
internationalize bilateral issues. In view of the belligerent attitude of Pakistan, the 
Committee desire that the Government should continue to proactively engage with 
the regional and multilateral bodies/organizations extensively so as to sensitize 
them of the role played by Pakistan in fostering terrorism and win their support in 
the fight against terrorism on its soil. Efforts may also be made to establish a 
common platform for countering terrorism under the Neighbourhood First Policy. 
Despite the lack of progress on the diplomatic front, the Committee urge the 
Government to consider the establishment of economic ties with Pakistan if they 
come forward and work towards broader people-to-people contacts in view of the 
cultural commonalities and civilizational linkages between our two countries and 
no feeling of enmity amongst citizens of both the countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry takes due note of the recommendation of the esteemed 
committee. The trade relations between India and Pakistan are affected by the 
overall political relationship between the two countries. Pakistan suspended all 
trade with India post August 2019 in retaliation to non-operationalization of article 

37 
 
370 of the Constitution of India. Pakistan partly relaxed its trade ban in September 
2019 to allow imports of only pharmaceutical goods. Trade with India in other 
items continues to be banned by Pakistan. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee note that under the Neighbourhood First Policy, India’s 
engagement with its neighbours range from connectivity projects including 
economic, energy and digital connectivity to cultural projects; education and health 
care; developmental and technological cooperation; cooperation in maritime 
security to humanitarian and disaster relief. It is seen that massive investment in 
infrastructure has improved physical connectivity in the neighbourhood. In the 
field of energy connectivity, India is promoting easier movement of hydrocarbons 
across the region and as a part of this, cross-border pipelines including the India-
Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline have been constructed. In the electricity sector, 
grid interconnection with our neighbouring countries is being augmented. The 
Committee find that India is also working on wind energy projects, renewable 
energy projects and solar power projects with some of the neighbouring countries. 
In the field of technology, the South Asia Satellite was launched in May 2017 and 
the India-Bhutan Satellite in November 2022. Tele-learning and telemedicine have 
emerged as new areas for assistance to our neighbours. Further, India is the 
educational hub and health care hub for the neighbourhood. On the economic front, 
24 bilateral trade with our neighbouring countries have improved and there has 
been a quantum jump from USD 3.27 billion in 2014 to USD 14.7 billion in 2020 
in India’s Lines of Credit to its neighbours. In fact, almost 50% of our global soft-
lending goes to our partners in the neighbourhood. Maritime security in the region 
has been expanded and the security capacities and capabilities of some of our 
neighbours upgraded through India’s efforts. Above all, India is the first responder 
during many humanitarian disasters in the region. The Committee acknowledge the 
efforts and initiatives taken so far, however, in view of the incontrovertible 
importance of the region to India and the potential of our country to contribute 
towards building a safe, secure, prosperous and well-connected South Asia, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to continue to uphold the “non-reciprocal policy” 

38 
 
towards its smaller neighbours in the sub-continent and its immediate perimeter in 
the fields of capacity building, cooperation in information and digital technologies, 
space, cyber security, etc. Moreover, the Committee would like that a clear 
roadmap should be prepared for promoting trade connectivity and contact among 
people of neighbouring countries so that India can achieve global role through 
defined role and contribution of these countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. In line with 
the recommendation, promoting Connectivity and People-to-People contact is a 
central focus of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy. This encompasses all 
dimensions of connectivity including in new areas like cooperation in digital 
technologies, ICT, Outer Space and Cyber security, etc., apart from improving 
connectivity in rail, road, air, and financial connectivity. Pilgrimage to religious 
shrines in the neighbourhood is also facilitated by the Government. 
 
Capacity building has remained a priority area of cooperation to assist the people, 
especially youth through various training programs under ITEC. India has also 
extended assistance to our neighboring countries in setting up institutions for 
higher learning and research, industrial training centers, etc. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Government in ensuring 
continued movement of goods and people through India’s borders during the 
COVID-19 lockdown facilitating the repatriation of nationals of Bhutan, 
Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar, Pakistan and other countries and in providing 
medicines/medical equipment to combat corona virus through bilateral aid as well 
as through its commitments in the SAARC. The initiative taken by India for 
creating a COVID-19 Emergency Fund based on voluntary contributions from the 
Member countries and the offer of 10 million US dollars as unilateral contribution 
to the fund are highly commendable. The Committee are of the view that India 
should continue to take the lead in humanitarian outreach as such efforts reap good 
will and foster the spirit of solidarity amongst our neighbours. As countries in our 

39 
 
immediate neighbourhood are prone to natural disasters like earthquake, tsunami, 
extreme weather events, etc., the Committee desire that the Ministry should also 
explore the feasibility of creating a Disaster Relief Fund on the lines of the 
COVID-19 Emergency Fund under the aegis of the Neighbourhood First Policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India has an established reputation of being the first responder in 
neighbourhood countries, in the Indian Ocean Region and beyond. In line with the 
recommendation of the esteemed Committee, annual budgetary allocation is made 
under a separate Head “Aid for Disaster Relief” from amongst the budget allocated 
to MEA. This enables Government to timely respond to requests for Humanitarian 
Assistance and Disaster Relief. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that India’s development partnership with Afghanistan covers 
areas such as power, water supply, road connectivity, healthcare, education, 
agriculture and capacity building running into more than five hundred projects 
spread across each of the 34 provinces of the country. India has committed over 
USD 3 billion for developments in Afghanistan. The Committee have also been 
informed that the majority of our projects in Afghanistan have been completed and 
handed over. The Committee further note that despite the changes in the political 
landscape of Afghanistan since August 2021, India continue to provide 
humanitarian assistance to the people of that country. Shipments of 40,000 MT of 
wheat, 55 tonnes of medicines and 500,000 doses of COVID vaccine have been 
supplied to the Afghan people. In the wake of the earthquake which struck Eastern 
Afghanistan in June, 2022, India as a true first responder had dispatched 28 tonnes 
of emergency relief assistance to the Afghan people. In view of the long standing 
civilizational relationship with the Afghan people, the Committee desire that the 
Government should continue as per the past practice to provide humanitarian 
assistance to the people of Afghanistan in times of need. As far as pending projects 
committed earlier are concerned, concerted efforts should be made to complete 

40 
 
them and hand them over at the earliest possible and also keep our arms open for 
other diplomatic gestures in the changed political scenario.  
 
Reply: Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with the recommendations of the esteemed committee, Government 
of India continues its humanitarian assistance for the welfare of Afghan people. In 
this endeavor, till date, India has supplied 50,000 MTs of wheat and 200 tonnes of 
medical assistance, and has also provided winter clothing, stationery, female 
hygiene kits, blankets, etc. 
 
India has continued ICCR scholarship schemes for Afghan students post August 15, 
2021. Since then, more than 2000 students, including 301 Afghan girls have been 
provided ICCR scholarships. For providing opportunities to Afghans residing in 
Afghanistan, India has now decided to provide online scholarships for 1000 
Afghan students. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
Under India’s Presidency, the UN Security Council met thrice to discuss the 
evolving situation in Afghanistan, resulting in four outcome documents. These 
included three press statements and a resolution. At the last of these meetings on 30 
August 2021, the Council adopted UNSC Resolution 2593, which demands that the 
Afghan territory should not be used to threaten or attack any country or to shelter 
or train terrorists or to plan and finance terrorist acts. In view of the urgent need to 
prevent cross-border terrorism in the country, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
make diplomatic efforts for implementation of the said Resolution in letter and 
spirit so that terrorist networks and safe havens are not nurtured in the soil of 
Afghanistan. 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with the recommendation of the esteemed committee, India is 
actively engaging with the regional and international partners to ensure stability 
and peace in Afghanistan, and to foster international and regional consensus on the 
issues related to terrorism and radicalization. With this aim, India regularly 
participates in various regional and international formats on Afghanistan. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee note that with the exchange of Instruments of Ratification of the 
India-Bangladesh Land Boundary Agreement on 6 June 2015, the land boundary 
between India and Bangladesh have been settled. Mechanisms for the peaceful and 
cooperative management of the 4,096 kms long international border are also 
actively focused on border fencing, joint inspection of boundary pillars, joint 
boundary demarcation including of riverine boundaries, among others. The 
Committee feel that there should be better management of the Indo-Bangladesh 
Border to prevent infiltration, cross-border smuggling, etc. and desire that the 
bilateral mechanisms for management of this long border should be strengthened. 
The Committee also desire to be apprised of the status of border fencing and the 
demarcation of riverine boundaries between India and Bangladesh.  
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. Ministry of Home Affairs is the lead Ministry for border fencing and 
related issues of infiltration, cross-border smuggling etc. for the management of 
the India-Bangladesh border.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 

42 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee are aware of the long outstanding issue between India and 
Bangladesh on sharing of Teesta River water and desire that this important issue 
be worked out at the earliest for improved bilateral relations with Bangladesh. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to initiate meaningful dialogues with 
Bangladesh on a regular basis to arrive at a consensus in the matter and the 
progress/outcome may be informed to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted. Water sharing is an 
important area of bilateral cooperation. India has regular meetings at various levels 
to discuss this issue including the issue of Teesta river water sharing.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee find that Bangladesh being India’s largest development partner, 
concessional credits amounting to almost USD 10 billion has been extended to 
them, including Lines of Credit (LOC) worth USD 7.862 billion (Rs. 59,000 
crores), comprising around 25% of India’s entire LOC portfolio. These include 
LOCs of USD 862 million (LOC-I), USD 2 billion (LOC-II), USD 4.5 billion 
(LOC-III) covering 42 projects across a wide range of sectors. In addition, there is 
a separate LOC of USD 500 million dedicated only for defence related projects. 
Out of the 42 projects covered under the three LOCs, 14 projects have already been 
completed; 8 projects are currently under execution; 7 projects are under tendering 
and 13 projects are under preparation stage. Besides, Concessional Financing 
Scheme of USD 1.6 billion is also being provided to Bangladesh. In addition to 
LOCs, India has also been providing grant assistance to Bangladesh for various 
infrastructure projects including construction of Akhaura-Agartala rail link, 
dredging of inland waterways and construction of India-Bangladesh Friendship 

43 
 
Pipeline for supply of High Speed Diesel into Bangladesh. 74 High Impact 
Community Development Projects including construction of student hostels, 
academic buildings, skill development and training institutes, cultural centers, 
orphanages as well as various heritage restoration projects have also been funded 
by India. The Committee feel that the benefits of our development partnerships 
with Bangladesh can best be reaped through timely and effective implementation 
of these projects. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to take effective steps for 
timely completion of all the projects including projects taken up under Lines of 
Credit through regular and intensive monitoring.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. The Development Partnership Administration (DPA) Divisions of the 
Ministry have been tasked with continuous monitoring of implementation of 
projects, including those taken up under Lines of Credit.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 
The Committee note that recently three MoUs have been signed between India and 
Bangladesh viz. MoU on Collaboration in IT systems and applications for 
Bangladesh Railways; MoU on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between 
Council for Scientific 39 & Industrial Research, India and Bangladesh Council of 
Scientific & Industrial Research and MoU on Cooperation in the Areas of Space 
Technology, to boost bilateral technology cooperation. Talks to explore new areas 
of technological cooperation like start-up ecosystem, cyber-security, emerging 
technologies, Fintech Sector (particularly UPI) and tech-skilling are also on 
between India and Bangladesh. The Committee desire that the MoUs and talks may 
result in enhanced cooperation between the two countries in various areas.  
 
 
 
 

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. India and Bangladesh have signed MoUs on cooperation in nuclear 
energy, Space, digital technologies etc. Bangladesh-Bharat Digital Service and 
Employment Training (BDSET), is a project funded by India in Bangladesh for 
employment and training of young professionals in Bangladesh. A MoU between 
NPCI and Bangladesh Bank for use of Unified Payments Interface (UPI) in 
Bangladesh has been signed and 'India-Bangladesh Startup Bridge' has also been 
launched following on the high-level announcement of exchanges between 
Startups and entrepreneurs of both countries. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note the recurring instances of cross border 
terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs 
and weapons from across Bangladesh Border. The Ministry of External Affairs has 
been raising the issue of illegal migration but with no outcome and the bilateral 
institutional mechanism has also not been capable enough to tackle the situation. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the existing bilateral institutional 
mechanisms to control all these issues should be strengthened to make it effective. 
They also desire that MEA should work in close coordination with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and the State Governments concerned to address the issue of illegal 
migration by monitoring the demographic changes taking place in Indo-
Bangladesh border villages and other parts of the country due to such migration 
and take up the issue of repatriation of such illegal migrants with the Government 
of Bangladesh at the highest level for an early resolution. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. 
Issues like cross-border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency 
and contra-band, trafficking in drugs and weapons etc. are primarily dealt by the 

45 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). The Ministry of External Affairs closely 
coordinates with MHA in this regard. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 
The Committee observe that apart from ongoing cooperation in areas such as 
connectivity, security, water-sharing and energy, cooperation in peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, space cooperation, new technologies, etc. have been identified as 
the areas for further strengthening of India’s relationship with Bangladesh under 
the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee expect that the Government 
would come up with fresh mutually beneficial initiatives in these areas and 
implement the same for enhanced bilateral ties and growth and prosperity of both 
the countries.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with the recommendation of the esteemed committee, India 
has extended cooperation to Bangladesh in areas of space cooperation and 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. India has also extended cooperation in capacity 
building at the Rooppur nuclear power project in Bangladesh. New mutually 
beneficial initiatives are being identified on a regular basis for further 
strengthening of bilateral ties.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 
The Committee note that India and Bhutan have agreed to expand bilateral 
cooperation in new areas of space, digital connectivity, health, youth exchanges 
and tertiary education. Four MoUs in Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) areas have been signed between the Royal University of 
Bhutan and the premier educational institutes of India- IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT 

46 
 
Bombay and NIT Silchar in August 2019. A new M.Tech scholarship (03 slots 
annually) at IIT Kanpur was instituted from the academic year 2020 onwards. In 
2020, GoI has established ‘India-Bhutan eLibrary Project’ in all districts of 
Bhutan with support from Centre for Development of Advanced Computing. In a 
new chapter in our advancing development partnership, the India-Bhutan SAT, 
jointly developed by India and Bhutan was launched into space on 26 November 
2022 by ISRO's Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle. Another significant milestone has 
been the complete inter-operability of RuPay card with Bhutan. Interconnection 
between India’s Knowledge Network (NKN) and Druk Research & Education 
Network (DrukREN) was established in August 2019. India also formalised in 
November 2021, the opening of seven new trade routes for Bhutan’s bilateral and 
transit trade with India. The Committee desire India and Bhutan to further expand 
the scope of bilateral cooperation under the Neighbourhood First Policy. The 
Committee also desire that such expansion should be made on the basis of 
findings of a 360 degree evaluation of the impact of the projects already 
implemented in Bhutan and MoUs signed for ongoing projects and after exploring 
the scope of expansion of bilateral cooperation under the Neighbourhood First 
Policy. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India and Bhutan have a strong tradition of high level exchanges on bilateral 
cooperation. In line with this tradition, His Majesty the King of Bhutan visited 
India on 03-04 April 2023 which provided an opportunity for both countries to 
review the entire gamut of bilateral cooperation and to advance the bilateral 
partnership.  
 
In line with the recommendation of the esteemed committee, several initiatives 
have been agreed by both sides to further expand bilateral cooperation on trade, 
technology, cross-border connectivity, and mutual investments include (i) long-
term sustainable arrangements for export of agricultural commodities from Bhutan 
and import of essential agricultural commodities from India. (ii) long-term bilateral 
arrangements for assured supply of critical commodities to Bhutan such as 
petroleum, fertilizers, and coal. (iii) consider setting up the first Integrated Check 

47 
 
Post along India-Bhutan border near Jaigaon and Phuntsholing (iv) proposed cross 
border rail link connecting Kokrajhar in Assam to Gelephu in Bhutan (v) Third 
International Internet Gateway for Bhutan (vi) development of inland waterways 
connectivity (vii) work towards opening of additional Foreigners Check posts 
between Bhutan and Assam. 
 
In the field of education cooperation, the number of scholarships offered to 
Bhutanese students in India has been regularly increased. At the request of the 
Royal Government of Bhutan, a new initiative of recruiting Indian teachers 
through MEA for teaching in schools of Bhutan was started. Engagement in space 
cooperation further deepened with the visit of Chairman, ISRO in March, 2023 for 
inauguration of Ground Earth Station for India-Bhutan SAT. A Joint Plan of 
Action (JPoA) is being finalized between India and Bhutan to take forward space 
cooperation. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 
The Committee understand that India shares over 699 km of open border with 
Bhutan across Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. In view of the 
open border between India and Bhutan, the Committee desire that the Government 
should work towards a regular border management and enhanced security 
cooperation and Central Government level by strengthening the existing 
mechanisms and not only leaving it open for annual border districts coordination 
meetings. The Committee also urge the Government to maintain closer 
coordination at Central level in sharing information on illegal activities; 
smuggling of drugs; fake Indian currency; trafficking; etc. between India and 
Bhutan for a safe and secure regional neighbourhood.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with the recommendation of the esteemed committee, India 
and Bhutan have a Border Management and Security mechanism headed at the 
level of Home Secretary. The mechanism discusses issues pertaining to cross-

48 
 
border crimes and strengthening security arrangements. In addition to this, Border 
District Coordination meetings between local level officials from Bhutan and 
States of Assam and West Bengal takes place regularly. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 
The Committee note that Maldives has always been a close and important 
maritime neighbour of India. It has been observed that despite the pandemic 
related disruptions and political instability in Maldives, our multifaceted ties have 
got further strengthened. In April, 2022, MoUs for taking up 7 new High Impact 
Community Development projects were signed with Maldives. In November 2022, 
budgetary support of USD 100 million was given to Maldives by India to 
overcome the impact of the ongoing economic crisis. RBI and MMA also signed a 
Currency Swap Agreement of USD 200 million in December 2022. Nine large 
infrastructure projects have been taken up for implementation under the USD 800 
55 million LOC extended to Maldives in December 2018. A number of projects, 
namely, construction of Addu Roads and Establishment of Water and Sanitation 
Network for 34 islands; redevelopment of Hanimaadhoo airport; expansion of 
Cricket Stadium in Hulhumale; upgradation of MIFCO’s fish processing units; 
construction of a new port in Gulhifalhu; expansion of Gan Airport in Addu and 
Cancer hospital; conservation of the Friday Mosque in Male, etc. are at different 
stages of implementation. Besides, five sports infrastructure projects and 
proposals of the Government of Maldives under USD 50 million defence LOC are 
also at PQ stage. The Committee further note that several ongoing initiatives are 
being carried out in new areas of cooperation between India and Maldives. Efforts 
are on to strengthen cooperation in the area of renewable energy and grid inter-
connectivity. Tourism and health sector are also potential areas for investment. 
The Committee feel that effective implementation and early completion of all the 
ongoing and pending projects in Maldives would be of immense mutual benefit to 
both countries and bring a new impetus to our bilateral relations. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to make concerted efforts in this direction. The 
proposals for sports infrastructure projects and defence projects through LOC 
which are at PQ stage, may be finalized at the earliest. The Committee also desire 

49 
 
that institutional linkages for cooperation in new areas like renewable energy and 
grid inter-connectivity, tourism and health sector, etc. be deepened. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India has been implementing various grant & concessional LoCs 
supported projects across Maldives. Large number of projects have been 
completed and many are under various stages of implementation and progress is 
regularly monitored and reviewed through various institutional mechanisms. 
Several of the sports and defence LOC projects have moved ahead from 
preliminary stage and new/revised proposals from Maldivian side in these sectors 
are also being received and processed. Efforts are being made to deepen the 
cooperation in new areas like renewable energy and grid inter-connectivity, 
tourism and health sector, etc. Discussions are ongoing to have cooperation in in 
renewable energy and grid interconnection based on mutual priorities of the two 
sides. Under the MoU on health cooperation, the Joint Working Groups have been 
meeting at regular intervals and various initiatives are being 
implemented/discussed. Regular cross border tourism expo/marts are being held 
by the private sector in both India and Maldives.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 
The Committee note that efforts are being made to tap the potential of seafood 
exports from Maldives to India. Facilitation of duty free tuna exports to India was 
announced in August 2022. Recognizing the potential for seafood export-import 
trade between India and Maldives, the Committee desire MEA to work in close 
coordination with the Ministries/Departments concerned for promotion of seafood 
trade between the two countries. India should also explore investment and 
partnership synergies with Maldives to tap the full potential for seafood trade 
between the two countries.  
 
 
 

50 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India has been supporting various projects in Maldives to expand the 
capacity of Tuna fishing in Maldives by supporting fish processing capacity up 
gradation under High Impact Community Development Projects (HICDPs)&Line 
of Credit (LoC) projects. A large scale fish processing factory with state of the art 
technology is being built under LOC. Once operational, this will be the first facility 
of this kind in Maldives and would significantly augment their fish processing 
capabilities thus enabling higher trade in this sector. For knowledge sharing and 
capacity development, an MoU has been recently signed between INCOIS India 
and Maldives’ Ministry of Fisheries (MoFMRA) for cooperation in Fisheries sector 
with aim to enhance potential fishing zone forecast capacity building and conduct 
of marine scientific research & capacity building. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 
The Committee observe that the tourism sector directly accounts for about 75% of 
the GDP of Maldives. Since 2020, India has been the largest source of tourist 
arrivals to Maldives. Further, medical tourism is an important aspect of the India-
Maldives health cooperation. In view of the opportunities and potential for 
economic development and employment generation offered by the tourism sector 
under its development partnerships with Maldives, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to promote investment in the tourism sector including medical tourism 
segment under the Neighbourhood First Policy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for 
compliance. India is an important Medical treatment destination for Maldivians. A 
large number of Maldivians travel to India for medical consultations and treatment.  
Recently, Maldivians are also traveling to India for consultations/treatment in 
traditional systems of Medicine including Ayurveda. A framework MoU was 
signed in June 2019 and under it the first JWG meeting was held in Jan 2020 at 

51 
 
Male. Second JWG on Health Cooperation was held (in virtual mode) in August 
2023. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 
The Committee note that Myanmar is a key partner for both India’s 
Neighbourhood First Policy and Act East Policy. The pace of new initiatives being 
taken with Myanmar has slowed down since 2020, firstly due to the COVID-19 
Pandemic and then due to the political crisis that has ensued after the military 
takeover of that country in February 2021. However, India has maintained its 
bilateral engagements with Myanmar with initiatives being finalized as and when 
feasible. GoI has also been providing technical and financial support to set up 
Indo-Myanmar Industrial Training Centres with two centres established in 
Pakkoku and Myingyan, and two more being set up in Monywa and Thaton. In 
2022, India signed a Project Agreement for Establishment of Modern Integrated 
Check Post at Tamu. Out of 24 projects under LOCs (total worth $ 745.57 
million), 21 projects have already been completed. The Committee further note 
that security situation in the area has been a challenge for progress of the Kaladan 
Multi-Modal Transit Project and IndiaMyanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway. The 
Committee desire that implementation of development projects in Myanmar 
should not suffer on account of change in its political landscape and urge the 
Government to make consistent efforts towards insulating such projects from 
political turmoil and make all out efforts for timely completion of the ongoing 
projects.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with the recommendation of the esteemed committee, steps 
are being undertaken for making progress on development projects, despite the 
political crisis and the associated security challenges in Myanmar. The Sittwe Port, 
part of Kaladan Multimodal Transit Project, and funded through Government of 

52 
 
India assistance was inaugurated in May 2023. Issues arising in making progress 
on projects are regularly taken up at the highest levels to ensure timely completion. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
 
Though there is no border dispute between India and Myanmar, the Committee 
understand that the boundary demarcation work remains to be completed in some 
sectors of the India-Myanmar border. Various initiatives have also been taken to 
strengthen border infrastructure like establishment of an Integrated Check Point at 
Moreh and a Land Crossing Station at Zokhawthar. A Project Agreement has been 
signed with Myanmar in 2022 for establishing a Modern Integrated Check Post at 
Tamu while framework for mode of operationalization of Border Haats is also 
under discussion. The Committee desire that the institutionalized bilateral 
mechanisms between India and Myanmar should be strengthened and boundary 
demarcation in the remaining sectors of India-Myanmar boundary should be 
completed at the earliest. Concerted efforts may also be made to establish 
Integrated Check Point/Modern Integrated Check Post and Land Crossing Station 
at the finalized locations. The Committee also urge the Ministry to speed up the 
process for establishing a framework for mode of operationalization of Border 
Haats. Progress achieved in this regard may be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Efforts are ongoing towards boundary demarcation in unsettled areas.  This 
is being discussed through various institutional mechanisms such as the Joint 
Boundary Working Group and Heads of Survey Department Meeting. The progress 
on the establishment of Modern Integrated Check Post and Border Haats has been 
affected by the ongoing internal conflict in Myanmar as some of the worst affected 
areas are along the India-Myanmar border. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 

53 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 
The Committee note that the issues of cross border terrorism, illegal migration, 
smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons are discussed at 
established bilateral institutional mechanisms with Myanmar. On the issue of 
illegal migration, MEA assists the concerned State Government and Ministry of 
Home Affairs to verify the nationality of the individuals for their repatriation and 
has also raised the issue of repatriation of illegal migrants with the Government of 
Myanmar from time to time. Trafficking of drugs and other cross-border security 
concerns are dealt through relevant bilateral institutional mechanisms with 
Myanmar. In view of the recurring instances of cross border terrorism, illegal 
migration, smuggling of fake currency, trafficking in drugs 64 and weapons, etc., 
the Committee desire that the bilateral institutional mechanisms to check the same 
may be strengthened. MEA should work in close coordination with the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and the State Governments concerned for speedy identification 
and repatriation of illegal Myanmarese immigrants. The issue of repatriation of 
illegal migrants may also be taken up with the Government of Myanmar at the 
highest level.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India and Myanmar have established bilateral mechanisms to 
discuss these issues. MEA coordinates closely with MHA which is the lead 
Ministry on these matters.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35) 
 
The Committee note that India’s bilateral relations with Nepal has expanded to 
new initiatives in agriculture, inland waterways and power sector cooperation. 
The ‘India Nepal New Partnership’ in Agriculture which focuses on collaborative 
projects in agriculture education and R&D was launched in April 2018. The 
Inland waterways connectivity between India and Nepal with four multi-modal 
transportation routes via Jharkhand, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh was announced in 

54 
 
2019. Two of the terminals at Varanasi and Sahibgunj have already been 
completed and work is underway for the remaining terminals. India and Nepal 
have also unveiled a Joint Vision Statement on Power Sector Cooperation in April 
2022. Indian companies are currently developing large Hydro Electric Projects in 
Nepal including Arun III (900 MW), Lower Arun (679 MW), Arun-4 (490 MW), 
West Seti and SR-6 (1200MW) and Upper Karnali (900 MW). Under Lines of 
Credit, 44 road projects; 7 projects in hydropower and transmission lines and 
several others in housing and reconstruction spread all across Nepal have been 
financed and a large number of these projects are either completed or are nearing 
completion. The Committee desire that the Government should give focused 
attention to collaborative projects in agriculture education and R&D as it would 
give a boost to the rural economy of both the countries. The remaining inland 
waterway terminals for the multi-modal transportation routes may be completed at 
the earliest. The Committee are aware that India would greatly benefit from the 
commissioning of large hydro electric projects currently being developed by 
Indian companies in Nepal by way of power export and urge the Government to 
monitor the progress of work effectively so that these hydro-electric projects are 
completed and operationalized without time and cost overruns. The Committee 
also desire that all the ongoing and pending projects under Lines of Credit, 
including housing and reconstruction projects, should be completed at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 
The Committee understand that ‘Operation Maitree’, the rescue, relief, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance provided by India to Nepal in the 
wake of the earthquake in April 2015, was India’s largest post-disaster assistance 
programme outside the country. Under ‘Operation Maitree’ India committed an 
assistance package of USD 1 billion including USD 250 million in grants and 

55 
 
US$ 750 million as Line of Credit, for post-earthquake reconstruction projects. 
Grant of US$ 50 million is allocated for reconstruction of 28 cultural heritage 
projects in 7 districts of Nepal. As of now, work is in progress in 24 sites; 2 
projects are in tendering process and 2 projects are at DPR preparation stage. 
Though major components of the assistance package that have either been 
successfully completed or are progressing towards completion include the sectors 
of housing, education, health care and cultural heritage restoration, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to monitor the progress of works that are progressing with a 
view to getting them completed expeditiously. Efforts may also be made for 
timely finalization of the projects at tendering stage and preparation of DPR and 
the Committee may be apprised accordingly.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. 
 
The post-earthquake reconstruction projects are categorized into four sectors- 
namely Housing, Health, Education and Culture. Out of these, housing sector 
projects have been completed in November 2021. Education sector projects are 
going to be completed by October 2023. Health Sector projects are ongoing and 
expected to be completed by June 2024.  
 
With regard to culture sector, out of 28 projects, 2 have been completed and 
handed over to the Government of Nepal while 22 are ongoing.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
 
The Committee note that India and Nepal have established bilateral mechanisms 
for regular discussion on the issues of flood and inundation management, namely 
the Joint Committee on Inundation and Flood Management and the Joint 
Committee on Kosi and Gandak Projects. Both countries also cooperate closely in 
the area of flood forecasting for which a network of meteorological and hydro-

56 
 
meteorological sites have been set up in India and Nepal. The Committee are 
aware about the difficulties faced by both the countries due to flooding of the Kosi 
and Gandak rivers. They, therefore, desire that the bilateral mechanisms should be 
strengthened so that regular and meaningful interactions are maintained between 
India and Nepal for cooperation on flood and inundation management as well as 
in carrying out river training projects across both sides of the border. The network 
of meteorological and hydro-meteorological sites in India and Nepal should also 
be upgraded with the latest technological advancement for accurate flood forecast 
and data inputs be shared for mutual benefits.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India and Nepal have established a three-tier bilateral mechanism at the 
Ministerial, Secretary and technical levels to oversee the entire gamut of 
cooperation in water related issues. These are (i) Joint Ministerial level 
Commission on Water Resources (JCMWR) at apex level; (ii) Joint Committee on 
Water Resources (JCWR) at Secretary level; and (iii) Joint Standing Technical 
Committee (JSTC) at technical level. Besides the above, there are specialized 
committees which implement the recommendations of the three-tier mechanism 
that meet more regularly and report to this three-tier mechanism. 
 
For rivers other than Gandak and Kosi, the Joint Committee on Inundation and 
Flood Management (JCIFM) has been established. It is headed by Member, Ganga 
Flood Control Commission (GFCC), Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) and has 
representatives from Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh as well as from 
MEA. This mechanism also takes care of funding of river training works in Nepal 
under ‘Aid to Nepal’ budget. For Gandak and Kosi rivers, the Joint Committee on 
Kosi and Gandak Projects (JCKGP) has been established. It is headed by Secretary, 
Water Resources, Government of Bihar and has members from MEA, MoJS and 
Government of Uttar Pradesh.  Further, to address repeated concerns on inundation 
and flooding along border areas, a Sub Committee of JCIFM was constituted in 
2018 to carry out joint inspection and suggest possible solutions. Works 
recommended by the Sub Committee are regularly taken up for resolution of such 
inundation and flooding issues. India and Nepal are also cooperating closely in the 

57 
 
area of flood forecasting. Towards this end, a network of meteorological and 
hydro-meteorological sites have been set-up in Nepal and in India. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 38) 
 
The Committee note that the Government is in the process of upgrading India-
Nepal border trade infrastructure with an objective to reduce bottlenecks, 
accelerate clearances and promote the creation of regional economic hubs. In 
recent years, India has been assisting Nepal in the development of border 
infrastructure through upgradation of 10 roads in the Terai area; development of 
cross-border rail links at Jogbani-Biratnagar, Jaynagar-Bardibas and establishment 
of ICPs at Birgunj, Biratnagar, Bhairahawa and Nepalgunj. The Committee further 
note that construction of ICP at Nepalgunj is ongoing while operationalization of 
ICP at Bairahawa would commence soon. Keeping in view the vast potential for 
border trade between India and Nepal, the Committee urge the Government to 
complete the construction work of the ICP at Nepalgunj and operationalize it at the 
earliest. The Committee also expect that the ICP at Bairahawa would commence 
functioning very soon. In order to achieve the goal of economic prosperity and 
stability in the region under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Committee further 
urge the Government to facilitate the creation of regional economic hubs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with ‘Neighbourhood First’ policy, the Government of India is 
committed to enhance connectivity with Nepal, including facilitating and 
promoting border trade and economic activities. In this pursuit, Government of 
India is building Integrated Check Posts (ICP) on either sides of Indo-Nepal border 
to systematize the movement of cross-border cargo trucks between the two 
countries by bringing customs and immigration facilities under one roof. The ICP 
facility is envisaged to promote systematic approach to cargo handling and, 
therefore, will result in saving of time and inconvenience to visitors and reduce 
overall transaction costs for cross-border trade and commerce.  

58 
 
ICP at Nepalgunj (Nepal), along with mirror ICP Rupaidiha (India) was 
inaugurated by PMs of India and Nepal in June 2023. Further, ground breaking 
ceremony for implementation of a fourth ICP at Bhairahawa in Nepal (along with 
mirror ICP at Sunauli, (U.P), was done in June 2023 and construction has 
commenced. In addition to the above, an MoU was signed during the visit of 
Nepali PM to India in June 2023, for initiating development of ICP 
DodharaChandani (mirroring ICP Banbasa in Uttarakhand) in Nepal under GoI 
assistance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 39) 
 
The Committee note that India is funding cross-border railway link between India 
and Nepal at Jaynagar in India to Bardibas in Nepal and Jogbani in India to 
Biratnagar in Nepal. Jaynagar-Kurtha stretch of the Jaynagar-Bardibas Project has 
been operationalised in April 2022. Work on the railway connectivity at Kurtha to 
Bijalpura stretch and extension uptoBardibas and on the 17.65 km Jogbani – 
Biratnagar rail link is ongoing. The Government has also provided funding for 
carrying out feasibility study of the proposed Raxaul-Kathmandu broad gauge rail 
link between both the countries. In view of the importance of cross-border railway 
link between India and Nepal for strengthening of border infrastructure and 
greater people to people connect, the Committee urge the Government for early 
operationalization of the ongoing rail link projects and completion of the 
feasibility study of the proposed Raxaul-Kathmandu broad gauge rail link.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. Status updates of these 
projects are as follows: 
 
a) Jayanagar-Bijalpura-Bardibas rail link: The length of the Jayanagar-Kurtha- 
Bijalpura-Bardibas Rail Link is 68.72 km, out of which 2.98 km is in India 
and 65.75 km is in Nepal. Jaynagar-Kurtha cross-border rail section (34.9 

59 
 
Kms.) was flagged off and operationalised by PMs of India and Nepal in 
April 2022. Kurtha-Bijalpura section was made operational in July 2023 and 
survey work is ongoing in the final segment.  
 
b) Jogbani-Biratnagar rail link: The length of Jogbani-Biratnagar railway line is 
18.6 km, out of which 5.45 km is in India and 13.15 km is in Nepal. Track of 
7.74 km section between Bathnaha (India) and Nepal Customs Yard(Nepal) 
has been completed. This stretch was flagged off for cargo traffic in June 
2023, by PMs of India and Nepal. Work is ongoing in the remaining 
segment. 
 
c) Raxaul-Kathmandu rail link:  Final Location Survey report for Raxaul-
Kathmandu rail link was handed over to Nepali side in June 2023. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 40) 
 
The Committee observe that a large number of Indians are attracted to Nepal for 
religious tourism while Nepalese nationals also visit tourist places, shrines and 
temples located in the farthest corners of India. A Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) on Cooperation in the field of Tourism was signed between the two 
Governments on 25 November, 2014 in Kathmandu. The Committee desire that 
the Government should make sincere efforts to achieve the aims and objectives of 
the MoU such as, enhanced cooperation between India and Nepal in the field of 
tourism; facilitating direct communication between the stakeholders of tourism 
and hospitality industry and bringing about better and improved tourism 
cooperation while enhancing economic development and employment generation 
in the country. The Committee also desire that periodic assessment of the impact 
of the said MoU may be made under intimation to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has taken several steps for enhancing tourism between India 
and Nepal, some of which are as follows: 

60 
 
 
1. Nepal India Chamber of Commerce and Industry in association with 
Embassy of India Kathmandu organised an event to promote bilateral 
tourism between India and Nepal on 27 March 2023. Mr Sudan Kirati, 
Hon'ble Minister for Culture, Tourism and Civil Aviation of Nepal was the 
Chief Guest.  
 
2. A coffee table book on religious and spiritual circuits in India and Nepal was 
launched. 
 
3. Government has been implementing various connectivity initiatives to 
facilitate movement of tourists between the two countries. Rail services such 
as Jaynagar-Kurtha connects cities of touristic importance of Nepal to India. 
Launch of RuPay Card in Nepal has further helped Indian tourists in Nepal. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 42) 
 
The Committee note that India has been pursuing the humanitarian issue of release 
of prisoners and fishermen in Pakistan’s custody. Since 2014, India has been 
successful in securing the release and repatriation of more than 2,700 Indian 
prisoners including 40 Indian fishermen and 05 Indian civilian prisoners. The 
Committee are aware that many more Indian nationals including fishermen have 
been languishing in Pakistani prisons for a long time and desire that the Ministry 
should step up its diplomatic efforts to secure their early release and repatriation to 
India.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Highest priority is attached to the welfare, safety, security and repatriation of 
Indian prisoners in Pakistani custody. As soon as cases of apprehension of Indian 
nationals by Pakistan are reported, immediate steps are taken by the Indian Mission 
in Islamabad towards seeking Consular Access from the Government of Pakistan. 

61 
 
All possible assistance is extended to the Indian prisoners for their early release 
and repatriation. Cases of apprehension of Indian prisoners and fishermen are 
raised continually with the Government of Pakistan and it is reiterated that prisoner 
and fishermen matters should be considered as a humanitarian issue. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 43) 
 
The Committee note that several rounds of talks were held under the aegis of the 
Composite Dialogue Process between 1998 and 2012 to discuss various issues 
including terrorism and drug trafficking; peace and security including Confidence 
Building Measures; Sir Creek, etc. between India and Pakistan. The Committee 
further note that many a times, initiatives of India for resumption of the Dialogue 
have been responded with acts of cross-border terrorism and violence by Pakistan. 
The Committee recommend that India should continue to remain active and fully 
prepared to expose Pakistan’s act of cross border terrorism and violence against 
India at the United Nations and various multilateral and regional fora and counter 
their raising the issue of Kashmir appropriately.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India continues to call upon Pakistan to take credible and verifiable actions 
to not allow any territory under its control to be used for cross-border terrorism 
against India. The issue of cross-border terrorism emanating from territory under 
Pakistan’s control is highlighted by India with partners through bilateral diplomatic 
channels and at international fora. The Government has been assiduously 
countering the anti-India propaganda efforts made by Pakistan at various 
international and regional fora. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 

62 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 44) 
 
The Committee note that Sri Lanka is one of our major development assistance 
partners. Under the Indian Housing Project, 60,000 houses are being built and 
numerous people-oriented High Impact Projects in sectors like agriculture, health, 
child and women empowerment, education and livelihood generation are under 
implementation. Several projects under Lines of Credit are under discussion. 
Implementation of the USD 100 million Solar project is expected to bolster 
cooperation in the renewable energy sector between India and Sri Lanka. The 
Committee further note that eleven rounds of negotiations on an Economic and 
Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) covering goods and services have 
been completed as far back as in September 2018 and the Sri Lankan side has now 
conveyed its willingness to resume the said negotiations. The Committee 
understand that the said ETCA would broaden the scope of Free Trade Agreement 
between India and Sri Lanka strengthening economic, trade, investment and 
technology cooperation and therefore, desire that the negotiations should be 
resumed for its early and successful conclusion. It should also be the endeavour of 
the Government to complete all the ongoing projects in various sectors 
expeditiously while taking up new initiatives for cooperation in capacity building 
and skill development.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India has been carrying out people-oriented development projects across Sri 
Lanka in accordance with the priorities of the Government and people of Sri Lanka. 
These projects cut across sectors such as infrastructure, housing, health, livelihood 
and rehabilitation, education, industrial development etc. Indian Housing 
Programme is the largest housing project undertaken by India abroad. The project 
commenced in 2012 and close to 50,000 houses have since been completed in three 
different phases. Sri Lanka wide operations of the 1990 Emergency Ambulance 
Service prove to be of great utility across the island particularly during COVID-19. 
In addition, India has completed numerous projects in diverse areas 
including railway infrastructure and integrated water supply plants.  

63 
 
 
During the visit of the President of Sri Lanka to India in July 2023, the 
Governments of India and Sri Lanka have agreed to undertake discussions on 
Economic and Technology Cooperation Agreement with an aim to 
comprehensively enhance bilateral trade and investments in new and priority areas. 
Accordingly, both sides are discussing suitable mutually convenient dates for 
resumption of talks.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 45) 
 
 The Committee note that the ongoing economic uncertainty in Sri Lanka along 
with the acute scarcity of forex have created challenges in financing of imports 
from India such as through Letters of Credit. Imposition of licensing requirements 
and restrictions on certain imports by Sri Lanka to reduce forex outflow to stabilize 
their current economic situation have impacted a few of India’s major exports to 
Sri Lanka such as vehicles. In addition, some pre-existing challenges in terms of 
non-tariff measures and regulations also have had some repercussions. The 
Committee also note that many of these issues have been resolved successfully 
while efforts are underway to address others. The Committee feel that despite the 
ongoing economic crisis in Sri Lanka, there is scope for smooth and enhanced 
bilateral trade between the two countries and they, therefore, urge the Ministry and 
Indian Mission to play a more proactive role in resolving all the pending issues so 
that significant increase in Indian exports to Sri Lanka is achieved.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India is engaging Sri Lanka for early resolution of bilateral trade issues. 
Despite the economic crisis in Sri Lanka last year and the scarcity of forex, 
bilateral trade in 2022-23 was to the tune of USD 6.12 billion (Indian export USD 
5.1 billion). Recent decisions taken by both sides to further strengthen trade and 

64 
 
commercial engagement include the decision to designate INR as currency for 
trade settlements; facilitation of digital financial payments; enhancing air & sea 
connectivity; and exchange of technology/know how etc.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 46) 
 
The Committee are aware of the long pending fishermen issue between India and 
Sri Lanka. The Ministry has informed that in the 5th Joint Working Group Meeting 
on Fisheries held in March 2022, both countries have agreed on the need to work 
out a long term solution to the fishermen issue. In view of Indian fishermen getting 
arrested and their boats being seized by Sri Lankan Navy every now and then, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to consistently engage with the Sri Lankan 
Government through meaningful dialogues so that a permanent solution to the 
issue of fishermen and their livelihoods is worked out in a humanitarian manner. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should also take initiatives for maritime 
domain awareness in its extended neighbourhood.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In respect of the arrest of Indian fishermen and boats, as on date, no Indian 
fishermen are under Sri Lankan custody. With sustained diplomatic efforts, 
Government of India secured release of all 2,934 fishermen, who were arrested by 
Sri Lankan authorities since 2014 and repatriated them to India. In case of boats, 
112 boats out of 139 boats under Sri Lankan custody.  
 
India has been regularly taking up the matter at the highest levels in the 
Government of Sri Lanka through diplomatic channels. India continues to remain 
engaged with Sri Lanka at all levels on its efforts to protect the interests of our 
fishing community.  
 
During the Virtual Bilateral Summit between India and Sri Lanka on 26 September 
2020, the two Prime Ministers “agreed to continue engagement to address the 

65 
 
issues related to fishermen through regular consultation and bilateral channels 
according to the existing frameworks and shared goals including the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals”. Further, Regular meetings of Joint Working 
Group Meeting on Fisheries and High-Level Meetings between the Coast Guards 
are being held. The 5th Meeting of India - Sri Lanka Joint Working Group on 
fisheries took place in March 2022 in a virtual format. These mechanisms act as a 
communication channel for discussions on ways to improve the fisheries order and 
pursue fisheries cooperation between India and Sri Lanka. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 47) 
 
The Committee note that India and Sri Lanka share a robust defence and security 
partnership. Our cooperation includes capacity building to prevent crimes across 
maritime boundary ranging from establishment of Maritime Rescue Coordination 
Center, Floating Dock for Sri Lankan Navy, Dornier Aircraft, etc. Security 
cooperation between India and Sri Lanka also involves sharing of information on 
issues of counter terrorism, narcotic smuggling, gold smuggling, human trafficking 
and illegal migration. Besides, the Colombo Security Conclave wherein maritime 
countries of the region (India, Sri Lanka, Maldives and Mauritius as members and 
Bangladesh and Seychelles as observers) discuss collective security concerns, is 
convened regularly. The Committee desire that security partnership with Sri Lanka 
should further be strengthened for enhanced inter-agency cooperation and 
coordination. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should take fresh 
initiatives for enhancing the maritime domain awareness of Sri Lanka in the 
interest of the country and the region as a whole.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In line with the recommendation of the esteemed committee, as a part of 
capacity building initiatives, a MoU/ Agreement for sourcing of MRCC and 
Floating Dock was signed in March 2023 with scheduled delivery in early 2024 

66 
 
and end 2025.  Further, the IN Dornier was deployed to Sri Lanka in August 2022 
and is being used for maritime surveillance by Sri Lankan Air Force. In addition, 
MoU’s related to Hydrography, NDC interaction and Defence Cooperation are 
being pursued for early conclusion with Sri Lankan side.  Additionally, an Indian 
Liaison Officer from Sri Lanka was deputed to Integrated Fusion Center-Indian 
Ocean Region (IFC-IOR) since March 2022. 
 
Under security partnership under Colombo Security Conclave, various initiatives 
like scientific research by academic institutes, focused operations by Navy’s and 
Coast Guard, and workshops by IFC IOR are being pursued. 
 
Towards improved Maritime Domain Awareness, MRCC project and sourcing of 
Dornier aircraft are being processed with Sri Lanka. In addition, seamless 
information sharing and coordinated efforts to tackle common maritime security 
challenges like illegal immigration, IUU fishing and drug trafficking are being 
undertaken by the Navy & Coast Guard of two countries. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 48) 
 
The Committee find that in 2022, India had offered US$ 1555 million credit 
facility to Sri Lanka in response to their requests for support to tide over the 
economic crisis they were facing. This included US$ 500 million LOC for 
purchase of petroleum products, US$ 1 billion Credit Facility for supply of food, 
fuel and other essential items and US$ 55 million LOC for the procurement of urea 
fertilizer. Apart from these, the RBI provided US$ 400 million as currency swap 
for Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) in January 2022. In addition to the above 
financial assistance, RBI also deferred about US$ 2 billion payment liabilities by 
CBSL under the Asian Clearing Union mechanism. Since Sri Lanka is still reeling 
under financial crisis, the Committee desire that the Government should continue 
to be Sri Lanka’s biggest friend in times of crisis and support Sri Lanka by offering 
favourable terms for Lines of Credit, currency swap and other financial measures, 
if required by Sri Lanka.  

67 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. In line with 
its 'Neighbourhood First' policy, the Government of India has continued the 
support extended to the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) last year during its 
economic crisis. Accordingly, after announcement of the debt repayment 
suspension by GOSL in April 2022, India is one of the only bilateral partners 
which continued to implement projects in sectors of priority to the Government of 
Sri Lanka for its early economic recovery. India (along with Japan and France) is 
also the co-chair of the Creditors Committee formed to expeditiously finalize terms 
and conditions of restructuring Sri Lanka's debt owed to its external bilateral 
creditors. The significance of India’s continued support and investment for Sri 
Lanka's sustainable, equitable and stable growth and the need to forge a closer and 
deeper bilateral economic partnership between the two countries has also been 
highlighted in the joint vision document released during the visit of President of Sri 
Lanka to India in July 2023.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 49) 
 
The Committee note that India is also the largest source of FDI for Sri Lanka with 
an inflow of US$ 142 million in 2021. Indian public and private sector entities are 
examining ways and projects to further expand their presence and investments in 
Sri Lanka in areas such as energy, power, real estate, ports & connectivity, 
renewable energy, minerals and manufacturing. As investment led growth is 
perhaps the most sustainable pathway for Sri Lanka to achieve expedited economic 
recovery, the Committee urge the Government to facilitate Indian public and 
private sector companies to invest in projects and set up businesses in Sri Lanka. 
 
 

68 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Investment-led growth is key for Sri Lanka's early economic recovery and 
overall socio-economic growth. In the past few years, Indian investment into Sri 
Lanka has seen encouraging trends, with India being the largest contributor of FDI 
to Sri Lanka over the past 4 years. Indian entities continue to develop projects 
related to energy, connectivity, renewable energy, real estate, hospitality and 
infrastructure in Sri Lanka. There are further opportunities for investors in India in 
the divestment of Sri Lankan State-owned Enterprises and in 
manufacturing/economic zones in various sectors in Sri Lanka. These opportunities 
are regularly highlighted to Indian public and private entities directly, through the 
Ministry and relevant industry chambers in India. Whenever required, Our High 
Commission facilitates Indian public and private Company' interactions with the 
Government of Sri Lanka and relevant stakeholders. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 50) 
 
The Committee has noticed that India has also engaged constructively with Sri 
Lanka on debt restructuring and in enabling the approval of the support programme 
for Sri Lanka in the IMF. The Committee appreciate the approach of India and 
desire that the Government should also strongly advocate the need for supporting 
Sri Lanka at the IMF, to other countries.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government of India (GOI) supported the people and the Government 
of Sri Lanka (GOSL) through an unprecedented assistance of USD 4 billion 
extended last year. GOI has also conveyed its support for GOSL's efforts to address 
its debt challenges unequivocally at various forums. In April 2022, on the sidelines 

69 
 
of the Spring Meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank 
in Washington DC, the Minister of Finance of India not only conveyed India's 
commitment to assist and support Sri Lanka but urged the international community 
to come forward and do the same. 
 
India was Sri Lanka’s first bilateral creditor to support debt restructuring and 
convey specific and credible financing assurances to IMF as early as 16 January 
2023, following which Paris Club and China also conveyed their financing 
assurances to IMF. This paved the way for approval of the IMF Executive Board to 
Sri Lanka’s Extended Fund Facility (EFF) Programme to support its economic 
policies and reforms in March, 2023.In April 2023, India, Japan and France 
launched a Creditors Committee to hold talks among Sri Lanka’s bilateral creditors 
to finalize a plan for restructuring Sri Lanka’s debt. Three meetings of this 
Committee have been held till date (on May 09, June 08 and July 24, 2023).    
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 51) 
 
The Committee note that India’s engagement with its neighbours under regional 
frameworks like SAARC, BIMSTEC and BBIN is an important element of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee recognize the potential for promoting 
deeper cooperation and regional integration through better partnerships under these 
regional frameworks. From the perspective of security also, a collective and 
coordinated efforts of member States in the region will prove more effective in 
countering terrorism and keeping a check on the various instruments used by 
terrorists to expand their activities. This would result in a secure and peaceful 
neighbourhood where growth and development can be accelerated. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to make persistent efforts for strengthening and re-
energizing these regional bodies to make them function more effectively. 
 
 
 

70 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted.  
 
India’s engagement with SAARC and BIMSTEC are important elements of the 
Government’s “Neighbourhood First Policy”. As a founding member of both 
SAARC and BIMSTEC, India believes these are important vehicles for building a 
peaceful, friendly and prosperous neighbourhood.  
 
India remains steadfast in its commitment to SAARC in building a connected, 
integrated, safe and prosperous South Asia. As a founding member, India remains 
committed to working with member states in SAARC to achieve the objectives laid 
down in the SAARC Charter including cooperation in areas of common interest. It 
continues to make significant contributions to SAARC institutions and support 
various initiatives to achieve closer cooperation in diverse areas for the 
development and progress of all countries in the region. India has continued its 
commitment to SAARC with initiatives such as extension of India’s national 
knowledge network, launch of South Asia Satellite, and continued support to 
SAARC Secretariat and SAARC institutions including South Asian University and 
SAARC Disaster Management Center. However, despite our sincere efforts, 
SAARC is not able to function optimally due to hurdles created by one SAARC 
member state, as a result of which, SAARC meetings have not been held in recent 
years and the progress on this platform has been limited.  
 
BIMSTEC’s unique strength is the connectivity it forges between South and South 
East Asia. The participation of BIMSTEC leaders at the swearing in of the 
Government of Prime Minister Modi in 2019 was a testament to its importance for 
India. India is committed to further building the momentum of regional 
cooperation under BIMSTEC. At the 5th BIMSTEC Summit in 2022 in Colombo, 
the Leaders adopted the BIMSTEC Charter, a milestone in the transition of 
BIMSTEC from a grouping into a regional organization. Prime Minister 
announced several initiatives at the Summit to take forward the BIMSTEC 
platform, several of which have been implemented including the grant of USD 1 
million to the operational budget of the BIMSTEC Secretariat to complete 
institution building tasks. 

71 
 
 
With regard to BIMSTEC, the 2016 Leaders’ Retreat of BIMSTEC Member states 
organized by India in October 2016 has added momentum to the BIMSTEC 
platform. Two Summits (4th Summit in 2018 and 5th Summit in 2022) have taken 
place since; BIMSTEC Charter was adopted at the 5th Summit and priority sectors 
of cooperation have been reorganized with each member state leading a crucial 
pillar of cooperation. Member states have also finalized Rules of Procedure for 
BIMSTEC core, sectoral mechanisms and for BIMSTEC’s external relations. A 
BIMSTEC Eminent Persons Group (EPG) to study the current functioning of 
BIMSTEC, and suggest practical steps to further strengthen the organization and 
take the cooperation to the next level will be launched soon. To further strengthen 
and guide the BIMSTEC platform, the 6th BIMSTEC Summit is scheduled to be 
held on 30 November 2023. 
 
 
BBIN Motor Vehicle Agreement (MVA) was signed in June, 2015 during the 
meeting of the Transport Ministers of the participating countries in Bhutan. Bhutan, 
pending ratification by its Parliament, in April 2017 gave its consent for 
implementation of the BBIN MVA by the three countries Bangladesh, India and 
Nepal. A draft MoU to implement the BBIN MVA amongst these three countries 
was agreed in a meeting held in March 2022. Draft Cargo Protocol and Passenger 
Protocol are also under discussions to operationalize the BBIN MVA at the earliest.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 52) 
 
 
The Committee are aware that BIMSTEC has emerged as an important regional 
organization in recent years while not much progress has been made under SAARC 
due to hurdles created by one member State. As one of the founding members of 
SAARC and BIMSTEC, the Committee desire that in the interest of the region, 
India should play a more pro-active role in both the bodies and formulate a fresh 
strategy for the purpose and to keep them active and utilize both whenever the 

72 
 
occasion arises. As enhancing greater cooperation and partnerships amongst the 
countries in the neighbourhood is essential to achieve regional integration in all 
spheres, the Committee urge the Ministry to take the initiative for collective and 
coordinated efforts so that the member countries are able to work more effectively 
towards ensuring peace, stability and prosperity in the region and do not start 
looking elsewhere. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India has taken several unilateral initiatives in SAARC to share the fruits of 
its technological advances with interested Member States such as extension of 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) to Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Bhutan; 
launching of South Asian Satellite (SAS) and the countries such as Bhutan, 
Maldives and Bangladesh are currently utilizing its services in telecommunication 
and broadcasting, tele-medicine, tele-education, e-governance, banking/ ATM 
services, cellular back-haul, meteorological data transmission, disaster response 
and networking of academic and research institutions. 
 
India is committed to further strengthen regional cooperation through BIMSTEC. 
During the 4th and 5th Summits, Prime Minister has announced several initiatives, 
many of which have been implemented with active participation and cooperation 
by member states. During the 5th Summit, in order for BIMSTEC to meet the 
expectations of member states and realizing the need to increase the capacity of the 
Secretariat, India announced financial assistance of one million dollars to the 
operational budget of the Secretariat. Member states finalized important rules of 
procedure which will help strengthen BIMSTEC mechanisms. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

73 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 54) 
 
The Committee note that networking among institutes of Marine Sciences in the 
BIMSTEC region and study on creating value chains for agricultural products in 
the BIMSTEC region are under process. With a view to promoting deeper 
cooperation through collective efforts in the BIMSTEC region, the Committee urge 
the Government to actively coordinate with BIMSTEC countries for early 
implementation of the above networking scheme and urge RIS to complete their 
study on creating value chains for value added agricultural products in the 
BIMSTEC region.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance. 
India is actively pursuing the initiative of networking among institutes of marine 
sciences in the BIMSTEC region. RIS is also actively working on completing the 
Study on creating value chains for agricultural products in the BIMSTEC region. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 56) 
 
Though SAARC has made good progress in some areas of cooperation, it has not 
been able to achieve its full potential as several important connectivity and trade 
initiatives such as SAARC Motor Vehicle Agreement, SAARC Railways 
Agreement, Agreement on Regional Air Services, Agreement on Trade in Services, 
etc. are held up since 2014 due to lack of consensus among all member States. 
Efforts toward collective collaboration and prosperity have been hampered by acts 
of terrorism and threats to national security by one country. In view of the vast 
potential offered by the South Asian region, it should be the endeavour of the 
Government to work towards realization of the full potential of SAARC through 
increased cooperation and collaboration with all other member countries isolating 
the defaulter country. The feasibility of establishing a common platform to fight 

74 
 
against acts of terrorism may also be explored. The Committee are hopeful that 
India would be instrumental in bringing the SAARC countries together and in 
jointly addressing the issue of cross border terrorism as done during the global 
COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted. India has on 
various occasions reiterated that the region’s efforts for greater collaboration have 
been repeatedly challenged with threats and acts of terrorism. India also reiterated 
that it is necessary to eliminate the scourge of terrorism in all its forms, without 
any discrimination, and end the ecosystem of its support for the region’s survival. 
All decisions in SAARC are taken by consensus. However, SAARC is not able to 
function optimally due to hurdles created by one SAARC member state, as a result 
of which, SAARC meetings have not been held in recent years and the progress on 
this platform has been limited. India has been steadfast in its commitment towards 
regional cooperation through SAARC. India invited the SAARC Secretary General 
for the Third Ministerial Conference on Counter Terrorism Financing “No Money 
for Terror” in Delhi in November 2022. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 57) 
 
The Committee note that at the last Summit of SAARC held in November 2014 in 
Kathmandu, India made a number of announcements to boost regional cooperation 
including enhancing cross border connectivity by rail, road and air; increasing 
intraregional tourism and creating cross-border tourist circuits; setting up a Special 
Purpose Facility for Infrastructure Development; introduction of the SAARC 
Business Traveler card; use of solar energy and micro-grids to provide electricity; 
monitoring and 102 surveillance of polio free countries in the region; funds to 
establish SAARC Regional Supra Reference Laboratory for TB; providing 
immediate medical visas to patients and their attendants visiting India for treatment, 
etc. Some of these announcements have been implemented while work is in 

75 
 
progress on others. The Committee are of the view that effective implementation of 
all the said announcements would promote regional integration and improved 
regional cooperation under SAARC and urge the Ministry to make all our efforts 
for effective and early implementation of all the said initiatives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India is actively monitoring the implementation of announcements made in 
the last SAARC Summit. Extension of India’s National Knowledge Network 
(NKN) to SAARC countries has been implemented in Sri Lanka, Bhutan, 
Bangladesh and Maldives. Bangladesh, Bhutan and Maldives are utilizing the 
services of South Asian Satellite launched by India. Provision of funds to establish 
SAARC Regional Supra Reference Laboratory for TB is being worked out. 
However, progress on other initiatives, particularly in infrastructure and in 
improving business is being blocked due to hurdles created by one member state. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 59) 
 
The Committee note that BIMSTEC has evolved from a sub-regional forum in 
1997 into a distinctive regional organization. The BIMSTEC Charter was also 
adopted in 2022. BIMSTEC is playing an important role in regional cooperation 
through numerous activities and projects in 14 diverse sectors with extensive 
cooperation among the member States. The Committee further note that BIMSTEC 
countries have institutionalized some important mechanisms for stability, such as 
BIMSTEC Convention on Cooperation in Combating International Terrorism, 
Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking (2009) while 
BIMSTEC Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters is ready 
for signing at the next BIMSTEC Summit. The Committee are aware that regional 
growth and prosperity cannot be achieved without stability and urge the Ministry to 
work towards strengthening BIMSTEC and ensuring the effective functioning of 
its institutionalized mechanisms, in close coordination with other BIMSTEC 
countries. The Committee also desire that India should take more initiatives for 

76 
 
elimination of destabilizing forces like terrorism, organized crime, drug trafficking, 
etc. in the region through collective efforts of all the member countries.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. India is the lead country for BIMSTEC cooperation in the security 
pillar. The BIMSTEC Convention on Cooperation in Combating International 
Terrorism, Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking was signed 
in 2009 and has entered into force on March 16, 2021. The BIMSTEC Convention 
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters was signed during the 5th Summit 
in Colombo on 30 March 2022, and is yet to be ratified by all member states. The 
draft text of the BIMSTEC Convention against Trafficking in Persons has been 
finalized by the member states.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 60) 
 
Over the years, BIMSTEC has proven to be a key body for regional cooperation 
serving as a unique link between South Asia and South East Asia. Activities under 
BIMSTEC have served as a visible input into our ‘Neighbourhood First Policy’ and 
‘Act East Policy’. Several unilateral initiatives announced by India including 
BIMSTEC Military Exercise (MILEX) and Army Chiefs’ Conclave; BIMSTEC 
Ministerial Conclave at India Mobile Congress 2018; BIMSTEC Disaster 
Management Exercise; Scholarships to students from BIMSTEC countries at 
Nalanda University and some capacity building programmes have been 
implemented while work is in progress on other initiatives. In view of the pivotal 
role of BIMSTEC in regional cooperation, the Committee desire that work in 
progress on other initiatives may be implemented speedily. BIMSTEC being a 
unique regional organization focusing on India’s core concerns in the region and 
thus fulfilling India’s key foreign policy priorities of ‘Neighborhood First’ and ‘Act 
East Policy’, the Committee urge the Ministry to take fresh initiatives to nurture 
and re-energize the organization to make it more outcome oriented. Inputs derived 

77 
 
from India’s engagement with BIMSTEC may also be optimally utilized in our 
foreign policy agenda. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the 5 th BIMSTEC Summit, in line with India’s commitment towards 
strengthening BIMSTEC, Prime Minister announced initiatives which have been 
implemented: (i) A onetime grant of USD 1 million to the operational budget of the 
Secretariat to complete institution building tasks; (ii) 1st capacity building program 
by ICRIER in collaboration with ADB on Trade Facilitation was organized in May 
2023; (iii) The scope of the BIMSTEC Nalanda Scholarship Scheme was expanded. 
Initiatives announced by the Prime Minister at the Summit namely on the 
establishment of networking scheme among institutes of Marine Sciences in the 
BIMSTEC region and a Study by RIS on creating regional value chains on value 
added agricultural products in the BIMSTEC region are under various stages of 
implementation. 
 
In addition, India also organized: a training programme for law enforcement 
officers from BIMSTEC countries on issues pertaining to Cyber Security, Counter 
Terrorism, Transnational Organized Crimes, De-radicalization and other Law 
Enforcement Challenges; BIMSTEC Business Conclave in Kolkata in June 2023; 
A symposium on BIMSTEC: A Vehicle for Growth and Development in 2021; An 
ISCS-MEA Collaborative 2nd Conference on “BIMSTEC: 25 Years of Driving 
Force Behind Neighbourhood Cooperation” in 2023; a BIMSTEC Literary festival 
in Bhopal in January 2023; and announced PG and PhD scholarships in Agriculture, 
which emphasize India’s commitment to strengthen cooperation in different areas 
for the larger benefit of the people in the BIMSTEC region.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 62) 
 
 
The Committee find that BIMSTEC member States have also recently finalized a 
‘Master Plan for Transport Connectivity’ that would lay down a long term roadmap 

78 
 
for even closer connectivity in the BIMSTEC sub-region. Implementation of the 
Master Plan would improve connectivity of India’s North East and beyond. In the 
opinion of the Committee, improved connectivity in the North Eastern Region of 
India will greatly contribute to the socio-economic development of the region and 
by virtue of the region’s close proximity to Myanmar which acts as a bridge for 
ASEAN, would be instrumental in the success of the Act East Policy. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport 
Connectivity should be implemented at the earliest and urge the Government to 
make coordinated efforts in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. Through the BIMSTEC Working Group on Transport Connectivity, 
member states are regularly discussing ways to improve connectivity including the 
implementation of the BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport Connectivity. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
  

79 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 55) 
 
 
The Committee note that the scope and substance of cooperation under SAARC 
has expanded over the years to diverse fields including trade and finance, 
economic integration, security, environment, education, culture, agriculture, border 
connectivity, telecommunication, S&T, etc. providing a firm basis for genuine 
partnership among the people of the region. A number of sub-regional and regional 
projects in social, economic and infrastructure fields are at different stages of 
implementation under the SAARC Development Fund. The Ministry has stated 
that SAARC leaders have pronounced that their ultimate goal is to create South 
Asian Economic Union in a phased and planned manner through a Free Trade Area, 
a Customs Union, a Common Market and a Common Economic and Monetary 
Union. The Committee desire that tangible outcomes and maximum benefits 
should be ensured under the SAARC Development Fund and urge the Government 
to work in close coordination with the member States towards fulfilling the 
ultimate goal of creating a South Asian Economic Union.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 SAARC Development Fund (SDF) is an umbrella financial institution with a 
comprehensive funding mechanism for all SAARC projects and programmes. It is 
aimed to contribute to regional cooperation and integration through project-based 
collaboration with the provision of three Windows (Social, Economic and 
Infrastructure). Due to hurdles created by one member state in finalizing the 
modalities of selection of the CEO, SDF is currently functioning without a duly 
appointed head. As a result, necessary meetings of SDF have not been held in 
recent years and the progress in this body of SAARC has been limited. 
 

80 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 58) 
 
In view of the strategic importance of the regional body SAARC, the Committee 
are of the opinion that that no member country should be allowed to impede the 
effective functioning of this forum and collective efforts need to be made by the 
other member countries to thwart any attempts to destabilize it. On account of the 
pivotal role of India in SAARC, the Committee urge the Government to take the 
initiative for coordinated efforts amongst the majority of the member countries 
ignoring the one so that regional cooperation under SAARC is promoted and not 
hampered due to lack of response from one country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted. India 
attaches highest priority to the development and prosperity of the region under its 
“Neighbourhood First” policy.  As a founding member of SAARC, India believes 
that is an important vehicle for building a peaceful, friendly and prosperous 
neighborhood. India has taken various initiatives including asymmetrical 
responsibilities for enhancing regional cooperation under SAARC. However, all 
decisions in SAARC are based on consensus. Due to hurdles created by one 
SAARC member state, SAARC meetings have not been held in recent years and 
the progress on this platform has been limited. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
  

81 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee observe that India’s Neighbourhood First Policy has achieved over 
the years benefits like greater regional connectivity, improved infrastructure, and 
stronger development cooperation in various sectors, enhanced security and 
broader people-topeople contacts with our immediate neighbours. Further, regular 
assessments are being done and the impact on the ground is measured in a real way. 
The Committee while acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry are of the view 
that more needs to be done, especially, addressing the huge deficiency in our 
border infrastructure. The Committee find that the deficiency relates to the way our 
border districts are developed compared to those facing the districts across the 
country. As our border areas are pivotal in unlocking the potential of our 
engagements with our neighbours, the need to stabilise and develop the border 
regions have become critical. So, for more effective engagement with our 
immediate neighbours, connectivity infrastructure like cross-border roads, railways, 
inland waterways and ports, energy, telecommunication and digital links, etc. needs 
to be enhanced. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External 
Affairs should take it up with various Central Ministries, Departments and agencies 
concerned the need for regional infrastructure development of the border areas 
through increased allocation/investment, pooling of resources and above all, 
convergence of everybody’s interest and focus. The Committee also desire that the 
feasibility of setting up a regional development fund for connectivity infrastructure 
under regional frameworks like BIMSTEC may also be explored.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is noted for compliance. 
Under India’s ‘Neighbourhood First policy’, Government of India has focused on 
enhancing development of border areas. Issues pertaining to development of the 

82 
 
border areas are taken up regularly with concerned line Ministries by the Ministry 
of External Affairs. 
Further, BIMSTEC member states have successfully negotiated an Agreement on 
Maritime Transport Cooperation. Member states are also negotiating BIMSTEC 
Motor V ehicle Agreement on priority. Member states are also negotiating the next 
steps toward implementation of the BIMSTEC Master Plan on Transport 
Connectivity which was adopted by the Leaders during the 5th  BIMSTEC Summit 
in Colombo. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 10 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that India and Bangladesh enjoy a robust partnership and 
2021 saw their diplomatic relations completing 50 years. Acknowledging the 
importance of leveraging the potential of new and emerging areas of cooperation, 
India and Bangladesh have agreed to collaborate in new areas of cooperation, such 
as, environment, climate change, cyber security, ICT, space technology, green 
energy and blue economy. Presently, both countries are looking forward to 
strengthening their trade and economic ties through a bilateral Comprehensive 
Economic Cooperation Agreement. As per the Ministry, a Joint Study Report on 
the Agreement has been finalized and the negotiations would be commencing soon. 
The Committee, hence, desire that the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation 
Agreement with Bangladesh, be finalized at the earliest and commence 
negotiations on the same for its early implementation within a time frame. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. India and 
Bangladesh finalized a Joint Study in 2022 for starting the negotiations on CEPA. 
Ministry of Commerce is the lead Ministry on negotiations for CEPA. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 19 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 
Presently, India offers seven major scholarships to Bhutan, including the 
wellknown Ambassador’s Scholarship, prestigious Nehru Wangchuck Scholarship, 
Five-Year Plan project-tied assistance based Undergraduate Scholarship, Nalanda 
University Scholarship, ICCR Undergraduate Engineering scholarships, IIT 
Kanpur scholarship and AYUSH scholarships. Over 1100 Bhutanese students 
benefit from these scholarships, making it an important aspect of our bilateral 
relationship. A large number of Bhutanese civil servants and professionals from 
private sector and others undertake ITEC training programmes administered by 
the Development Partnership Administration Division of the Ministry of External 
Affairs. In recent times, the focus has been on developing customized ITEC 
programmes specifically for Bhutanese nationals. In 2021-22 alone, 340 
Bhutanese nationals benefited from the e-ITEC training programmes whereas in 
2020-2021, it was 250. In 2022, GoI also customised special ITEC progammes for 
training 100 Bhutanese young entrepreneurs at the prestigious Entrepreneurship 
Development Institute of India, Ahmedabad and 30 entrepreneurs at the Indian 
Institute of Packaging. Going by this track record, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to further expand the scope of scholarships and customized training 
programmes in the coming years to accommodate more number of students, 
Government officials and professionals. 
 
 

84 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 28 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
  

85 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee find that there aren’t enough Parliamentary exchanges between 
India and its neighbourhood countries and there has been only one Parliamentary 
visit from the People’s Majlis of Maldives in the recent years. The Committee are 
of the strong view that regular Parliamentary Exchanges with neighbouring 
partners can also play a pivotal role in the implementation of the Neighbourhood 
First Policy. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to utilize the 
Parliamentary forum in a better way by facilitating more and more Parliamentary 
exchanges between India and its neighbouring countries for better interaction 
between Parliamentarians of India and the countries in the neighbourhood so that 
the philosophy of the Neighbourhood First is widely shared and upheld in its true 
spirit. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee and 
would strive to work out a plan for structured interaction with the Parliamentarians 
from foreign countries, including from the neighbourhood. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 7 of Chapter I of this Report 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
The Committee observe that efforts are being undertaken to strengthen the border 
infrastructure by opening and upgrading Integrated Check Posts (ICPs)/Land 
Customs Stations (LCS) and border haats at India-Bangladesh border. They also 
understand that infrastructural capacity constraints and procedural issues at border 
are discussed under the mechanisms of Sub-group on Infrastructure of ICPs/LCS, 
Commerce Secretary Level Talks (CSLT) and Joint Group on Customs (JGC) 

86 
 
meetings. Presently, the work for upgradation of 6 more LCSs to ICPs on the 
India-Bangladesh border is on. In view of the importance of strengthening the 
infrastructure at the India-Bangladesh border from security and economic/trade 
perspective, the Committee urge the Government to open more ICPs/LCS as well 
as border haats, wherever required and upgrade the existing ones. Bilateral 
working mechanisms to discuss infrastructural and capacity constraints and 
procedural issues at border may also be strengthened. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted. Up-
gradation of border infrastructure is discussed between India and Bangladesh under 
the Sub Group on Infrastructure. Currently five Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) are 
operational on India-Bangladesh border, namely ICP Petrapole, ICP Agartala, ICP 
Sutarkandi, ICP Dawki and ICP Srimantapur. Government of India plans to 
upgrade seven more of the existing Land Customs Stations into ICPs to boost 
bilateral trade and commerce namely Sabroom, Kawrpuichhuah, Fulbari, 
Ghojandanga, Mahadipur, Hilli, and Changrabandha.  
Currently, six Border Haats in states of Meghalaya and Tripura are functional 
between both countries. Work is ongoing to establish more Border Haats in Assam, 
West Bengal and Mizoram. Proposal for the expansion of the Border Haats is 
currently under consideration of the Department of Commerce.    
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 25 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
The Committee note that a number of proposals for new projects in Bhutan are 
currently in nascent stage, viz., establishment of a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the 
Bank of Bhutan (which has 20% shares by SBI) in India; construction of a railway 
line between Gelephu in Bhutan and Kokrajhar in India; construction of Integrated 
Check Post at Jaigaon, etc. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should facilitate for an early finalization and implementation of 

87 
 
these projects through effective coordination with the Ministries/Departments 
concerned.  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. The 
establishment of a wholly owned subsidiary of the bank of Bhutan in India is being 
discussed at the technical level between RBI and the Royal Monetary Authority of 
Bhutan. 
The preliminary study for construction of a railway line between Gelephu (Bhutan) 
and Kokrajhar (India) has been carried out for establishing rail connectivity 
between India and Bhutan and the report is being finalized by the Ministry of 
Railways. 
Currently there is no Integrated Check Post (ICP) on the India Bhutan border. West 
Bengal Government has offered 54 acres of land recently for development of ICP 
Jaigaon. The land acquisition process is presently underway. 
 
    [File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 41) 
The Committee note that with the launch of RuPay card in India and Nepal, RuPay 
has become the new element of our digital and financial connectivity. 
Interoperability of our financial platforms and products is something which is very 
intrinsic and fundamental to the financial and digital connectivity between our two 
countries. The Committee, hence, desire that the Government should explore the 
digital e-market and e-commerce platforms in neighbouring countries to market 
Indian products and vice versa so as to achieve upgraded digital and financial 
connectivity in the region.  
    
 

88 
 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for further 
action. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 53) 
The Committee find that a draft MoU to implement BBIN Motor Vehicle 
Agreement among Bangladesh, India and Nepal was agreed in March 2022 and 
draft Cargo and Passenger Protocols are under discussion to operationalize the 
BBIN MVA. As BBIN MVA would result in tremendous economic benefits for 
border trade and transport through the North Eastern Region, the Committee urge 
the Government to make concerted efforts for early finalization of the Cargo 
Protocol and Passenger Protocol for operationalizing BBIN MVA.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted. BBIN Motor 
Vehicle Agreement (MVA) was signed in June, 2015 during the meeting of the 
Transport Ministers of the participating countries in Bhutan. Bhutan, pending 
ratification by its Parliament, in April 2017 gave its consent for implementation of 
the BBIN MVA by the three countries Bangladesh, India and Nepal. A draft MoU 
to implement the BBIN MVA amongst these three countries was agreed in a 
meeting held in March 2022. Draft Cargo Protocol and Passenger Protocol are also 
under discussions to operationalize the BBIN MVA at the earliest. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 

89 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 61) 
The Committee note that India is currently leading BIMSTEC cooperation in four 
priority sectors, namely, Counter Terrorism & Trans-national Crime, Transport & 
Communication, Tourism and Environmental & Disaster Management. Besides, 
initiatives including HADR exercises, start-up conclaves and hackathons; capacity 
building; cooperation in science, technology and space; and establishment of 
Parliamentary forum have also been announced in 2018. The Committee welcome 
these initiatives as active collaboration and hope that mutual assistance on matters 
of common interest in the economic, social, technical and scientific fields would be 
promoted. Moreover, establishment of Parliamentary forum will facilitate 
interaction and discussion on common areas of interests, key areas of concern and 
also serve as a forum for building consensus. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the new initiatives announced for the BIMSTEC region including establishment of 
Parliamentary forums should be realised at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for 
compliance. The establishment of a BIMSTEC Parliamentary Forum is under 
process. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/74/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 43 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
_05 February, 2024                                                                                           Chairperson,                                 
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                              Committee on External Affairs 

90 
 
APPENDIX-I 
  
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2023-24) HELD ON 5 FEBRUARY, 2024 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, 5 February, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1.        Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
  
Lok Sabha 
  
2.      Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5.      Shri P. C. Mohan 
6.     Smt. Queen Oja 
7.      Dr. K. C. Patel 
8. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
9.      Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
10. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
   
Rajya Sabha 
  
 12.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan   
13.  Shri Anil Desai 
14.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
  
Secretariat 
             
           1.        Shri Anjani Kumar                           -          Joint Secretary  
2.        Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan              -          Director 
3.        Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut               -          Deputy Secretary 
4.        Smt. Maya Menon                             -          Under Secretary 

91 
 
  
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3.        XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
4.        XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
5.        XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
6.         Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Second Report of the Committee on External Affairs on 
the subject ‘‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’. 
7.        The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report after some deliberations. The Committee adopted 
the draft report without any modification. 
8.        The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action 
Taken Report and present the same to Parliament. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 
Appendix II 
  
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SECOND REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (17TH LOK SABHA) 
                                             
(i)    Total Number of 
Recommendations                                                                       62                                     
                                                   
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
  
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 
23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 
48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 59, 60  and 62 
.                                                                             
                                                                                          Total-51 
Percentage:  82.26% 
  
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
         
Recommendation Nos. 55 and 58 
  
                                                                      Total- 02 
 Percentage: 3.22 % 
  
 (iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the     Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
  
Recommendation Nos.  8, 17 and 27 
                                                                                Total-03 
 Percentage: 4.84% 
  
(v)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of   the   Government are still awaited. 
  
Recommendation Nos.  5, 22, 26, 41, 53 and 61 
                                                                                                          Total- 06 
Percentage:        9.68% 
 
 