 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘India and International Law including 
Extradition Treaties with Foreign Countries, Asylum Issues, International Cyber-security and Issues of 
Financial Crimes’ 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
18 
 

 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘India and International Law including 
Extradition Treaties with Foreign Countries, Asylum Issues, International Cyber-security and Issues of 
Financial Crimes’ 
 
  
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2022 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21 December, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 158      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………      1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................    19 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………   36 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..    38 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………     42 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Eight Sitting of the Committee held on 19 December, 2022.              43                                                             
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………....          45 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   -  Under Secretary 
  
 
(ii) 
   
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2022-23) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report of the Committee on the subject ‘India and International Law including Extradition Treaties 
with Foreign Countries, Asylum Issues, International Cyber-security and Issues of Financial 
Crimes’. 
 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2021 and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2021. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 19 April, 2022 (English 
Version) and 27 April, 2022 (Hindi Version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on    
19 December, 2022. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
19 December, 2022                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
28 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Ninth Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘India and 
International Law including Extradition Treaties with foreign countries, asylum 
issues, international cyber-security and issues of financial crimes’ which was 
presented to the Lok Sabha on 06 December, 2021 and laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2021. 
 
2.     The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs on all the 15 observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: - 
  Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.  
Total- 12 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 Recommendation No. 6          
        Total- 1 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration: - 
 Recommendation No. 1 and 5      
Total- 2  
Chapter-IV 

2 | P a g e 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited: - 
Nil 
Total- 0 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments and 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may 
be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of 
this Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
5. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
  “The Committee recognize the critical importance of safeguarding 
the Country’s interests in the varied streams of International Law and 
note with satisfaction that India is committed to multilateralism and 
enhancement of respect for International Law. They also laud the 
country’s continuing unwavering engagement with and commitment to 
the cause for reforms in global governing structures to reflect changing 
and contemporary realities. The Committee, however, find that India’s 
capacity, expertise and involvement in the framing and further 
modification of International Law in various spheres needs to be further 
strengthened. The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts towards that 
goal should not be limited to ensuring the recruitment of qualified 

3 | P a g e 
 
personnel in concerned Ministries and Divisions, but should also extend 
to promotion of institutions of international legal studies and research in 
the country, scholarships and funding of research by meritorious law 
students, professionals and educators. 
 
  The Ministry should also, in coordination with Ministry of 
Education identify some eminent institutions for establishing chairs for 
the purpose. Similarly, they should also establish suitable chairs in legal 
studies in the Foreign Service Institute and the Indian Council of World 
Affairs. They also desire the concerned ministries to promote and 
facilitate the entry of Indian international law experts into the various 
international governing bodies like the Sixth Committee (Legal) of the 
United Nations General Assembly, International Courts of Justice, 
International Tribunals, etc. responsible for framing and amending 
international law on the varied fields including in the areas of Law of the 
Sea and maritime affairs; international criminal law including terrorism 
and extradition; human rights and humanitarian law; trade law; space law; 
legal issues arising out of disarmament, environment, intellectual 
property rights, energy security, nuclear energy, cyberspace, WTO, outer 
space. Moreover, the Committee desire that the Ministry of External 
Affairs, in close co-ordination with all concerned ministries, set up a 
Working Group devoted to achieving the above goals and to ensure 
strengthening India’s position in the study, framing, amending, 
implementing and interpretation of International Law adequately to 
protect its interests” 

4 | P a g e 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
    
 “ Ministry of External Affairs closely works with institutions and 
universities. Government of India contributes 5 lakhs every year 
towards the library of Indian Society of International Law. 
 
  2. The treaty body reporting under various Conventions are 
prepared in consultation and with the inputs from academic 
institutions and law schools who have expertise in international 
law.  
 
  3. Internship programmes – MEA provides internship to 
budding international law scholars to familiarize themselves with 
the process of formulation of treaties and its negotiations. Interns 
report to and work under close supervision of the  Head of Division 
(HOD) of L&T Division. They may be required to conduct 
research, write reports, analyze evolving developments, or carry 
out any other task entrusted to them by the HOD.   
 
  4. Indian international law experts into the various international 
governing bodies - The following positions are held by Indian 
legal experts. 
 
   i.  Dr. Dalveer Bhandari, Judge of the International Court 
of Justice, former Judge of Supreme Court.  
 
 ii. Dr. Neeru Chadda, Judge of the International Tribunal 
for Law of the Sea. She is former Additional Secretary, Legal 
and Treaties Division, MEA. She is the first Indian women to 
hold the position.  
 
 iii. Dr. Aniruddha Rajput is a member of International 
Law Commission from 2017-2022. The election for the next 
term will be in November 2021. India has fielded a candidate 
for the  term that begins from 2023.  
 
 iv. An officer at the level of Counselor from the Legal 
and Treaties Division represents India at the Sixth Committee 
(Legal) of the United Nations General Assembly.   
 
 v. Legal Officers from Legal and Treaties Division are 
posted in Permanent Mission of India in Geneva and Embassy 

5 | P a g e 
 
of India in The Hague to follow international law matters in 
various forums including Human Rights Council, International 
Court of Justice, Hague Conference on Private International 
Law (HCCH). 
 
 vi. India is an elected member of the Council of the 
International Seabed Authority. Indian  experts are members 
of the Legal and Technical Commission (LTC) ad the Finance 
Committee.  
 
 5. MEA works closely with other Ministries depending on the 
subject/area to form a consolidated position on various 
international law areas. For example, we closely work with 
Ministry of Commerce with regard to issues of Arbitration, with 
Ministry of Women and Child Development in areas of inter-
country adoption, surrogacy etc. Further, we take note of the desire 
of the Committee that the Ministry of External Affairs, work in 
close co-ordination with all concerned ministries, to ensure 
strengthening India’s position in the study, framing, amending, 
implementing and interpretation of International Law adequately to 
protect its interests. 
 
 
7. Taking cognizance of the need to strengthen India’s capacity, 
expertise and involvement in the framing and modification of International 
Law in various spheres, the Committee had desired that the Ministry in 
coordination with Ministry of Education to identify some eminent 
institutions for establishing Chairs for the purpose including Chairs in 
legal studies in the Foreign Service Institute and the Indian Council of 
World Affairs. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry of 
External Affairs, in close co-ordination with all concerned ministries, set 
up a Working Group devoted to achieving the goals and ensure 
strengthening India’s position in the study, framing, amending, 
implementing and interpretation of International Law to protect its 
interests adequately. The Committee take note of the Ministry’s submission 
that they work closely with academic institutions and law schools who have 

6 | P a g e 
 
expertise in international law. The Committee also find it encouraging to 
note that the MEA provides internship to budding international law 
scholars to familiarize themselves with the process of formulation of 
treaties and its negotiations. While appreciating the Ministry’s assurance 
to work in close co-ordination with all concerned ministries, to strengthen 
India’s position in the study, framing, amending, implementing and 
interpretation of International Law the Committee note that the reply of 
the Ministry is silent on the establishment of Chairs and setting up of 
Working Group for the purpose. The Committee are of the firm view that 
with India’s rising stature in global affairs and the country’s increasing 
engagements, it is imperative that the country’s interests in the varied 
streams of International Law be safeguarded. Setting up of a Working 
Force and establishing of Chairs would give a boost in India’s endevour to 
strengthen its position in the study, framing, amending, implementing and 
interpretation of International Law adequately to protect its interests. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that the 
Ministry of External Affairs, in coordination with Ministry of Education, 
take positive steps towards identifying some eminent institutions for 
establishing Chairs especially establishment of Chairs in legal studies in the 
Foreign Service Institute and the Indian Council of World Affairs. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to work in close co-ordination with all 
concerned ministries to set up   a Working Group devoted to achieving the 
above goals. 
 
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
8. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
 “The Committee note that India is signatory to the Hague Convention on 
the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in civil or 

7 | P a g e 
 
commercial matters. The Hague Convention on taking of evidence 
abroad in civil and commercial matters was also adopted in the year 
2007 under the belief that the process of service of legal documents 
would become faster than letter rogatory and India has also signed 
Mutual Legal Assistance treaties with 40 countries. The Committee, 
however, find it disappointing that even then there are 845 MLAT 
requests pending with various countries which include Letters Rogatory 
and Mutual Legal Assistance requests. The Committee, therefore, 
conclude that the desired cooperation from the countries concerned in 
honouring such requests is waiting. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry of External Affairs should take serious cognizance of the 
huge pendency of requests and institute a task force to look into the 
reasons for the same and suggest measures for the prompt fructification 
of all extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance requests pending with 
various Countries. Simultaneously, more and more MLATs must be 
entered into with other important countries on priority basis.”   
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “During the Joint Working Group meetings on Counter Terrorism 
(JWG-CT) with various countries, the matter relating to pending 
extradition cases and MLAT requests on counter terrorism matters 
relating to that country are discussed for expediting the pending 
MLAT requests. The Missions are regularly pursuing the pending 
requests with respective countries. 
 
  ii. The Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal 
Affairs is incharge of The Hague Convention on Service Abroad of 
Judicial and extra-Judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial 
Matters and for MLATs in Civil and commercial matters. 
Similarly, the Ministry of Home Affairs is incharge of Mutual 
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters. The Ministry of External 
Affairs during Consular Dialogue and through its Missions abroad, 

8 | P a g e 
 
from time to time propose the need for Mutual Legal Assistance 
Agreement in Civil and Commercial and Criminal matters and 
facilitate the conclusion of these agreements. The Indian Missions 
abroad actively coordinate with the concerned Foreign States for 
early execution of India’s MLAT requests.” 
 
10. Concerned about the high number of Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaty (MLAT) requests pending with various countries including Letters 
Rogatory, the Committee had desired that the Ministry of External Affairs 
establish a task force to look into the reasons for the pendency and suggest 
measures for prompt fructification of all extradition and Mutual Legal 
Assistance requests pending with various Countries. In their Action Taken 
Reply, the Ministry have informed that during the Joint Working Group 
meetings on Counter Terrorism (JWG-CT) with various countries, the 
matter relating to pending extradition cases and MLAT requests relating to 
that country are discussed for expediting the same. The Ministry have 
further submitted that the Missions are regularly pursuing the pending 
requests with respective countries. The Ministry have also given areas of 
jurisdiction of the various Ministries in the matter. While taking note that 
inter-Ministerial jurisdictional cooperation is necessitated to ensure speedy 
action in the matter, the Committee are disappointed to note that the 
Ministry’s reply is silent on the recommendation of setting up of a Task 
Force to look into the matter.  The Committee are of the firm view that 
setting up of a Task Force comprising all the Ministries concerned would 
bolster the efforts being made by the Ministry in the matter. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry to make serious efforts to institute a task force to look into the 
reasons for the delay in honouring of the extradition requests and suggest 
measures for the prompt fructification of all extradition and Mutual Legal 
Assistance requests pending with various countries and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. 

9 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
11. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
 “The Committee are aware that in the absence of any domestic law that is 
specific to address the situations of refugees and asylum seekers, and also 
in the light of India being not a signatory to the 1951 UN Convention or 
its 1967 Protocol, requests for asylum are being dealt with existing legal 
framework at the moment. They are aware that the Foreigners Act covers 
a whole gamut of issues related to entry of foreigners, their stay in India, 
their activities in India and their exit from India, besides other Acts like 
the Registration of Foreigners Act, the Citizenship Act, etc. The 
Committee are apprised that the Central Government has passed legal 
orders under these Acts to govern the regime of legal as well as illegal 
foreigners, and that a protocol is issued to various implementing agencies 
like FRRO and FROs in the States whereby the status of a foreigner can 
be assessed and in consultation with security agencies and the MEA, a 
view is taken whether to grant her/him asylum or the status of a refugee. 
While recognizing the flexibility this approach grants, the Committee are 
of the opinion that it leaves much scope for elements of discretion to 
officials. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in the absence of a 
domestic Legislation of Refugees and Asylum Seekers, the Ministry of 
External Affairs, in consultation with concerned Ministries like Home 
Affairs, Law and Justice, etc. should prepare and notify a Domestic 
Protocol on status of refugees and asylum seekers with specific 
responsibilities assigned to specific agencies. This would not only ensure 
prompt response but also enhance accountability in dealing with situations 
of refugees and asylum seekers in the Country.” 
 

10 | P a g e 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  “Ministry of Home Affairs had issued a Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) to be followed by all concerned agencies while 
dealing with foreign nationals who claim to be refugees vide letter 
No. 25022/34/2001-F. IV dated 29.12.2011 addressed to the State 
Governments/UT Administrations. The SOP has been modified by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs vide letter No. 25022/34/2001-F.IV 
dated 20.03.2019. The SOP clearly defines the role assigned to the 
specific agencies assessing the claims made by the foreign 
nationals and the further course of action to be adopted if the claim 
is found to be  justified or not. The existing system is sufficient to 
handle the refugee situation at this point of time. However, as 
recommended by the Committee a proposal for preparing and 
notifying new Domestic Protocol on status of refugee and asylum 
seekers with specific responsibilities assigned to specific agencies 
could be considered in consultation with all stakeholders.” 
 
13. The Committee in their Ninth Report had recommended that the 
Ministry of External Affairs, in consultation with Ministries concerned like 
Home Affairs, Law and Justice, etc. prepare and notify a Domestic 
Protocol on the status of refugees and asylum seekers with specific 
responsibilities assigned to specific agencies. In their Action Taken Reply 
the Ministry have informed that SOP in this regard  has been issued by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, which clearly defines the role assigned to the 
specific agencies assessing the claims made by the foreign nationals and the 
further course of action to be adopted if the claim is found to be  justified 
or not. The Ministry have further opined that the existing system is 
sufficient to handle the refugee situation at this point of time. The 
Committee, however, would like to be apprised about the actual steps taken 
and outcome after proposal for preparing and notifying new Domestic 
Protocol on status of refugee and asylum seekers with specific 
responsibilities assigned to specific agencies with due consultation with all 
stakeholders. 
 

11 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 11  
 
14. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
  ‘The Committee note that the Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT-In) and the Information Technology Act are the 
administrative and legal mechanisms in the country to respond against 
cyber attacks and to tackle cyber crimes. The Committee are concerned 
with the reactive disposition of CERT-In since the benefit is greater in 
pre- empting and preventing possible fraud, cyber attacks and such other 
cyber crimes. The Committee appreciate the efforts to make the CERT-
in mechanism more proactive, but desire that more effort needs to be 
devoted and the Ministries concerned must work together to attract 
adequate talent in IT and software engineering to strengthen the 
capabilities and capacity of CERT-In. They also recommend that the IT 
Act, and rules under the Act must be constantly reviewed to address fast 
changing requirements due to ever evolving technology and progress in 
the information technology realm to keep the country safe and in a 
leadership position for international mechanisms and instruments of 
cooperation’ 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “Officials from CERT-IN and MEITY have been taking part 
in bilateral, regional and multilateral cyber consultations of India.  
  ii. In bilateral Cyber Dialogue set up, CERT-In has been 
involved to take up consultations with its counterparts, provide 
feedback and come up with proposals to enhance CERT-to-CERT 
Cooperation.  
  iii. MEITY is the nodal Ministry to frame draft domestic laws 
on Cyber related issues and is part of Indian delegations in 
UNGGE, UNOEWG, etc. where issues related to Cyberspace 

12 | P a g e 
 
are/were being discussed to develop acceptable global norms and 
rules.” 
 
16. Concerned with the reactive disposition of CERT-In , the Committee 
had desired that more efforts be devoted to making the CERT-in 
mechanism more proactive and that the Ministries concerned work 
together to attract adequate talent in IT and software engineering to 
strengthen the capabilities and capacity of CERT-In. The Committee had 
further recommended that the IT Act, and rules under the Act be 
constantly reviewed in this regard. The Committee note with satisfaction 
the efforts being made by the Ministry in the bilateral, regional and 
multilateral consultations. The Committee, however, are of the opinion that 
the Ministry has not made any serious efforts to initiate action on this 
recommendation. The Committee are aware that MEITY is the nodal 
Ministry to frame draft domestic laws on Cyber related issues. The 
Committee, however, urge the Ministry to actively pursue the matter with 
the Ministry concerned and keep the Committee apprised of the outcome.  
 
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
 
17. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
 ‘The Committee note with satisfaction that efforts of the Government to 
prevent financial crimes through cooperation with global fora which 
include collaboration with the OECD and G-20 Group, where India has 
been a very pro-active participant in developing a uniform standard for 
automatic exchange of information is making good progress. Further, 
after initial sharing of financial information with 49 countries, that the 
number now has doubled to about 80 countries is a good achievement. 

13 | P a g e 
 
The Committee urge the Ministry of External Affairs to bring in more and 
more countries in this network of mutual and automated exchange of 
financial information critical to fight against financial crimes which are 
increasingly assuming a trans-border character.’ 
 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “Government of India has mandated Financial Intelligence Unit 
India (FIU-India) for sharing information relating to fight against 
financial crimes. FIU-India works under the administrative control 
of Department of Revenue, Government of India. On part of MEA, 
FIU-India is encompassed to share information with their 
counterparts in foreign countries. Where required, a representative 
of FIU-India and relevant agencies are also included in the Indian 
delegation for the meetings of JWG-CT to exchange relevant 
information particularly on countering financing of terrorism. 
  ii. Ministry of Finance in nodal for matters related to Financial 
Intelligence Unit (FIU).” 
 
19. On the issue of developing a uniform standard for automatic 
exchange of information through cooperation with global fora to prevent 
financial crimes, the Committee had urged the Ministry to bring in more 
and more countries into the network of mutual and automated exchange of 
financial information to fight against financial crimes. In their Action 
Taken Reply, the Ministry have informed that Government of India has 
mandated Financial Intelligence Unit India (FIU-India) for sharing 
information relating to fight against financial crimes. The Ministry have 
further informed that where required, a representative of FIU-India and 
relevant agencies are included in the Indian delegation for the meetings of 
JWG-CT to exchange relevant information particularly on countering 
financing of terrorism. The Committee are aware that FIU-India works 
under the administrative control of Department of Revenue, Government 
of India and as such the Ministry of Finance is the nodal for matters 

14 | P a g e 
 
related to Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). However, taking into account 
the grave need for increased global cooperation and assistance to counter 
organised crime, money laundering and related financial crimes, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to actively take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance and push for bringing in more and more countries into 
the network of mutual and automated exchange of financial information. 
 
 (Recommendation No. 13) 
 
20. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
   
  ‘The Committee are apprised that, under the Fugitive Economic 
Offenders Act, India have filed 11 petitions for declaring a person a 
fugitive offender, out of which, in two cases orders have been passed, 
where assets worth of Rs. 358 crore have been confiscated in one case, 
and the person has been declared as a fugitive offender in the other. The 
Committee also note that there is a limit of Rs. 100 Crore as the lower 
limit of money involved for proceeding against offenders under this Act. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the entire judicial process for 
declaring a person a fugitive offender appears to be very slow and desire 
that the Ministries concerned must together examine possibilities of 
simplifying the procedures to expedite the progress in such cases. Further, 
the Committee feel that the limit of 100 crore as the limit for proceeding 
against such criminals seem to give a lot of leeway to many smaller 
offenders and they desire that the matter may be reviewed at the earliest 
to enable proceedings to be initiated against criminals involving less than 
100 crore also’ 
 
 

15 | P a g e 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
   
  “At the time the Fugitive Economic Offender Act 2018 
(FEOA) was passed there was an exigency and need of such 
legislation to stop the economic offenders from absconding from 
country by mandating confiscation of assets of such fugitive 
economic offenders. The threshold for invoking the provisions of 
FEOA was prescribed at one hundred Crore rupees or more as the 
total value involved in the scheduled offence or offences. While the 
FEO Bill was being discussed before the Parliament on 19.07.2018 
the question of such threshold of Rs 100 Crore was also raised by 
the Hon’ble members. After the Bill received Presidential assent 
the then Hon’ble Finance Minister Sh. Piyush Goyal backed the 
legislation by saying that “The intention of the government is to 
ensure faster and speedy tackling of cases involving big 
offenders” and “catch the big offenders and not to clog the 
courts”. 
 
 ii. The law has been in force for about 3 years and in view of 
the Directorate of Enforcement there is an urgent need for 
relaxation of this threshold of Rs. 100 Crores on various grounds 
which are broadly summarized as under: 
 
 (a)  Money laundering by itself is a serious economic 
offence with larger economic and social ramifications. But 
even among the  money laundering cases being investigated 
by the Directorate, there is a category of cases in which the 
accused may be involved in serious economic offences 
(predicate offence) such as terror funding, drug trafficking, 
environmental offences, corruption etc. which have an acute 
potential to impact the security, economic or strategic 
interests the country. It has been observed that some of 
these cases involving serious economic offences do not 
meet the monetary threshold of Rs 100 Crores required for 
invoking the provisions of FEOA. However, given the 
magnitude, seriousness and economic/security implications 
of such offences it is believed that the purpose and intent of 
the legislation would be effectively achieved if the assets of 
such offenders who have fled the country, are made liable 
for confiscation under FEOA. 
 

16 | P a g e 
 
 (b) The investigation under the provisions of PMLA has 
revealed that provisions of FEOA could not be invoked 
against many of the fugitive offenders involved in serious 
economic offences such as terror financing, drug trafficking 
and cyber crime for the reason that proceeds of crime in 
these cases are much below the threshold of Rs. 100 crore. 
For example, provisions of FEOA could not be invoked 
against international terrorists namely Hafiz Muhammad 
Saeed & Ors because the proceed of crime involved in these 
cases are at Rs.8.93 crore and Rs. 11.26 respectively. A list 
of one such category of cases i.e terror funding cases under 
investigation with ED along with PoC involved in each 
case, is enclosed as Annexure A.  
 
 (c) Further, till date the Directorate has filed petitions 
under FEOA against 14 persons only. On the other hand, till 
date the Directorate has got Red Corner Notices (RCNs) 
published against 19 accused persons against application for 
publication of RCN made by the Directorate in respect of 
35 persons. The Directorate has also sent extradition request 
in respect of 27 accused persons. It has been observed that 
in some such cases in which Directorate has got RCNs 
published or sent extradition requests, it is unable to file an 
application under FEOA as the in the said cases the 
threshold of Rs 100 Crores is not met. A brief of one such 
case is enclosed as Annexure B. 
 
 (d) The objective of FEOA is "to provide for measures to 
deter economic offenders from evading the process of law 
in India" and is to speedily bring fugitive economic 
offenders to justice by swiftly confiscating their assets and 
restituting the wronged party. In this context, it is stated that 
provisions of Sections 82-86Cr.PC are similar to the 
provisions of FEOA in their intended purpose and 
applicability. Also, Cr.Pc being applicable for all criminal 
offences including petty offences, Section 82 Cr.PC does 
not stipulate any monetary threshold for its invocation. 
Since the legislative intent of FEOA is to provide a 
procedure for more effective and swift confiscation of 
assets as compared to above mentioned provisions of Cr.PC 
(as FEOA is invoked in cases of economic offences of 
larger magnitude and more serious implications), a 
monetary threshold may prove to be a roadblock in bringing 

17 | P a g e 
 
fugitive criminals involved in serious economic offences 
within the ambit of FEOA. 
 
 iii. For aforestated reasons, it is suggested that there should not 
be any monetary threshold for invoking the provisions of FEOA in 
the case involving serious economic offences such as terror & 
naxal financing, drug trafficking, cyber crimes, human trafficking, 
arms & explosives trafficking, etc. For other categories of 
economic offences, threshold limit may be reduced from existing 
threshold of Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 10 crore. 
 
  Further, with regard to the recommendation of the 
Committee that the judicial process is slow and there is a need for 
simplifying the procedures to expedite the progress in cases under 
FEOA, following are the inputs: 
 
  (a) The process prescribed in the FEOA follows the 
principle of due process of law as well as the principles of 
natural justice. The process prescribed is not complex, 
however certain time limits may be fixed for taking 
necessary steps. For instance: 
 
 It may be prescribed that upon filing of Application 
under section 4 of the Act, the Special Court to decide 
whether to issue notice within two weeks from the date of 
filing of application. 
 The Special Court shall pass an order after conclusion 
of final arguments on the application under section 4 of the 
Act within a period of 3 weeks. 
 
 (b) For the effective and successful implementation of the 
FEOA, 2018 it is also suggested that other Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and Judicial Officers must 
be sensitized about the provisions of the Act. 
 
22.  Perturbed by sluggish judicial process for declaring a person a 
fugitive offender under the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, the 
Committee had desired that the Ministries concerned examine the 
possibilities of simplifying the procedures to expedite the cases. The 
Committee had also desired that the limit set for proceeding against 

18 | P a g e 
 
economic offenders under the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act at 100 
crore may be reviewed. The Committee understand that at the time the 
Fugitive Economic Offender Act 2018 (FEOA) was passed there was an 
exigency and need of such legislation to stop the economic offenders from 
absconding from country and that the threshold of Rs 100 Crore was kept 
to ensure faster and speedy tackling of cases involving big offenders and 
not to clog the courts. The Committee find it disappointing that while the 
Ministry of Finance are in agreement with the Committee’s observation 
that there is an urgent need for relaxation of this threshold of Rs. 100 
Crores, any active move to amend the legislation has been missing on their 
part. The Committee appreciate the Ministry of External Affairs inputs on 
the strategy to expedite the progress in cases under FEOA. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Finance may actively be pursued for 
amending of the Fugitive Economic Offender Act 2018 (FEOA) in respect 
to the threshold of Rs. 100 Crores for proceeding against economic 
offenders.  
 
 
 
 

19 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee take note of the India’s growing global interests and 
corresponding efforts made by the Government that manifest themselves in the 
range of agreements / MoUs that the country has entered into with countries or 
plurilateral / multilateral organizations in diverse areas spanning from judicial 
and customs cooperation, financial data sharing, war on drugs, counter-
terrorism, cyber security, Migration, labour and movement of professionals, etc. 
While lauding the efforts of the Government in its endeavours, the Committee 
feel that the achievements in terms of the numbers of agreements entered into 
and signed with countries and plurilateral/multilateral organizations in various 
areas of possible cooperation are still full of possibilities, keeping in mind the 
Country’s aspirations to become a much bigger player in international affairs. 
They, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs, as the Nodal 
Ministry, should vigorously explore more avenues of cooperation with other 
countries and groups of countries particularly in the areas of extradition, 
economic crimes, counter terrorism and migrant mobility agreements for 
possible cooperation that a globalized economy and increasingly interconnected 
world that advances in information technology have ushered in. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To explore avenues of cooperation in the area of counter terrorism Ministry of 
External Affairs has established Joint Working Groups on Counter Terrorism 
(JWG-CT) with 26 countries, in addition to the European Union. Besides India 
also participates in the meetings of BRICS and BIMSTEC Joint Working Group 
on Counter Terrorism and their subgroups. All concerned Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies of Government of India are represented in the JWG-
CT meetings depending on the agenda of the meetings. The JWG-CT Provide a 
forum for counter terrorism cooperation enabling sharing of information and 
experience and sharing terrorist threat assessments at national, regional and 
global level, counter terrorism training and capacity building, strengthening of 
multilateral efforts in the fight against terrorism and terrorist financing, 
expediting mutual legal assistance requests, facilitating agency to agency 
cooperation and emphasizing the importance of early adoption of a 
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) which India 
introduced in the United Nations in 1996. India regularly holds meetings of 
JWG-CT with foreign countries. It has been the endeavor of CT Division, 

20 | P a g e 
 
Ministry of External Affairs to have Joint Working Group meetings on Counter 
Terrorism (JWG-CT) with as many countries as possible. Constant efforts are 
also on to strengthen and increase counter terrorism cooperation with relevant 
countries. 
 
ii. In line with the recommendation of the Committee, the CPV Division of 
the Ministry is actively making efforts to broaden the network of extradition 
treaties and arrangements with foreign countries to further facilitate bringing 
back fugitive criminals including those involved in economic crimes, terrorism 
and financial fraud, etc. Similarly, the OIA-I Division is engaged in pursuing 
mobility agreement keeping in mind the interest of Indian Diaspora. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee are of the view that India follows the principle of ‘dualism’ 
reflected in Article 253 of the Constitution, which gives Parliament the power to 
make laws to implement international laws. They also note that the Supreme 
Court has on certain occasions and rulings digressed from this principle on the 
logic that Customary International Law, unless there exists a domestic law 
which contradicts the same, may be accepted. The Committee feel that rather 
than allowing such digression to become a point of contention between the 
institutions of the State, the Ministry of External Affairs should take note of the 
vacuum in domestic legislation on such matters and make efforts in 
coordination with the concerned Ministry to have adequate domestic legislation 
on such matters that are firmly based on the established principles of 
jurisprudence and equality of rights enshrined in the Constitution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
According to the Indian Constitutional scheme, negotiating international treaties 
is an executive act. A Treaty is entered with the approval of the Union Cabinet. 
It is not placed before the Parliament for discussion and approval. However, 
where the implementation of treaty obligations entail alteration of the existing 
domestic law or requires new enactment, it accordingly requires legislative 
action.  
 
ii. In order to ensure that India is in a position to efficiently discharge all 
obligations emanating from the treaties/Conventions, our practice is to 
ratify/accede only after the relevant domestic laws have been amended, or the 
enabling legislation has been enacted in cases where there are no domestic laws 

21 | P a g e 
 
on the subject.  
 
iii. L&T Division incharge of international law issues examines the proposed 
Treaty/Convention in the first instance and highlights India's obligations and the 
need /possibility of enacting a domestic legislation. However, the administrative 
Ministry is specifically advised to examine the Treaty/Convention in 
consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice as to ensure whether 
implementing the Treaty/Convention will require amending the relevant 
domestic laws, or enacting appropriate legislations. This step is undertaken by 
the L&T Division before the Treaty/Convention is ratified. 
 
iv. While concluding extradition treaties, it is ensured that they are in 
accordance with our domestic law. Further, the extradition treaty / arrangement 
are also notified under the provisions of Extradition Act so that the treaty 
becomes implementable upon its entry into force. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that India has signed extradition treaties with 50 countries 
and has extradition arrangements with 11 countries and that efforts are on to 
extend the network of extradition treaties and arrangements with other 
countries. While appreciating these achievements and the efforts underway to 
extend India’s network of extradition treaties with more countries, the 
Committee are concerned with the delays in extraditing offenders fleeing the 
country and taking refuge in the countries particularly with which India already 
has either signed an Extradition Treaty or have Extradition Arrangements and 
want that the process should be expedited in each case. Moreover, the 
Committee also observe that taking advantage of absence of extradition treaties 
the offenders are taking refuge in the countries having provisions for citizenship 
by investment programmes or favourable residency or passport regimes 
through investment routes. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
such countries should be indentified and an extradition treaty or extradition 
arrangement should be initiated/concluded on priority basis so that the cases of 
fleeing of offenders to those countries after committing serious economic and 
other crimes in India be prevented. 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to observe that in certain instances, the 
requirements of the rule for India that of the other treaty Country which should 
be the same ended up being different, and India’s request being delayed on such 
unequal application of rules. The Committee desire that the Ministry of External 
Affairs being the Nodal Ministry for Extradition Treaties, should make prompt 

22 | P a g e 
 
and effective efforts to ensure equality of application of rules under the treaty 
with partner countries. They also desire that the Ministry should explore with 
other like-minded countries to evolve an international mechanism to oversee the 
equal application of rules under such treaties and provide relief to aggrieved 
countries in cases where their treaty partners fail to respect the equal 
applicability of rules under the treaty. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry has already 
identified the countries having provisions for citizenship by investment 
programme or favourable residency requirements through investment routes. 
Proposals for entering into extradition treaties with such countries have been 
initiated. 
 
ii. The Government of India, being conscious of the importance of bringing 
such fugitive offenders to India for prosecution, actively pursues, in 
collaboration with concerned law enforcement agencies, the extraction cases 
abroad. The Ministry also actively assists the law enforcement agencies in the 
preparation of extradition requests and supplementary information as and when 
required by them. The extradition requests are processed and considered by the 
Courts of the Requesting State as per its domestic law, necessary assurances, as 
and when required, are also given to facilitate a positive outcome of the request. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
 
Recommendation (SL. No. 7) 
 
The Committee are aware that in the absence of any domestic law that is 
specific to address the situations of refugees and asylum seekers, and also in the 
light of India being not a signatory to the 1951 UN Convention or its 1967 
Protocol, requests for asylum are being dealt with existing legal framework at 
the moment. They are aware that the Foreigners Act covers a whole gamut of 
issues related to entry of foreigners, their stay in India, their activities in India 
and their exit from India, besides other Acts like the Registration of Foreigners 
Act, the Citizenship Act, etc. The Committee are apprised that the Central 
Government has passed legal orders under these Acts to govern the regime of 
legal as well as illegal foreigners, and that a protocol is issued to various 
implementing agencies like FRRO and FROs in the States whereby the status of 
a foreigner can be assessed and in consultation with security agencies and the 
MEA, a view is taken whether to grant her/him asylum or the status of a 
refugee. While recognizing the flexibility this approach grants, the Committee 

23 | P a g e 
 
are of the opinion that it leaves much scope for elements of discretion to 
officials. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in the absence of a 
domestic Legislation of Refugees and Asylum Seekers, the Ministry of External 
Affairs, in consultation with concerned Ministries like Home Affairs, Law and 
Justice, etc. should prepare and notify a Domestic Protocol on status of refugees 
and asylum seekers with specific responsibilities assigned to specific agencies. 
This would not only ensure prompt response but also enhance accountability in 
dealing with situations of refugees and asylum seekers in the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs had issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to 
be followed by all concerned agencies while dealing with foreign nationals who 
claim to be refugees vide letter No. 25022/34/2001-F. IV dated 29.12.2011 
addressed to the State Governments/UT Administrations. The SOP has been 
modified by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide letter No. 25022/34/2001-F.IV 
dated 20.03.2019. The SOP clearly defines the role assigned to the specific 
agencies assessing the claims made by the foreign nationals and the further 
course of action to be adopted if the claim is found to be  justified or not. The 
existing system is sufficient to handle the refugee situation at this point of time. 
However, as recommended by the Committee a proposal for preparing and 
notifying new Domestic Protocol on status of refugee and asylum seekers with 
specific responsibilities assigned to specific agencies could be considered in 
consultation with all stakeholders. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
Recommendation (SL. No. 8) 
 
The Committee appreciate India’s stance on cyber diplomacy which is for a 
secure, open, accessible, peaceful and stable internet respecting sovereignty of 
countries, and the multilateral approach to Cyber Space and internet 
governance. They also believe that International Law while being applicable to 
cyber space needs certain customization in modalities for effective application. 
The Committee are also aware of the ongoing efforts and India’s active role 
under the UN processes and the mechanisms for discussions for evolution of a 
global architecture for cyber Security. The Committee, however, desire that the 
Ministry of External affairs make enhanced efforts in coordination with other 
concerned Ministries to contribute more and perhaps lead the global efforts to 
customize the modalities for application of International Law in cyber space and 
internet governance, in building a global architecture for cyber security, as well 
as in the formulation of new legal regimes that will respect sovereignty of 
countries and promote a peaceful order in cyberspace. 

24 | P a g e 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Cyber Diplomacy Division in the MEA has been a strong proponent of the 
application of International Law in cyberspace and internet governance. To this 
effect, the CD Division has convened and participated in various bilateral, 
regional and multilateral fora including the United Nations mandated processes 
on cyberspace such as 
 
(a)  Group of Government Experts on Advancing Responsible State Behaviour 
in cyberspace in the context of International Security’ (GGE), 
 
(b)  Open Ended Working Group on the Developments in the Field of 
telecommunications and ICTs in the context of International Security’ (OEWG) 
and ‘Intergovernmental Expert Committee on Cybercrime’ (IEG). 
 
Through UNGGE and UNOEWG , CD Division presented its views on the 
current form of Laws and significant gaps that obstruct application of these 
Laws to cyberspace. The CD Division has adopted a multi-stakeholder 
approach for this purpose by engaging relevant stakeholders – Ministries and 
agencies such as MHA, MEITY , NSCS, DRDO, CBI,  L&T Division of MEA. 
 
ii. Cyber Diplomacy Division has led a concerted effort in the ASEAN 
Regional Forum, BRICS, European Union, IBSA, Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) and QUAD Cyber Consultations to advance India’s 
position and views on expediting international cooperation towards application 
of Laws to Cyberspace and form necessary institutional mechanisms of 
cooperation to realize the above goal. 
 
iii. Cyber Diplomacy Division has Cyber Dialogue with 16 countries and has 
taken up the necessity of increased global efforts to customize the modalities 
for application of Laws in cyberspace and internet governance in various 
bilateral cyber policy dialogues/consultations with countries such as France, 
Germany, UK, Australia, Russia, Japan, USA and others.  
 
iv. Ministry of External Affairs is intensively engaged in its participation, 
deliberation, intervention and negotiations in various UN forums like UN 
Group of Governmental Experts on Advancing responsible State behaviour in 
cyberspace in the context of International Security (UN GGE), UN Open-
Ended Working Group (UN OEWG), UN Ad Hoc Committee established by 
General Assembly Resolution 74/247 to elaborate a comprehensive 
International Convention on countering the use of ICT for criminal purposes 
where the new International norms governing the Cyberspace are being 

25 | P a g e 
 
deliberated and negotiated to safeguard and protect the interests of the country 
and convey India’s position on various aspects of deliberations so as to 
incorporate the Indian views in the emerging norms governing the Cyberspace. 
The deliberations and negotiations in the UN Ad Hoc Committee on 
Cybercrime will be important as it has been mandated by the UN Resolution 
No. 74/247 dated 27/12/2019 and 75/282 dated 26/05/2021 to complete its task 
with in two and a half years and present its report to 78th UNGA in 2024 and 
the Convention will be International Convention for countering the use of ICT 
for criminal purposes. MEA is taking the lead and consulting all stakeholders 
like NSCS, MHA, DRDO, MEITY , CERT-IN, CBI, etc. to take a “Whole of 
Government approach” to present its views in the UN. India is a member of the 
UN Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a comprehensive International 
Conventions countering the use of ICTs for criminal purposes which will have 
its first Session in January, 2022. This is an important and significant effort 
under the UN aegis to negotiate an International Convention on Cybercrime 
which will have a binding effect. MEA has taken the lead and have convened 
inter-ministerial meetings to present a “whole of Government approach in the 
UN Ad Hoc Committee. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
Recommendation (SL. No. 9) 
 
The Committee are aware of the rising profile of cyber security threats which 
are in the form of financial crimes, identity and monetary theft via cyber tools, 
fake news propagation, election interference, inflammatory messages on social 
media leading to social and civil unrest, propagation of obscene material over 
cyberspace, online radicalization of youth, etc. these increasingly threaten the 
safety, security and stability of nations. The Committee, however, note that the 
efforts of the Ministry of External Affairs and other concerned agencies at 
various international and regional instruments on international cyber security 
seem lagging due to the exclusive groupings between countries on a regional 
level or for Geo-political reasons. The Committee while appreciating the 
Country’s reliance on the processes under the UN for intergovernmental 
committee of experts towards a comprehensive international convention, feel 
that India given its rich resources in IT must attempt to leverage it to secure its 
interests by gaining entry into the various regional instruments of collaboration 
on cyber security. They recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs must 
explore all the possible ways to secure the cooperation of countries with 
established multi-lateral and regional instruments of cooperation on cyber 
security protocols through enhanced diplomatic efforts. They further desire that 
the Ministries concerned must work ceaselessly to find alternative fool proof 
mechanisms of securing our cyber space. 

26 | P a g e 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
In the absence of International Law on Cyberspace, Cyber Diplomacy Division 
has pursued the applicability of norms to Cyberspace and Internet Governance 
in the various UN-mandated cyber processes that establish foundation for 
future discourse on cyber governance such as ‘Group of Government Experts 
on Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in cyberspace in the context of 
International Security’ (GGE),  ‘Open Ended Working group on the 
Developments in the Field of telecommunications and ICTs in the context of 
International Security’ (OEWG) and ‘Intergovernmental Expert Committee on 
Cybercrime’ (IEG). 
 
ii. India has, in advance, communicated to the Chair of the New OEWG 
2021-2025 the priority areas for India in the upcoming Study Group 
deliberations and ‘International Law’ as one of the key priority areas from 
India’s point of view, not just for itself but for many Member States that are 
having variable level of cyber preparedness and cyber defence. 
 
iii. In the spirit of multi stakeholder approach, Cyber Diplomacy Division has 
been engaging MHA, MOD, MEITY , NSCS and other relevant government 
entities/agencies to present a comprehensive position of India as a “whole of 
Government approach” on cyber matters in the multilateral and regional 
instruments of cooperation on Cyber Security through established institutional 
cyber cooperation mechanisms such as Cyber Dialogues, Framework 
Arrangements, Joint Working Groups, informal Cyber Consultations, Expert 
level engagements with Cyber Ambassadors of other countries in the regional 
forums like ARF, QUAD, SCO, BRICS, IBSA, EU, CICA and others. This 
helps India to make effective presentation of its views in bilateral, regional and 
International forums on issues of Cyberspace.  
 
 iv. As far as Budapest Convention (European Convention on 
Cybercrime) is concerned, as informed earlier to the Standing Committee India 
is not a Member of Budapest Convention and not all signatories to Budapest 
Convention have ratified this Convention yet. It is also a regional initiative and 
India has reservations about some of its provisions. However, MEA has again 
sought the views/opinion of the stakeholders about Budapest Convention 
whether India should become an Observer as suggested by National Cyber 
Security Coordinator. The replies are awaited. However, It may be noted that 
Budapest Convention was negotiated and concluded on 23/11/2001 and it is 
already two decades old Convention. Thereafter, there have been a lot of 
technological progress in the cyberspace as the technology has been evolving at 
a rapid pace. Hence, Budapest Convention may not be able to cover all the new 

27 | P a g e 
 
challenges that have emerged in the cyberspace since its conclusion in the year 
2001. Moreover UNGA 3rd Committee is seized with the preparation of 
International Convention on elaboration of comprehensive International 
Convention on countering the use of Information and Communication 
Technology for criminal purposes which will be a broad based International 
Convention under the aegis of UN and will have more acceptability as well as 
it will be able to cover the newer technologies and challenges in the cyberspace 
taking into account the works of UN GGE, UN OEWG and Regional 
Convention like Budapest Convention. India is actively participating in this UN 
Ad Hoc Committee on countering the use of ICT for criminal purposes in 
cybercrime and its first Substantive Session will take place in January, 2022 in 
New York. 
 
 v.   MEA has facilitated 18 MOUs between CERT-IN and its 
counterparts in other countries which is helping CERT-IN to receive and share 
information on Cyber incidents and deal with the emerging Cyber threats. It 
also enables CERT-IN to develop further cooperation in its capacity building. 
There are about 10 more MOUs which are under negotiations to establish 
cooperation between CERT-IN and its counterparts in other countries. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
Recommendation (SL. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that major issues dominating international cyber security 
concerns and measures discussed during conferences on cyber security relate to 
developing a consensus on attribution of cyber attacks, legality of use of 
countermeasures as well as norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour 
of States, confidence building measures and capacity building. The Committee 
also note that unlike physical warfare, the attribution of cyber attacks to 
attacking entities presents a very complex challenge which needs international 
accord on acceptable norms as attacking entities can be any party from 
professional hackers, rogue hackers, military establishments of an enemy nation 
or non-state actors, etc. The Committee have also examined in detail the 
difficulties and complexities posed in the cyber sphere by India’s lack of control 
over the root servers. There are 13 root servers in the entire world through which 
all data on the internet has to pass through out of which ten are in US and one 
each in Netherlands, Sweden and Japan but none in India. In view of the fact 
that in the current IP Version IV system only 13 root servers can exist and the 
root servers are being monopolized through which controlling countries can 
extract tremendous strategic and security leverages. Thus being a huge concern, 
the Committee would like that rather than working to achieve data localization 
which is proving to be impossible in near future, the Ministries concerned must 

28 | P a g e 
 
further strengthen our domestic laws on cyber security so that they are 
consistent with the norms in the international framework and proper 
accreditation is secured. Further, the Committee also desire that India should 
gradually proceed in the direction of data localization leveraging its strengths 
like the huge availability of software programmers, huge capabilities in 
development of algorithms, etc. to become a leader in cyber space and 
overcome the monopoly of few countries till the technology switches from IPV 
IV system to IPV VI when India may have root servers within our borders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India currently has Information Technology Act 2000 which was amended in 
2008 and National Cyber Security Policy 2013. The personal Data Protection 
Bill 2019 is under consideration of Parliament Committee. National Cyber 
Security Strategy 2021 is being developed by MEITY and NSCS. The domestic 
Cyber Laws are drafted by MEITY for approval of Parliament. Recently MEA 
shared with the stakeholders the Pakistan Cyber Security Policy 2021 for their 
consideration and to take appropriate measures, if any, in drafting the National 
Cyber Security Strategy 2021. 
 
ii. MEITY , DOT and other Indian agencies are focusing on development of 
technologies to overcome the absence of “root server” in India and can learn 
from the strategies adopted by the Russians and Chinese to deal with this unique 
situation as both Russia and China also do not have “root servers”. 
 
iii. MEA is leading the GOI efforts bilaterally, regionally and at multilateral 
forums including UN through Cyber Dialogues, Joint Working Groups, 
meetings in the regional and multilateral forums to increase the cooperation 
between Indian entities with their counterparts in other countries to deal with 
the evolving challenges in the Cyberspace.  
 
iv. MEA is leading the Indian delegations with multi-stakeholder approach in 
the UN Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate the International Convention on 
countering the use of ICTs for criminal purposes which is mandated to complete 
its work by 2024 by the UN Resolution. This will create the first International 
Law on Cyber crimes. 
 
    [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 

29 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation (SL. No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) 
and the Information Technology Act are the administrative and legal 
mechanisms in the country to respond against cyber attacks and to tackle cyber 
crimes. The Committee are concerned with the reactive disposition of CERT-In 
since the benefit is greater in pre- empting and preventing possible fraud, cyber 
attacks and such other cyber crimes. The Committee appreciate the efforts to 
make the CERT-in mechanism more proactive, but desire that more effort needs 
to be devoted and the Ministries concerned must work together to attract 
adequate talent in IT and software engineering to strengthen the capabilities and 
capacity of CERT-In. They also recommend that the IT Act, and rules under the 
Act must be constantly reviewed to address fast changing requirements due to 
ever evolving technology and progress in the information technology realm to 
keep the country safe and in a leadership position for international mechanisms 
and instruments of cooperation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Officials from CERT-IN and MEITY have been taking part in bilateral, regional 
and multilateral cyber consultations of India.  
 
ii. In bilateral Cyber Dialogue set up, CERT-In has been involved to take up 
consultations with its counterparts, provide feedback and come up with 
proposals to enhance CERT-to-CERT Cooperation.  
 
iii. MEITY is the nodal Ministry to frame draft domestic laws on Cyber 
related issues and is part of Indian delegations in UNGGE, UNOEWG , etc. 
where issues related to Cyberspace are/were being discussed to develop 
acceptable global norms and rules. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that efforts of the Government to prevent 
financial crimes through cooperation with global fora which include 
collaboration with the OECD and G-20 Group, where India has been a very pro-
active participant in developing a uniform standard for automatic exchange of 
information is making good progress. Further, after initial sharing of financial 
information with 49 countries, that the number now has doubled to about 80 
countries is a good achievement. The Committee urge the Ministry of External 
Affairs to bring in more and more countries in this network of mutual and 

30 | P a g e 
 
automated exchange of financial information critical to fight against financial 
crimes which are increasingly assuming a trans-border character. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India has mandated Financial Intelligence Unit India (FIU-
India) for sharing information relating to fight against financial crimes. FIU-
India works under the administrative control of Department of Revenue, 
Government of India. On part of MEA, FIU-India is encompassed to share 
information with their counterparts in foreign countries. Where required, a 
representative of FIU-India and relevant agencies are also included in the Indian 
delegation for the meetings of JWG-CT to exchange relevant information 
particularly on countering financing of terrorism. 
 
ii. Ministry of Finance in nodal for matters related to Financial Intelligence 
Unit (FIU). 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee are apprised that, under the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 
India have filed 11 petitions for declaring a person a fugitive offender, out of 
which, in two cases orders have been passed, where assets worth of Rs. 358 
crore have been confiscated in one case, and the person has been declared as a 
fugitive offender in the other. The Committee also note that there is a limit of 
Rs. 100 Crore as the lower limit of money involved for proceeding against 
offenders under this Act. The Committee are of the opinion that the entire 
judicial process for declaring a person a fugitive offender appears to be very 
slow and desire that the Ministries concerned must together examine 
possibilities of simplifying the procedures to expedite the progress in such 
cases. Further, the Committee feel that the limit of 100 crore as the limit for 
proceeding against such criminals seem to give a lot of leeway to many smaller 
offenders and they desire that the matter may be reviewed at the earliest to 
enable proceedings to be initiated against criminals involving less than 100 
crore also. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At the time the Fugitive Economic Offender Act 2018 (FEOA) was passed there 
was an exigency and need of such legislation to stop the economic offenders 
from absconding from country by mandating confiscation of assets of such 

31 | P a g e 
 
fugitive economic offenders. The threshold for invoking the provisions of 
FEOA was prescribed at one hundred Crore rupees or more as the total value 
involved in the scheduled offence or offences. While the FEO Bill was being 
discussed before the Parliament on 19.07.2018 the question of such threshold of 
Rs 100 Crore was also raised by the Hon’ble members. After the Bill received 
Presidential assent the then Hon’ble Finance Minister Sh. Piyush Goyal backed 
the legislation by saying that “The intention of the government is to ensure 
faster and speedy tackling of cases involving big offenders” and “catch the 
big offenders and not to clog the courts”. 
 
ii. The law has been in force for about 3 years and in view of the Directorate 
of Enforcement there is an urgent need for relaxation of this threshold of Rs. 
100 Crores on various grounds which are broadly summarized as under: 
 
 (a) Money laundering by itself is a serious economic offence with larger 
economic and social ramifications. But even among the  money laundering 
cases being investigated by the Directorate, there is a category of cases in which 
the accused may be involved in serious economic offences (predicate offence) 
such as terror funding, drug trafficking, environmental offences, corruption etc. 
which have an acute potential to impact the security, economic or strategic 
interests the country. It has been observed that some of these cases involving 
serious economic offences do not meet the monetary threshold of Rs 100 Crores 
required for invoking the provisions of FEOA. However, given the magnitude, 
seriousness and economic/security implications of such offences it is believed 
that the purpose and intent of the legislation would be effectively achieved if the 
assets of such offenders who have fled the country, are made liable for 
confiscation under FEOA. 
 
 (b) The investigation under the provisions of PMLA has revealed that 
provisions of FEOA could not be invoked against many of the fugitive offenders 
involved in serious economic offences such as terror financing, drug trafficking 
and cyber crime for the reason that proceeds of crime in these cases are much 
below the threshold of Rs. 100 crore. For example, provisions of FEOA could 
not be invoked against international terrorists namely Hafiz Muhammad Saeed 
& Ors because the proceed of crime involved in these cases are at Rs.8.93 crore 
and Rs. 11.26 respectively. A list of one such category of cases i.e terror funding 
cases under investigation with ED along with PoC involved in each case, is 
enclosed as Annexure A.  
 
 (c) Further, till date the Directorate has filed petitions under FEOA 
against 14 persons only. On the other hand, till date the Directorate has got Red 
Corner Notices (RCNs) published against 19 accused persons against 
application for publication of RCN made by the Directorate in respect of 35 

32 | P a g e 
 
persons. The Directorate has also sent extradition request in respect of 27 
accused persons. It has been observed that in some such cases in which 
Directorate has got RCNs published or sent extradition requests, it is unable to 
file an application under FEOA as the in the said cases the threshold of Rs 100 
Crores is not met. A brief of one such case is enclosed as Annexure B. 
 
 (d) The objective of FEOA is "to provide for measures to deter economic 
offenders from evading the process of law in India" and is to speedily bring 
fugitive economic offenders to justice by swiftly confiscating their assets and 
restituting the wronged party. In this context, it is stated that provisions of 
Sections 82-86Cr.PC are similar to the provisions of FEOA in their intended 
purpose and applicability. Also, Cr.Pc being applicable for all criminal offences 
including petty offences, Section 82 Cr.PC does not stipulate any monetary 
threshold for its invocation. Since the legislative intent of FEOA is to provide a 
procedure for more effective and swift confiscation of assets as compared to 
above mentioned provisions of Cr.PC (as FEOA is invoked in cases of 
economic offences of larger magnitude and more serious implications), a 
monetary threshold may prove to be a roadblock in bringing fugitive criminals 
involved in serious economic offences within the ambit of FEOA. 
 
iii. For aforestated reasons, it is suggested that there should not be any 
monetary threshold for invoking the provisions of FEOA in the case involving 
serious economic offences such as terror & naxal financing, drug trafficking, 
cyber crimes, human trafficking, arms & explosives trafficking, etc. For other 
categories of economic offences, threshold limit may be reduced from existing 
threshold of Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 10 crore. 
 
 
 Further, with regard to the recommendation of the Committee that the 
judicial process is slow and there is a need for simplifying the procedures to 
expedite the progress in cases under FEOA, following are the inputs: 
 
(a)    The process prescribed in the FEOA follows the principle of due process 
of law as well as the principles of natural justice. The process prescribed is not 
complex, however certain time limits may be fixed for taking necessary steps. 
For instance: 
 
• It may be prescribed that upon filing of Application under section 4 
of the Act, the Special Court to decide whether to issue notice within two 
weeks from the date of filing of application. 
• The Special Court shall pass an order after conclusion of final 
arguments on the application under section 4 of the Act within a period of 
3 weeks. 

33 | P a g e 
 
 
   (b)   For the effective and successful implementation of the FEOA, 2018 it is 
also suggested that other Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and Judicial 
Officers must be sensitized about the provisions of the Act. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee note that the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
(UAPA) was amended in 2004 to criminalise, interalia, terrorist financing and 
further amended in December 2008 to broaden its scope and to bring the 
legislation more in line with the requirements of the United Nations Convention 
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (FT Convention). The 
amendment also established the National Investigation Agency (NIA) which, 
among other actions, further strengthened the fight against terrorism and its 
financing. They also note that UAPA was further amended in August, 2019 to 
provide special procedures to deal with terrorist activities, including designation 
as a terrorist, of an individual or organisation. The amendment also broadened 
the scope of terrorist acts dealt by the Act by adding the International 
Convention for Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (2005) in its Schedule. 
While the Committee appreciate the various amendments, especially to bring it 
in line with UN Convention for Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, they 
feel that while domestic legislations are important in fighting financial crime, 
more efforts should be invested in having an international legal framework to 
tackle such crimes which are assuming increasing transnational and 
international dimensions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has been at the forefront of bilateral international and regional efforts to 
counter terrorism. The issue of countering terrorism including terrorist financing 
finds prominent mention in various bilateral and multilateral meetings at all 
levels. At all such interaction, India proposes early adoption of Comprehensive 
Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) at the United Nations General 
Assembly, which India has introduced in 1996 in the UN. 
 
ii. India is also a member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and 
Egmont group and regularly participates in their meetings which are aimed at 
strengthening international legal framework against money laundering and 
financing of terrorism. The Financial Action Task Force (FA TF) is an inter-
governmental policy making body whose purpose is to establish international 
standards, and to develop and promote policies, both at national and 

34 | P a g e 
 
international levels, to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism. 
The Egmont Group is a united body of 167 Financial Intelligence Units (FIUs) 
which provides a platform for the secure exchange of expertise and financial 
intelligence to combat money laundering and terrorist financing (ML/TF),since 
2010. 
 
iii. Department of Revenue, FATF Cell, Ministry of Finance, is the nodal 
department for Financial Action Task Force (FATF) related matters. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that India presently has Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties 
in Criminal Matters with 42 Countries which are useful in enhancing mutual 
cooperation between countries in addressing transnational organised crimes and 
terrorism. Such treaties enable cooperation and assistance to India to counter 
organised crime, money laundering and related financial crimes.India has signed 
the United Nations Convention against Corruption (the Merida Convention) on 
9 December 2005. Corruption is one of the predicate offences for money 
laundering. The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts must be made to 
increase the network of MLATs in criminal matters with countries around the 
world. They also desire that India should continue to work towards 
strengthening the Merida Convention of 2005 to enhance cooperation between 
UN members in matters of international financial crimes involving various 
players like MNCs, individuals and various online vendor companies, etc. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 01.03.2022, India has signed Treaty/ Agreement on Mutual Legal 
Assistance in Criminal Matters with 44 countries, namely, Australia, Azerbaijan, 
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Bosnia & 
Herzegovina, Canada, Cambodia, Egypt, France, Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Iran, 
Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Kuwait, Maldives, Mauritius, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Myanmar, Mongolia, Morocco, Oman, Russia, Singapore, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, South Africa, South Korea, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey, 
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, 
Uzbekistan and Vietnam.  
 

35 | P a g e 
 
 Negotiations with some countries in matters of MLA T are ongoing. 
Recently MHA has revised the Indian Standard Draft (ISD) on MLAT with 
approval of Union Home Minister. In line with the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry is actively making efforts to broaden the network of 
MLA T treaties and arrangements with foreign countries to further strengthen 
India's efforts and capacity to combat transnational crimes by enhancing 
cooperation in law enforcement and mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 

36 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee are aware that India is not a signatory to the UN Convention, 
1951 on the status of Refugees and the related 1967 UN Protocol. The 
Committee find the Government of India’s stance on the issue, that India’s 
Domestic laws are adequate to effectively handle refugee crises facing the 
country, as demonstrated in the past crises involving Tibetan refugees and Tamil 
refugees, not fully convincing. The Domestic Laws like the Foreigners Act, 
1946; the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939; the Passport (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 are legislations that govern the regulation of entry, stay and exit of 
foreign nationals during normal times and under normal circumstances, whereas 
a refugee situation demands prompt and specified response owing to the crisis 
nature and the urgency of response required to avoid potent humanitarian crises 
resulting therefrom. However, the Committee are also taking note of the 
limitations in the 1951 UN Convention on the Status of Refugees and its 1967 
Protocol, specifically in the critical lack of the concept of shared 
responsibility of all Sovereign countries, in which India strongly believes. The 
Committee, therefore, while disagreeing with the stance that existing Domestic 
Laws are adequate to deal with refugee situations, desire that the Ministry of 
External Affairs stead fastly advocate India’s stand on the concept of shared 
responsibility of all Sovereign countries in refugee crises developing anywhere 
in the world, making a strong case for review of the 1951 UN Convention and 
its 1967 Protocol. After that India can reconsider and revisit the 1951 
Convention and 1967 Protocol. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following are the main grounds on which the Ministry of Home Affairs has not 
favored enactment of a refugee Law:- 
 
1. India is saddled with the serious problem of illegal migrants. A liberalized 
refugee entry regime would aggravate the situation and would blur the dividing 
line between an illegal immigrant and a bonafide asylum seeker. 
 
2. India has open/porous borders with Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Pakistan, 
Myanmar and easily navigable sea route between India and Sri Lanka. The 
liberalization of existing laws for the grant of Asylum/Refugee status would 
open floodgates for unfettered immigration of people from our neighboring 
countries. 

37 | P a g e 
 
3. There have been instances when entry to India by undesirable persons is 
refused and this will not be possible with the enactment of the legislation. 
 
4. With a large population and surplus labour force, Indian social 
infrastructure is already under strain. The equality in providing 
facilities/privileges to refugee at par with India citizens would impinge on the 
share of Indian citizens. It would be virtually impossible to identify and 
segregate undesirable elements from genuine asylum seekers in case of mass 
influx of refugee. 
 
5. The necessity or otherwise of a Refugee/Asylum specific legislation has 
to be viewed not only from a humanitarian point of view but also from the point 
of view of national security, territorial integrity, sovereignty of the State and 
India's geo-political situation in South-East Asia. 
 
6. The restrictions on extraditions, deportation, etc. may prove to be an 
impediment in preventing the entry of undesirable elements as refugee seekers. 
Allowing refugees to settle down in India may be exploited by anti-national 
elements/agencies thereby posing a threat to national security. 
 
7. There is possibility of too many people, including economic immigrants, 
approaching the Indian Courts on a false pretext of persecution. 
 
8. Even in the absence of a national law on refugee, India's track record in 
dealing with or providing protections to refugee has been internationally 
acclaimed. This points to the fact that the existing policies of treating the 
refugee problem on a case to case basis, as and when such situations have 
arisen, afforded wide latitude of flexibility and accorded room to tailor 
Government policy to suit the situation. The existing system has stood the test 
of time admirably. Therefore, commensurate benefits will not accrue by 
enacting a separate Refugee Law as anyway India has all along been quite 
liberal in dealing with legitimate refugee. 
 
9. India's track record in the principle of non-refoulment (not sending back) 
is second to none. We have large presence of refugees mostly from Tibet, 
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka and that still continues. 
 
10. A separate Refugee law is not considered necessary as the existing laws 
for dealing with foreigners i.e. (i) The Foreigners Act, 1946, (ii) The Passport 
(Entry into India) Act, 1920, (iii) The Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 and 
(iv) The Citizenship Act, 1955 are sufficient to deal with the issue of refugees 
also. 
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 

38 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee recognize the critical importance of safeguarding the Country’s 
interests in the varied streams of International Law and note with satisfaction 
that India is committed to multilateralism and enhancement of respect for 
International Law. They also laud the country’s continuing unwavering 
engagement with and commitment to the cause for reforms in global governing 
structures to reflect changing and contemporary realities. The Committee, 
however, find that India’s capacity, expertise and involvement in the framing 
and further modification of International Law in various spheres needs to be 
further strengthened. The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts towards that 
goal should not be limited to ensuring the recruitment of qualified personnel 
in concerned Ministries and Divisions, but should also extend to promotion of 
institutions of international legal studies and research in the country, 
scholarships and funding of research by meritorious law students, professionals 
and educators. 
 
 The Ministry should also, in coordination with Ministry of Education 
identify some eminent institutions for establishing chairs for the purpose. 
Similarly, they should also establish suitable chairs in legal studies in the 
Foreign Service Institute and the Indian Council of World Affairs. They also 
desire the concerned ministries to promote and facilitate the entry of Indian 
international law experts into the various international governing bodies like the 
Sixth Committee (Legal) of the United Nations General Assembly, International 
Courts of Justice, International Tribunals, etc. responsible for framing and 
amending international law on the varied fields including in the areas of Law of 
the Sea and maritime affairs; international criminal law including terrorism and 
extradition; human rights and humanitarian law; trade law; space law; legal 
issues arising out of disarmament, environment, intellectual property rights, 
energy security, nuclear energy, cyberspace, WTO, outer space. Moreover, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs, in close co-ordination 
with all concerned ministries, set up a Working Group devoted to achieving the 
above goals and to ensure strengthening India’s position in the study, framing, 
amending, implementing and interpretation of International Law adequately to 
protect its interests. 
 

39 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of External Affairs closely works with institutions and universities. 
Government of India contributes 5 lakhs every year towards the library of 
Indian Society of International Law. 
 
2. The treaty body reporting under various Conventions are prepared in 
consultation and with the inputs from academic institutions and law schools 
who have expertise in international law.  
 
3. Internship programmes – MEA provides internship to budding 
international law scholars to familiarize themselves with the process of 
formulation of treaties and its negotiations. Interns report to and work under 
close supervision of the  Head of Division (HOD) of L&T Division. They may 
be required to conduct research, write reports, analyze evolving developments, 
or carry out any other task entrusted to them by the HOD.   
 
4. Indian international law experts into the various international governing 
bodies  - The following positions are held by Indian legal experts. 
 
i. Dr. Dalveer Bhandari, Judge of the International Court of Justice, former 
Judge of Supreme  Court.  
 
ii. Dr. Neeru Chadda, Judge of the International Tribunal for Law of the Sea. 
She is former Additional Secretary, Legal and Treaties Division, MEA. She is 
the first Indian women to hold the position.  
 
iii. Dr. Aniruddha Rajput is a member of International Law Commission from 
2017-2022. The election for the next term will be in November 2021. India has 
fielded a candidate for the term that begins from 2023.  
 
iv. An officer at the level of Counselor from the Legal and Treaties Division 
represents India at  the Sixth Committee (Legal) of the United Nations General 
Assembly.   
 
v. Legal Officers from Legal and Treaties Division are posted in Permanent 
Mission of India in Geneva and Embassy of India in The Hague to follow 
international law matters in various  forums including Human Rights Council, 
International Court of Justice, Hague Conference  on Private International Law 
(HCCH). 
 
vi. India is an elected member of the Council of the International Seabed 
Authority. Indian  experts are members of the Legal and Technical Commission 

40 | P a g e 
 
(LTC) ad the Finance Committee.  
 
5. MEA works closely with other Ministries depending on the subject/area to 
form a consolidated position on various international law areas. For example, 
we closely work with Ministry of Commerce with regard to issues of 
Arbitration, with Ministry of Women and Child Development in areas of inter-
country adoption, surrogacy etc. Further, we take note of the desire of the 
Committee that the Ministry of External Affairs, work in close co-ordination 
with all concerned ministries, to ensure strengthening India’s position in the 
study, framing, amending, implementing and interpretation of International Law 
adequately to protect its interests. 
 
   [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
 
The Committee note that India is signatory to the Hague Convention on the 
Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in civil or commercial 
matters. The Hague Convention on taking of evidence abroad in civil and 
commercial matters was also adopted in the year 2007 under the belief that the 
process of service of legal documents would become faster than letter rogatory 
and India has also signed Mutual Legal Assistance treaties with 40 countries. 
The Committee, however, find it disappointing that even then there are 845 
MLA T requests pending with various countries which include Letters Rogatory 
and Mutual Legal Assistance requests. The Committee, therefore, conclude that 
the desired cooperation from the countries concerned in honouring such 
requests is waiting. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should take serious cognizance of the huge pendency of 
requests and institute a task force to look into the reasons for the same and 
suggest measures for the prompt fructification of all extradition and Mutual 
Legal Assistance requests pending with various Countries. Simultaneously, 
more and more MLATs must be entered into with other important countries on 
priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the Joint Working Group meetings on Counter Terrorism (JWG-CT) 
with various countries, the matter relating to pending extradition cases and 
MLA T requests on counter terrorism matters relating to that country are 
discussed for expediting the pending MLA T requests. The Missions are 
regularly pursuing the pending requests with respective countries. 
 

41 | P a g e 
 
ii. The Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs is incharge 
of The Hague Convention on Service Abroad of Judicial and extra-Judicial 
Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters and for MLA Ts in Civil and 
commercial matters. Similarly, the Ministry of Home Affairs is incharge of 
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters. The Ministry of External Affairs 
during Consular Dialogue and through its Missions abroad, from time to time 
propose the need for Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement in Civil and 
Commercial and Criminal matters and facilitate the conclusion of these 
agreements. The Indian Missions abroad actively coordinate with the concerned 
Foreign States for early execution of India’s MLA T requests.  
 
       [O.M No. AA/Parl/125/60/2021) dated 25/11/2021] 
 
 
 

42 | P a g e 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL A WAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
19 December, 2022                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
28 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 

43 | P a g e 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 19 December, 2022 from 1515 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 4.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
5.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 6.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
7.     Shri Ritesh Pandey 
8.     Dr. K. C. Patel 9.     Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
10.   Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
   
Rajya Sabha  
 
 
11.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
12.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
  
 1. Shrii Vinay Kwatra   :  Foreign Secretary  
 2. Shri Anurag Srivastava  :  JS (North)  
 3. Ms. Smita Pant    :  JS (BM) 
 4. Dr. Sumit Seth    :  JS (PP & R)  
 
Secretariat 
  
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishna  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 

44 | P a g e 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of 
the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘India and International Law including 
Extradition Treaties with Foreign Countries, Asylum Issues, International Cyber-security and 
Issues of Financial Crimes’; 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. The 
Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
6.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
7. XXX   XXX    XXX 
8.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
9. XXX   XXX    XXX 
10. XXX   XXX    XXX 
11.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
12. XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned.

45 | P a g e 
 
APPENDIX- II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(i) Total Number of Recommendations :  15 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.  
Total- 12 
Percentage: 80% 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 Recommendation No. 6          
        Total- 1 
Percentage: 6.67% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration: - 
 Recommendation No. 1 and 5      
Total- 2  
Percentage: 13.33% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited: - 
Nil 
Total- 0 
Percentage: 0% 