 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2022-23’ 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
19 
 

 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2022-23’ 
 
  
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  22  December, 2022 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2022 /Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 159       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1-19 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................  20-63 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………   64-87 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..    88-91 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………    92-93 
  
                                                             ANNEXURES 
      I.  List of Missions /Posts……………………………………………………………………   94-102 
      II. Institutional initiatives taken by RIS during the recent past………………………….. .    103-114 
     III. Details of the income generated by RIS………………………………………………….   115 
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 19 December, 2022……..116-117         
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………...........118  
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   -  Under Secretary 
  (ii) 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2022-23) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2022-23’. 
 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 23 March, 2022. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 07 July, 2022 (English 
Version) and 16 August, 2022 (Hindi Version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on    
19 December, 2022. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
19 December, 2022                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
28 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iv) 

1 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
their Twelfth Report on the subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2022-23’ which was presented to the Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 23 March 2022. 
 
2.     The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs on all the 33 observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 28, 29, 30 and 33. 
Total- 26 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 Recommendation Nos. 26, 27, 31 and 32          
        Total- 4 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration: - 
 Recommendation No. 15, 25      
Total- 2  
Chapter-IV 

2 | P a g e 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos.   23               
Total- 1 
Chapter-V 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and observation/recommendation contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report.  
 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
 
Embassies and Missions 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
5. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
  ‘The Committee note that the budgetary sub-head ‘Embassies and 
Missions’ which caters to expenditure on India’s representation abroad 
and functioning of Missions/Posts abroad, have witnessed an upward 
trend. An allocation of Rs. 2861.06 crore was provisioned during BE 
2021-22, which was increased to Rs. 3397.99 crore during RE 2021-22 
and further to Rs. 3769.06 crore during BE 2022-23. As per the Ministry, 
the enhanced allocation has been provided mainly for opening of 3 new 
Missions in Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican Republic; increase under 
the Salaries head and Medical Treatment due to increase in medical 
expenses in view of Covid 19. The Committee note that out of 193 UN 

3 | P a g e 
 
Member countries (including India), India doesn’t have resident Missions 
in 48 countries. The Ministry has informed that it has identified 11 
countries where resident Missions can be set up, after obtaining approval 
from the Cabinet. 
  The Committee note that the budget allocation for Indian Missions 
and Posts abroad is a large-scale and comprehensive exercise, wherein 
fund demands from over 200 Missions and Posts are compiled, assessed 
and accommodated within the Ministry’s overall budgetary constraints. 
Efforts made by the Ministry for rationalizing the working and 
expenditure of Indian Missions/Posts are laudable. India aspires to be a 
permanent member of United Nations Security Council (UNSC) and to 
achieve this objective, our presence in all UN member countries is crucial 
so as to coordinate our efforts with their Foreign Offices. The Committee, 
therefore, emphasize the need for having Resident Missions in all UN 
member countries. The Ministry should chalk out a roadmap for setting 
up of Indian Missions/Posts in the remaining 48 countries in a timely 
manner. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the steps taken and 
progress made in this regard.’ 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
  “In keeping with the vision of Government of India of 
maximizing India’s diplomatic presence abroad, the Union Cabinet 
in March 2018 accorded approval for opening of 18 new Indian 
Missions in Africa in a phased manner between 2018-2021. India 
has established its presence in 14 Missions in phases in Conakry 
(Guinea), Djibouti (Djibouti), Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), 
Brazzaville (Republic of Congo), Malabo (Equatorial Guinea), 
Kigali (Rwanda), Yaounde (Cameroon), Asmara (Eritrea), 
Mbabane (Eswatini), Freetown (Sierra Leone), Sao Tome (Sao 
Tome and Principe), Lomé (Togo), Monrovia (Liberia) and 
Nouakchott (Mauritania). Personnel have been deployed to Chad 

4 | P a g e 
 
and are waiting to travel to assume charge. All efforts are being 
made to operationalise the last 3 Missions viz: Mogadishu 
(Somalia), Bissau (Guinea-Bissau) and Praia (Cape Verde).  
  The 3 new Missions in Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican 
Republic approved by Cabinet in December, 2020 have been made 
operational in January-February, 2022. Cabinet has also approved 
opening of new Consulate in Addu, Maldives in May, 2021 and a 
new Mission in Lithuania in April, 2022 and all efforts including 
creation of posts of Director & below from Department of 
Expenditure are underway to operationalize it. Appropriate 
budgetary provisions are projected as per the expected timeline of 
operationalization of the Missions, in consultation with the 
Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry. 
  Opening of a resident Indian Mission or Post is a time-taking 
exercise requiring internal planning and approvals for logistics, 
deployment, infrastructure as well as coordination and liaisoning 
with the host Government. India has diplomatic engagements with 
those countries (wherein resident Missions are not currently 
functional) through concurrent accreditation arrangements. The 
scope and depth of bilateral relations with these countries are 
regularly reviewed and Missions are opened in these countries 
according to need. 
   List of Missions/Posts are placed at Annexure I.” 
 
7. The Committee had noted that out of 193 UN Member countries 
(including India), India doesn’t have resident Missions in 48 countries. 
Recognizing the crucial role the Indian Missions/Posts would play in giving 
impetus to India’s  aspiration to be a permanent member of United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC), the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry should chalk out a roadmap for setting up of Indian 
Missions/Posts in the remaining 48 countries in a timely manner. The 
Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s efforts in establishing Indian 
missions in various counties across the world. The Committee are hopeful 
that the Missions in Mogadishu (Somalia), Bissau (Guinea-Bissau) and 
Praia (Cape Verde) shall be made operational soon. The Committee note 
with satisfaction that Cabinet approval has been granted for opening of 

5 | P a g e 
 
new Consulate in Addu, Maldives in May, 2021 and a new Mission in 
Lithuania in April, 2022. Though the Committee agree that opening of a 
resident Indian Mission or Post is a time-taking exercise requiring internal 
planning and approvals for logistics, deployment, infrastructure as well as 
coordination and liaisoning with the host Government keeping in sight 
Government of India’s vision of maximizing India’s diplomatic presence 
abroad, however, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry should prepare 
a roadmap and act sincerely towards establishing  Resident Missions 
remaining in UN member countries and apprise the Committee 
accordingly.  
 
Passport and Emigration 
(Recommendation No. 8)  
 
8. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
  ‘The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation under the 
sub head ‘Passport and Emigration’ has gone down from Rs. 1328.63 
crore in BE 2021-22 to Rs. 1056.28 crore in RE 2021-22 and further to 
Rs.996.67 crore during BE 2022-23. The decreased allocation is primarily 
due to lesser anticipated expenditure under printing and procurement of 
travel documents, postal and freight charges for travel documents and 
service charges for Passport Seva Projects. The Ministry has further 
stated that requirements of funds, if any, will be considered at the 
supplementary stage. The Committee note that the Government has 
planned to issue e-passports to citizens from 2023 and the total 
anticipated expenditure for rollout of the e-Passport project by NIC is 
about Rs. 268.67 Crore.  
 

6 | P a g e 
 
  The Committee welcome the use of ICT in improvement of 
passport issuance system as there is a proposal that the Passport Seva 
Project will embark on version 2.0 with greater focus on technology 
adaptation and up- gradation through use of biometrics, Artificial 
Intelligence, Advance Data Analytics, Chat-bot, Auto response, natural 
language processing and Cloud Enablement.’ 
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  “Phase wise budget requirement for e-Passport Project 
  NIC and NICSI have submitted various project proposals, 
including Detailed Project Report (DPR), commercial and draft 
agreements to the Ministry. The total anticipated expenditure for 
rollout of the e-Passport project by NIC is about Rs. 268.67 Crore. 
The anticipated expenditure of Rs. 268.67 Crores is primarily for 
building up Information and Technology Infrastructure for issuance 
of e-Passport. As per the DPR, readiness of e-Passport setup shall 
take 6 months from the date of Ministry’s approval of the proposal 
to NICSI. Once the set-up is ready, the Ministry shall conduct a 
third party audit after which rollout of issuance of e-Passport for 
the citizens would be started. 
  The anticipated expenditure of Rs. 268.67 crores will be 
incurred over a period of 7 years, the annual breakup of which is 
given under. The Ministry would be able to manage the e-Passport 
project within its allocated funds. 
  (i) Year 1 -  Rs. 130.58 crores 
  (ii) Year 2 -  Rs. 25.03 crores 
  (iii) Year 3 - Rs. 25.03 crores 
  (iv) Year 4 -  Rs. 25.03 crores 
  (v) Year 5 -  Rs. 25.03 crores 
  (vi) Year 6 -  Rs. 24.46 crores 
           (vii) Year 7 -  Rs. 13.51 crores" 
 
10. The Committee note that the Government plans to issue e-passports 
to citizens from 2023 and that the total anticipated expenditure for rollout 
of the e-Passport project by NIC and NICSI is about Rs. 268.67 Crore. The 
Committee appreciate that budgetary provisions for a period of 7 years 

7 | P a g e 
 
have been made for the project, the annual breakup of which has also been 
given by the Ministry. The Committee also welcome Ministry’s assurance 
that it would be able to manage the e-Passport project within its allocated 
funds every year without any curtailment but they should ensure that the 
desired fund is also released under the Passport and Emigration head every 
year. The Committee hope that the Ministry would successfully roll out the 
issuance of e-passport for citizens after due approval and complete the 
same within the time frame fixed in this regard. The Committee desire to 
be kept apprised of the progress in the matter.  
  
Recommendation No. 10  
 
11. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
  ‘The Committee note that version 2.0 of the Passport Seva Project 
will include the issuance of e passports to Indian citizens with embedded 
chip for ease of international travel. It will be a combined paper and 
electronic passport with a RFID chip and antenna embedded as an inlay 
in the back cover While ISP Nashik has finalized the global three-stage 
tender for procurement of International Civil Aviation Organisation 
(ICAO)-compliant electronic contactless inlays along with its operating 
system, the National Informatics Centre Services (NICSI) have been 
entrusted with the technical responsibilities for issuing the e- Passports. 
 
  The Committee welcome the issuance of e-passport from 2023 
onwards and are hopeful that it will facilitate ease of travel for Indian 
citizens, increased security of data and will be in line with International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should take all requisite measures to ensure data privacy and 

8 | P a g e 
 
security of the Indian citizens as contained in the chip. The Committee 
also desire to be apprised about the progress made with regard to issuance 
of e-passports.’ 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The Government is planning to issue e-passports to its citizens, 
starting in 2022-23.  An e-Passport is a combined paper and 
electronic passport with an embedded Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) chip that contains biometric information that 
can be used to authenticate the identity of travellers. The Data is 
written in accordance with the Logical Data Structure (LDS) and 
secured using the Public Key Interface (PKI) methodology. The 
personal particulars of the applicants would be digitally stored in 
the chip which would be embedded in the present form of physical 
passport booklet. In case, anyone tampers with the chip, the system 
shall be able to identify it resulting in the failure of the passport 
authentication. 
  The data of the citizens for e-Passport would be used for the 
specific purpose only, i.e. issuance of the passport and related 
services. There is no secondary use of the data, thereby 
safeguarding the privacy concerns. Further transaction processes 
are authenticated by digital certificates and are cryptographically 
signed. Once captured, the data is stored in a secured repository, 
i.e. industry standard database. Relevant database security related 
controls are performed round the clock by Security Operations 
Centre. 
  The main benefit of the e-passport is its enhanced ability to 
maintain the integrity of data. This is expected to increase the level 
of confidence in the Indian passport.  E-passports would also 
facilitate the ease of travel for Indian citizens, making their 
interface with immigration authorities much smoother. Since the 
ICAO has recommended its introduction by member countries, the 
introduction of e-passports would be in consonance with global 
best practices. 
  The Ministry has entrusted National Informatics Centre 
(NIC) with the technical responsibilities for issuing the e-Passports. 
Full-scale manufacture and issue will commence with the 
completion of the technical eco-system and infrastructure. 
  The e-passports with advanced security features and better 
printing and paper quality will substantially upgrade existing 

9 | P a g e 
 
passports and service to the citizens. The epassport will provide 
greater protection against fraudulent practises and tampering. With 
introduction of this advanced security features, possibilities of 
forgery of Indian passports will be greatly eliminated. 
Infrastructure planned to be created for ePassport shall be scalable 
for enhancing various features in ePassport. 
   
  Present Status 
  Based on the recommendation of Delegated Investment 
Board, EAM has approved the proposal to implement the e-
Passport Project. Tripartite Agreement among MEA, NIC and 
NICSI is being finalized.” 
 
13. The Committee note that version 2.0 of the Passport Seva Project will 
include the issuance of e-passports to Indian citizens with an embedded 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) chip containing biometric 
information that can be used to authenticate the identity of travellers. The 
Committee further note that the personal particulars of the applicants 
would be digitally stored in the chip which would be embedded in the 
present form of physical passport booklet. The Committee have been 
assured that the chip shall be tamper proof and that the system shall be 
able to identify any tampering of the chip resulting in the failure of the 
passport authentication thus providing greater protection against 
fraudulent practises. The Committee are allayed by Ministry’s assurance 
that the data of the citizens for e-Passport would be used for the specific 
purpose only, i.e. issuance of the passport and related services and that 
there is no secondary use of the data, thereby safeguarding the privacy 
concerns. The Committee are also reassured to note that once captured, the 
data is stored in a secured repository and that the relevant database 
security related controls are performed round the clock by Security 
Operations Centre. The Committee are optimistic that e-passports with its 
advanced security features shall ensure integrity of data and increase the 
level of confidence in Indian passports. The Committee have been apprised 

10 | P a g e 
 
by the Ministry that EAM has approved the proposal to implement the e-
Passport Project and that the Tripartite Agreement among MEA, NIC and 
NICSI is being finalized. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the 
finalization of Tripartite Agreement among MEA, NIC and NICSI to 
ensure a timely completion of version 2.0 of the Passport Seva Project. The 
Committee also desire to be kept apprised of the progress in the matter.   
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
14. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
   
  ‘The Committee note that the shortage of personnel in the Central 
Passport Organization has been a recurrent challenge in Passport Seva 
Project (PSP). As on 1 March, 2021, the sanctioned strength of Central 
Passport Organisation is 2741 and the actual working strength of the 
Central Passport Organisation (CPO) Cadre is 1723. The Ministry has 
apprised the Committee about the corrective measures that are being 
taken to address this challenge. These include promotion of eligible 
officers to the next grade, deputation from Central Government 
employees, conducting of Direct Recruitments/Limited Departmental 
Competitive Examinations (LDCE) by Staff Selection Commission, etc. 
The Committee also recall that staffing study of CPO by the Staff 
Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance has been pending since 2019. 
 
  The issue of human capital has been a major area of concern and 
has been part of the Committee’s recommendations over the years. 
Taking serious cognizance of this matter, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take up this issue with Department 

11 | P a g e 
 
of Personnel and Training (DoPT) at the highest level and ensure that the 
vacant positions are filled up in the shortest possible time. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about the status of the pending 
staffing study of CPO. 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “The Sanctioned Strength of Central Passport Organisation is 2741 
and the actual working strength of the Central Passport 
Organisation (CPO) cadre is 1746 as on 01.05.2022. In addition, 21 
posts (including 15 Technical and 6 supporting staff) were 
sanctioned by the Union Cabinet for the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) of the Passport Seva Project.  The break of the vacancies is 
as under: 
Sl. No. Group 'A' Group 'B' Gazetted Group 'B' and Group 
'C' non-Gazetted 
1 Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working 
strength 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working 
strength 
Total 226 161 565 351 1950 1234 
Net 
Vacancy 
65 214 716 
   
  Ministry has taken the following steps to fill up the existing 
vacancies at the Passport Offices: 
 
  The regular placement of indents for recruitment of Office 
Assistant(MTS), Junior Passport Assistant, Assistant 
Superintendent, Junior Translation Officer and Stenographers with 
Staff Selection Commission (SSC). 368 posts at various levels 
have been indented to SSC.  Out of which, 92 dossiers were 
received recently from SSC and appointment letters have been 
issued to the candidates. Further, there are 123 vacancies pertaining 
to different vacancy years to be filled up from the respective feeder 
posts as per Recruitment Rules through Limited Departmental 
Competitive Examination (LDCE) being conducted by SSC for 
which SSC has been requested persistently. For 96 vacancies of 
Assistant Superintendents to be filled through LDCE, “No 
Objection Certificate” (NOC) to conduct the examination by the 
Ministry of External Affairs itself has been obtained from SSC. 
Accordingly, EdCIL, a PSU under Ministry of Education has been 

12 | P a g e 
 
hired to conduct the said examination which will be conducted in 
the ensuing months. 
  The Ministry has also hired 347 Data Entry Operators 
(DEOs) and 51 Multi Tasking Staffs (MTSs) from Outsourced 
Agency as an interim measure to fill the gap against the vacant 
non-Gazetted posts for smooth functioning of the Passport Offices. 
  To fill up the existing vacancies at the Passport Offices, 
regular meetings of the Department Promotion Committees (DPCs) 
have been held for the promotion of eligible officials to the next 
grade. 
  The Ministry is appointing the officers on deputation basis as 
per Recruitment Rules of Deputy Passport Officer and Passport 
Officer.  
 
 2.  As regards to the proposal submitted to D/o Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance to carry out the Physical Inspection & Staffing 
Study of CPO, it is mentioned that the Ministry of Finance has 
recently advised the MEA, in November, 2021, to carry out the 
review of the Cadres under them for which they are Cadre 
Controlling Authority as per extant guidelines on the subject and 
thereafter it may be referred to M/o Finance with the 
recommendations of Financial Adviser and with the approval of 
Minister-in-Charge. Accordingly, a fresh Committee to review all 
the Cadres of Central Passport Organisation under Ministry of 
External Affairs is being constituted with due approval of Minister-
in-Charge.” 
 
16. The Committee have year after year raised concerns regarding the 
issue of shortage of staff in the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) cadre. 
The committee are appalled to note that despite repeated appeals to the 
Ministry to address the issue of shortage of personnel in the Central 
Passport Organization on priority basis, the reply furnished by the 
Ministry reflects a shortfall of 996 personnel in the working strength of the 
Central Passport Organisation (CPO) cadre as on 01.05.2022 i.e nearly 36 
% vacancy in the cadre strength of CPO. While the Committee 
acknowledge that the Ministry is taking plethora of corrective measures to 
address the issue, the Committee are disappointed in the undue delay in the 
process of filling of such large number of vacancies. The Committee also 

13 | P a g e 
 
note that the staffing study of CPO by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has been pending since 
2019. It is disparaging to note that after nearly two years, the Ministry of 
Finance has advised the MEA to carry out the review of the Cadres under 
them as per extant guidelines on the subject and thereafter refer the same 
to M/o Finance with the recommendations of Financial Adviser and with 
the approval of Minister-in-Charge. The Ministry has apprised the 
Committee that a fresh Committee to review all the Cadres of Central 
Passport Organisation under Ministry of External Affairs is being 
constituted with due approval of Minister-in-Charge. The Committee urge 
the Ministry to fast track the constitution of the Committee seek their 
recommendation in the shortest possible time and make more concerted 
efforts to fulfill the vacancies. The Committee also desire to be apprised of 
the recommendations of the Review Committee and the steps being taken 
to implement their recommendations. 
 
India’s Development Partnership 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
17. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
   
  ‘The Committee note that the extent, magnitude and scope of 
India’s international development cooperation have expanded 
significantly in recent years. The Ministry has submitted that the 
developmental aid and assistance projects, including capacity building 
assistance are implemented with the long- term goal of generating 
goodwill and thereby creating positive influence or leverage to derive 
foreign policy objectives. The Committee are aware about the plethora of 
challenges faced in implementation of projects abroad. The Committee 

14 | P a g e 
 
have also taken note of the institutionalized review mechanism for 
monitoring of technical aid and development assistance projects. 
Expressing concern over the unpredictable budgetary demands and 
allocation under this Head, and reiterating their opinion, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should frame a developmental 
aid/cooperation policy and a separate aid disbursal body should be 
established for smooth and effective implementation of international aid 
projects.’ 
 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
   
  “IFD response based on previous years’ reply – 
  India’s development partnership cooperation is integral part 
of India’s foreign policy. The inalienable component of our 
development cooperation is “partnership”. India’s economic 
cooperation through development partnership is demand driven. 
For example, India’s Grants-in-aid projects and capacity building 
programs are demand driven and are based on local 
demand/priority of the partner countries.  Through development 
cooperation, Government aims to give fillip to South-South 
Cooperation.   
  Development assistance is offered on the request of the host 
government, which is scrutinized by the Ministry in consultation 
with concerned Territorial Division from foreign policy perspective 
and also the line ministries.  Feasibility study/DPR is undertaken 
by the project implementation agency, which is vetted by the line 
ministries.  Physical and financial progress is monitored at various 
levels, including our Missions abroad as well as Project Monitoring 
Committees (PMC) constituted for this specific purpose.  
Additionally, expert advice of consultants and technical advisors 
on deputation from other specialized organizations outside the 
Ministry is also taken regarding implementation of these projects.   
Moreover, period reviews of the development assistance programs, 
viz., comprehensive review of ITEC, CEITs, etc are undertaken to 
attune these programs from impact and outcome perspective.  
Budgetary outlays are pre-fixed and payments are released on 
milestone basis.       

15 | P a g e 
 
  As regards Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation of 
instituting a separate aid disbursal body, the Ministry is fully seized 
of the matter and is periodically reviewing all aspects of 
development cooperation and aid delivery.”   
 
19. In view of significant expansion of extent, magnitude and scope of 
India’s international development cooperation the Committee have been 
continuously recommending the Ministry to frame a development 
aid/cooperation policy and establishment of a separate aid disbursal body 
for smooth and effective implementation of international aid projects. 
While the Committee appreciate that the progress of development 
assistance offered to the host governments is being closely monitored by the 
Ministry, the Committee are of the considered view that establishment of a 
separate aid disbursal body shall fast track the scrutiny and disbursement 
process. The Committee strongly feel that framing a development 
aid/cooperation policy shall in the long run help in achieving the Ministry’s 
aim to give fillip to South-South Cooperation. The Committee are not 
satisfied by the arguments put forth by the Ministry in the matter and, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that the Ministry 
should explore the feasibility of framing a development aid/cooperation 
policy and establishing a separate aid disbursal body for smooth and 
effective implementation of international aid projects.  
 
Overseas Indian Affairs 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
20. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  ‘The erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MoIA), which 
was primarily responsible for protection and welfare of overseas Indians, 
was merged with the Ministry of External Affairs in 2016. Since then, the 
Overseas Indian Affairs Division within the MEA has been dealing with 

16 | P a g e 
 
issues relating to engagement with Indian Diaspora. Observing a 
general trend of ad hocism and arbitrariness in budgetary allocation to 
schemes and programmes related to welfare and protection of the 
overseas Indians, the Committee had been steadily recommending the 
Ministry to accord requisite fiscal space and importance to such a critical 
aspect of its responsibility. The Committee are disappointed to note that 
budgetary allocation for schemes/programmes related to welfare of 
overseas Indians during the current fiscals has either been reduced or kept 
constant. The Ministry’s assertion that COVID-19 pandemic and related 
travel restrictions and lockdowns have hampered the execution of 
programmes & schemes in India & in Missions abroad have been duly 
noted. The Committee observe that a Working Group has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (CPV&OIA) for 
evaluation of various Schemes and Programmes for the welfare of the 
Indian Diaspora. The Committee welcome the creation of a new budget 
head for the Nirbhaya Fund with an allocation of Rs. 5 Crore for 
empowerment, safety and security of women and girl children. In this 
regard, the Ministry has informed that the guidelines to be followed by 
the Missions/Posts abroad for establishment and operation of the One 
Stop Centre are also being worked upon. 
 
  Taking a serious view of the unpredictability and low budgetary 
allocation for Overseas Indians, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should prepare  a vision for reaching out to all Indians abroad in 
a more committed manner and project improved budgetary allocations 
for the same. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
findings of the Report of the Working Group in six months. With regard 
to the newly created Nirbhaya Fund, the Committee desire that guidelines 

17 | P a g e 
 
for establishing the One Stop Centres are chalked out without any further 
delay so that the disbursal from the fund does not suffer. 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
  “Due to Covid-19 pandemic, travel restrictions and lockdowns 
hampered the execution of programmes & schemes throughout FY 
2020-21. Ministry will be holding the next Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in 
January, 2023, which would increase the budgetary 
expenditure/allocations substantially. Other schemes which were in 
abeyance because of COVID will also be executed this year, which 
will also increase the budgetary allocation for the Diaspora related 
activities. The next meeting of the Working Group expected to be 
held soon. The outcome of the same shall be apprised to the 
Committee. Further, it is informed that the guidelines for establishing 
the One Stop Centres have already been formulated and vetted by the 
competent authority in the Ministry.” 
 
22. On the issue of budgetary allocation for schemes/programmes related 
to welfare of overseas Indians, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry should prepare a vision for reaching out to all Indians abroad in a 
more committed manner and project improved budgetary allocations for 
the same. Ministry’s assurance that holding of the next Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas in January, 2023, and execution of other schemes kept in abeyance 
because of COVID Pandemic would entail increase in the budgetary 
allocation for the Diaspora related activities is duly noted, however, 
committee do not find any reason for delay in preparation of vision for 
reaching out to all Indian abroad. The Committee also hope the next 
meeting of the Working Group will be scheduled without further delay. 
The Committee should be kept apprised of the outcome of the same and the 
progress in preparation of a vision. The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the approved guidelines to be followed by the Missions/Posts 
abroad for establishment and operation of the One Stop Centres. 

18 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
23.  The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 ‘In view of the number and spread of overseas Indians, there is a high 
possibility of them getting stranded in a crisis situation. The recent political 
crisis in Afghanistan and conflict in Ukraine is a gross reminder about the 
implications on safety and security of Indian nationals in such a volatile 
situation. The role played by the Ministry in Afghanistan and Ukraine in the 
recent past has been commendable. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
evacuation preparedness has emerged as a significant issue. The Committee are 
aware that during outbreak of conflict or any other exigencies, the evacuation of 
Indian citizens is planned on a case-to-case basis and evacuation is dependent 
on a number of factors. The Committee desire that a database of Indian 
nationals abroad may be prepared and updated on a regular basis for emergency 
situations. Furthermore, a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for evacuation 
of Indian nationals stranded in exigencies must also be chalked out and the 
same may be made available at all Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The 
Committee would like to be kept informed about steps taken in this direction.’ 
 
24.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated under: 
 
  “The Ministry has been keeping a record of Indian Diaspora 
abroad and keeps updating the same. Separate databases are being 
maintained in respect of NRIs, PIOs and Students. However 
collation of such data is dependent on voluntary registration by 
our diaspora living abroad.  
                                 A Rapid Response Cell (RRC) has been created in the 
Ministry to deal with exigencies and emergency situations similar 
to the recent Ukraine crisis, where more than 22 thousand 
stranded Indians were evacuated by the Government in 
“Operation Ganga”.  
 

19 | P a g e 
 
  The Rapid Response Cell in the Ministry handled SOP for 
the Control Room set up during the evacuation process. Based on 
the event report sent by the Indian Mission in Kyiv after 
Operation Ganga, recommendations for implementation/inclusion 
of evacuation procedures in MEA’s existing Crisis Management 
Plan is already under consideration.” 
 
 
 
 
25. On the issue of evacuation preparedness for stranded Indian 
Diaspora abroad, the Committee had desired that a database of Indian 
nationals abroad may be prepared and updated on a regular basis for 
emergency situations. The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s 
submission that it has been keeping a record of Indian Diaspora abroad 
and keeps updating the same. Separate databases are being maintained in 
respect of NRIs, PIOs and Students. The Committee also appreciate that a 
rapid response Cell has been created in the Ministry to deal with exigencies 
and emergency situations abroad. The Committee, however, note that the 
Ministry’s reply is silent on the issue of chalking out of  Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for evacuation of Indian nationals stranded in 
exigencies and the making the same available at all Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad. Lives of thousands of distressed/stranded Indian Nationals is 
dependent on the quick and decisive actions taken by the Ministry and 
Indian Missions/Post abroad. A set of Standard Operating Procedure 
would go a long way in assisting the staff of the Indian Mission/Posts 
abroad in taking proactive steps to ensure timely and safe evacuations of 
stranded Indian Diaspora abroad. As such the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
evacuation of Indian nationals stranded in exigencies may be chalked out 
by the Ministry at the earliest and the same may be made available at all 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
  

20 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee observe that MEA’s budgetary allocation for FY 2022-23 is Rs. 
17, 250 crore which is 4.98% less than BE 2021-22 allocation and 7.81% more 
than RE 2021-22 allocation. The Committee also observe that despite an 
increase in the overall budget allocation of the Government of India, the 
allocation made to MEA in percentage terms has witnessed a downward turn 
during the last four years and during 2022-23 it is only 0.44 % of the 
Government of India’s overall Budget. 
 
 The Committee do not find such allocation in consonance with the 
country’s rising aspirations and growing global stature. The Committee are 
rather dismayed by the fact that the budgetary allocation made to MEA at the 
BE stage is lowest in both absolute as well as relative terms. In Committee’s 
view in connection with India’s rising global profile, engagement and footprint, 
the allocations made to MEA are evidently insufficient. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that the issue of provisioning of adequate 
funds has been vigorously taken up with the Ministry of Finance at various 
levels but with adverse results. The Committee hope that with the subsiding of 
the Covid Pandemic, regular activities of the Ministry will resume and more 
funds will be needed to pace up the delayed projects and exchanges. The 
Committee, therefore, would like that the allocations made to MEA should be 
increased substantially and be brought at least at the level of one per cent of 
GoI’s overall Budget every year. The Committee, strongly urge the Ministry to 
make a compelling case for enhanced allocation at the RE stage and also 
continue its constructive engagement with the Ministry of Finance for the same. 

21 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has been making concerted efforts to engage with the Ministry of 
Finance at the level of Minister, Secretary and Financial Advisor. These efforts 
to engage with and apprise the Ministry of Finance of our requirement of funds 
has been ongoing and will be continued. This engagement has been positive and 
constructive, as indicated by the decreasing gap between Ministry’s demand and 
allocation of funds. As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, Ministry will 
endeavour to effectively utilize its budgetary allocation so that a compelling 
case for adequate resources can be made to the Ministry of Finance at the RE 
stage.  
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs, 
the mismatch between the budgetary demand and actual allocations has been an 
issue that has drawn considerable attention of the Committee. The Committee 
have noted that the RE 2021-22 allocation of Rs. 16,000 crore is 87.79 % of 
MEA’s demand and BE 2022-23 allocation of 17,250 crore is 83.30 % of 
MEA’s demand. The Ministry’s assertion that Ministry’s RE and BE demand-
allocation differential has reduced indicating realistic projections and 
constructive appreciation of Ministry’s requirements by Ministry of Finance as 
indeed financial value principle of Zero Based Budgeting brings. In terms of 
numbers, the reduction in the gap has been generous. However, at a substantive 
level it appears that the improvement is due to lower demand sought by MEA 
and not better allocation given by the Government. The Committee, therefore, 
exhort the Ministry to make projections based on India’s widening and 
deepening engagement with the world as adequate finances only will allow the 
Ministry to perform optimally in this regard. 
 

22 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to submit that the decreasing gap between demand and 
allocation of budget at the BE and RE stages may be seen as a reflection of 
Ministry’s concerted efforts to formulate budgetary demands with greater rigor 
of Zero based budgeting and constructive appreciation by Ministry of Finance 
of Ministry’s demands. Further, the aspect of zero based budgeting has also 
been an integral part of the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations to the 
Ministry over the years and efforts have been made to imbibe the same in its 
budgetary projections. This has led to a realistic and budgetary projections and 
allocation based on realistic expectation of budgetary utilization.  
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has incorporated the 
underlying principles of Zero Based Budgeting in their budgetary process. The 
Ministry has stated that in consonance with Zero-Based Budgeting, that no head 
both in Scheme or Non-Scheme heads are given fixed or rigid budgetary 
resource allocation/management, but, each head is assessed for respective 
demands considering a base of Zero. Moreover, allocations for Aid heads are 
made after undertaking a realistic spending assessment based on project 
implementation cycles, local conditions and physical progress for on-going 
projects, schemes and programmes; and based on project implementation 
timelines and cost estimates for planned projects, schemes and programmes. 
 The availability of requisite funds is critical for effective and smooth 
functioning of the Ministry of External Affairs that has been mandated with the 
task of conducting India’s foreign policy. It is, therefore, imperative to have a 
meticulous budgetary exercise so that allocations are sought on the basis of 
realistic assessment and valid justifications. With an objective of further 
streamlining of the budgetary process, the Ministry should continue making 

23 | P a g e 
 
efforts to realize credible budgetary demands justified by past efficient 
utilization of funds and objective assessment of anticipated expenditures 
based on implementation progress. Good budgetary process needs to be backed 
by constructive engagement with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
would recommend that the Ministry should strongly reach out to the Ministry of 
Finance for better appreciation of their fund requirements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per recommendations of Hon’ble Standing Committee and best practices of 
budgetary management, Ministry continues to strive to formulate budgetary 
demands with greater rigor of Zero based budgeting. Therefore, unit based 
expenditure plans based on anticipated progress in ongoing projects, likely new 
initiatives, challenges being faced in individual projects etc, all form part of 
comprehensive consideration of budgetary demand and allocation.  
 Ministry would also like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will 
continue its efforts to engage with the Ministry of Finance at all levels to ensure 
better appreciation of our fund requirements. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee are aware that the past two years have been unusual due to the 
COVID-19 Pandemic related disruptions across the globe. Notwithstanding this 
fact, the Ministry of External Affairs has been an effective spender and a 
perusal of their quarterly expenditure during the last three financial years are a 
testimony to it. During the FY 2021-22, in consonance with the Cash 
Management Guidelines of Ministry of Finance, the cumulative quarterly 
expenditure has been 14 %, 37% and 55%. The Committee note that regular 
monitoring of expenditure by the designated mechanism has been a catalyst in 
ensuring smooth and even pace of expenditure. The Committee also note that all 

24 | P a g e 
 
instructions contained in various Circulars of the Ministry of Finance towards 
economy measures, rationalization of expenditure, etc., are being scrupulously 
followed by the Ministry. The Committee are optimistic that the Ministry 
will continue making efforts to ensure optimum and even pace of expenditure 
in the upcoming year. The Ministry should showcase its prudent and effective 
utilization pattern as a strong basis for seeking enhanced allocations from the 
Ministry of Finance during both RE as well as BE stages. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to thank the Hon’ble Committee for appreciating its efforts 
to effectively monitor and ensure even pace of expenditure in all quarters of the 
previous financial year (2021-22), as also our efforts to follow instructions 
issued by Ministry of Finance towards economy and rationalization of 
expenditure. Ministry will continue making efforts to ensure optimum and even 
pace of expenditure in the Current Financial Year. As advised by the Hon’ble 
Committee, Ministry will apprise the Ministry of Finance and showcase its 
utilization of funds as a strong basis for seeking enhanced allocations from the 
Ministry of Finance during both RE as well as BE stages. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Over the past five years, the Committee have been recommending that the 
Ministry should carry out cross-Ministry as well as cross-country (of 
Ministries/Departments with the mandate of managing foreign affairs) 
comparative analysis of budgetary allocations. During the last Demands for 
Grants Report, the Ministry was asked to submit the findings of the study within 
three months. Since 2019, the Ministry has been furnishing the same reply 
that the preliminary report of the study conducted by Research and Information 
System for Economic Development (RIS) is under examination. Further, this 

25 | P a g e 
 
year, the Ministry has submitted that the RIS has been requested to expand the 
mandate of the study to include more number of countries and more number of 
Ministries within the Government of India for a more accurate comparative 
analysis and the Report is in its final stages and will be completed in this 
financial year. 
 The Committee are disappointed by the casual approach of the Ministry 
on such a significant matter. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the comparative study must be finalized in the current financial year, 
without fail. The Committee also desire that the findings of this study should be 
used to strengthen the case for making more budgetary demands so that Indian 
foreign policy is carried out in alignment with its expanding mandate and 
activities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to apprise the Hon’ble Committee that the Report on the 
cross- Ministry and cross-country comparative study of budgetary allocations of 
Ministries /Departments with the mandate of managing foreign affairs, being 
prepared by Research and Information System for Economic Development 
(RIS), is in the final stages of its completion. As submitted earlier, RIS was 
requested to expand the mandate of the study to include more number of 
countries (representing a good mix of developed and emerging economies) and 
more number of Ministries within the Government of India (representing a cross 
section of key/ big and similarly placed Ministries) for a more accurate 
comparative analysis. As the Report is in its final stages, Ministry is confident 
of achieving its stated target of completion of the Report in the current financial 
year.     
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
 

26 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee note that the budgetary sub-head ‘Embassies and Missions’ 
which caters to expenditure on India’s representation abroad and functioning of 
Missions/Posts abroad, have witnessed an upward trend. An allocation of Rs. 
2861.06 crore was provisioned during BE 2021-22, which was increased to Rs. 
3397.99 crore during RE 2021-22 and further to Rs Rs. 3769.06 crore during 
BE 2022-23. As per the Ministry, the enhanced allocation has been provided 
mainly for opening of 3 new Missions in Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican 
Republic; increase under the Salaries head and Medical Treatment due to 
increase in medical expenses in view of Covid 19. The Committee note that out 
of 193 UN Member countries (including India), India doesn’t have resident 
Missions in 48 countries. The Ministry has informed that it has identified 11 
countries where resident Missions can be set up, after obtaining approval 
from the Cabinet. 
 The Committee note that the budget allocation for Indian Missions and 
Posts abroad is a large-scale and comprehensive exercise, wherein fund 
demands from over 200 Missions and Posts are compiled, assessed and 
accommodated within the Ministry’s overall budgetary constraints. Efforts 
made by the Ministry for rationalizing the working and expenditure of Indian 
Missions/Posts are laudable. India aspires to be a permanent member of United 
Nations Security Council (UNSC) and to achieve this objective, our presence in 
all UN member countries is crucial so as to coordinate our efforts with their 
Foreign Offices. The Committee, therefore, emphasize the need for having 
Resident Missions in all UN member countries. The Ministry should chalk out a 
roadmap for setting up of Indian Missions/Posts in the remaining 48 countries in 
a timely manner. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the steps taken 
and progress made in this regard. 
 
 

27 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
In keeping with the vision of Government of India of maximizing India’s 
diplomatic presence abroad, the Union Cabinet in March 2018 accorded 
approval for opening of 18 new Indian Missions in Africa in a phased manner 
between 2018-2021. India has established its presence in 14 Missions in phases 
in Conakry (Guinea), Djibouti (Djibouti), Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), 
Brazzaville (Republic of Congo), Malabo (Equatorial Guinea), Kigali 
(Rwanda), Yaounde (Cameroon), Asmara (Eritrea),  Mbabane (Eswatini), 
Freetown (Sierra Leone), Sao Tome (Sao Tome and Principe), Lomé (Togo), 
Monrovia (Liberia) and Nouakchott (Mauritania). Personnel have been 
deployed to Chad and are waiting to travel to assume charge. All efforts are 
being made to operationalise the last 3 Missions viz: Mogadishu (Somalia), 
Bissau (Guinea-Bissau) and Praia (Cape Verde).  
 The 3 new Missions in Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican Republic 
approved by Cabinet in December, 2020 have been made operational in 
January-February, 2022. Cabinet has also approved opening of new Consulate 
in Addu, Maldives in May, 2021 and a new Mission in Lithuania in April, 2022 
and all efforts including creation of posts of Director & below from Department 
of Expenditure are underway to operationalize it. Appropriate budgetary 
provisions are projected as per the expected timeline of operationalization of the 
Missions, in consultation with the Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry. 
 
 Opening of a resident Indian Mission or Post is a time-taking exercise 
requiring internal planning and approvals for logistics, deployment, 
infrastructure as well as coordination and liaisoning with the host Government. 
India has diplomatic engagements with those countries (wherein resident 
Missions are not currently functional) through concurrent accreditation 
arrangements. The scope and depth of bilateral relations with these countries are 

28 | P a g e 
 
regularly reviewed and Missions are opened in these countries according to 
need. 
List of Missions/Posts are placed at Annexure I 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
Recognizing the significance of evaluation and monitoring in improvement of 
the overall functioning of the various Mission/Posts abroad, the Committee had 
persistently called up on the Ministry to expedite the launching of Revamped 
(Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System) Portal. The Committee are 
satisfied to learn that PEMS 2.0 portal, a centralized online monitoring 
mechanism to evaluate the functioning of our Missions/Posts abroad on an 
annual basis, was launched in 2021. The Ministry has submitted that the 
monitoring is being done through evaluation of the responses of the 
Missions/Posts of a comprehensive questionnaire that includes questions related 
to political, economic, cultural, administrative and financial processes and 
consular responsibilities. It is discerned that provisional evaluation has been 
completed in respect of almost all the 193 Missions/Posts and final 
evaluation has also been done in respect of more than 90% of these 
Missions//Posts. The findings of evaluation done through PEMS 2.0 Portal 
vary from Mission to Missions and remedial measures, where necessary have 
been suggested. While appreciating the revamped monitoring mechanism for 
monitoring and evaluation of Mission/Posts abroad, the Committee desire that 
the Ministry should continue to regularly follow up on the actions being taken 
by each Mission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to confirm that it continues to follow up with respect to 
action being taken by the various Missions/Posts as recommended by the 

29 | P a g e 
 
Committee. Ministry would also like to inform that it has launched PEMS 3.0 
questionnaire to conduct annual evaluation of Missions/Posts for Financial Year 
2021-22. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation under the sub head 
‘Passport and Emigration’ has gone down from Rs. 1328.63 crore in BE 2021-
22 to Rs. 1056.28 crore in RE 2021-22 and further to Rs.996.67 crore during BE 
2022-23. The decreased allocation is primarily due to lesser anticipated 
expenditure under printing and procurement of travel documents, postal and 
freight charges for travel documents and service charges for Passport Seva 
Projects. The Ministry has further stated that requirements of funds, if any, will 
be considered at the supplementary stage. The Committee note that the 
Government has planned to issue e-passports to citizens from 2023 and the total 
anticipated expenditure for rollout of the e-Passport project by NIC is about Rs. 
268.67 Crore.  
 The Committee welcome the use of ICT in improvement of passport 
issuance system as there is a proposal that the Passport Seva Project will 
embark on version 2.0 with greater focus on technology adaptation and up- 
gradation through use of biometrics, Artificial Intelligence, Advance Data 
Analytics, Chat-bot, Auto response, natural language processing and Cloud 
Enablement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Phase wise budget requirement for e-Passport Project 
 NIC and NICSI have submitted various project proposals, including Detailed 
Project Report (DPR), commercial and draft agreements to the Ministry. The total 
anticipated expenditure for rollout of the e-Passport project by NIC is about Rs. 

30 | P a g e 
 
268.67 Crore. The anticipated expenditure of Rs. 268.67 Crores is primarily for 
building up Information and Technology Infrastructure for issuance of e-Passport. As 
per the DPR, readiness of e-Passport setup shall take 6 months from the date of 
Ministry’s approval of the proposal to NICSI. Once the set-up is ready, the Ministry 
shall conduct a third party audit after which rollout of issuance of e-Passport for the 
citizens would be started. 
  The anticipated expenditure of Rs. 268.67 crores will be incurred over a period 
of 7 years, the annual breakup of which is given under. The Ministry would be able to 
manage the e-Passport project within its allocated funds. 
 (i) Year 1 -  Rs. 130.58 crores  
 (ii) Year 2 -  Rs. 25.03 crores  
 (iii) Year 3 - Rs. 25.03 crores  
 (iv) Year 4 -  Rs. 25.03 crores  
 (v) Year 5 -  Rs. 25.03 crores  
 (vi) Year 6 -  Rs. 24.46 crores  
          (vii) Year 7 -  Rs. 13.51 crores 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note that Passport Seva Project, was started in 2012 in a Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mode and during all these years various measures 
have been undertaken by the Ministry for qualitative as well as quantitative 
improvements in delivery of passport services. The Committee has been 
informed that Passport Seva Project is embarking on Version 2.0 with the 
selection of new Service Provider and renewed focus on technology upgradation 
and adaptation. 
 Furthermore, a passport database named Passport Related Information 
Data Exchange (PRIDE) and a Public Grievance Redressal Cell has been active. 
For smooth police verification process, mPassport Police App was launched. 

31 | P a g e 
 
The Committee are happy to learn that 177 Indian Missions/Posts have been 
integrated into the Passport Seva Project and in integration in the remaining 
are in progress. The Ministry has, however, apprised the Committee that lack of 
connectivity and unavailability of multiple Internet Service Providers (ISP) and 
difficult geographical terrain are the technical constraints for integration of PSP 
system online with the District Police/Police Station in North East States and 
J&K region. 
 Passport Seva Project has emerged as the most citizen centric initiative 
of the Ministry of External Affairs with expansive network of Passport Seva 
Kendras (PSK) and Post Office Passport Seva Kendras (POPSK). The 
Committee understand that due to COVID 19 Pandemic the average time to 
issue passports had slightly increased in the last two years, however, the 
Committee are hopeful that with the easing of Covid 19 relaxations, issuance of 
passport will be expedited. In the opinion of the Committee, police 
verification process requires further streamlining and States/UTs should be 
encouraged to link the verification process with mPassport Police app. The 
Ministry should also strive to overcome the technical constraints faced by 
District Police/Police Stations in North East States and UTs of J&K and 
Ladakh. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As recommended by the Committee, Ministry has advised all the Passport 
Offices to coordinate with the Police authorities for expeditious launch of 
mPassport Police app. As on date, the mPassport Police app has been launched 
in 22 States/UTs (Total 8275 Police Stations) in the country. The Ministry is 
providing required technical support/training and hand holding to smoothly 
operationalize mPassport Police app across the country.  
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 

32 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
The Committee note that version 2.0 of the Passport Seva Project will include 
the issuance of e passports to Indian citizens with embedded chip for ease of 
international travel. It will be a combined paper and electronic passport with a 
RFID chip and antenna embedded as an inlay in the back cover While ISP 
Nashik has finalized the global three-stage tender for procurement of 
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)-compliant electronic 
contactless inlays along with its operating system, the National Informatics 
Centre Services (NICSI) have been entrusted with the technical responsibilities 
for issuing the e- Passports. 
 The Committee welcome the issuance of e-passport from 2023 onwards 
and are hopeful that it will facilitate ease of travel for Indian citizens, increased 
security of data and will be in line with International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO). The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take 
all requisite measures to ensure data privacy and security of the Indian citizens 
as contained in the chip. The Committee also desire to be apprised about the 
progress made with regard to issuance of e-passports. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is planning to issue e-passports to its citizens, starting in 2022-
  An e-Passport is a combined paper and electronic passport with an 
embedded Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) chip that contains biometric 
information that can be used to authenticate the identity of travellers. The Data 
is written in accordance with the Logical Data Structure (LDS) and secured 
using the Public Key Interface (PKI) methodology. The personal particulars of 
the applicants would be digitally stored in the chip which would be embedded 
in the present form of physical passport booklet. In case, anyone tampers with 
the chip, the system shall be able to identify it resulting in the failure of the 
passport authentication. 

33 | P a g e 
 
 
 The data of the citizens for e-Passport would be used for the specific 
purpose only, i.e. issuance of the passport and related services. There is no 
secondary use of the data, thereby safeguarding the privacy concerns. Further 
transaction processes are authenticated by digital certificates and are 
cryptographically signed. Once captured, the data is stored in a secured 
repository, i.e. industry standard database. Relevant database security related 
controls are performed round the clock by Security Operations Centre. 
 
 The main benefit of the e-passport is its enhanced ability to maintain the 
integrity of data. This is expected to increase the level of confidence in the 
Indian passport.  E-passports would also facilitate the ease of travel for Indian 
citizens, making their interface with immigration authorities much smoother. 
Since the ICAO has recommended its introduction by member countries, the 
introduction of e-passports would be in consonance with global best practices. 
  The Ministry has entrusted National Informatics Centre (NIC) with 
the technical responsibilities for issuing the e-Passports. Full-scale manufacture 
and issue will commence with the completion of the technical eco-system and 
infrastructure. 
 
 The e-passports with advanced security features and better printing and 
paper quality will substantially upgrade existing passports and service to the 
citizens. The epassport will provide greater protection against fraudulent 
practises and tampering. With introduction of this advanced security features, 
possibilities of forgery of Indian passports will be greatly eliminated. 
Infrastructure planned to be created for ePassport shall be scalable for 
enhancing various features in ePassport. 
 
 

34 | P a g e 
 
Present Status 
Based on the recommendation of Delegated Investment Board, EAM has 
approved the proposal to implement the e-Passport Project. Tripartite 
Agreement among MEA, NIC and NICSI is being finalized.  
                (File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
The Committee note that the shortage of personnel in the Central Passport 
Organization has been a recurrent challenge in Passport Seva Project (PSP). As 
on 1 March, 2021, the sanctioned strength of Central Passport Organisation is 
2741 and the actual working strength of the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) 
Cadre is 1723. The Ministry has apprised the Committee about the corrective 
measures that are being taken to address this challenge. These include 
promotion of eligible officers to the next grade, deputation from 
Central Government employees, conducting of Direct Recruitments/Limited 
Departmental Competitive Examinations (LDCE) by Staff Selection 
Commission, etc. The Committee also recall that staffing study of CPO by the 
Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance has been pending since 2019. 
 The issue of human capital has been a major area of concern and has been 
part of the Committee’s recommendations over the years. Taking serious 
cognizance of this matter, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
should take up this issue with Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) at 
the highest level and ensure that the vacant positions are filled up in the shortest 
possible time. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the status of 
the pending staffing study of CPO. 
 
 
 

35 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Sanctioned Strength of Central Passport Organisation is 2741 and the actual 
working strength of the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) cadre is 1746 as 
on 01.05.2022. In addition, 21 posts (including 15 Technical and 6 supporting 
staff) were sanctioned by the Union Cabinet for the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) of the Passport Seva Project.  The break of the vacancies is as under : 
 
Sl. No. Group 'A' Group 'B'  
Gazetted 
Group 'B' and 
Group 'C' non-
Gazetted 
1 Sanction
ed 
Strength 
Workin
g 
Strengt
h 
Sanction
ed 
strength 
Workin
g 
strength 
Sanctione
d 
strength 
Workin
g 
strength 
Total 226 161 565 351 1950 1234 
Net 
Vacancy 
65 214 716 
 
Ministry has taken the following steps to fill up the existing vacancies at 
the Passport Offices: 
 
I. The regular placement of indents for recruitment of Office 
Assistant(MTS), Junior Passport Assistant, Assistant Superintendent, 
Junior Translation Officer and Stenographers with Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC). 368 posts at various levels have been indented to 
SSC.  Out of which, 92 dossiers were received recently from SSC 
and appointment letters have been issued to the candidates. Further, 
there are 123 vacancies pertaining to different vacancy years to be 

36 | P a g e 
 
filled up from the respective feeder posts as per Recruitment Rules 
through Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) 
being conducted by SSC for which SSC has been requested 
persistently. For 96 vacancies of Assistant Superintendents to be 
filled through LDCE, “No Objection Certificate” (NOC) to conduct 
the examination by the Ministry of External Affairs itself has been 
obtained from SSC. Accordingly, EdCIL, a PSU under Ministry of 
Education has been hired to conduct the said examination which will 
be conducted in the ensuing months. 
II. The Ministry has also hired 347 Data Entry Operators (DEOs) and 51 
Multi Tasking Staffs (MTSs) from Outsourced Agency as an interim 
measure to fill the gap against the vacant non-Gazetted posts for 
smooth functioning of the Passport Offices. 
III. To fill up the existing vacancies at the Passport Offices, regular 
meetings of the Department Promotion Committees (DPCs) have 
been held for the promotion of eligible officials to the next grade. 
IV. The Ministry is appointing the officers on deputation basis as per 
Recruitment Rules of Deputy Passport Officer and Passport Officer.  
 
2.     As regards to the proposal submitted to D/o Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance to carry out the Physical Inspection & Staffing Study of CPO, it is 
mentioned that the Ministry of Finance has recently advised the MEA, in 
November, 2021, to carry out the review of the Cadres under them for which 
they are Cadre Controlling Authority as per extant guidelines on the subject and 
thereafter it may be referred to M/o Finance with the recommendations of 
Financial Adviser and with the approval of Minister-in-Charge. Accordingly, a 
fresh Committee to review all the Cadres of Central Passport Organisation 
under Ministry of External Affairs is being constituted with due approval of 
Minister-in-Charge. 

37 | P a g e 
 
 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation for the construction of 
South Asian University (SAU) has decreased from Rs. 314.00 crore in BE 
2021- 22 (Rs. 94 crore at RE stage) to Rs. 128.00 crore in BE 2022-23. The 
reduction in allocation at BE 2022-23, is based on the physical progress of work 
and projected expenditure towards operational costs. It is noted that out of the 
total land allotted for the construction of the permanent campus, construction is 
ongoing only on approximately 50% of the land. Due to a combination of 
factors, including land encumbrances, delays in obtaining statutory approvals, 
frequent bans on construction activity in NCR and COVID-19 Pandemic the 
construction work has been delayed. No construction work has commenced on 
the remaining part of the land due to various reasons viz court cases, geo-
morphological ridge, etc. 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that despite their repeated 
recommendation, the progress in construction of South Asian University has 
been unsatisfactory. The Committee are hopeful that with the appointment of a 
full-time President, the University will make rapid strides. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should take all necessary 
measures, including establishment of a monitoring Committee, to overcome 
these challenges and ensure that the construction work (including in the 
remaining 50 per cent of the land) is completed at the earliest. The Committee 
also desire to be kept informed about the progress made in this regard 
 
Reply of the Government 
The construction of the South Asian University (SAU) campus had slowed 
down due to various factors including COVID-19 pandemic.  The work has 
resumed with the return of labour and the contractor to the project from 

38 | P a g e 
 
February 2022.   The construction of five buildings under Package-II is 
physically complete and the landscapping and art work is ongoing to initiate the 
process of obtaining the occupancy certificate for the Package-II completed 
buildings.  With the resumption of construction work, the seven buildings under 
Package-III are expected to be physically complete by this year end.   
 Ministry is making efforts to expedite the settlement of the legal cases on 
the allotted land parcels.  Once the legal issues are resolved, the process of 
construction of Package-IV will be initiated.   The appointment of the regular 
President expected to be completed in a couple of months got delayed due to 
postponement of the South Asian University Governing Board Meeting (the 
appointing authority) as requested by one of the Member States.   
 Ministry has appointed Chief Liaision Officer at SAU for coordinating / 
liasioning with various local authorities, pursuing of pending legal issues, 
facilitate obtaining statutory approvals relating to the construction project.  
Ministry further monitors the project through regular meetings with the 
University management.  Ministry accords high priority for timely completion 
of the SAU construction project. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
Nalanda University was established with the overarching objective of emerging 
as “international institution for pursuit of intellectual, philosophical, historical 
and spiritual studies”.   An outlay of Rs. 250.00 crore was provisioned for 
Nalanda University at BE 2021-22, which was increased to Rs. 350 crore at RE 
stage. The allocation at BE 2022-23 has been reduced to Rs. 200 crore. The 
Committee find that the progress in construction of this University has been 
satisfactory. Over 90 per cent of the infrastructure comprising of all Academic 
blocks, Administrative buildings, Laboratories, Auditoriums, campus amenities, 
utility structures including the site development works etc has been completed. 

39 | P a g e 
 
Moreover, the construction of the student hostel blocks and residences for the 
faculty & staff that commenced in end of 2018 has seen 70% progress. The 
Committee are happy to note that the Governing Board, Academic Council, 
Board of Schools and Centres provide the institutional framework for setting 
academic standards for the University and the Nalanda University is fully 
functional at the new campus. The Committee desire that the remaining 
construction work related to residential buildings should be completed in a time 
bound manner and academic credentials of the University are upheld. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry takes due note of the recommendation of the Committee to 
complete all infrastructural development of Nalanda University (NU). The 
Ministry has recently (in March 2022) extended the Government of India 
funding to NU till FY 2025-26. The infrastructure development of NU approved 
by the Cabinet is likely to be completed by FY 2025-26. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
The Committee note that out of MEA’s budget of Rs. 17250 crore, an outlay of 
Rs. 6043.77 crore (35.03%) has been provisioned for ‘Technical and Economic 
Cooperation’ that caters to Indian’s aid and assistance programme. The 
Committee note that the funds under this sub head are proposed after 
undertaking a realistic assessment of needs & spending patterns, project 
implementation cycles, local conditions and physical progress for on-going 
projects, schemes and programmes. As per the Ministry, the issue of adequate 
provisioning of funds under this sub head is regularly taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance and the response of the latter has been ‘positive’ and 
‘constructive’. The Committee, however, are not satisfied with MEA’s assertion 
as the budgetary allocation under this head has not only been reduced but is the 
lowest in terms of percentage vis-a-vis last five years. 

40 | P a g e 
 
 
 In Committee’s view, Development Partnership Initiatives have positive 
impact on India’s relationship with the partner countries in a multi-faceted way. 
Over the years, the Committee have categorically recommended that this sub 
head must be kept immune from budgetary cuts as India’s global image and 
credentials directly hinges on it. The Committee are distressed to note that 
neither the Ministry of External Affairs nor the Ministry of Finance has paid 
desired attention. The Committee, therefore, recommend that this issue should 
be treated with utmost priority and the Ministry should make earnest efforts to 
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to have a better appreciation of our 
technical and development cooperation and associated fund requirements. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the steps taken and the outcome thereof. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry remains committed to ensuring that our international development 
commitments are adequately funded and implemented in a timely manner, in 
keeping with our foreign policy objectives. To this end, Ministry will continue 
reviewing the administrative processes and arrangements, and making the 
necessary requisitions for additional funds as and when required. As far as 
development cooperation policy & separate aid disbursal body is concerned, 
India’s development partnerships are guided by mutual respect for partner 
countries under the broad principles of South-South cooperation. India’s 
approach to development cooperation is one of partnership and not a donor-
donee relationship.  
The issue of provision of adequate allocation of funds is regularly taken up with 
the Ministry of Finance at various levels, including at the level of Minister, 
Secretary and Financial Advisor, apart from regular interaction at other levels. 
Ministry will continue making a dynamic and realistic assessments of funds for 
the Aid heads, in line with Committee’s recommendation, and if required will 

41 | P a g e 
 
seek additional funds from Ministry of Finance, including Supplementary grants 
or enhanced RE 2022-23 allocation. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee observe that India’s development projects in neighbouring 
countries cover a range of sectors from infrastructure development, including 
construction, roads & bridges, waterways and transmission lines as also power 
generation, agriculture, capacity building, education, health, rural development 
etc. The Ministry has made the submission that the Government of India 
attaches high priority to our relationship with our neighbouring countries and 
has a well articulated policy of ‘Neighbourhood First’ with a focus on creating 
mutually beneficial, people-oriented, regional frameworks for stability and 
prosperity. The Committee, however notices that there has been reduction in 
allocation under ‘Aid to Nepal’, ‘Aid to Bhutan’, and ‘Aid to Afghanistan’. In 
view of the increasing Chinese outreach and presence in India’s neighbourhood, 
the Committee feel that India needs to review and enhance their developmental 
diplomacy. The Committee, therefore, desire that a strategy/vision should be 
formulated to expand our developmental partnership, particularly capacity 
building and knowledge sharing, to effectively counter the presence of other 
regional powers in our neighbourhood. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The primary orientation of India’s foreign policy remains its immediate 
neighbourhood, under the Neighbourhood First Policy. The overarching 
philosophy is to ensure that our partners in the region draw benefits and values 
from the growth, development and rise of India and on this basis, all countries 
in our region work towards developing equitable partnerships with each other. 
This is a logical extension of the Government’s policy of Sabka Saath, Sabka 

42 | P a g e 
 
Vikas, aur Sabka Vishwas into the foreign policy arena. Prime Minister outlined 
the principles of engagement in the neighbourhood in the form of Samman 
(respect), Samvad (dialogue), Shanti (peace), and Samriddhi (prosperity). 
A wide range of agreements have been concluded with our 
neighbourhood countries for partnering in areas of infrastructural linkages via 
rail, road, ports, inland waterways connectivity, energy cooperation, 
standardisation of commercial and trading practices, widening broadening 
people to people contacts and cultural cooperation. Some of the key projects 
completed in recent years include the Afghan Parliament building, the Afghan-
India Friendship Dam, Agartala-Akhaura rail link with Bangladesh, India-
Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline, Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) at Birgunj and 
Biratnagar in Nepal, fish processing plants in Addu Atoll, Maldives, and Jaffna 
Cultural Centre in Sri Lanka and other projects. Work is ongoing on several 
projects wherein India has extended grants and LOCs to enhance infrastructural 
connectivity. 
India accorded its immediate neighbourhood the highest priority when it 
came to coordinated efforts against COVID-19. At the Video Conference of 
SAARC Leaders on combating COVID-19 in March 2020, a USD 10 million 
COVID-19 Emergency Fund was announced, which became operational to 
deliver urgent medical supplies, equipment and humanitarian assistance to the 
SAARC neighbours. We are using e-ITEC network to share expertise on 
COVID-19 with healthcare professionals from SAARC countries. We have also 
developed a ‘SAARC COVID19 Information Exchange Platform (COINEX)’ 
for exchange of specialized information and tools on COVID-19 among health 
professionals in the region. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 

43 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee observe that there has been an increase in budgetary allocation 
made under the sub-head 'Aid to Bangladesh' from Rs. 200 crore during BE 
2021-22, to Rs. 300 crore BE 2022-23. Some of the important ongoing projects 
in Bangladesh includes Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link Project, India Bangladesh 
Friendship Pipeline, Dredging in Indo-Bangladesh Inland Water Transit & 
Trade Protocol Connectivity (Sirajganj- Daikhawa & Ashuganj-Zakiganj), High 
Impact Community Development Projects, humanitarian aid etc. The 
Committee are happy to note that despite the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, 
considerable progress have been made on the development cooperation 
initiatives with Bangladesh. The Committee note that in the financial year 2021-
22, three projects have been completed under the High Impact Community 
Development Projects (HICDP). Also, the India-Bangladesh Friendship 
Pipeline project is scheduled to be operationalized in the year 2022. The 
Foreign Secretary has informed about three major projects (the India-
Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline; the Rampal Power Plant; and the Khulna-
Mongla rail line) are expected to be inaugurated this year. The Ministry has also 
informed that Bangladesh portion of the Akhaura Agartala Rail Linkproject has 
achieved physical progress of 50% and financial progress of 40% due to several 
reasons including disruption caused by Covid-19 pandemic and prolonged and 
heavy monsoon rainfall resulting in short working period in project area. 
 While the Committee are satisfied with the pace of implementation of 
most projects in Bangladesh, the tardy progress of Akhaura Agartala Rail Link 
Project remains a cause of concern. The Ministry should use its good offices to 
overcome the challenges emanating from the Bangladesh portion of the project. 
The Committee are optimistic that the three projects that are expected to be 
operationalized in this fiscal year will be completed within the stipulated time. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
Akhaura-Agartala:  
 The recommendation of the Committee to overcome the challenges in the 
completion of the Bangladesh portion of the Akhaura-Agartala rail project has 
been taken note of. MEA is engaging extensively with Government of 
Bangladesh to improve the Akhaura-Agartala project progress and their 
timely completion. Ministry is committed to the completion of this critical 
cross-border connectivity project at the earliest. Multiple review meetings and 
site visits have been conducted to review progress of the project and expedite 
implementation. The most recent joint review of the project was conducted by 

44 | P a g e 
 
officials of High Commission of India, Dhaka and Bangladesh Railway along 
with consultant and contractor on 07 April 2022.  The physical progress as on 
date is approximately 55% and financial progress is approximately 40.54%.  
India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline 
 The 129.5 km pipeline for supply of high speed diesel is being 
constructed from Siliguri in West Bengal to Parbatipur in Bangladesh. The 
project is being executed under a G2G MoU between GoI and Government of 
Bangladesh. The project has achieved a physical progress of 90.30% as on April 
30, 2022 and is expected to be commissioned this year. 
Rampal Power Plant project 
 The work on the Maitri thermal power plant at Rampal being 
implemented under Concessional Financing Scheme is progressing on schedule 
and is expected to be commissioned this year.  
Khulna-Mongla Rail Line: 
 All efforts are underway for the early completion of the 53 Km 
Khulna -Mongla rail line currently being  implemented under GoI Lines of 
Credit. The 5.13 km Rupsha bridge, which is part of the rail line, is almost 
complete and the progress on the rest of the rail line is being continuously 
monitored for timely completion. 
High Impact Community Development Projects :  
In addition to the three High Impact Community Development projects 
mentioned in the inputs given to the Standing Committee in February 2022, one 
more additional project” Construction of single storied Multipurpose 
Community Hall” in Sri Sri Kendriyo Loknath Mandir at Ganeshtala, Dinajpur 
has been completed during the last financial year. As on date 72 projects have 
been completed and 16 projects are ongoing. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee note that there has been a drastic reduction in budgetary 
allocation under the sub head ‘Aid to Bhutan.’ The Ministry has informed that 
fund requirements have been lower as all Projects have been affected by 
COVID- 19 related restrictions and strict lockdown in Bhutan, etc. leading to 
supply chain issues, labour shortages, etc. The Committee note that about 82 

45 | P a g e 
 
projects under Project tied assistance and 524 under High Income Community 
Development Projects are being implemented that virtually cover all areas of 
socio-economic development, including agriculture, infrastructure, ICT, health, 
education, capacity building and culture. The Committee also note that India 
has provided extensive assistance in the form of vaccines, essential medicines, 
medical supplies, test kits, X-ray machines, etc., in the wake of the COVID-19 
Pandemic. 
 
 The Committee are aware that India shares unique and special relation 
with Bhutan and the same is reflected in the extensive developmental 
partnership. Since the COVID-19 situation appears to be normalizing, aid 
projects are likely to get back on track; it should be ensured that no project is 
delayed due to lack of fund requirements. The Ministry should seek additional 
fund requirement, if any, at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for 
compliance. Bhutan is entering Phase – II of the COVID – 19 pandemic under 
which restrictions on movement of labour and material within the country have 
been removed. The Royal Government of Bhutan has also reduced the 
quarantine for international arrivals from 14 days to 5 days. With the easing of 
restrictions on the movement of labour and material, the supplies of Cement, 
Steel, HSD and POL, and chemicals etc. for Hydropower Projects 
(Punatsangchhu I and II, Kholongchhu HEPs) are being restored to normal 
levels. The Punatsangchhu – II Project is facing shortage of 1700 workers, and 
the Project has, after consultation with the Royal Government of Bhutan, given 
an induction plan to bring in 1500 workers by end of June 2022. 
 

46 | P a g e 
 
 The fund disbursement of India’s Committed Plan Assistance of Rs. 4500 
crores for the 12th Plan of Bhutan is progressing smoothly. There are several 
bilateral mechanisms at various levels to monitor and review the progress of the 
GoI assisted projects in Bhutan, including the Plan Talks & the Project 
Monitoring Committee (PMC) mechanism. 
The fund releases for Plan Assistance would continue to be disbursed based on 
the assessment of individual project progress reports and bilaterally agreed 
modality for the Project. Based on Budget utilization and projected expenditure, 
additional fund requirement, if any, would be submitted at the RE stage. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 

47 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee note that the allocation under the sub head ‘Aid to Nepal’ is Rs. 
750.00 crore for BE 2022-23, which is 24% less than BE 2021-22. The reason 
for decline in allocation under this head during both RE as well as BE stage is 
that the physical progress of most of the ongoing projects was slow due to 
COVID-19 Pandemic. The Ministry has informed that under GoI Earthquake 
reconstruction assistance, 50000 houses in Gorkha and Nuwakot districts of 
Nepal were completed and handed over to beneficiaries in November 2021. 
Further, the Jaynagar- Kurtha segment of Jayanagar-Bardibas cross border rail 
link has been completed and taken over by Government of Nepal on October, 
2021. While understanding the Covid induced delays in implementation of 
project, the Committee are hopeful that there will be a renewed focus on 
completing ongoing projects and undertaking new projects of mutual interest in 
the coming year. The Ministry should ensure smooth, expeditious and timely 
execution of various ongoing projects in Nepal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Honourable Committee’s recommendations are noted. Government of India has 
allocated INR 750 crores under Aid to Nepal budget head for various 
development assistance and infrastructure projects in Nepal in the current 
financial year 2022-23. There are oversight mechanisms at various levels to 
monitor and review the progress of the GoI assisted and funded projects in 
Nepal. These include high-level mechanism at Ministerial level as well as 
working level mechanism at senior officials’ level. There are also Joint Project 
Monitoring Committees held with Government of Nepal. The purpose of these 
mechanisms is to regularly oversee and ensure smooth and expeditious 
implementation of projects and achievement of targets within specified 
timelines. 

48 | P a g e 
 
 COVID-19 has had a debilitating effect on the projects’ implementation 
and their execution.  Now with the situation improving, a renewed thrust is 
being placed on completion of all projects in a timely manner. In the same spirit, 
project reviews and Joint Project Monitoring Committee (JPMC) are taking 
place after a long time. It is expected and efforts will be made so that projects 
are completed within the stipulated timelines.  It may be added that Jaynagar-
Kurtha rail link has recently become operational and was jointly inaugurated by 
the Prime Ministers of both India and Nepal in April 2022. Bids have been 
invited for construction of Nepal Police Academy Project in Nepal.  The pace of 
work in various projects is improving now which hitherto was being impeded 
by COVID-19 challenges. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
The budgetary allocation under the head ‘Aid to Afghanistan’ has seen a 
downward trend from Rs. 350 crore in BE 2021-22 to Rs. 200 crore in BE 
2022-23. The Committee note that India’s development partnership with 
Afghanistan includes more than five hundred projects spread across each of the 
34 provinces of the country in critical areas of power, water supply, road 
connectivity, healthcare, education, agriculture and capacity building. In the 
given political scenario in Afghanistan, majority of countries, including India, 
have halted their projects in Afghanistan. The Committee are happy to note that 
India has been steadily providing humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people 
including foodgrains and medical assistance. The Ministry should continuously 
monitor the situation and continue providing humanitarian assistance to Afghan 
people. 
 
 

49 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has noted the observations of the Hon’ble Committee and will work 
towards the same. Several proposals in this regard are already under process. 
Due to the political and security situation in Afghanistan, projects 
implementation has suffered setbacks.  
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
The Committee notice that an improved allocation has been provisioned for 
expenditure on the budget sub head ‘Aid to Myanmar.’ The allocation during 
BE 2021-22 was Rs. 400.00 crore, which was increased to Rs. 600 crore during 
RE 2021-22.   BE 2022-23 has also been pegged at Rs. 600 crore. The stated 
reason for enhanced allocation is based on realistic assessment of physical 
progress in pace of expenditure in ongoing projects such as 
construction/upgradation of Kalewa-Yargi road, road & waterways component 
of Kaladan project, construction of bridges on TKK Road, Coastal Surveillance 
System, Border Area Development programs, training and scholarships. 
 
         While noting that the ongoing political turmoil in Myanmar has impacted 
the pace of implementation of aid projects, the Committee are pleased to 
observe that the Ministry has remained in constant touch with the concerned 
authorities in Myanmar to secure their support for ensuring smooth and 
expeditious implementation of our projects. The Ministry, therefore, should 
continue making earnest efforts in expeditious completion of ongoing projects 
in Myanmar, particularly the much delayed Kaladan Multi Modal Transit 
Transport (KMMTT). 
 

50 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
Despite the ongoing political situation in Myanmar, GoI has completed and 
handed over two Capacity Building institutions, Myanmar Institute of 
Information Technoogy (MIIT) in Mandalay and Advanced Centre for 
Agricultural Research and Education (ACARE) at Yezin Agricultural 
University in Nay Pyi Taw in March this year. Both these are amongst the 
premier institutes in their respective fields in Myanmar and are contributing to 
building a highly skilled and well-qualified cadre of IT professionals and 
agricultural research scientists respectively.  
 
 On the Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport project, the waterways 
component has been completed. A port operator jointly appointed by the 
Governments of India and Myanmar, has started maintenance of the Port 
since February 2020. Efforts are underway to operationalise the Sittwe Port by 
this year. Progress on construction work of the road component has been slow, 
mainly due to the security situation on the Myanmar side and the delay caused 
due to COVID-19 pandemic. Recently, a new Project Executing Agency has 
been appointed for early completion of the road portion of the project. 
 
 Given the current security and political situation in Myanmar, 
implementation and execution of the above projects have been met with 
numerous challenges.  Kalewa-Yargi road section projects on trilateral highway 
is under construction and the current physical progress is 40%.  The DPR for 69 
Bridges has been updated and NHAI has been appointed as new Project 
Executing Agency on 28.02.2022 for their construction. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 

51 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
The budgetary allocation under the sub head 'Aid to African Countries' has been 
abridged from Rs. 300.00 crore (BE 2021-22) to Rs. 250.00 crore (BE 2022- 
23). The Ministry has proffered two broad reasons for this reduced allocation - 
suboptimal utilisation of funds and various challenges like delay in decision 
making by host institutions, sub-optimal choice of location by host countries, 
lack of funds with host countries to provide land/building/running cost as per 
agreement, internal conflicts and civil unrest faced in implementation of 
projects. The Committee note that the three India-Africa Forum Summits [IAFS 
I, II & III] in 2008, 2011 and 2015 have further reinforced the development 
partnership with the Continent. The Ministry has informed that the initial period 
of e-VidyaBharati and e-AarogyaBharati Network Project (e-VBAB) which was 
5 years from 2016-21. However, due to technological and regulatory changes 
from time to time, the project could be launched only in October 2019 and the 
actual implementation started in January 2020. The Committee note that a 
regular and high-level review of projects undertaken under various IAFS is 
carried out in consultation with all concerned stakeholders and policy decisions 
are taken accordingly. 
 
 Keeping in mind the geographical extent and significance of the Africa 
region, the Committee are disappointed with the drooping allocation and the 
slow pace of progress in projects under this budget sub-head. The Committee are 
dissatisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the reduction in 
allocation under this sub head. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the 
budgetary allocation should be reflective of the importance India attaches to this 
Region. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that enhanced 
allocation must be provisioned for this head and based on a feasibility study, 
physical and financial targets should be established for completion of all 
ongoing projects in Africa. 

52 | P a g e 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has sincerely noted the concerns and recommendations of the 
Hon’ble Standing Committee.  The Ministry would like to reassure the Hon’ble 
Committee that Africa is receiving high priority by the Government.  
 
2. India has maintained a vibrant relationship with African countries, which 
is evident with 34 outgoing visits since 2014 [President (13), Vice President 
(12) and Prime Minister (9)] and around 100 incoming visits at ministerial level.  
The 10 guiding principles enunciated by the Prime Minister in Uganda in 2018, 
have continued to guide India-Africa relations and to take our engagement to 
the next higher level.  These guiding principles have been given ‘top priority’ in 
various areas including digital & IT, agriculture, trade & investment, 
development partnership, especially designed people-centric projects, enhance 
local capacity and assist African youth, capacity building, climate change, 
cooperation in terrorism & maritime issues, international cooperation for 
representative world order, etc.  The Ministry is in a continued process of taking 
these elements forward in a focused manner.  This is reflected in the range of 
important events completed in previous years and/or planned between India and 
Africa in near future.  
 
3. In order to enhance our diplomatic presence in African continent, GOI 
has opened 18 new Missions.  Missions in Republic of Guinea, Burkina Faso, 
Cameroon, Republic of Congo, Togo, Sao Tome & Principe, Liberia, Sierra 
Leone and Mauritania have already been operational and the Missions in Guinea 
Bissau, Cape Verde and Chad may be operational within this year.  After 
opening of the 18 new Missions in Africa, India will have resident Missions in 
47 out of 54 African countries. 
 

53 | P a g e 
 
4. The IAFS-IV was expected to be held in September 2020 but was 
postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.  In the run up of the Summit, 1st 
India-Africa Defence Ministers’ Conclave was held in February 2020 in 
Lucknow.  However, various other scheduled events since then were postponed 
due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The Ministry endeavors to hold the 
IAFS-IV at the earliest suitable opportunity. 
 
5. During the spread of COVID-19 pandemic, India provided around 150 
tonnes of medical aid in the form of HCQ tablets and 16 other life-saving drugs 
worth US $ 5.3 million (Rs. 40 crore) to 33 African countries as a gift.  Since 
January 2021 till now, we have supplied a total of 37.60 million doses of Made-
in-India COVID-19 Vaccine to 42 African countries as a Grant, under COVAX 
initiative and on commercial basis. We have also vigorously pursued signing of 
MoUs in mutual recognition of the COVID-19 Vaccine certificates issued by 
India and respective African countries. 
 
6. In the light of the last wave of COVID-19 pandemic world over in 
December 2021, we expressed our solidarity with Africa through highlighting 
our readiness to supply essential life-saving drugs, test kits, gloves, PPE kits 
and medical equipment as ventilators, as may be required. India also announced 
to consider favourably cooperation in genomic surveillance and virus 
characterization related research work with our African counterparts. India and 
South Africa took initiative in WTO to seek exemption on IPR to produce 
Vaccines to fight COVID-19 pandemic.  The initiative was supported by a large 
number of countries including the USA.  
 
7. The Ministry, with the budgetary allocation of Rs. 250 crore for the 
financial year 2022-23 provisioned under the Head “Aid to African Countries”, 
would continue to focus on catering to the setting up of Institutes; various 

54 | P a g e 
 
Scholarships/Training programmes including under IAFS-III; ICCR 
Scholarships; Food Aid, Medical aid including for equipment; humanitarian 
aids to fight natural disasters; Books; Vehicles; organising Events/Seminars/ 
Studies/Visits; Cash Grants; development assistance projects; etc. in order to 
further strengthen our friendly relations with various African countries. The 
Ministry will continue to vigorously follow up and review the projects 
announced during IAFS-I, IAFS-II and IAFS-III which are presently at various 
stages of setting up to have these implemented within the shortest possible time. 
In order to augment our development partnership with the friendly African 
countries, India would continue to extend LoCs and Grants to various African 
countries as per their need basis within the parameters prescribed.  
 
8.  The Ministry would also like to emphasize that the high priority and 
importance accorded to Africa in our Foreign Policy is sought to be reflected in 
the development cooperation context.  The Ministry will ensure effective 
utilisation of funds for expeditious implementation of our diverse ongoing 
projects in Africa and seek enhanced allocation under the budgetary Head “Aid 
to African countries” at Revised Estimates (RE) stage, if necessary; and/or on 
finalisation of the dates of the IAFS-IV. We have noted Hon’ble Committee’s 
observations on the drooping allocation and the slow pace of progress in 
projects under this budget sub-head.  During the fiscal year 2021-22, we made 
utmost efforts to spend the funds allocated under the budgetary Head “Aid to 
African Countries” in spite of the COVID-19 induced restrictions. Nevertheless, 
due to the prevailing restrictions on international travel out of India, many of 
our aid projects in Africa could not make optimal progress.  However, as the 
COVID-19 pandemic has subsided and the situation is returning to normal, we 
will move ahead on our grant projects with renewed focus in Africa. 
 

55 | P a g e 
 
9. The Ministry has taken a note of all the recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Committee and will seek to address them suitably. 
 
10. As far as the e-VidyaBharati & e-AarogyaBharati Network project is 
concerned, the Cabinet approved period of the project expired in 2021 and 
hence enrollments to academic sessions of July 2021 and January 2022 could 
not be carried out. This resulted in low budget utilization. However, ‘in-
principle’ approval of Hon’ble EAM has been obtained for the extension of the 
project beyond 2021 till December 2024 clearly indicating the physical and 
financial targets for the project. Process for appraisal and approval of Delegated 
Investment Board has also been initiated. 
 
 Once the extension of the project is approved, the utilization of the 
budget would be optimal. Division would be vigorously pursuing to ensure that 
the physical and financial targets of the project are achieved. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs through Indian 
Missions and Posts abroad regularly engages with the Indian diaspora in 
seeking its time, expertise and investment to develop a strong bond between the 
members of the diaspora and their origin country.   Also, there exists a robust 
institutional framework for the welfare, safety and protection of Indian migrants 
working abroad, which inter alia includes e-Migrate system, Pre-Departure 
Orientation Programme, MADAD portal, Indian Community Welfare Fund, 
Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras, help lines at Indian Missions and Posts, 
Shelter Homes, etc. The Ministry has informed that Protectorate of Emigrant 
offices have been opened in 11 cities with the aim of gradually covering all 
States. The Committee note that to facilitate return of Indian nationals stranded 

56 | P a g e 
 
in various countries due to restriction imposed in the wake of Covid pandemic, 
the Vande Bharat Mission was started on 7th May, 2020. Around INR 45.78 
crores were utilized from ICWF to extend assistance to more than 1,73,618 
Indians till end December, 2021. SWADES (Skilled Workers Arrival Database 
for Employment Support) initiative was launched to conduct a skill mapping 
exercise of the returning citizens under the Vande Bharat Mission. 
 
 The Committee applaud the efforts made by the Ministry to proactively 
help distressed/stranded Indian nationals during the COVID-19 Pandemic. As 
the Pandemic has created significant uncertainties for a certain section of 
Overseas Indians, particularly migrant workers and students, the Committee are 
hopeful that the Ministry will coordinate with other line Ministries and ensure 
that such Indians are suitably rehabilitated and assisted in their future career 
options. The Committee also desire that Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) should be used proactively for wider dissemination of 
various schemes and programmes that are being implemented by the Ministry 
for welfare of Indians abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The acknowledgement and appreciation of Ministry’s efforts to proactively help 
distressed/stranded Indian nationals during the COVID-19 Pandemic by the 
Hon’ble Committee is duly noted. Further, the following updates are submitted 
-   
i. At present, 13 Protectorate of Emigrant Offices are working full-fledged 
in 13 different cities of the country for welfare, safety and protection of Indian 
migrants. These offices provided assistance to emigrants related to their 
employment abroad, contract, payment, living conditions, Pravasi Bhartiya 
Bima Yojana etc. With the aim of gradually covering all States, opening of 4 
new Protectorate of Emigrant Offices are in advanced stage.  

57 | P a g e 
 
 
ii. Ministry of External Affairs provides Pre-Departure Orientation Training 
(PDOT) aimed at enhancing soft skills of Indian migrant workers largely going 
to the Gulf region and Malaysia in terms of culture, language, tradition and 
local rules and regulations of the destination country, to sensitize migrant 
workers about pathways to safe and legal migration and various government 
programmes for their welfare and protection. As on 28th February, 2022, 
1,12,212/- migrant workers have undergone PDO Training. Shri V. 
Murleedharan, Minister of State for External Affairs addressed the special event 
on reaching of land mark figure of one lakh participants. During this special 
event, MOS has also launched PDOT portal-http://pdot.mea.gov.in.  
 The Ministry also launched the first online Pre-departure Orientation 
Training (PDOT) Programme on 7 April 2021 with an objective to provide pre-
departure orientation training to prospective migrants who are not in a position 
to attend the training in-person. 
 
iii. The Awareness Generation and Training of Trainers (TOT) Workshops 
were organized by the Ministry in collaboration with India Centre for Migration 
(ICM) and State Governments aimed at generating awareness and to sensitize 
participants about the benefits of safe, orderly and regular migration and welfare 
and protection measures of the Ministry for the migrant workers. Awareness 
Generation and Training of Trainers (TOT) Workshops have been conducted in 
nine States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal in coordination with the concerned 
Departments of the State Government. 
 
iv. E-books of PDO Manuals for Master Trainers and Handbooks for 
emigrant workers with a standardized content have been developed in Hindi, 
English, Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu languages under the 

58 | P a g e 
 
aegis of India Centre for Migration (ICM). These E-books have been updated 
time to time and uploaded on e-Migrate and ICM website for wider public 
dissemination. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 25) 
In view of the number and spread of overseas Indians, there is a high possibility 
of them getting stranded in a crisis situation. The recent political crisis in 
Afghanistan and conflict in Ukraine is a gross reminder about the implications 
on safety and security of Indian nationals in such a volatile situation. The role 
played by the Ministry in Afghanistan and Ukraine in the recent past has been 
commendable. The Committee, therefore, feel that evacuation preparedness has 
emerged as a significant issue. The Committee are aware that during outbreak of 
conflict or any other exigencies, the evacuation of Indian citizens is planned on 
a case-to-case basis and evacuation is dependent on a number of factors. The 
Committee desire that a database of Indian nationals abroad may be prepared 
and updated on a regular basis for emergency situations. Furthermore, a 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for evacuation of Indian nationals 
stranded in exigencies must also be chalked out and the same may be made 
available at all Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee would like to be 
kept informed about steps taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry has been keeping a record of Indian Diaspora abroad and keeps 
updating the same. Separate databases are being maintained in respect of NRIs, 
PIOs and Students. However collation of such data is dependent on voluntary 
registration by our diaspora living abroad.  
 A Rapid Response Cell (RRC) has been created in the Ministry to deal 
with exigencies and emergency situations similar to the recent Ukraine crisis, 

59 | P a g e 
 
where more than 22 thousand stranded Indians were evacuated by the 
Government in “Operation Ganga”.  
 
 The Rapid Response Cell in the Ministry handled SOP for the Control 
Room set up during the evacuation process. Based on the event report sent by 
the Indian Mission in Kyiv after Operation Ganga, recommendations for 
implementation/inclusion of evacuation procedures in MEA’s existing Crisis 
Management Plan is already under consideration.  
 (File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
The Committee are aware that Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service 
(SSIFS) conducts in service training for Indian Foreign Service (IFS) officers 
and other MEA personnel, courses for foreign diplomats and other professional 
training course. The budgetary allocation under the sub-head was Rs. 25.76 
crore during BE 2021-22, and has been marginally reduced to Rs. 23.48 crore 
during BE 2022-23. It is understandable that the COVID-19 pandemic–induced 
lockdowns and international travel restrictions have resulted in a decline in 
expenditure incurred under this sub head since FY 2020-21. The Committee 
note that measures have been taken for incorporating feedback from the trainees. 
The Committee observe that despite an increase in demand for training, the 
allocation under this sub-head has remained stagnant and can adversely impact 
our capacity building measures. The Committee are hopeful that with the easing 
down of Covid related restrictions, training of foreign diplomats will increase 
and the budgetary allocation to Ministry of External Affairs should also be 
enhanced adequately. 
 

60 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
Various training programmes for foreign diplomats are under consideration and 
will be worked out in consultation with the Foreign Offices of the concerned 
countries and the concerned Territorial Division of MEA. Augmentation of 
budgetary resources as and when required will be provisioned for. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
As a pre-eminent organization of Ministry of External Affairs with a mandate of 
India’s soft power abroad, ICCR’s activities are spread across the globe ranging 
from providing scholarships to organizing exhibitions to performing arts and 
visuals arts programme. The Committee note that there has been a marginal 
increase in allocation to ICCR from Rs. 300 crore (BE 2021-22) to Rs. 320 
crore (BE 2022-23). Enhanced allocation has been provisioned for Incoming 
Exhibitions, Distinguished Visitors Programme, Academic Visitors Programme, 
Incoming Cultural Delegation, Bust & Statue, Gen Next Democracy Network. 
All ICCR’s activities, including those conducted through its extended arms like 
Indian Cultural Centers, the Chairs of Indian Studies in Foreign Universities, 
and the foreign students’ scholarships programme, are conducted in close 
coordination with MEA and Indian Missions/Posts in the concerned country. 
The Committee note that barring a small and insignificant amount (on account 
of fee receipt from local students) from Indian Cultural Centress abroad, ICCR 
has no other source of extra-budgetary funding. While the activities of ICCR 
have expanded, there has been no improvement in budgetary allocation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should further increase 
the budgetary allocation for ICCR at RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 stage 
justifying the increasing significance of soft power projection of the country and 
central role of ICCR in it. The Ministry should explore the possibility of 

61 | P a g e 
 
Partnership and PPP Models for ICCR where the partners also put in resources 
for executing projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
ICCR is fully funded by MEA through Grants-in-Aid.  Apart from a small and 
insignificant amount from ICCs abroad on account of fee receipt from local 
students, ICCR has no other source of funding and therefore, adequate 
budgetary allocations for carrying out ICCR’s objectives including soft power 
projection.  
 As recommended by the Committee, ICCR will seek enhanced budget 
from MEA at the stages of RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24. ICCR will also 
explore avenues for generating additional fund in future by organizing events on 
PPP Model, renting its infrastructural spaces etc. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
Indian   Cultural   Centres   are   instruments   of    India’s    cultural outreach 
abroad. The Ministry has informed that ICCR is now operating 37 Indian 
Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad and is in the process of opening its two new 
centres in Washington and Paris. The Committee note that the renovation work 
of both the centres is ongoing and slated for completion shortly. The Ministry 
has recently conducted a performance audit of its cultural centres abroad and 
appropriate action to implement requisite changes is underway. 
 
 The Committee are relieved to learn that the much delayed 
establishment of cultural Centres in two significant places like Washington and 
Paris are expected to be completed. The Committee desire that the Cultural 
Centres in Washington and Paris are operationalized by the end of this year. 

62 | P a g e 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the findings of the audit of 
Cultural Centres. 
 
Reply of the Government 
With respect to findings of the audit of cultural centres it is mentioned that the 
audit of ICC is conducted by Embassy Audit of C&AG at the time of 
conducting audit of Missions.  These audit reports are available with the O/o 
C&AG, Missions and respective ICCs. The performance audit of the cultural 
centres has mentioned issues such as (i) Need of enhanced Coordination 
between ICC and Embassy; (ii) Re-devising of the soft power projection 
process; (iii) Reorganizing of ICCs and (iv) To re-visit the selection process of 
Directors of ICCs. Appropriate action to implement the recommendations is 
under way. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
The Committee are aware that Covid-19 has spread to every corner of the globe 
and has caused disruptions in every aspect of life. This has led to realignment in 
India’s foreign policy in the short term. The Committee are contented to note 
that during such global crisis India has acted as a responsible international actor 
by providing Covid-related medical supplies to over 154 countries, more than 
half of which were grants to our partners in the developing world. Moreover, 
development and production of Covid vaccines in India, and their export 
highlighted India’s position as a responsible and reliable stakeholder in   global   
health   supply   chains.   The challenges   imposed   to   diplomatic 
communication and interaction was adapted by usage of virtual tools. The 
Committee note that various multilateral, plurilateral and bilateral meetings took 
place using virtual platforms and voice communications. Vande Bharat Mission, 

63 | P a g e 
 
the largest repatriation operation was successfully conducted to facilitate safe 
travel of international travel of more than 3 million stranded & distressed people 
during global shutdowns in the wake of the pandemic. The Committee desire to 
put it on record that the resilience, vigour, prudence displayed by the Ministry 
during such a crisis has been exemplary and laudable and should keep 
preparedness for taking a leading role in any such adverse situation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to thank the Hon’ble Committee for appreciation of 
Ministry’s efforts in the times of global crisis such as Covid 19 and its 
repatriation efforts through the Vande Bharat Misison. As advised by the 
Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry is fully committed and prepared for India to 
play a leading role during any such global crisis situation arising due to Covid-
19 pandemic.  
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
  

64 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
Over the years, the Committee have highlighted the issue of human resource 
constraints within the Ministry of External Affairs. The Ministry has informed 
that sanctioned strength of the Ministry is 4474 out of which, one third of the 
manpower is deployed in Headquarters and are assigned different divisions 
from time to time, based on functional requirements. As regards the number of 
female employees in the Ministry, the percentage is 19.65 % at Gazetted level 
and 14.21% in Non Gazetted level. The Committee also note that only 15 
woman officers are posted as Head of Missions. On further probing, the 
Ministry informed that there is no gender based reservation in direct recruitment 
to IFS or in induction and promotion to IFS from the feeder grade. 
 
 The Committee find that the data relating to sanctioned strength of MEA 
appears to be inconsistent. As per the Ministry, the sanctioned strength was 
8951 in 2020 and 4474 in 2021.   The Ministry is advised to be meticulous and 
cautious in furnishing replies. Over the issue of skewed gender representation 
within MEA, the Committee would reiterate its earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should ensure improvement in internal practices on occupational 
equality including careers progression, promotion, training and appointments to 
higher ranks. The Ministry should also undertake a thorough and comparative 
cross-service analysis of the reason behind the skewed gender intake ratio and 
apprise the Committee about the findings of the same. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 

65 | P a g e 
 
The sanctioned strength of the Ministry is 4474. However there are other 
Subordinate Offices/attached offices/Autonomous Bodies/Statutory bodies such 
as Central Passport Organization, Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA), 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), Research and Information System 
for Developing Countries (RIS), Office of Principal Chief Controller of 
Accounts (CCoA), Cabinet Secretariat etc, whose strength, when added sums 
upto 8946.  
 
 The recruitment of IFS officers is via a competitive examination 
conducted by UPSC. There is no gender based reservation in direct recruitment 
to IFS or in induction and promotion to IFS from the feeder grade of Grade I of 
IFS Branch B. The Service has been open to both men and women in equal 
measure since its inception and have proper representation of women and more 
and more women officers are entering the Service in the recent years. Ministry 
has ensured equal opportunities for all the personnel and promotion& 
appointments of female Officers to higher ranks are based on seniority of the 
Officers. Gender equality is more a common practice than an exception as far as 
the IFS is concerned. Similarly, recruitment to General Cadre of IFS 'B', 
Stenographers' Cadre of IFS'B' and other cadres in the Ministry is done via 
competitive examination conducted by UPSC/SSC and there is again non gender 
based reservation in direct recruitment or in promotion. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
The Committee had welcomed the decision to the Ministry to utilize external 
expertise in form of subject specialist Consultants since 2015. The Committee 
note that currently there are 58 Consultants engaged by the Ministry and they 
carry out research activities as per the functional requirements of the respective 
Division where they are deployed in. However, the Ministry has informed that 

66 | P a g e 
 
there is no provision/way to absorb these consultants in the Ministry. In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, having subject specialist Consultants has 
been a progressive step as it will lead to both quantitative as well as qualitative 
productivity. The Committee feel that the absence of provision for absorbing the 
subject specialist Consultants within the MEA will act as a constraining factor in 
getting senior experts. The Committee, therefore desire that the Ministry should 
explore the possibility of absorption of some of the subject specialist experts for 
attracting quality experts and also opening of better career opportunities for 
senior experts within it. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Consultants engaged in the Ministry carry out research/specific activities as per 
functional requirements of the respective Division where they are deployed. The 
process of hiring of consultants is governed by the relevant sections of the 
General Financial Rules, 2017 (Rules Nos. 177-196), provisions of “Manual for 
Procurement of Consultancy and other Services 2017’ and Order issued on the 
subject by Department of Personnel & Training and Department of expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, from time to time. 
 
2. As per rules, engagement of consultant is to be undertaken for specific jobs 
which meet the following criteria: 
 
(i) The assigned job is time-bound, with well defined targets and is not 
of routine nature, 
(ii) The engagement would result in optional efficiency and economy 
for Ministry/ Government, 
(iii) The domain knowledge that the Consultant is expected to bring. 
 

67 | P a g e 
 
3. Consultants are selected for specialized jobs for implementation of various 
projects within the Ministry and a defined job profile, targets and time lines. The 
Consultants are engaged for short term contracts for specific tasks and specific 
term. The requirements may vary from time to time and it would be beneficial to 
attract skilled manpower to meet such requirements from the open market as and 
when the need arises. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
The Committee observe that Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) and 
Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) play an 
important role towards the promotion of India’s foreign policy goals in the field 
of regional and international trade, finance, development, science, technology 
and innovations. An allocation of Rs. 14.81 crore and Rs. Rs. 14.59 crore has 
been earmarked on expenditure for ICWA and RIS, respectively for the FY 
2022-23. On an in-depth analysis of the mandate, organizational structure and 
activities undertaken by ICWA and RIS, the Committee are of the opinion that 
there is significant overlapping of activities conducted by the two autonomous 
bodies. In an increasingly interdependent global order, there cannot be a 
segregation of foreign policies issues into economic and non economic. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry should make an assessment 
study of revamping and merging these two research organizations with a greater 
budgetary outlay, clear mandate and focused research outputs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is pertinent to understand the origin of both RIS and ICWA, in order to better 
comprehend the diverse nature of functions that they perform. 
 

68 | P a g e 
 
Origins of RIS:  
 
● The concept of a ‘Research and Information System’ (RIS) of Non-
aligned and other developing countries was mooted by NAM Ministerial 
Conference 1975 and the  decision to establish it was taken by the 
Colombo Summit in 1976. 
 
● The first meeting of the system was held in Belgrade in January 1979 and 
ICSSR was designated as the focal point in India.    
 
● At 7th Non-aligned Summit in New Delhi in 1983, the decision to hold its 
second meeting in India was reiterated.  Considering India’s 
chairmanship of the Non-aligned Movement during the year, it was 
decided to establish a focal point at the national level to give a definitive 
shape to the work of the RIS.  
 
● On recommendations made during two meetings of the Committee of 
Secretaries(COS), led by the Cabinet Secretary, it was decided to 
establish a society entitled ‘Research and Information System of Non-
aligned and other Developing Countries’. 
 
● COS felt  that the RIS would be a useful mechanism with its independent 
back-up facilities to assist the developing countries in their dialogue with 
the developed countries. It also recommended that RIS should be 
established as a registered society in order to make it a “legal entity” 
entitled to receive and utilize funds and to enter into contracts and 
providing the necessary flexibility, as in the case of ICSSR and ICCR.  
● In order to give the new institution required freedom of action and 
degree of independence for its operational effectiveness and efficiency, 

69 | P a g e 
 
RIS was established as a Society with the Registrar of Societies in Delhi 
on 30 May 1983. It was also given the power to generate funds by way 
of “Consultancy fee and like charges” by conducting specialized studies 
and programmes for its partner institutions and bodies within the country 
or abroad.  
 
● It is always important  for Governments, both  emerging or  major 
powers, to have some policy research institutions working as think tanks, 
bodies or agencies  to influence global opinion in favour of their  policy 
postures or  to defend and promote their national interests in this new age. 
The advantage of having such institutions, like RIS as a registered 
Society, is that it amplifies government’s advice in an unvarnished 
manner without attributing it to   by virtue of its reach among key 
national and international institutions and bodies dealing with policy 
issues. Such independent institutions normally share ongoing trends, 
impressions and findings on important issues with the government as 
such key inputs are not easily available to policy makers and shapers to 
holistically examine the various dimensions of the policy options 
available before important policy announcements are made.  Further, as 
part of their role to conduct track 1.5 or 2 consultations with policy 
makers or leading or influential scholars of other countries on vital issues, 
such independent bodies ascertain and share their feedback and reaction 
with the government which is imperative for the proper conduct of 
important policy.   As such, the formation of RIS as a Society was 
consciously done by our policy makers.   
 
● Accordingly, several eminent academics, intellectuals and senior 
Government officials were appointed as Members of RIS and Shri G. 
Parthasarathi, Chairman ICSSR, was appointed as its President and Prof. 

70 | P a g e 
 
S. Chakravarthy as the Vice-President. FS and Secretary (ER), MEA; 
Secretary, DoE, and Secretary (DST) were appointed  as the ex-officio 
members to give the required economic heft to the institution.    
 
Origin of ICWA: 
  ICWA is not an autonomous body per se but is a statutory body. Unlike 
RIS which came into being in 1984 (RIS), ICWA was established in 1943 by 
a group of eminent intellectuals with the principal objective of creating an 
Indian perspective on international relations and to act as a repository of 
knowledge and thinking on foreign policy issues. It is India's oldest foreign 
policy think tank and possibly the first institution of its kind in Asia. As such 
its institutional heritage is important. It is also the institution where serious 
study of International Affairs in India began. ICWA Act of 2001 and the 
ICWA (Amendment) Act, 2003 designated the Council as an institution of 
national importance with the Hon'ble VP of India as its President.  
 
 
Effects of proposed revamping or merger of RIS and ICWA: 
                   It may be noted that the nature and focus of the activities carried out by 
both of the institutes ICWA and RIS are very different. RIS's activities are 
not focused on ‘Area Studies', or on issues of geopolitics, foreign policy and 
security which is the core focus of ICWA. Moreover, to look at both the 
institutes only on the basis of the binaries of economic and non-economic 
thrust areas may not be appropriate, as each of these aspects are of a special 
nature. The fact is also that both institutes are different in their vision, 
mandate, objectives, institutional identity, history and standing. In order to 
have focused research outputs and policy outcomes, both institutes working 
separately on their respective domain areas will bring value through 
analyzing of global issues impacting national interest.The impact of proposed 

71 | P a g e 
 
revamping or merger with regard to RIS and ICWA is enumerated separately 
in a detailed manner: 
 
Impact of revamping or merger on RIS: 
 
● The pioneering work RIS has done on issues relating to economic, social, 
scientific and technological matters in general and South-South and 
Triangular Cooperation in particular  to defend and promote the interests 
of the developing countries would get seriously affected.  
 
● Against the overarching mandate of ICWA, issues relating to specialized 
knowledge domains of RIS, which are gaining far higher tracking at 
global level than ever before, would stand marginalized depriving its 
partner institutions in the developing countries of its cutting edge 
knowledge and policy research. Similarly, the role of RIS as critical 
inputs provider on important issues to the MEA and line Ministries and 
institutions would get impacted.  
 
● RIS produces evidence based policy research studies in consultation with 
some of our key Ministries and Departments of the Government and 
provides them with vital policy inputs on a regular basis. Similarly, RIS 
also interacts closely with several inter-governmental organizations and 
is invited by them to contribute to their policy formulation processes on 
key issues affecting the developing countries, which may not be the case 
under its new governance structure.   
 
● As RIS is able to get across institutions beyond the national governments, 
including  CSOs and NGOs globally on critical issues, it would not be 

72 | P a g e 
 
possible for the new set up to do so because of the government ownership 
of the new system which is normally confined to predefined parameters.  
 
● The unique character of RIS as a registered Society would gradually 
wane the moment the research work under the new set up comes under 
the provisions of an institution working under an Act of Parliament.  It 
would have incalculable  impact on the working of the wide body of 
platforms RIS has already created over the years as part of its outreach 
and networking  among developing  countries  as most of these 
institutions are not run by their respective governments or work  under 
their  national government set up  and  act on their own with a fairly 
reasonable degree of independence in their operations and would not like 
to be dealing with government run structures and promote the spirit of 
plurality of views on critical matters.  
 
● The idea of segregation of economic and non-economic issues  in the 
foreign policy is rightly based  on the premise that most of the front line  
economic issues require specialized knowledge and expertise by subject 
experts and renowned academia  in this highly dynamic and volatile 
world where new trade and economic architectures perpetuating the 
domination of the rich countries  are emerging in an unabated manner in 
new forms and have to be deftly dealt with to defend and promote the 
interests of the developing countries  for which RIS was visualized by its 
founding members. It would be best if the distinct character of RIS as a 
specialized institution is maintained.  
 
● The larger ambit of the new set up may make it unwieldy in terms of 
handling economic and non-economic issues and primacy to geo-political 
issues would be at the cost of trade, economic and development issues,   

73 | P a g e 
 
which are seriously impacting the core interests of the Indian economy in 
general with the emergence of new generation issues being touted by the 
Western countries to erect a multitude of barriers to prevent the self-
reliance of developing countries, including India. 
 
● It may prove to be difficult for the new set up to come up with credible 
research studies covering  political and strategic dimensions of the issues 
involved, along with analytical and policy research on trade and 
development related issues as both these streams are dealt with by 
separate domain experts. 
 
 RIS has been designed as a forum for intellectual debate on international 
economic issues with the support of the network of institutions which it has 
developed and nurtured over the years in other countries beyond the  ambit  of  
national  governments  and  through its wide  network, it  has created a number 
of specific platforms globally to effectively put across India’s standpoint on 
issues of critical importance, including Global Development Centre, FITM, 
Science Diplomacy network, NeST, FITM, FIDC etc.  GDC, which is currently 
being funded by the UK Government through FCDO, has also entered into a 
multi-year partnership agreement with Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to 
promote replication of India’s best development practices within and outside the 
country.  Further, the German think tank GIZ IN is entering into a two year 
partnership agreement with RIS in the field of South-South Cooperation, 
including their participation in the Delhi Process, and detailed studies on 
Triangular Cooperation. It is quite possible that under the new set up these 
networks may lose their effectiveness in the absence of the engagement of RIS 
with them as their incubator. 
 

74 | P a g e 
 
● In the recent years, RIS has been able to enlarge its footprint globally by 
dint of its credible evidence based policy research capabilities and 
potential. A large number of funding agencies, including FCDO, 
European Commission, JAICA, B&MGF, USAID, IFPRI,UNDP, 
UNOSSC and so on  have entered into research and cooperation 
partnership agreement with RIS which has enabled RIS to generate 
substantial income on its own through commissioned projects studies and 
programmes thereby reducing its reliance on government funding while 
promoting India’s core economic interests. Similarly, a large number of 
Government Departments have also entered into partnership agreements 
with RIS to conduct specific research studies on their behalf including 
Department of Science & Technology, Ministry of Ayush, and Ministry 
of Commerce etc.  
 
● While RIS  acts  as India’s national focal point for co-ordination of trade 
and economic research activities among developing countries  and 
advises the Government on issues relating to multilateral economic 
issues  to safeguard and promote the interests of developing countries, 
the new set up may not be able to immediately move forward to take up 
such important responsibilities during these turbulent and critical times 
where time is of essence and any of such disruption would have serious 
repercussions on countries’ interests. It is not clear as to how effectively 
the new set up would be able to provide specialized knowledge and 
evidence based research to the Global South and our government. It 
would also be difficult to maintain the depth of its regional and global 
networks and partner institutions through its unique convening power to 
present multi-disciplinary multi-dimensional perspectives on issues 
critical to developing countries.   
 

75 | P a g e 
 
● It would not be easy for the new set up to maintain the momentum and 
dynamism of the ongoing work programme of RIS on South-South and 
Triangular Cooperation, which is gaining far higher global traction now 
than ever before due to the substantial pioneering research work done by 
RIS. Over the years, RIS has developed the expertise to promote multi-
stakeholder consultations on vital issues concerning the developing 
countries, including South Cooperation, under which it brings together 
the North and the South for maximum possible convergence on 
development issues and for the promotion of collaborative and 
cooperative endeavors between the two sides. RIS hosts annual Delhi 
Process dialogue with the strong support of MEA on international 
development cooperation with the participation of international 
development experts. 
 
● While RIS has been working steadfastly for the attainment of aims and 
objectives enshrined in its MoA, which was signed in 1983, there is a 
perceptible change in the global landscape with the emergence of new 
challenges governing international trade, finance, technology and 
economic relations. In addition, the emergency of Covid has reset the 
entire global economic and financial  landscape and posed unimaginable 
challenges in dealing with issues such as multilateralism,  globalization,  
singular reliance on  particular nation states in global value chains of 
essential  goods and services. Threats to the sovereignty of developing 
countries in name of infrastructure development by some states using 
their funds for geo-political purposes, and the question of  the relevance 
of existing global governance institutions and weaponization  of financial 
and economic sanctions unilaterally  thereby seriously impacting the 
developing countries. The fact that current emphasis by the rich nations 
on labour standards, sustainability, responsible governance, human and 

76 | P a g e 
 
religious rights, gender issues, growing inequalities and  greater use of 
clean technologies in the name of climate change to make productivity in 
developing countries expensive are all seriously threatening India’s 
efforts towards  Atmanirbhar Bharat. These vital questions would have to 
be taken note of before taking any decision about the fate of RIS.  
 
● Similarly, it has been well-established that commerce is central to global 
prosperity and well-being. As a result, international commercial 
diplomacy has gained primacy in international relations.  It is vividly 
evident from the trends that during the visit of Heads of States of major 
industrialized countries abroad, their main objective is to clinch low 
hanging fruits or favourable trade deals for their industries.  As we share 
a common future, we intend to share trade and economic partnerships for 
a better future.  Therefore, strong trade relations are being developed the 
world over.  During the past decades the convergence of economies of 
developed and developing countries has promoted the spirit of 
globalization which is now under serious threat and requires constant 
monitoring and analysis to safeguard India’s core trade and economic 
interests .  
 
● Further, industrialized countries are also encouraging developing 
countries to cut taxes, carry out administrative and financial reforms to 
create conducive and warm business environment in the name of 
structural  reforms  to attract greater investments for the creation of jobs 
in their countries  and building their better future. Some of them are 
openly calling on the developing countries to strengthen their Intellectual 
Property protection and cut tariffs on manufacture and agricultural goods 
and break down the barriers to the investors and market access to 
facilitate the entry of their multinationals in their economies which India 

77 | P a g e 
 
has steadfastly resisted and their pressure is now mounting again in the 
new economic world we are witnessing.   They are also deliberately 
mixing up the issue of immigration by professionals with refugees and 
economic migrants to stall the movement of qualified professionals to the 
developed world.  It is well-established that qualified professionals are 
not only job creators and promoters but also knowledge bearers and 
innovators. India has to some extent overcome these challenges in its new 
set of deals with some of them but inherently their intent of dominating 
developing countries remains undiminished. Focused policy research on 
such issues is being done by RIS.  
 
● Furthermore, the  major challenges before the developing countries, 
including India, is the declining faith in the spirit of multilateralism in the 
industrialized world, rise of protectionism, and introduction of new 
issues, including non-tariff barriers, standards,  intellectual property right 
and labour issues,  to stall the flow of imports and movement of qualified 
professionals from the developing countries to the developed world.  RIS 
has done considerable policy research in these sectors which is of great 
importance towards national policy making on these issues.  
 
● India has always believed and stood for global well-being and has 
partnered with the global community for the success of an inclusive, 
equitable, democratic and rule based system of international relations. 
India engagement with the Paris Agreement on Climate Change is an 
excellent model of innovative multilateralism consistent with respect for 
national sovereignty of its partner countries. Terrorism, piracy, drug 
trafficking, poverty, climate change, deforestation and epidemic diseases 
underline the imperatives of multilateral actions by the international 
community. 

78 | P a g e 
 
 
● The convergence of economies of developed world and developing world 
brought about by the spread of globalization has reduced global 
inequality for some time and  the redistribution of wealth at national, 
regional and global scale has also seriously impacted by the devastating 
effects of Covid pandemic. However, Covid pandemic has taught 
everyone the devastating consequences of dependencies on a single 
nation state in value chains that can threaten the survival of everyone and 
as a result the Western countries are looking for alternative approaches to 
deal with these threats.  
 
● Over the past decade RIS has expanded its research and outreach 
portfolio in such a manner that overall dependence of RIS on MEA has 
started gradually going down.  For instance, in 2012-13 the total 
expenditure of RIS was Rs. 7.01 crore and percentage contribution of 
MEA was 76 per cent. 
 
● In 2015-16, the total expenditure of RIS was Rs. 13.16 crore and the 
share of MEA was 44 per cent.  Likewise, in 2016-17 the total 
expenditure was Rs. 12.56 crore and the share of MEA was 55 per cent.  
The same trend evolved further with MEA share in total expenditure was 
53 per cent in 2018-19 and 60 per cent in 2019-20. 
 
● RIS has succeeded in creating several new parallel trajectories which 
have immensely helped in the Track 1.5 diplomacy.  RIS is also closely 
linked with neighbouring countries through their think-tanks, experts, 
research institutions and in some cases even the civil societies.  In this 
way, though RIS functions within the government, still as a registered 

79 | P a g e 
 
society it has emerged as an independent think-tank and research 
institution. 
   
● Though, it is only MEA that extends grant-in-aid to RIS, the Governing 
Council and General Body is constituted in such a manner that the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry; Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance; and Ministry of Science and Technology are also on 
the Board for multiple engagements by RIS.  As a result, the Institute 
now runs different forums for advancing government policy initiatives 
including handling the onerous responsibility of the G20. 
● RIS will be a key knowledge partner during the Indian Presidency of G20 
in 2023. By anticipating well in advance as a responsible policy research 
institution from India, RIS has consolidated its G20 programme in 2019 
on its own without any funding support from MEA or any other external 
sources. Besides scaling up and providing a direction to the RIS G20 
work that was happening since 2012, the programme served as a strong 
institutional foundation for soon after its launch. By creating 10 dedicated 
subject verticals within RIS in with the Task Forces of T20, a leading 
Engagement Group of G20; launching a peer-reviewed journal called 
‘G20 Digest’ and establishing a Coalition of Engagement Groups 
(COEG) with CII for Business 20 (B20) and Indian National Science 
academy (INSA) for Science 20 (S20), RIS kickstarted with a series of 
seminars and brainstorming sessions that formed a solid support for MEA 
at early stages of its preparatory work for G20. 
● By contributing policy briefs and serving as Co-Chairs to various task 
forces of T20, RIS faculty has developed networks within G20/T20 
fraternity which could help build India’s positions on important global 
issues and mould public opinion through seminars, conferences and other 
forms of academic and policy interactions. RIS now serves as the 

80 | P a g e 
 
Knowledge Partner for MEA and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer 
Welfare, created G20 Research Forum with ERIA and University of 
Indonesia to work, beyond Indian presidency,  with Brazil and South 
Africa. It reflects RIS’s self-initiated endeavours to support the cause of 
India’s leadership on developing country priorities. 
● RIS has also created platforms, which are sector specific and bringing in 
industry specific stakeholders and other actors together for meaningful 
conversations.  For instance, Ayush Ministry has funded a mega project 
to run the Forum for Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) at RIS.  The 
Ministry of Science and Technology has funded the Forum for Indian 
Science Diplomacy (FISD).  With Ministry of Earth Sciences, RIS is 
closely working on Blue Economy Forum.  With the Development 
Partnership Administration (DPA) of MEA and with 21 other civil 
society institutions and experts, RIS is running the Forum for Indian 
Development Cooperation (FIDC).  In partnership with United Nations 
Office of South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC) and 12 think tanks from 
other southern economies, RIS is also leads the Network of Southern 
Think Tanks (NeST). 
 
 In view of the above, it is our considered view that it would be in our 
interest to retain the exclusive identity of RIS as a credible policy research 
institution on trade and development issues without in any way altering its 
unique character as a registered Society for its operational efficiency and 
effectiveness. Such an approach would be in consonance with the aims and 
objectives of the institution, particularly since its inception RIS has played an 
extremely important role to defend and promote the core interests of the country 
and its growing importance and footprint clearly testifies it.  
 

81 | P a g e 
 
The impact of proposed revamping or merger on ICWA: 
 The Council has been able to undertake numerous activities and 
initiatives towards the fulfillment of its stated mandated objectives to promote 
the study of Indian foreign policy and international affairs. The activities were 
carried out under its three pillars-(a) Research and Publications (b) Policy 
debates and discussions and (c) Outreach.  
(a) With regard to research and publication, the Council has addressed 
issues of foreign policy agenda through its range of publications and 
articles by in-house as well as outside experts. With its "Area Studies" 
focus it has increased its research output by commissioning books, 
monographs, and special studies from eminent experts and scholars on 
emerging issues having implications for foreign and security policy in 
various geographies. In the past three years, the Council has published 
books focusing on areas such as Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri 
Lanka, Maldives, Europe, Africa, West Asia, South Caucasus, Central 
Asia, South East Asia and Indo - Pacific, thus contributing to knowledge 
creation in these areas. The Council has also fulfilled the requirements of 
the Ministry by undertaking special studies and research projects on 
Africa, Nepal, UN and Latin America in the domain of politics, 
diplomacy and security. ICWA journal 'India Quarterly' has appeared 
regularly since the 1940s and remains the oldest, one of the most sought 
after and important Indian journal in the field of Area Studies and 
Foreign Policy.  
(b) Regarding policy debates the Council has been proactive in providing 
forum for  debate and discussion on major issues of foreign and security 
policies through Seminars, Round Table discussions, Lectures, 
Dialogues in both the Track 1.5 and Track II format. It has provided a 
platform for visiting leaders to publicly articulate their views on issues 
of national and international importance. Many world dignitaries, 

82 | P a g e 
 
intellectuals, diplomatic community have addressed the Council in the 
past years  
(c) With regard to Outreach ICWA has been regularly holding various 
bilateral dialogues with its national and international MoU partners.  
 At the national level ICWA has supported seminars/ conferences 
organized by Universities and its MoU partners across India on 
foreign policy and international relations in order to promote and 
strengthen foreign policy thinking and discourse. This contributes to 
enhance understanding of issues of topical importance across 
various States among students, scholars and general public.  
 At the international level the Council has MoU partners with 
counterparts in several countries including Nepal, Russia, Poland, 
Hungary, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Egypt, Turkey, Morocco, Uzbekistan, 
Kazakhstan, China, South Korea, Vietnam, Indonesia, Australia, 
New Zealand, Colombia. The Council holds regular dialogues with 
its partners which have been very fruitful in terms of exchange of 
perspectives/ views on global, regional and bilateral issues.  
 It is pertinent to note here that our international MoU partners also 
have similar Foreign Policy and geo-political and geo-strategic 
focus and objectives. Some of them are directly under their Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. In several countries one can see think tanks/ 
research institutes with only International relations, foreign and 
security policy focus and also other think tanks with exclusive 
international economy focus. One example is South Korea with 
whom ICWA and RIS have 2+ 2 MoU arrangement with KNDA 
and KIEP. Similarly, in case of Germany, ICWA and RIS engaged 
with GIGA and SWP.  
 ICWA's unique institutional identity, gives India the advantage of 
having Think tank with a long historical record, and one which has 

83 | P a g e 
 
been recognised as an Institute of national importance by an Act of 
Parliament. Merger of this vertical in a single identity would not 
thus achieve any great synergy or optimum utilisation of the 
Council's history and international standing. It would on the other 
hand, erode its standing built in last 8 decades.  
 Finally, it can be said that in a vast country like India there are very 
few think tanks which specialize in the domain of foreign policy, 
geopolitics /geo-strategy, and international relations. Hence, 
merging an existing one with another think tank may not be 
appropriate. Both these organizations have exclusive identities and 
have been performing various functions as per their mandates. 
Based on the assessment, we feel that both these organizations 
contribute to the shaping of our foreign policy in their unique 
manner.  
 Based on above keeping ICWA and RIS, separate, is in overall 
interest of the Nation 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 
The Policy Planning Division is the nodal division of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for policy planning and public diplomacy initiatives with the strategic 
and academic community. The Committee note that the primary objectives of 
India’s foreign policy are to protect and promote India’s national interests, 
defend territorial integrity and sovereignty and ensure peaceful, secure and 
stable regional and global environment that is conducive to India’s growth and 
development. The Ministry has informed that high priority is accorded to 
engaging academics based in universities and think tanks and utilizing their 
expertise in the preparation of research papers and policy briefs. The Committee 

84 | P a g e 
 
are pleased to know that in pursuance of their recommendation, the Ministry has 
carried out survey of 171 countries to ascertain the international practice 
regarding publication of official grand strategy/foreign policy documents. On 
the basis of the findings of the study, the Ministry has informed that India’s 
practice of articulation of foreign policy through Annual Reports, Parliament 
discussions, statements of high functionaries etc. is, therefore, in line with 
international practice of the vast majority of foreign offices. While appreciative 
of the Ministry’s informed reply, the Committee notice that the 23 countries 
(excluding EU) that publish comprehensive strategy documents about strategic 
and foreign policy objectives include countries with remarkable global standing 
such as USA, UK, EU, Russia and others. 
 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry should continue its 
constructive engagement with academicians, domain experts, think tanks and 
other stakeholders. There is a dire need for wider dissemination of the 
publications of Reports, Briefs and compendia of the Ministry and its network 
of think tanks and autonomous bodies. The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry should reach out to established think tanks in partner countries for a 
deeper exchange of ideas and policies. In the opinion of the Committee, India as 
a rising power should publish an official foreign policy document in the form a 
White Paper or Strategy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of External Affairs is happy to note that the Parliamentary 
Committee is satisfied with its justification for not releasing a grand strategy 
document. The Committee’s recommendation about having a foreign policy 
document, if not a grand strategy, that clearly delineates the guiding framework 
for our foreign policy engagements, is also duly noted. However, the Ministry 
has certain concerns regarding the publication/ release of such a foreign policy 

85 | P a g e 
 
document. Some of these concerns have already been mentioned in our previous 
response and would like to state the following: 
 India’s foreign policy is articulated in accordance with precedent, law and 
parliamentary rules in documents that are available in the public domain. 
These include the Annual Report of the Ministry, replies to Parliamentary 
Questions, submissions to the Parliamentary Committee, media briefings, 
and bilateral and multilateral documents containing a public expression of 
our foreign policy priorities. 
 Public statements by the President, Vice President, Prime Minister, 
Minister of External Affairs, and the Ministers of State and senior 
officials of the Ministry of External Affairs provide comprehensive and 
clear-cut guidelines for foreign policy on various issues while adhering to 
the rules of a parliamentary democracy. For example, the Prime Minister 
announced the objectives of our Climate Change policy by offering 
‘Panchamrit’ promises at the recently concluded COP26 Summit in 
Glasgow. India’s commitment to an open, free and rules based order in 
the Indo-Pacific region was reiterated at the G20 and Quad summits. The 
importance of ‘Neighbourhood First’, ‘Act East’ and ‘Think West’ to our 
foreign policy is regularly asserted. 
 Continuity and change have been the defining characteristic of India’s 
foreign policy. The ends of our foreign policy are deeply intertwined with 
national developmental priorities. Correspondingly, the means and 
strategies devised to achieve those ends have been attuned such that there 
is maximum convergence between India’s global diplomatic engagement 
and domestic development. In effect, India’s foreign policy strategy is 
aimed to diversify and expand the country's political, economic, and geo-
strategic options to ensure that India continues moving on an upward 
trajectory as a fast-growing inclusive economy, with a rising profile in 
global affairs. 

86 | P a g e 
 
 Each country has a different strategic culture and needs to be dealt with 
taking the historical, geographical, cultural, economic and political 
context into account. While the harmonisation of ends and means through 
a foreign policy document is appealing, it is our considered view that 
such a document will be of limited practical value because different 
countries are guided by different belief systems. Moreover, a dynamic 
diplomatic strategy is essential for responding to constantly evolving 
global challenges. 
 The Ministry holds the view that a context specific approach is better 
suited to meeting our foreign policy objectives than adhering to one 
overarching and formalised foreign policy document. 
 No single overarching policy document can capture all aspects of India’s 
foreign policy. However, the principles of India’s diplomatic strategy are 
long-established and enduring. The underlying principles and priorities 
have been disseminated by the Ministry through various channels of 
public communication. 
 A grand strategy or a single Foreign Policy document outlining foreign 
policy carries with it the risk of oversimplification of India’s deeply 
historical and richly diverse statecraft. Further, our foreign policy 
apparatus works in close cooperation with various other Ministries and 
institutions such as the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, National Security 
Council Secretariat, and the Prime Minister’s Office. 
 India’s Foreign Policy is not restricted to the realm of the Ministry of 
External Affairs. It involves the participation of multiple actors at various 
levels. Considerations of defence, economy, science and technology, law, 
intelligence, climate change, tourism, health and the prevailing domestic 
environment have to be taken into account. The United Kingdom, for 
instance, released an integrated security, defence, development and 

87 | P a g e 
 
foreign policy document in July 2021, which had a foreword by their 
Prime Minister. Australia’s foreign policy white paper in 2017 was 
collaboration between the foreign affairs office and the trade, tourism and 
investment office. It also included an introduction by their Prime 
Minister. 
 Foreign policy documents are more relevant for the scholarly and 
academic community whose objective is to connect the dots in a 
country’s past behaviour in order to predict future trends. This method 
helps aid academia’s understanding of the inner workings of the 
government better. Such a method may not be ideal for practitioners of 
foreign policy to formulate actual strategy as they pose the risk of making 
a country’s approach to Foreign Policy inflexible and rendering it 
susceptible to outside influence. 
 Ministry’s practice of articulation of foreign policy through Annual 
Reports, Parliament discussions, statements of high functionaries, etc., is 
therefore in line with international practice of the vast majority of foreign 
offices. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee note that the extent, magnitude and scope of India’s 
international development cooperation have expanded significantly in recent 
years. The Ministry has submitted that the developmental aid and assistance 
projects, including capacity building assistance are implemented with the long- 
term goal of generating goodwill and thereby creating positive influence or 
leverage to derive foreign policy objectives. The Committee are aware about the 
plethora of challenges faced in implementation of projects abroad. The 
Committee have also taken note of the institutionalized review mechanism for 
monitoring of technical aid and development assistance projects. Expressing 
concern over the unpredictable budgetary demands and allocation under this 
Head, and reiterating their opinion, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should frame a developmental aid/cooperation policy and a separate aid 
disbursal body should be established for smooth and effective implementation 
of international aid projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
IFD response based on previous years’ reply – 
 
 India’s development partnership cooperation is integral part of India’s 
foreign policy. The inalienable component of our development cooperation is 
“partnership”. India’s economic cooperation through development partnership is 
demand driven. For example, India’s Grants-in-aid projects and capacity 
building programs are demand driven and are based on local demand/priority of 

89 | P a g e 
 
the partner countries.  Through development cooperation, Government aims to 
give fillip to South-South Cooperation.   
 
Development assistance is offered on the request of the host government, 
which is scrutinized by the Ministry in consultation with concerned Territorial 
Division from  foreign policy perspective and also the line ministries.  
Feasibility study / DPR is undertaken by the project implementation agency, 
which is vetted by the line ministries.  Physical and financial progress is 
monitored at various levels, including our Missions abroad as well as Project 
Monitoring Committees (PMC) constituted for this specific purpose.  
Additionally, expert advice of consultants and technical advisors on deputation 
from other specialized organizations outside the Ministry is also taken regarding 
implementation of these projects.   Moreover, period reviews of the 
development assistance programs, viz., comprehensive review of ITEC, CEITs, 
etc are undertaken to attune these programs from impact and outcome 
perspective.  Budgetary outlays are pre-fixed and payments are released on 
milestone basis.       
 
 As regards Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation of instituting a 
separate aid disbursal body, the Ministry is fully seized of the matter and is 
periodically reviewing all aspects of development cooperation and aid delivery.   
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 
In view of the number and spread of overseas Indians, there is a high possibility 
of them getting stranded in a crisis situation. The recent political crisis in 
Afghanistan and conflict in Ukraine is a gross reminder about the implications 

90 | P a g e 
 
on safety and security of Indian nationals in such a volatile situation. The role 
played by the Ministry in Afghanistan and Ukraine in the recent past has been 
commendable. The Committee, therefore, feel that evacuation preparedness has 
emerged as a significant issue. The Committee are aware that during outbreak of 
conflict or any other exigencies, the evacuation of Indian citizens is planned on 
a case-to-case basis and evacuation is dependent on a number of factors. The 
Committee desire that a database of Indian nationals abroad may be prepared 
and updated on a regular basis for emergency situations. Furthermore, a 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for evacuation of Indian nationals 
stranded in exigencies must also be chalked out and the same may be made 
available at all Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee would like to be 
kept informed about steps taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Ministry has been keeping a record of Indian Diaspora abroad 
and keeps updating the same. Separate databases are being maintained in 
respect of NRIs, PIOs and Students. However collation of such data is 
dependent on voluntary registration by our diaspora living abroad.  
 
  A Rapid Response Cell (RRC) has been created in the 
Ministry to deal with exigencies and emergency situations similar to the recent 
Ukraine crisis, where more than 22 thousand stranded Indians were evacuated 
by the Government in “Operation Ganga”.  
 
  The Rapid Response Cell in the Ministry handled SOP for the 
Control Room set up during the evacuation process. Based on the event report 
sent by the Indian Mission in Kyiv after Operation Ganga, recommendations for 

91 | P a g e 
 
implementation/inclusion of evacuation procedures in MEA’s existing Crisis 
Management Plan is already under consideration.” 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
 
 
  

92 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
The erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MoIA), which was primarily 
responsible for protection and welfare of overseas Indians, was merged with the 
Ministry of External Affairs in 2016. Since then, the Overseas Indian Affairs 
Division within the MEA has been dealing with issues relating to engagement 
with Indian Diaspora. Observing a general trend of ad hocism and 
arbitrariness in budgetary allocation to schemes and programmes related to 
welfare and protection of the overseas Indians, the Committee had been steadily 
recommending the Ministry to accord requisite fiscal space and importance to 
such a critical aspect of its responsibility. The Committee are disappointed to 
note that budgetary allocation for schemes/programmes related to welfare of 
overseas Indians during the current fiscals has either been reduced or kept 
constant. The Ministry’s assertion that COVID-19 pandemic and related travel 
restrictions and lockdowns have hampered the execution of programmes & 
schemes in India & in Missions abroad have been duly noted. The Committee 
observe that a Working Group has been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (CPV&OIA) for evaluation of various Schemes and Programmes for 
the welfare of the Indian Diaspora. The Committee welcome the creation of a 
new budget head for the Nirbhaya Fund with an allocation of Rs. 5 Crore for 
empowerment, safety and security of women and girl children. In this regard, 
the Ministry has informed that the guidelines to be followed by the 
Missions/Posts abroad for establishment and operation of the One Stop Centre 
are also being worked upon. 
 

93 | P a g e 
 
 Taking a serious view of the unpredictability and low budgetary 
allocation for Overseas Indians, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should prepare  a vision for reaching out to all Indians abroad in a more 
committed manner and project improved budgetary allocations for the same. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the findings of the Report of the 
Working Group in six months. With regard to the newly created Nirbhaya Fund, 
the Committee desire that guidelines for establishing the One Stop Centres are 
chalked out without any further delay so that the disbursal from the fund does 
not suffer. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Due to Covid-19 pandemic, travel restrictions and lockdowns hampered the 
execution of programmes & schemes throughout FY 2020-21. Ministry will be 
holding the next Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in January, 2023, which would 
increase the budgetary expenditure/allocations substantially. Other schemes 
which were in abeyance because of COVID will also be executed this year, 
which will also increase the budgetary allocation for the Diaspora related 
activities. The next meeting of the Working Group expected to be held soon. 
The outcome of the same shall be apprised to the Committee. Further, it is 
informed that the guidelines for establishing the One Stop Centres have already 
been formulated and vetted by the competent authority in the Ministry. 
(File No. AA/Parl/125/23/2022) dated 07/07/2022) 
 
 
 
                           
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
19 December, 2022                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
28 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 

94 | P a g e 
 
ANNEXURE I 
List of Missions/Posts 
Sl No Name of Mission  
AFRICA 
1 Embassy of India, Abidjan 
2 Embassy of India, Addis Ababa 
3 Embassy of India, Algiers 
4 Embassy of India, Antananarivo 
5 Embassy of India, Asmara 
6 Embassy of India, Bamako 
7 Embassy of India, Lome 
8 Embassy of India, Brazzaville 
9 Embassy of India, Cairo 
10 Embassy of India, Conakry 
11 Embassy of India, Dakar 
12 Embassy of India, Djibouti 
13 Embassy of India, Freetown 
14 Embassy of India, Juba 
15 Embassy of India, Khartoum 
16 Embassy of India, Kigali 
17 Embassy of India, Kinshasa 
18 Embassy of India, Luanda 
19 Embassy of India, Malabo 
20 Embassy of India, Monrovia 
21 Embassy of India, Niamey  
22 Embassy of India, Nouakchott 
23 Embassy of India, Ouagadougou 

95 | P a g e 
 
24 Embassy of India, Rabat 
25 Embassy of India, Sao Tome 
26 Embassy of India, Tripoli (resident in Tunis) 
27 Embassy of India, Tunis 
28 Embassy of India, Yaoundé 
29 High Commission of India, Abuja 
30 High Commission of India, Accra 
31 High Commission of India, Dar Es Salaam 
32 High Commission of India, Gaborone 
33 High Commission of India, Harare 
34 High Commission of India, Kampala 
35 High Commission of India, Lilongwe 
36 High Commission of India, Lusaka 
37 High Commission of India, Maputo 
38 High Commission of India, Mbabane  
39 High Commission of India, Nairobi 
40 High Commission of India, Port Louis 
41 High Commission of India, Pretoria 
42 High Commission of India, Victoria (Mahe) 
43 High Commission of India, Windhoek 
44 Consulate General of India, Cape Town 
45 Consulate General of India, Durban 
46 Consulate General of India, Johannesburg 
47 Consulate General of India, Saint Denis 
48 Consulate General of India, Zanzibar 
49 Consulate General of India, Lagos 
50 Assistant High Commission of India, Mombasa 

96 | P a g e 
 
ASIA 
51 Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi 
52 Embassy of India, Amman 
53 Embassy of India, Ashgabat 
54 Embassy of India, Astana (Nur-Sultan) 
55 Embassy of India, Baghdad 
56 Embassy of India, Manama, Bahrain 
57 Embassy of India, Bangkok 
58 Embassy of India, Baku 
59 Embassy of India, Beijing 
60 Embassy of India, Beirut 
61 Embassy of India, Bishkek 
62 Embassy of India, Damascus 
63 Embassy of India, Doha 
64 Embassy of India, Dushanbe 
65 Embassy of India, Hanoi 
66 Embassy of India, Jakarta 
67 Embassy of India, Kabul (temporarily closed) 
68 Embassy of India, Kathmandu 
69 Embassy of India, Kuwait City 
70 Embassy of India, Manila 
71 Embassy of India, Muscat 
72 Embassy of India, Phnom Penh  
73 Embassy of India, Pyong Yang (temporarily closed) 
74 Embassy of India, Riyadh 
75 Embassy of India, Sanaá (resident in Djibouti) 
76 Embassy of India, Seoul 

97 | P a g e 
 
77 Embassy of India, Tashkent 
78 Embassy of India, Tehran 
79 Embassy of India, Tel Aviv 
80 Embassy of India, Thimphu 
81 Embassy of India, Tokyo 
82 Embassy of India, Ulaan Baataar 
83 Embassy of India, Vientiane 
84 Embassy of India, Yangon 
85 Embassy of India, Yerevan 
86 High Commission of India, Bandar Seri Begawan 
87 High Commission of India, Colombo 
88 High Commission of India, Dhaka 
89 High Commission of India, Islamabad 
90 High Commission of India, Kuala Lumpur 
91 High Commission of India, Male 
92 High Commission of India, Singapore 
93 ASEAN Mission in Jakarta 
94 Consulate General of India, Bali 
95 Consulate General of India, Bandar Abbas  
96 Consulate General of India, Birgunj 
97 Consulate General of India, Chiangmai 
98 Consulate General of India, Dubai 
99 Consulate General of India, Erbil 
100 Consulate General of India, Guangzhou 
101 Consulate General of India, Hambantota 
102 Consulate General of India, Herat (temporarily closed) 
103 Consulate General of India, Ho Chi Minh City 

98 | P a g e 
 
104 Consulate General of India, Hong Kong 
105 Consulate General of India, Jaffna 
106 Consulate General of India, Jalalabad (temporarily closed) 
107 Consulate General of India, Jeddah 
108 Consulate General of India, Kandahar (temporarily closed) 
109 Consulate General of India, Mandalay 
110 Consulate General of India, Mazar e Sharif (temporarily closed) 
111 Consulate General of India, Medan 
112 Consulate General of India, Osaka Kobe 
113 Consulate General of India, Phuentsholing 
114 Consulate General of India, Shanghai 
115 Consulate General of India, Sittwe 
116 Consulate General of India, Vladivostok 
117 Consulate General of India, Zahidan 
118 Assistant High Commission of India, Chittagong 
119 Assistant High Commission of India, Khulna 
120 Assistant High Commission of India, Kandy 
121 Assistant High Commission of India, Rajshahi 
122 Assistant High Commission of India, Sylhet 
123 Representative Office of India, Almaty  
124 Representative Office of India, Ramallah 
EUROPE 
125 Embassy of India, Ankara 
126 Embassy of India, Athens 
127 Embassy of India, Belgrade 
128 Embassy of India, Berlin 
129 Embassy of India, Berne 

99 | P a g e 
 
130 Embassy of India, Bratislava 
131 Embassy of India, Brussels 
132 Embassy of India, Bucharest 
133 Embassy of India, Budapest 
134 Embassy of India, Copenhagen 
135 Embassy of India, Dublin 
136 Embassy of India, The Hague 
137 Embassy of India, Helsinki 
138 Embassy of India, Kyiv 
139 Embassy of India, Lisbon 
140 Embassy of India, Ljubljana 
141 Embassy of India, Madrid 
142 Embassy of India, Minsk 
143 Embassy of India, Moscow 
144 Embassy of India, Oslo 
145 Embassy of India, Paris 
146 Embassy of India, Prague 
147 Embassy of India, Reykjavik 
148 Embassy of India, Rome 
149 Embassy of India, Sofia 
150 Embassy of India, Stockholm 
151 Embassy of India, Tallinn 
152 Embassy of India, Vienna 
153 Embassy of India, Warsaw 
154 Embassy of India, Zagreb 
155 High Commission of India, Nicosia 
156 High Commission of India, London 

100 | P a g e 
 
157 High Commission of India, Valletta, Malta 
158 Permanent Mission of India, Geneva 
159 Permanent Delegation of India, Paris 
160 Consulate General of India, Birmingham 
161 Consulate General of India, Edinburgh 
162 Consulate General of India, Frankfurt 
163 Consulate General of India, Geneva 
164 Consulate General of India, Hamburg 
165 Consulate General of India, Istanbul 
166 Consulate General of India, Milan 
167 Consulate General of India, Munich 
168 Consulate General of India, St Petersburg 
NORTH AMERICA 
169 Embassy of India, Guatemala City 
170 Embassy of India, Havana 
171 Embassy of India, Mexico City 
172 Embassy of India, Panama City 
173 Embassy of India, Santo Domingo 
174 Embassy of India, Washington 
175 High Commission of India, Kingston 
176 High Commission of India, Ottawa 
177 High Commission of India, Port of Spain 
178 Permanent Mission of India, New York 
179 Consulate General of India, Atlanta 
180 Consulate General of India, Chicago 
181 Consulate General of India, Houston 
182 Consulate General of India, New York 

101 | P a g e 
 
183 Consulate General of India, San Francisco 
184 Consulate General of India, Toronto 
185 Consulate General of India, Vancouver 
OCEANIA 
186 High Commission of India, Canberra 
187 High Commission of India, Port Moresby 
188 High Commission of India, Suva 
189 High Commission of India, Wellington 
190 Consulate General of India, Melbourne 
191 Consulate General of India, Perth 
192 Consulate General of India, Sydney 
SOUTH AMERICA 
193 Embassy of India, Asuncion  
194 Embassy of India, Bogota 
195 Embassy of India, Brasilia 
196 Embassy of India, Buenos Aires 
197 Embassy of India, Caracas 
198 Embassy of India, Lima 
199 Embassy of India, Paramaribo 
200 Embassy of India, Santiago 
201 High Commission of India, George Town 
202 Consulate General of India, Sao Paulo 
 
 
Missions/Posts that have been sanctioned by the Cabinet 
203 Embassy of India, N'Djamena Africa 
204 Embassy of India, Bissau Africa 

102 | P a g e 
 
205 Embassy of India, Mogadishu Africa 
206 Embassy of India, Praia Africa 
207 Embassy of India, Vilnius Europe 
208 Consulate General of India, Addu, Maldives Asia 
 

103 | P a g e 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Institutional initiatives taken by RIS during the recent past are: 
 
India-ASEAN Centre(AIC)  
 India-ASEAN relations have improved considerably over the 
years. RIS has been engaged in the process of promoting and 
strengthening ASEAN-India partnership since 1993. The institute 
has a rich treasure of in-house research on East Asia and ASEAN 
countries. Following the recommendations of the Eminent Persons’ 
Group, the Government of India has established the ASEAN-India 
Centre (AIC) at RIS. AIC undertakes research on various 
dimensions of India-ASEAN relations and conducts seminars, 
conferences and meetings in India and the ASEAN. 
 
 Global Development Centre (GDC) 
 Established at RIS, the GDC aims to contribute to the 
evolving alternative development paradigm that goes beyond the 
doctrines of Anglo-Saxon Model and promotes the virtues of 
inclusiveness and sustainability. Developing countries have 
recently witnessed significant improvement in poverty alleviation, 
women empowerment, financial inclusion, energy transition and 
other areas which need to be properly analysed, assimilated and 
shared among other countries for wider adoption and replication. 
With deeper understanding of theories and practices, GDC intends 
to promote this newly acquired knowledge from India’s successful 
programmes and initiatives among partner countries in Asia, Africa 
and Latin America, and facilitate learning from other country 
experiences through empirical research, sharing of skills, expertise 

104 | P a g e 
 
and best practices, and exchange of human resources. In the spirit 
of collective understanding and partnership, the Centre along with 
its partner institutions, agencies and governments commits to 
promote equity and accessibility based on multidisciplinary and 
multi-functional approaches. 
 
 Founded with the financial support of erstwhile DFID, GDC is 
currently being funded by FCDO.  In addition, Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation (BMGF) has also entered into a multi-year 
partnership with GDC to promote the aims and objectives of GDC 
within and outside the country.  It has become only possible as in 
the case of GDC due to the unique character of RIS, which is far 
away from the shadow of the government structures.  
 
 Forum for Indian Science Diplomacy (FISD) 
 RIS, in collaboration with the National Institute of Advanced 
Study (NIAS), Bangalore and the Department of Science and 
Technology (DST), Government of India has established the 
Forum for Indian Science Diplomacy (FISD) in May 2018 as part 
of its programme on Science Diplomacy.  FISD aims to harness the 
full potential and synergy between science and technology, 
diplomacy, foreign policy and development cooperation in order to 
meet India’s development and security needs and to strengthen its 
engagement with the international system and on key global issues 
involving science and technology. 
 
 Blue Economy Forum (BEF) 
 Blue economy has emerged as a commonly acceptable 
development paradigm which has effectively blended economic 

105 | P a g e 
 
growth with sustainable development. Blue Economy Forum 
(BEF) aims to serve as a dedicated platform for fostering dialogue 
on promoting the concept in the Indian Ocean and other regions. 
The forum focuses on conducting studies on the potential, 
prospects and challenges of blue economy; providing regular 
inputs to practitioners in the government and the private sectors; 
and promoting advocacy for its smooth adoption in national 
economic policies. The forum facilitates linkages between the 
policy makers, academicians and business community in the Indian 
Ocean and other regions. 
 
 Forum on Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) 
 The Ministry of AYUSH has established the Forum on 
Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) at RIS as a common platform 
for all actors and stakeholders to come together to contribute to 
policy making in the area of Indian Systems of Medicine (ISMs) 
across systems like Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Yoga, which 
provide alternatives in healthcare to almost 75 per cent of the 
Indian rural population. With growing global interest in medicinal 
and aromatic plants and compounds derived from them, FITM also 
explores challenges in domestic and global promotion of ISMs 
covering regulatory frameworks, pharmaceutical standards and 
Intellectual Property Rights. 
 
 Science Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) Forum 
 RIS, in collaboration with India Habitat Centre (IHC), and 
other prominent institutions working on S&T issues, including The 
Energy Research Institute (TERI), Centre for Science and 
Environment (CSE), Indo-French Centre for the Promotion of 

106 | P a g e 
 
Advanced Research (IFCPAR/CEFIPRA) and Vigyan Prasar has 
launched the Science Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) 
Forum. STIP Forum aims to promote informed debate on various 
aspects of Science, Technology and Innovation Policy and bridge 
gap between science and society through dissemination of 
information on developments in S&T. 
 
 South Asia Centre for Policy Studies (SACEPS) 
 As part of its work programme, RIS has been deeply 
involved in strengthening economic integration in the South Asia 
region. It has been working closely with the SAARC Secretariat 
and other partner think tanks associated with SAARC. In this 
context, the role of the South Asia Centre for Policy Studies 
(SACEPS) is very important. SACEPS is a network organization 
engaged in addressing regional issues of common concerns in 
South Asia. 
 
 BRICS Academic Forum 
 The BRICS Academic Forum is a Track 2 platform for 
academics from the five countries to deliberate on issues of crucial 
importance to BRICS and come up with ideas and 
recommendations. Such Academic Fora have been held before 
every BRICS Summit so far. The Forum usually invites scholars 
from each member nation to speak on themes of importance. In 
addition, a large number of scholars from all countries participate 
in the deliberations. RIS has been participating in the deliberations 
of the BRICS Fora. In 2016, RIS co-hosted BRICS Academic 
Forum held in Goa.   In 2020-21, RIS and ORF jointed organized 

107 | P a g e 
 
in BRICS Academic Forum under India’s Presidency of the 
BRICS.  
 
 Of all the BRICS Academic Forum Dialogues, three dialogues 
were organised by RIS on the following topics:   
 
I. Dialogue on Traditional Medicine Cooperation, 12 May 
2021 
 The first Dialogue on Traditional Medicine Cooperation was 
held on 12 May 2021. Dr. Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary, Ministry of 
Ayush, Government of India delivered the inaugural address. There 
were two sessions. The session I was on ‘Restoring Wellness 
Strategies and Wellness Indicators for BRICS’. The Session II was 
on ‘Promoting Trade in Medicinal Products and Services; Digital 
Sequencing Information (DSI); Access and Benefit Sharing 
(ABS)’. It was chaired by Dr André de Mello e Souza, Coordinator 
(IPR specialist), International Cooperation and Exchange, Institute 
of Applied Economic Research, Brazil.  
 
II. SDGs and Strengthening the Means of Implementation, 20-
21 May 2021  
 The second dialogue on SDGs and Strengthening the Means 
of Implementation was held on 20-21 May 2021. The Day I started 
with the inaugural address by Dr. Rajiv Kumar, Vice-Chairman, 
NITI Aayog, and Government of India. Session I was on ‘National 
Strategies and Decade of Action for SDGs’. The session II was on 
Science, Technology & Innovation (STI) for SDGs. Dr. Arabinda 
Mitra, Scientific Secretary, and Office of the Principal Scientific 
Adviser to the Government of India chaired.  Session III on day 2 

108 | P a g e 
 
was devoted to  ‘Consolidation of Development Finance for 
SDGs’. It was chaired by Dr. Paulo Esteves, Director, and BRICS 
Policy Center, Brazil.  
 
III. Reviving Trade and Investment for Recovery: Focus on 
Resilience, Inclusion and Sustainability, 20 July 2021  
Prof.  S K Mohanty, Professor, RIS, gave the welcome remarks. 
Professor Manoj Pant, Director. IIFT, chaired and the panel 
discussion.  
 
 BIMSTEC Network of Policy Think Tanks (BNPTT) 
 BNPTT was established subsequent to the decision taken at 
the Second BIMSTEC Summit which was held in New Delhi, India 
on 13 November 2008. The current members of the BNPTT are 
Bangladesh - Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD); Bhutan- Royal 
Institute for Governance and Strategic Studies (RIGSS); India - 
Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS); 
Myanmar - Myanmar Institute of Strategic and International 
Studies (MISIS); Nepal -Centre for Economic Development and 
Administration (CEDA); Sri Lanka – Institute of Policy Studies of 
Sri Lanka (IPS); Thailand - Indian Studies Center of 
Chulalongkorn University (ISCCU). Since inception of BIMSTEC, 
RIS has been providing important inputs for its work programme. 
 
 ASEAN India Network of Think Tanks (AINTT) 
 AINTT was formed following a decision taken by the 
leaders of ASEAN and India at their first summit held in 
November 2002. It serves as a forum for interaction among think-
tanks and also provides a platform for sharing views, ideas and 

109 | P a g e 
 
proposals and strengthening ASEAN-India relationships. As part of 
its work programme, RIS organises roundtables of AINTT to 
generate new ideas and suggestions for strengthening ASEAN-
India partnership. Roundtables aimed to bring policy makers, 
scholars and others together to bridge the knowledge gap. 
 
 IBSA Academic Forum 
 IBSA Academic Forum is a Track 2 platform for Academics 
from India, Brazil and South Africa to exchange knowledge and 
insights on the potential for this unique trilateral partnership and 
reinforce its relevance for the promotion of multilateralism, South-
South Cooperation and inclusive global order.  Strong democratic 
foundations of domestic polity offer IBSA unique strength in terms 
of leadership in taking up global issues of concern. RIS has been 
participating in the deliberations of the IBSA Academic Forum in 
the past and has hosted the Forum in India. RIS convened the Sixth 
IBSA Academic Forum on 3-4 May 2019 in Kochi, India. 
 
 Seventh IBSA Academic Forum,11-12 August 2021 
 The RIS organised the two-day long 7th IBSA Academic 
Forum on 11-12 August 2021, on wide ranging issues and 
identified several important areas of cooperation among the IBSA 
countries. The two roundtables and three plenary sessions of 7th 
IBSA Academic Forum discussed several important themes.  The 
Forum was inaugurated by the Hon’ble Minister of State for 
External Affairs, Dr. Rajkumar Ranjan Singh.  The Forum featured 
a conversation with IBSA Sherpas on the future of economic 
partnerships and the need for strengthening intra-IBSA cooperation 
on issues of trade, technology, resilient value chains, and 

110 | P a g e 
 
accelerating the digital transition processes for inclusive social 
development. Other pressing issues like pandemic preparedness, 
reform of the UN Security Council, rise of vaccine nationalism and 
the need for strengthening manufacturing sector for the 
manufacture of vaccines and diagnostic tools, were also brought to 
attention.  
 
 Network of Southern Think Tanks (NeST) 
Background 
 Though existing for decades as one of the elements of the 
international development cooperation, South-South Cooperation 
(SSC) has grown into prominence due to a rise both in quantum as 
well in diversity in approaches and delivery in development 
partnerships. There has been a growing consensus among the 
partners that the SSC has often been poorly understood. It has 
many knowledge and evidence gaps. While North-South 
cooperation has evolved over 50 years, the SSC needs a common 
platform among South-South partners for exchange and 
systematization of knowledge and development. Knowledge 
generated endogenously among the Southern partners can help in 
consolidation of stronger common issues at different global policy 
fora. Consequent to the consensus reached on many of these issues 
at the High-Level Conference of Southern Providers in Delhi 
(March 2013) and establishment of the subsequent Core Group on 
the SSC within the UNDCF (June 2013), the Network of Southern 
Think-Tanks (NeST) was formally launched at the Conference on 
the South-South Cooperation, held at New Delhi during 10-11 
March 2016. 
 

111 | P a g e 
 
Objective 
 The purpose of the NeST is to provide a global platform for 
Southern Think-Tanks for collaboratively generating, 
systematising, consolidating and sharing knowledge on SSC 
approaches for international development. 
 
The different work programmes that NeST plans to take forward 
are as follows: 
 
• Theorising operationally successful models of SSC; 
• Impact assessment of SSC; and 
• Documentation of SSC. 
 
 Regional Initiatives of the NeST 
China International Development Research Network, China 
 The China International Development Research Network 
(CIDRN) is an informal association of Chinese research centres, 
institutes and university departments, created and developed by 
scholars and researchers interested in China’s role in international 
development, and more particularly in China’s engagement with 
other developing countries. It aims to provide a platform for 
sharing and dissemination of international development knowledge 
and experiences among academic institutions, international 
organisations, government agencies and individuals. Such a 
platform for enhancing knowledge exchange and cooperation 
among Chinese researchers and between Chinese and international 
development communities, supporting knowledge-based policy 
development, can assist in formulation of China’s international 
development policy. 

112 | P a g e 
 
 
NeST Africa, South Africa 
 The NeST Africa chapter was established as a multi-
stakeholder platform to discuss issues, challenges and opportunities 
for development cooperation in Africa and it highlights the role of 
South Africa and other emerging donors, and contribution of the 
SSC in the development of the continent. The work of NeST Africa 
spans analytical frameworks and toolkits, evidence-based field 
research, capacity-building and training services, policy support 
and improving data quality and availability for the SSC. The NeST 
Africa provides inputs for global and regional debates, the African 
Platform for Development Effectiveness (AP-Dev), Africa Vision 
2063, the Post-2015 Development Agenda, Financing for 
Development (Ffd), and BRICS/IBSA Summits. 
 
 
NeST Mexico 
 The Mexican chapter of the Network of Southern Think 
Tanks (NeST) was launched in December 2017. The NeST Mexico 
chapter aim to provide a multi-stakeholder platform to support the 
Mexican and Latin American debate on international development 
policy, by generating evidence, better understanding and 
systematising knowledge on the Mexican development 
cooperation, and how this relates to the approach of other Southern 
providers and traditional donors. 
 
NeST Brazil 
 NesT Brazil was launched in February 2015. It aims to carry 
out research activities, offering empirical evidence and conceptual 

113 | P a g e 
 
bases for debate on the SSC and Brazilian cooperation. In 
particular, NeST Brazil seeks to: (a) identify and elaborate Brazil’s 
specific approach to the international development cooperation, 
how the approach relates to other emerging countries and the 
OECD, and how it would contribute to the Global NeST network; 
(b) articulate with pre-existing networks and initiatives working 
with the international development cooperation at the national and 
regional levels; (c) develop a common and if possible consensual 
understanding of stakeholders on the nature, concepts, principles, 
approaches and indicators of the development cooperation in Brazil 
and Latin America; (d) improve availability and accessibility of 
data and information on the activities of Brazil and Latin American 
countries and their partners in the cooperation; and (e) organize 
meetings, workshops and seminars on the subject periodically with 
Brazilian and foreign researchers and other desiring parties. At the 
same time, NeST Brazil would also contribute to articulate creation 
of a regional network of NeST Latin America by identifying and 
interacting with institutions engaged in research on the 
international development cooperation in the region. 
 
NeST Argentina 
 The Argentine chapter is the latest entrant to the Network of 
Southern Think Tanks (NeST). A number of Argentinean think-
tanks and universities have decided to establish the chapter and be 
a part of the global movement to advance knowledge and 
experiences around South-South cooperation. It aims to contribute 
to the development of ideas and knowledge around SSC that 
promotes an interregional perspective. 
 

114 | P a g e 
 
FIDC 
 The Forum for Indian Development Cooperation (FIDC) has been 
launched to explore various facets of Indian development cooperation policy 
with its partner-countries. The objective is to encourage debate and analytical 
research on all broad constituents of India’s development partnership spectrum 
to bolster policy-making process in the field of critical importance. Thrust of the 
forum is to substantially contribute in facilitating an informed debate on policy 
framework of India and other developing countries. The Forum is engaged in 
establishing dialogue with the relevant government agencies, academia and civil 
society organisations focusing on the South-South Cooperation. FIDC is 
working towards raising the awareness about various dimensions of the 
development cooperation policies through seminars, discussion meetings and 
publications and contributes towards developing a conceptual framework for 
SSC. 

115 | P a g e 
 
Annexure-III 
 
Details of the income generated by RIS 
 
Details of funds received by RIS from MEA & other funding 
agencies  
Sr
. 
N
o. 
Financial 
Year  Grant in Aid  Sponsored 
Project  Receipt  % of Project  
1 2014-15 5,28,00,000  3,31,71,689 63% 
2 2015-16 5,85,00,000  3,79,35,967 65% 
3 2016-17 6,90,00,000  7,03,54,456 102% 
4 2017-18 8,65,00,000  6,86,23,246 79% 
5 2018-19 12,00,00,000  8,64,22,961 72% 
6 2019-20 12,00,00,000 9,51,52,633 79% 
7 2020-21 11,47,96,000 3,65,51,373 32% 
8 2021-22 22,84,00,000 12,62,88,640 55% 
 
 
 
  
 
  

116 | P a g e 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 19 December, 2022 from 1515 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 5.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
6.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 7.     Shri Ritesh Pandey 8.     Dr. K. C. Patel 
9.     Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 10.   Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
   
Rajya Sabha  
 
 
11.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
12.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
  
 1. Shrii Vinay Kwatra   :  Foreign Secretary 
 2. Shri Anurag Srivastava  :  JS (North)  
 3. Ms. Smita Pant    :  JS (BM) 
 4. Dr. Sumit Seth    :  JS (PP & R) 
 
Secretariat 
  
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishna  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 

117 | P a g e 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. XXX   XXX    XXX  
4. XXX   XXX    XXX  
5. XXX   XXX    XXX   
6.  Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2022-
23. 
7. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Reports. The members suggested some minor modifications. The 
Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
8.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
9. XXX   XXX    XXX 
10. XXX   XXX    XXX 
11.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
12. XXX   XXX    XXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

118 | P a g e 
 
APPENDIX- II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWELFTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS  
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations 33 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 28, 29, 30 and 33. 
Total- 26 
Percentage:78.79% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
 Recommendation Nos. 26, 27, 31 and 32          
        Total- 4 
Percentage:12.12% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration: - 
 Recommendation No. 15, 25      
Total- 2  
Percentage:6.06% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation Nos.   23               
Total- 1 
Percentage:3.03% 
 