 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken  by the Government  on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the  Twenty-Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Issues 
relating to migrant workers including appropriate legislative framework and skill 
development initiatives for prospective emigrants’.] 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2020 Magha 1942 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-20) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
04 
 

 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2019-20) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Third  Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Issues relating to 
migrant workers including appropriate legislative framework and skill development 
initiatives for prospective emigrants’.] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 9 September, 2010 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on   11 February 2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on11 February 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2020 Magha 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
COEA NO. 144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20)……............................................................   (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………  (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………….  1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................   47 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………   73 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..   76 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………    78 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (16th Lok Sabha) ……………………………………   88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) 
 
 1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
3.  Shri Margani Bharat   
4.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
5.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8.  Shri Pakauri Lal Kol   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha   
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao  
16.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
17.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
18.  Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan  
19.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
21.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel  
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas$  
29.  Shri Sharad Pawar 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C.Koul  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip -           Additional Director 
3.   Ms. Smita Singh  - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
$      Shri Neeraj Shekhar, Member, Rajya Sabha had resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 31.1.2020 and Shri Shamsher 
Singh Manhas,Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 4.2.2020. 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2019-20) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third  Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Issues relating to migrant workers including appropriate 
legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective emigrants’. 
2. The Twenty-Third Report was presented to the Parliament on 2 January, 2019. The updated 
Action Taken Replies of the  Government on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 4 December, 2019 (English version) and 9 December, 2019 (Hindi 
version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report through circulation.  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the  Twenty Third Report  of the Committee on External Affairs (16 th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                            Shri P.P. Chaudhary,                   
31 August, 2020                                                                                Chairperson,                                  
….Phalguna,1941 (Saka)                                                Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Third Report 
(Sixteenth Lok  Sabha) on the  subject „Issues relating to migrant workers including 
appropriate legislative framework and skill development initiatives for prospective 
emigrants‟ which was presented to the Lok  Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya  Sabha 
on 2 January, 2019. 
 
2.     The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on 
all the 30 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, and 
22 
Total- 17 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
Recommendation No. 23, 27 and 29          
   Total- 3 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
    Recommendation Nos. 19       
Total- 1 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos.  6, 13, 14, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 30              
Total- 9 

2 
 
3.   The Twenty -Third Report (Sixteenth Lok  Sabha) of the Committee on External 
Affairs (2018 -19) on the subject “Issues relating to migrant workers including 
appropriate legislative framework and skill initiatives for prospective emigrants” was 
presented to the Parliament on 2 Janu ary, 2019 and t he Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the 
Ministry on 28 March, 2019 (English version) and 1 April 2019 (Hindi v ersion). 
However, due to the dissolution of the Sixteenth Lok  Sabha, the replies could not be 
examined and the Report could not be presented thereto. After the re -constitution of 
the Committee on External Affairs in September, 2019, the Ministry of External Affairs 
was requested to furnish updated action taken replies and the same were furnished on 9 
December 2019. The Committee take a view of the fact that despite the lapse of a lmost 
one year, there are nine Observations/Recommendations  (i.e. Recommendation Nos.  6, 
13, 14, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 30)  whose final Action Taken replies are still awaited.  The 
Committee deprecate such a c old approach of the Ministry towards furnishing Action 
Taken Replies to the Observations/R ecommendations of the Committee ; such delays 
hinder the oversight function of the Committee . Furthermore, the Committee also 
reiterate that the Action Taken Replies to the Committee‟s 
Observations/Recommendations should b e clear, focused and specific. The Ministry 
should not furnish general and elusive replies to the Observations/ Recommendations 
made by the Committee . The Committee also desire that final replies to the comments 
contained in Chapter-I and Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations. 

3 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Need for a coherent policy and institutionalized architecture on migration 
5. The Committee had observed that the size, spread and depth of migration pathways 
from India has been witnessing significant changes during the last three decades. A closer 
look at the pr ofile of Indian emigrants pointed  to a general trend of skilled and qualified 
Indians moving to Organization for Economic Cooperation (OECD) countries while the 
unskilled or semi -skilled/low skilled workers are going to the Gulf r egion. The Committee, 
however, we re concerned to note that the existing institutional arrangements for the 
protection, saf ety a nd welfare of Indian emigrants we re based on inadequate data 
infrastructure. Moreover, in the absence of any articulated m igration policy, the country had  
not been able to tap in the full potential offered by mobility of Indians in the international 
labour market and the efforts geared in that direction appeared fragmentary and myopic.  
 Given the c ompelling circumstances that dro ve emigration and the profound socio -
economic impact of migration, the Government ought to have had a stated policy on 
international migration that provided the overarching architecture for migration governance 
and institutional framework. The Committee  had, therefore, strongly urge d that the 
Government should undertake coordinated modes of engagement with all concerned 
stakeholders and enhance India‟s migration governance by framing a coherent migration 
policy. Furthermore, the Government should have put in place a strong mechanism for inter -
ministerial coordination and cooperation with State Governments to improve the governan ce 
on migration, addressed the challenges and effectively implemented the ongoing programmes 
for the protection and welfare of Indian migrants. 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Tak en Reply, has stated that the 
observations made by the Committee have been duly noted. It has  been the high priority of 
the Government to develop a robust and responsive framework to ensure welfare, safety and 
to prevent exploitation of Indian workers going abroad in coordination with all stakeholders 
including concerned Ministries in Government of India and State Governments.  Ministry has 
developed a robust framework for the welfare and protection of our migrant workers. The 
initiatives like MADAD, e -Migrate, Indian Community Welfare Fund, Pravasi  Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendras, Pravasi  Bharatiya Bima Yojana, Pravasi  Kaushal Vikas Yojana, Pre -

4 
 
Departure Orientation Programmes, open houses in Mission and Posts and active follow up 
of the workers‟ grievances by the missions/posts with the local authorities of the ho st 
government have played an instrumental role in improving the migration experience of 
Indian workers in recent years. Bilateral mechanisms with Gulf countries have also been 
strengthened by entering into MOUs/Agreements on labour and manpower cooperation  
related matters. Such MoUs/ Agreements have been signed with Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. The issues related to migrant workers are also 
regularly taken up during Joint Working Group Meetings that are integral part of such 
MoUs/Agreements.   
 The Ministry coordinates with Bureau of Immigration, Ministry of Home Affairs, for 
clearance of emigrants before boarding flights to foreign countries through online e -Migrate 
system and also with other Ministries as and when issues aris e in overseas employment such 
as with Ministry of Shipping, for overseas deployment of Seafarers, Ministries of Home 
Affairs and Women and Child Development on the issue of human trafficking etc.  
 Three high -level Conference(s) of major labour sending Sta tes to promote safe and 
legal emigration and to curb the activities of the overseas recruitment business being carried 
out by illegal agents, have been convened on 9 th November, 2016, 8 th May, 2017 and 10 th 
January, 2018, in New Delhi. The state government s were represented by their Chief 
Ministers, NRI Ministers and concerned senior officers. During the conferences State 
Governments were, inter -alia, requested to pro -actively check the growth of illegal agents 
who indulge in overseas recruitment activities  illegally and to take strict action against them. 
They were also requested to launch awareness campaigns in vernacular medium for wider 
coverage and assimilation. The Ministry has also expanded the Pre Departure Orientation 
Training Programme in coordinat ion with State Governments.Under this model, one center 
each is operational in Jaipur, Sikar (Rajasthan); Hyderabad, Nizamabad and Karimnagar 
(Telangana); Gaya, Muzzafarpur, Darbhanga and Patna (Bihar), these centers are managed by 
State Government Agencies.   
 Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) has been undertaking visits to various States, 
during which interaction with senior State Government officials concerned with workers 
going abroad are being held; where the issue connected with safe and legal migr ation with 
safeguards and ways and means to better spread awareness are discussed. In the last six 
months such visits and meetings with the State Governments of Gujarat, Goa, Tamil Nadu, 

5 
 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka and Rajasthan have taken place.  
 The extant legislative framework of all matters related to emigration of Indian nationals 
is prescribed by Emigration Act 1983.  However, the nature, pattern, numbers and directions 
of migration of our nationals has undergone a paradigm shift during the last three -and-half 
decades.  In this regard, the Ministry has had extensive consultations with (i) concerned 
Ministries (ii) with recruitment industry, international organizations, think -tanks, business 
organizations and academia and (iii ) States and Union Territories.  A draft bill has been put 
on the Ministry‟s website and social media platforms and responses and comments are being 
received from various stakeholders.  The consultation exercise is going  on to ensure that all 
aspects to pu t in place a modern, technology oriented Emigration Bill are taken into 
consideration.  
 
7. In view of the vast expanse,  spread and flow of migration from India, the 
Committee were perplexed to observe an absence of a stated policy on migration that 
could underline the overarching architecture for migration governa nce and 
institutional framework in India . The Committee , had, therefore strongly 
recommended that the Ministry should spell out a coherent migration policy and also 
establish strong modes of  inter-ministerial coordination to effectively tackle the 
challenges emanating out of such massive migratory outflows.  In its reply, the Ministry 
has contended that there exists a robust and responsive framework for the welfare and 
protection of Indians mi grant workers that work s in coordination with all concerned 
stakeholders, including Ministries in Government of India and State Governments. The 
Committee find that the steps taken by the Government for the welfare and protecti on 
of the migrant workers abr oad have proved ineffective and have  not been able to 
prevent their exploitation. There appears to be a lack of coordination between the 
Ministries of Central Government and the State Gover nments. Over the years, the 
Committee have been exhorting the Gover nment of India to formulate a new law to 

6 
 
replace the obsolete Emigration Act, 1983 that provides the legislative framework on all 
matters related to emigration. The Committee note that after extensive consultations 
with concerned stakeholders, a draft Bill  has been prepared and uploaded on the 
Ministry‟s website for public comments.  While recognizing the plethora of measures 
taken by the Ministry for safeguard and protection of emigrants, the Committee insist 
that a coherent migration policy is the need of the hour for better migration governance 
and the Ministry ou ght to frame it at the earliest . Furthermore, in order to strengthen 
the legislative framework for emigration, the Committee strongly recommend  that the 
Ministry should expedite the consultations on the Draft Emigration Bill and introduce 
the same, without any further delay. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Authentic and comprehensive database on emigration 
8. The Committee had felt that without any authentic database regarding the number of 
Indian migrant workers in different countries and their employment patterns, the Government 
might not be able to reach out to the emigrant workers and ensure their safe, legal and regular 
migration. Exact official data wa s available only for workers registering for emigration 
clearance. The Committee had noted that despite the growing scale of migratory flows, vi tal 
statistics and information were not readily available. Recognizing the gravity of the issue, the 
Foreign Secretary had informed the Committee that recently an arrangement has been made 
between the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs to share data of 
ECNR pass port holders since June, 2016. The Committee were hopeful that  recent 
arrangement would bring forth requisite database of emigration from India for both ECR and 
ECNR passports and well -equip the Ministry in formulating and implementing various 
welfare meas ures for migrant workers. While conscious of the challenges in volved, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should maintain an authentic database 
relating to various aspects of migration such as the profile of migrants, their job profile, 

7 
 
country of destination, complaints registered and response thereon using the data available 
with PGE and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
9. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Exter nal Affairs  has responded that the 
concern of the Committee has been noted. Presently, the Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
passport holders workers going to ECR countries have to mandatorily obtain Emigration 
Clearance (EC) through MEA‟s web portal “eMigrate” before proceeding abroad and the data 
of such Indians migrating legally for overseas employment is captured on eMigrate portal. 
The Ministry has also been making efforts to devise mechanism for collating data with regard 
to Non-Emigration Check Required (ECNR) passport holding Indians going abroad. In fact, 
registration of ECN R category emigrants going for employment to ECR countries was 
launched on pilot basis with effect from 29.11.2017 by filling up of a single page form, on 
eMigrate portal, with minimal fields of information. ECNR passport holders going for 
employment to EC R countries currently are encouraged to register in the e -Migrate system. 
As special preventive measure, registration of ECNR passport holders going to Iraq for 
employment has been made mandatory in addition to ECR passport holders requiring 
clearance. The Ministry is coordinating closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs for making 
available the data on real time basis on the persons going overseas on employment visas. 
Letters have been sent at high level to Ministry of Home Affairs in this regard. It is t he 
consistent effort of the Ministry to extend every possible help to all Indians abroad, ECR or 
ECNR, in case of any eventuality. 
10. The existence of an authentic database is imperative for effective migration 
governance and management. Moreover, the Committee feel that without the 
availability of reliable statistical information, the implementation of our policy towards 
migrant workers going abroad would be rendered  ineffective. Moreover, official data 
regarding Indians migrating abroad is limited only to Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) passport holders‟ workers going to ECR countries. In order to fill the data gaps, 
the Committee had recommended tha t the Ministry should maintain a n authentic 
database relating to all aspects of migration cycle. The Ministry has submitted that it is 

8 
 
coordinating with the Ministry of Home Affairs for making available all data on a real 
time basis on the persons going overseas on employment visas. 
 The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should maintain comprehensive, integrated and reliable data pertaining to all 
aspects of migration of both ECR a s well as ECNR passport holders for providing a 
foundation on which effective and impactful policy architecture can be built. 
(Recommendation Nos. 3 and 17) 
Prioritization of interest of Indian emigrant workers in Gulf Countries 
11. In their Recommendation No. 3, t he Committee had observed that the migrant 
workers constituted the most vulnerable section of Indian emigrants. A significant number of 
Indian workers migrate d to the Gulf countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait and 
Oman but due to skill deficits, general lack of awareness about their rights, emp loyment 
contracts, customs and regul ations, these emigrant workers we re the most explicated and 
vulnerable at the destination countries. The Kafala system and issues related to Iqma had 
further complicated the already precarious position of these workers in  the Gulf region. The 
Committee had strongly emphasize d that all migrant workers we re entitled to respect and 
protection of their human rights and dignity of labour. The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry should ensure that concerted efforts are being made to reduce 
their vulnerabilities, curb exploitation and harassment by placing them at the centre of our 
migration policy framework. There was a strong need to enhance the quality of interventions 
to maximize the positive impacts of migration and minimize its negative consequences. 
12. The Committee in Recommendation No.17 had observed that majority of the workers 
from India migrate to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries where the working 
conditions are not always very conducive to their overall well being. Due to the existence of 
multiple problems such as skill deficits, general lack of awareness about their rights, 
employment contracts, customs and regulations, these workers were often exploited by their 
foreign employers making them the most vulnerable segment of the Indian Di aspora. The 
Kafala (sponsorship) system and issues related to Iqama (resident permit) further complicate 

9 
 
the already precarious position of these workers. The Ministry of External Affairs had also 
admitted the fact that its policy priorities should be focu sed on this extremely vulnerable 
section of Diaspora. 
 Despite the existence of a well -established mechanism and a settled pattern of 
migration to these countries, the Committee failed to understand the logic behind the absence 
of an exigency window to cat er to such problems. The Committee had noted that while 
restricting workers mobility, the Kafala system put the workers at the mercy of Foreign 
employers with little scope to safeguard their rights. It was relieving to learn that in recent 
years, governments in some GCC countries have taken measures to reform the Kafala system 
to make it more institutionalized in order to protect the interest of workers. UAE has 
amended certain features of the sponsorship system whereby the professional employers and 
degree holders are permitted to change their sponsors after a certain period. However, in 
practical terms, changing one‟s employer is still very difficult especially for the blue collar 
workers. 
 Given the fact that the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) region comp rises the bulk of 
India's expatriate migrant workers and contribute to more than half of our remittances, it was 
beyond comprehension that a trend of migration which is more or less well established since 
the past few decades had not drawn adequate policy attention of the Government and is being 
dealt with in an ad -hoc manner. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that 
the Government should forge an institutionalized arrangement with GCC countries delving 
upon the full spectrum of issues concerning our expatriate workers, their rights and safety. 
13. In its Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No. 3, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted that the welfare and protection of Indian workers abroad is among the highest 
priorities of the Ministry. Significant efforts have been made towards ensuring a safe, orderly, 
legal and humane migration process. Ministry has developed a robust framework for the 
welfare and protection of our migrant workers. The initiatives like MADAD, e -Migrate, 
Indian Community Welfare Fund, Pravasi  Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras, Pravasi  Bharatiya 
Bima Yojana, Pravasi Kaushal VikasYojana, Pre-Departure Orientation Programmes , open 
houses in Mission and Posts and active follow up of the workers‟ grievances by the 
missions/posts with the local authorities of the host government have played an instrumental 
role in improving the migration experience of Indian workers in recent ye ars. Bilateral 

10 
 
mechanisms with Gulf countries have also been strengthened by entering into 
MOUs/Agreements on labour and manpower cooperation related matters. Such MoUs/ 
Agreements have been signed with Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia an d 
UAE. The issues related to migrant workers are also regularly taken up during Joint Working 
Group Meetings that are integral part of such MoUs/Agreements.  
  The Ministry works closely with Ministry of Labour& Employment, Ministry of 
Home Affairs as well  as State Governments whenever the need for a coordinated effort is 
necessitated. The Ministry also has an arrangement with Bureau of Immigration, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, for clearance of emigrants before boarding flights to foreign countries, 
through online e-Migrate system and coordinates with different other Ministries as and when 
issues arise in overseas employment such as Ministry of Shipping, for overseas deployment 
of Seafarers, Ministries of Home Affairs and Women and Child Development in cases of  
human trafficking etc.  Initiatives taken by the Ministry to prevent exploitation of Indian 
emigrant workers in destination countries: 
(i)  Most of the complaints are addressed by the Indian Missions by taking them 
up with the concerned local authorities.   Complaints pertaining to employment are 
taken up by the Indian Missions with the concerned foreign employer/Labour officials 
in that country. 
(ii)  The on -line MADAD portal enables the emigrant workers and their family 
members to register their consular grievances online and track their redressal. 
(iii) Grievances related  to Overseas Employment in notified Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) countries including gulf countries, can also be logged in directly by 
emigrants/relatives or through the Pravasi  Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) on 
eMigrate portal. These grievances are settled by respective jurisdictional Protectors of 
Emigrants (PoEs) as per laid down procedures. 
(iv) Missions in Gulf countries also conduct Open Houses on a regular basis where 
workers can seek redressal of their grievances. 
(v) A multi-lingual 24X7 Helpline of Pravasi  Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) 
earlier known as Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) in New Delhi provides 
information, guidance and grievance redressal on al l issues and problems pertaining to 
overseas employment of Indian nationals in several Indian languages. 

11 
 
(vi) Missions in Gulf countries have also established 24x7 helplines and Toll Free 
help lines for the benefit of Indian workers to seek help. 
(vii) Indian Workers Resource Centres (IWRCs), renamed as Pravasi  Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendras (PBSKs) have been set up at Dubai and Sharjah (UAE), Riyadh and 
Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), to provide guidance 
and counseling on all matters pertaining to overseas Indian workers. 
(viii) Migrant Resource Centres, renamed as Kshetriya  Pravasi Sahayata Kendras 
(KPSK) have also been setup in Delhi, Kochi, Hyderabad, Chennai and Lucknow to 
assist emigrants or their relatives to redress their pr oblems/complaints regarding 
overseas employment. 
(ix) The Missions utilize the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) to provide 
assistance to overseas Indian nationals in times of distress. 
(x) Suitable accommodation facilities for distressed Indian nationa ls have been 
setup in Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE and Malaysia to 
provide temporary accommodation. 
(xi) Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are already in place 
with the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries that  provide the institutional 
framework to comprehensively discuss and review labour related issues. 
14. The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Reply  to Recommendation 
No. 17 stated that  there is about 9 million strong resident Indian community in the Gulf 
Cooperation Council countries. The welfare of Indian migrant workers in GCC countries is 
of utmost priority. As noted by the Committee, the system of sponsorship remains a 
challenge. However, important labour reforms are gradually being taken in GCC countries 
for the benefit of expat workers. The Government has entered into Labour and Manpower 
Cooperation MOUs/Agreements with Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. 
These are ai med at safeguarding the interests and ensuring welfare and protection of Indian 
workers and seek to expand the institutional framework of manpower cooperation between 
India and the destination country. They comprehensively delineate the responsibilities of  the 
sending and receiving country, mechanism for settlement of dispute and areas of cooperation. 
In addition, these MOUs and Agreements have the provision of implementation through Joint 
Working Groups, comprising of representatives from both sides who me et annually, 

12 
 
alternately in both countries, and all prevailing labour and manpower related issues are 
discussed during these meetings. 
 Further, to safeguard the specific interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, who 
are often the most vulnerable cate gory; Ministry has signed separate MoUs/Agreements on 
domestic workers. Agreement  on Labour Cooperation for Domestic Sector Workers 
Recruitment with Saudi Arabia was signed in January 2014. In case of UAE, there is a 
Protocol on Domestic Workers annexed to the MOU with the UAE in the Field of Manpower 
that was signed in February 2018. In January 2019, the Cabinet has also given its approval 
for signing of MOU for Cooperation on Recruitment of Domestic Workers between India and 
Kuwait. The MOU was initialed during the visit of EAM to Kuwait from October 30 -31, 
2018.  
 Further, Government is in process of integrating online labour recruitment platform 
eMigrate with online platforms of Saudi Arabia and UAE. Expanding such collaboration with 
other GCC countries are in the pipeline. Such integration takes the reference of mutually 
agreed Standard Employment Contract of the destination country in processing recruitment, 
which would curb duplicity of contracts being signed at present. 
 
15. With approximately 9 million Indians, the Gulf countries constitute the primary 
destination countries for overseas migration from India. The vast majority of migrant 
workers are semi -skilled, making them susceptible to host of challenges, ranging from 
exploitative working conditions, non-payment of salaries, restrictions on freedom, poor 
living conditions, sexual abuse , etc. In view of the serious and well -documented 
challenges to the human rights of Indian migrant workers in the Gulf region, the 
Committee had suggested that the Ministry should continue making sustained efforts to 
ensure a safe, legal and humane migration process by putting the migrant workers at 
the centre of the policy. In their reply, the Ministry has enlisted several measures that it 
has taken in this regard . Notable among them are on -line MADAD portal, Pravasi  
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra, e-Migrate portal, conducting of Open Houses in Missions 

13 
 
in Gulf countries, establishment of 24*7 help lines, Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(ICWF), Labour and Manpower Coopera tion MoUs/Agreements. The Committee also 
note that the Government is in  the process of integrating eMigrate with online 
platforms of Saudi Arabia and UAE and such collaboration with other GCC countries 
are in the pipeline.  The Committee, however , find that most of these measures are to 
help/support the victims. The Committee are of the view that apart from establishing 
institutionalized mechanism with the GCC countries , a lot  more needs to be done to 
strengthen the existing mechanism for protectio n of the rights of migrants workers 
abroad. The Committee would therefore urge  that the Government should  adopt a 
more pro -active approach to Indian workers  in the Gulf region , particularly  for 
safeguarding the interests of the most vulnerable sections  by cementing a mutual 
partnership with GCC countries and also cultivating India‟s soft power in the region.  
The Committee also desire to be apprised about the progress made regarding  the 
integration of e-Migrate with online labour platform with the remaining Gulf countries. 
(Recommendations Nos. 4 and 5) 
Strict regulation of illegal Recruiting Agencies 
16. The Committee had noted that migrant workers we re employed either directly by the 
employers or through outsourcing agencies and recruitment agents. In order to safeguard the 
interests of emigrants, the Emigration Act 1983 specifically stipulated  that only registered 
Recruiting Agents and Foreign employ ers certified by the Protector General of India can 
recruit for overseas employment. There we re well-established procedures for registratio n of 
recruiting agents which had  been linked with the e -Migrate project.  There we re a large 
number of complaints agai nst the Registered Recruiting Agents found indulging in 
malpractices in recruitment, but a very few of them face stringent actions like the 
cancellation of Registration Certificate; maximum number of complaints were either dropped 
or s ettled. If a similar complaint wa s received against any unregistered recruiting Agent, 

14 
 
Police cases registered and prosecution was done. The Committee had, therefore, desired that 
PGE, under provisions of law , should take appropriate and strong action including 
prosecution of fraudulent Registered Recruiting agent s, if complaints we re received against 
them. Because if they we re not punished stringently, there is a greater likelihood that such 
agents would continue to commit similar frauds. The desired provisions should, therefo re, be 
made in the Emigration Act or in relevant procedures. Failure to regulate and monitor the 
malpractices of such agents creates fertile ground for the development of irregularities once 
the workers reach the country of destination. For controlling the  frauds committed by foreign 
employers, the Committee had desired that the relevant Missions/Posts abroad should 
integrate the e -Migrate project with a list of recruiting agents and also authenticate the job 
contracts of the workers before giving them emigration clearance. 
17. The Ministry had informed that a host of measures such as media campaigns on safe 
and legal migration, extending outreach programmes to sensitize State Governments, 
prioritizing Prosecution Sanction Requests etc had been taken to check the fraudulent 
activities by these agents. The Ministry were also conducting workshops known as „Videsh  
Sampark‟ and High-Level Meetings with the State Governments to sensitize them about this 
issue. But the problem of unauthorized recruitment agents  was on increase and a majority of 
workers were still being sent abroad by them.  The malpractices of the unregistered recruiting 
agents had greatly contributed to the exploitation and vulnerabilities of the Indian migrant 
workers. The Ministry of External Affairs responded to these complaints received against the 
agents by merely forwarding their names and details to the DG of the concerned State Police. 
The number of sanctions for prosecution vis-à-vis the number of complaints referred to the 
States is ver y less. The Committee found that steps have been taken to bring the state 
governments on board for taking prompt action in such matters of fraud and human 
trafficking, but without the desired results. 
 The Committee were surprised to note that even after knowing the locations of such 
illegal agents, the Central Government or the State Governments have not been able to stop 
them. The Committee had, therefore, desired that MEA/PGE should take some concrete  suo 
moto actions by engaging the PoE offices in such states/districts from where more complaints 
are received. By identifying such illegal agencies, the PoE offices should lodge complaints 

15 
 
with the local police so that their illegal business of recruiting  and human trafficking stops 
forever. 
18.  The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No4 
has stated that i n cases of complaints involving illegal emigration through an unregistered 
Agent, the concerned Police Authority in  the State is requested to take action as „Law & 
Order‟ is a subject of State Government(s). Simultaneously, if the emigrant is faced with 
difficulties/distress in the destination country, the concerned Indian Mission abroad is 
requested to take up the iss ue with the Foreign Employer to resolve the grievance of the 
emigrant as early as possible and if required, to arrange for his/her repatriation – irrespective 
of the fact whether the emigrant went legally or through illegal channel. 
Section 27 of Emigratio n Act, 1983 provides that prosecution shall not be instituted 
against any person in respect of any offence under Emigration Act, 1983 without the previous 
sanction of the Central Government, however, no sanction shall be required when an offence 
has been committed in respect of an emigrant or an intending emigrant and the complaint is 
filed by such emigrant or intending emigrant, or on behalf of such emigrant or intending 
emigrant, by the father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister or guar dian of 
such emigrant or intending emigrant, or if such emigrant or intending emigrant is a member 
of a joint Hindu family, by the manager of that family.   
As per the laid down procedure, on receipt of complaints against unregistered Agents, 
the concerned Police Authority will investigate the matter and after investigation will request 
the Central Government to grant prosecution sanction under Section 27 of Emigration Act, 
1983 to enable them to prosecute such unregistered Agent or a person. 
The Government had issued Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to be followed by 
States on receipt of complaints against unregistered/ unscrupulous agents.  The State 
Governments were also requested to appoint „Nodal Officer‟  in their respective States who 
would pursue the  matter| with concerned police authorities for submitting enquiry report on 
complaints that have been forwarded to them. Majority of the State Governments have 
already appointed „Nodal Officer‟ in their States.   
As regards mechanism to control frauds comm itted by the Foreign Employers (FEs), 
there is already a mechanism, through eMigrate, whereby the credentials of the prospective 
FEs are verified by the Indian Missions/Posts before registration of the FE on eMigrate. Even 

16 
 
after registration, if the dealings of the FE with Indian workers employed in his company are 
found to be detrimental to the interests of Indian workers, there is a provision to put the FE in 
“Prior Approval Category (PAC)”, which would imply that prior permission will be required 
by the concerned FE to recruit Indian workers.  
All authorized Recruiting Agents are registered or figure on the eMigrate portal. Now 
the Recruiting Agents can recruit any worker having ECR passport and going to any ECR 
country, and hence requiring clearance, only through the eMigrate. In addition, even  the 
recruitment of workers not requiring clearance can be done only by a Registered or licenced 
agent who figures in the eMigrate.   
19. In its Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No.5, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted that the recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been duly noted. The 
Government has been receiving from time to time complaints/grievances from emigrants and 
their family members/relatives of being cheated by illegal agents. The Ministry has a robust 
grievance redressal mech anism including MADAD and e -Migrate portals for online 
registration of grievances of emigrants who have been subjected to cheating. Such 
complaints are forwarded to concerned State Governments and Police authorities urging them 
to apprehend illegal agents and prosecute them. Wherever required, such complaints are also 
referred to Mission/Posts abroad for providing relief/rescue. As per the available records, the 
number of complaints against unregistered agents received and referred to the State 
Government/Police during the period of 2016-2019 is as under: 
Detail of Complaints forwarded to State Government from, 2016 to 2019 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Nos of 
Complaints 
received 
Cases referred to 
State Governments 
for action 
Prosecution 
Sanction sought by 
State Government 
Prosecution 
Sanction issued by 
Ministry of 
External Affairs 
1 2016 231 231 42 42 
2 2017 446 446 30 30 
3 2018 350 350 15 15 
4 2019 * 556 556 29 29 
* (Up to 30thSeptember, 2019) 
  

17 
 
In May 2016 Ministry of External Affairs issued a Standard Operating Procedure to 
be followed by States on receipt of complaints of cheating by illegal agents by emigrants. 
Visual and print media campaigns are also launched from time to time for promoting legal 
and safe migration and encouraging emigrants to use the service s of registered Recruiting 
Agents to avoid being trapped by illegal/fake agents. 
 In order to promote safe and legal emigration and to curb the activities of the overseas 
recruitment business being carried out by illegal agents, three high -level Conference(s) of 
major labour sending States were convened on 9 th  November, 2016, 8th May, 2017 and 10 th 
January, 2018, in New Delhi, with External Affairs Minister as the chairperson during which, 
State Governments were, inter -alia,  requested to pro -actively check the growth of illegal 
agents who indulge in overseas recruitment activities illegally and to take strict action against 
them. They were requested to launch awareness   campaigns in vernacular medium for wider 
coverage and assimilation, which has been done. In October, 2019, the Ministry has created 
an online system where State Nodal Officer can lo gin and can have access to the 
grievances/complaints received in OE & PGE Division. Accordingly, Chief Secretaries of the 
States have been requested to make the system fully functioned in order to deal with 
complaints against illegal agents for tracking pe riodically which will go a long way in 
quickening and making the system robust.  It is hoped that with the appropriate response 
from State Governments the system become functional.   
 In view of the complaints of exploitation and harassment by unscrupulous  agents and 
employers in the Gulf countries, the Government has taken additional measures to safeguard 
the interests of female workers migrating to Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries as 
Domestic Sector Workers (DSW). As per extant guidelines, the mi nimum age of Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category female workers (DSW) proceeding for overseas 
employment to Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries is 30 years. Their emigration for 
overseas employment is permitted only through following seven desig nated State - run 
recruitment agencies: 
(i) Non- Resident Keralites‟ Affairs Roots (NORKA), Kerala; 
(ii) Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultant (ODEPC), 
Kerala; 
(iii) Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd. (OMCL), Tamil Nadu. 
(iv) Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC), Uttar Pradesh; 

18 
 
(v) Overseas Manpower Company A. P. Ltd. (OMCAP), Andhra Pradesh;  
(vi) Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM), Telangana; 
(vii) Rajasthan Skil& Livelihood Development Corporation (RSLDC) 
 In add ition, Foreign employers have to deposit US$2500 in the form of a Bank 
Guarantee with the Indian Missions in case of direct recruitment  of  female workers holding 
ECR passports, which is returned when the emigrant return safely. 
20. Under the Emigration Act, 1983 all Recruiting Agents (RAs) and Foreign 
Employers are obliged to register with Government before recruiting overseas Indians. 
Notwithstanding this fact, several RA‟s have been indulging in fraudulent and corrupt 
practices. To curb these malpractices, the Committee had strongly urged that stringent 
action should  be taken against such Registered RA s upon receiving complaints. 
Furthermore, in order to check and regulate fraudulent practices committed by the 
Foreign Employers, the  Committee had desired integration of Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad with the e-Migrate Portal. The Committee observed that there are illegal/fake 
recruiting agents operating clandestinely outside the legal and policy domain. Time and 
again, complaints are being received against such illegal agents. The Ministry was 
therefore urged to take suo moto cognizance of misconduct by illegal RAs and lodge 
complaint in local police stations.As per the Ministry, all authorized Recruiting Agents 
are registered or figure d on the e -Migrate Portal. Regarding the frauds committed by 
Foreign Employers, their credentials are verified by the Indian Missions/Posts before 
registration on e-Migrate. The Ministry has also instituted a robust grievance redressal 
mechanism including MADAD and e -Migrate portals for online registration of 
grievances of emigrants who have been subjected to cheating by illegal RAs. The 
Committee note that the Government has issued  Standard Operating Procedures to be 
followed by State Governments on receipt of complaints against unregistered RAs. The 

19 
 
Committee are happy to learn about the gender -specific measures taken by 
Government to safeguard interests of female workers migrating  to Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) countries as Domestic Sector Workers (DSWs). 
 Despite the presence of several measures  recruitment of workers abroad, 
systemic misconduct within recruitment persists and non-accountability of recruiter s 
remains pervasive. Recruitment agents serve an important function by enabling 
aspiring low-skilled workers to access otherwise inaccessible employment opportunities 
abroad. At the same time, systemic wrongs within the recruitment system – legal as well 
as illegal – create conditions for exploitation and vulnerability of the migrant workers. 
While acknowledging the intricate recruitment governance framework , the Committee 
feel that there is disconnect between the regulatory content and migrants‟ recruitment 
experience, lack of focus on awareness, dissemination and ineffective penalizing 
mechanism. In the Committee‟s view, without strict and focused measures , the 
fraudulent activities of the Registered Recruiting Agents, foreign employers and 
unauthorized RAs may not be contro lled. The Committee, therefore, specifically 
recommend that s ufficient care and attention should be given to accreditation of 
Registered Recruiting Agents and Foreign Employers.  Moreover, a m echanism should 
be established for timely compensation as well as  other remedies to migrant workers 
who have been mistreated abroad  and s tringent action should be taken against 
unregistered RAs with active involvement of the State Governments. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Emphasis on enhancing skill sets for better employability 
21. In order to reap the benefits of global mi gratory flows, the Committee we re of the 
considered view that upgrading the skill sets of our migrant workers is essential for a labour 

20 
 
exporting country like India. The limited skill sets of our migrant workers are a major 
hindrance in their quest to find gainful overseas employment. The Ministry of External 
Affairs has highlighted five core elements that are essential for preparing the workforce for 
global mobility. These include d alignment of qu alifications, curriculum, and content with 
global standards; development of infrastructure, both soft as well hard for training purpose; 
credible assessment and certification framework; pre -departure orientation training and job 
linkage. As per the Ministr y, we had progressed satisfactorily on the first two elements . The 
Committee had also been informed that anMoU has been signed with the Ministry of Skills 
Development and Entrepreneurship and since then fifteen Indian International Skill Centres 
have becom e operational. The Ministry of External Affairs had  also prepared a 
comprehensive pre-departure manual in order to enhance the soft skills of migrant workers. 
This manual had been translated into Hindi and Telugu language. The Committee had desired 
that the Ministry should translate the same into other major regional languages and hand over 
to the State governments for their wider dispension. 
 While appreciative of the slew of measures taken by the Ministry to upgrade the skill 
sets of migrant workers, the Committee were of the opinion that much more needed  to be 
done in  that regard. The Committee  had, therefore, recommend ed that the Government 
should establish a strong and multi-level engagement with all the concerned stakeholders and 
incorporate all the fi ve elements while framing curriculum and standards for skill 
development. The Government should also establish Migrant Help Desks at all major airports 
and handover a comprehensive pre -departure manual to migrants before departure to 
destination countries. 
22. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Exter nal Affairs , submitted that Pre-
Departure Orientation (PDO) curriculum content has been standardized all over the country. 
Comprehensive PDO Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in seven languages 
i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. Similarly, Handbooks for 
migrant workers have also been developed in eight languages i.e.  Hindi, English, Bangla, 
Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and Urdu. Presently, these handbooks are distributed to 
prospective migrant workers attending One Day PDO Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and 
Lucknow. The translation of these handbooks and manuals has  been carried out with 
assistance from the concerned State Governments. E -Books have also been developed and 

21 
 
uploaded on e -Migrate portal. All these resource materials for Pre -Departure Orientation 
Training (PDOT) program have been developed under the aegis of India Centre for Migration 
(ICM).  
 Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is working t owards a 
system to ease the process of migration of highly skilled workers in line with the core 
elements highlighted by MEA. MSDE has also informed that they are progressing ahead on 
alignment of qualification, creation of training infrastructure, establi shing job linkages and 
pre-departure orientation program. Setting up of help desks at the airports is also under 
consideration. 
23. Recognizing the significance of skill development and upgradation of emigrant 
workers, the Committee had recommended that th e Government should establish a 
multi-level engagement with all the concerned stakeholders and frame curriculum and 
standards for skill development. The Ministry was also urged to establish Migrant Help 
Desks at all major airports. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has informed that 
under the aegis of India Centre for Migration (ICM) , Pre -Departure Orientation 
Training resource materials including  handbooks have been developed in seven 
languages for master trainees and in eight langu ages for prospective migrant workers 
and uploaded on e -Migrate portal. The Committee also observe that P re-Departure 
Orientation (PDO) c urriculum has been standardized all over the country. The 
Committee has noted that the Ministry of Skill Development and  Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE) is working towards incorpora tion of five core elements ―  alignment of 
qualifications, curriculum and content with global standards; development of 
infrastructure for training; credible assessment and certification framework; pre -
departure orientation training; and job linkage ― to ease the migration process. The 
Ministry has informed that setting up of help desks at the airports is under 
consideration.  

22 
 
 Even after a hiatus of more than a year, the inability of the Ministry to furni sh 
specific and actionable replies is disappointing. In the considered view of the Committee 
skilling can lead to better employability, improved working conditions and higher 
incomes of migrant workers abroad. The Committee would  therefore like to know the 
exact status of the action taken on the Observations/Recommendations made regarding 
the performance of Skill Development Centres in engagement with MSDE, preparation 
of pre-departure manuals in remaining major Indian languages and the establishment 
of help desks at airports at the earliest.  
 (Recommendation No. 11) 
Safe and comprehensive evacuation plan during emergency situations 
24. The Gulf region has been facing  frequent crisis in recent past. The tragic death of 39 
Indian workers in Iraq in early 2018 was a sad testimony to the security and safety challenges 
faced by them. The Committee had noted that during emergency situations, the Ministry 
made serious efforts to evacuate them by issuing travel advisories and setting up an 
emergency helpline. Non -payment of salaries, seizure of passports, lack of finances, 
inadequate communication etc further augmented  the security challenges of these migrant 
workers. The Committee had recommended that the Government should chalk out an 
emergency pl an that clearly delineates the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and also 
forge an institutionalized mechanism with host countries to evacuate workers. Furthermore, 
the migrant workers should also be provided with the manner in which emergency situations 
can be dealt with during their pre-departure training phase. 
25. The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply submitted that the Indian 
Missions and Posts abroad have put in place crisis management plans for dealing with 
emergency situations, taking into account the specific local conditions of respective countries 
and keeping in view the interests, safety and security of all Indian natio nals in the countries 
concerned. Migrant workers proceeding overseas for employment are now being given pre -
departure orientation training under which relevant information for dealing with emergency 

23 
 
situations in foreign countries including emergency conta ct numbers of Indian Missions, 
24x7 helpline numbers of Pravasi  Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK), etc. are provided. In 
addition, The Handbook of Migrant Workers, which is distributed to migrant workers 
attending PDOT programme at PDOT Centres in New Delhi , Mumbai, Kochi and Lucknow 
also contains contact details of Indian Missions/Posts in GCC countries, Protector of 
Emigrants (POE) Offices in India, Helpline numbers of PBSK and information about Madad 
Portal. 
26. The Committee were  concerned to note the ma nner in which crisis situation in 
Gulf region adversely  impacted the safety, security and interests of our migrant 
workers. Issues such as non -payment of salaries, confiscation of passports, inadequate 
finances and lack of communication further aggravated their existence on foreign soil. 
In order to reduce the challenges faced by migrant workers, the Committ ee had 
recommended that a clear -cut emergency plan with a Stand ard Operating Procedure 
must be formulated by the Government along with an institutionalized mechanism for 
safe evacuation of migrant workers during times of crisis. The Ministry was also asked 
to include awareness about emergency evacuation at the time of pre-departure training. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has informed that on the basis of specific local 
conditions, Indian Missions and Posts have put in place a crisis management plan for 
safety and security of all Indian nationals. The Committee are happy to learn that 
relevant information for dealing with emergency situations in foreign countries, 
including emergency contact numbers of Indian Missions/Posts abroad, 24x7 helpline 
numbers of Pravasi  Bharatiya Sahatya Kendra (PBSK) , etc are being pro vided to 
migrant workers at the time of pre-departure orientation training. Furthermore, during 
the PDOT programme at PDOT centres in New Delhi, Mumbai, Kochi and Lucknow 
the migrant workers are also given a handbook which contains details of Indian 

24 
 
Missions/Posts in GCC countries, Protector of Emigrants (POE) offices in India, 
information about MADAD portal and helpline numbers of PBSK. 
While appreciating the host of measures taken by the Government for safe 
evacuation of Indian nationals, particularly the  migrant workers, the Committee desire 
that emergency plans with a set Standard Operating Procedure should be prepared and 
an institutionalized mechanism with host countries to evacuate workers should also be 
developed. Moreover, significant e fforts should be invested in spreading awareness 
about these measures  to the targeted group. Keeping in mind the size and extent of 
workers proceeding abroad for overseas employment, the Committee propose setting 
up of more PDOT Centres. 
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
Re-launching Transportation of Mortal Remains (TMR) Portal 
27. The Committee had observed that repatriation of human remains is a painstaking and 
expensive process. As per the Ministry, local procedures for transportation of mortal remains 
vary from country to country. The time taken for co mpletion of local formalities was  usually 
two to four weeks and the wait is even longer for unnatural deaths due to the procedure of 
investigation. Moreover, registration of death at the concerned Indian Mission/Post is 
essential for which too much documentation is needed. 
 The Committee were of the view that the extant procedures often add to the agony of 
those who lose their family member and we re left at the mercy of officials of host countries 
and the Indian Consulates and Embassies. As a humanitarian issue, the Committee had 
recommended that the Governmen t should take up the  issue with utmost seriousness and 
devise an effective mechanism with the host governments to ensure speedy repatriation of the 
mortal remains of the Indian migr ants. A single window system could be set up in the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to ease the formalities and reduce the time taken for repatriation.  
28. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs s tated that the 
Government accords the highest priority to early repatriation of mortal remains. During 

25 
 
around last five years, the government has taken steps to expedite and streamline the process 
of repatriation of dead bodies. Our Missions and Posts abroad also proactively engage with 
the local authorities in these matters. As a result, the overall time t aken in repatriation has 
come down. Certain delays particularly in instances of accidental and unnatural deaths do 
occur due to the mandatory legal requirements of the host countries and where Missions and 
Posts have to comply with the stipulated procedure s. Bringing dead body/bodies of Indians 
who die abroad, involves completion of certain formalities before the local authorities allow 
such body/bodies to be transported to India. In some cases police investigations are to be 
completed. Our Missions/Posts a broad extend all possible help in bringing back the mortal 
remains of Indians to the relatives of those who die abroad either naturally or accidentally. 
As soon as the information about the death of an Indian national comes to the 
knowledge of the concerne d Indian Mission/Post abroad, they take proactive action by 
seeking a report from the local Foreign Office and other concerned authorities regarding the 
cause of the death of the Indian national. Our Missions/Posts abroad also inform the next of 
kin of the deceased Indian national, and facilitate the transportation to India or local burial of 
mortal remains in accordance with the wishes of the family of the deceased. The relevant 
documents related to the deceased are attested and other assistance is provide d on priority 
basis when required, including after office hours and on holidays. Under MADAD maximum 
priority is accorded to the follow up of mortal remains cases. Anyone can directly lodge a 
grievance in MADAD portal, which flashes it immediately for action to the welfare officer of 
the concerned Indian Mission/Post. MADAD portal also enables swift tracking and sharing 
of information among the grievant, Indian Mission/Post as well as the Ministry. 
29. For speedy repatriation of mortal remains, the Committee had recommended 
that the Government should devise an effective mechanism with host governments and 
also set up a single window clearance in Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee 
note that the Missions and Posts abroad have been pro -actively engaging with local 
authorities to extend help and assistance for expeditious repatriation of mortal remains 
of Indians to the relatives of those wh o die abroad either naturally or  accidentally. The 
Ministry also informed that the MADAD portal has enabled  swift tracking and sharing 

26 
 
of information among the grievant, Indian Mission/Post as well as the Ministry. While 
realizing the procedural delays and logistical challenges faced in bringing back the 
remains of bodies of Indians in accidental/unnatural deat hs, the Committee desire that 
as a humanitarian issue , the Ministry should accord utmost priority to such cases. The 
Committee reiterate their recommendation that a single window clearance should be set 
up for swift tracking and sharing of information betw een  Indian Missions/Posts and 
MEA. An online portal for Transportation of Mortal Remains (TMR),as was created by 
erstwhile MoIA in 2014 , should be re -launched with desired modifications for sharing 
information and appropriate follow up on mortal remains cases. 
 (Recommendation No. 13) 
Re-visiting Minimum Referral Wages (MRW) 
30. The Government of India had  been fixing minimum referral wages to regulate the 
wages of Indian migrant workers employed in different countries falling under the 
Emigration Check Regulation (ECR) category. The Ministry had  informed the Committee 
that on the basis of consultation with  our Missions, the minimum wage rates were fixed in 
2014 on the then prevailing wage rate. The wage str ucture in the Gulf countries had  
plummeted since 2014 due to the oil crisis and fall in prices. However, the minimum referral 
wages fixed by the Government had not kept pace with such changes, leading to widening of 
the wage differential between the one imposed by the Indian Government and the prevailing 
wage rate in the destination countries. Though the fixing of higher minimum referral wages 
might be justified for the protection of migrant workers; this might result not only in reduced 
preference for Indian workers but also greater exploitation through dual contracts - one for 
the e-Migrate and the other for the Government in the destination country. The Committee 
had noted that the Ministry has taken due cognizance of this issue and established a 
Committee to review it.  
 The Committee agreed with the Ministry that there wa s an urgent need to revisit the 
minimum referral wages and making it more realistic  and up to date. The Committee, had 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry should co-ordinate with the Ministry of Labourand 

27 
 
set up a Committee for reviewing the minimum referral wages at least on annual basis with 
the primary purpose of striking a balance between protection of workers and promotion of 
employment.  
31. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply , stated that the 
recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. Former  EAM had taken a meeting 
with the Associations/Federation of registered Recruiting Agents (RAs) on 14.12.2018 on 
different issues including the reviewing of existing MRW. The assoc iations were of view 
that, the current minimum wages, detailed category -wise and country wise, in the eMigrate 
system for emigration clearance have become unrealistic due to the fact that, the economies 
of the countries (mainly ECR) have stagnated and henc e jobs at such wages are no more 
available, particularly as claimed by the RA Associations/Federations, people from the 
neighboring countries are willing to work on lower wages which are still comparatively 
better than the wages prevalent in their countries. A  Committee has been constituted 
comprising of representatives of RAs and officers of the MEA. However, the Consultative 
Committee of Ministry of External Affairs, where revision of minimum wages has been 
deliberated upon, has not yet given any clear di rections. The Ministry is seized with the 
subject and after appropriate consultations and discussions with concerned stake holders, 
further action would be taken. 
32. Upon noticing the difference in the Minimum Referral W ages (MRW) fixed by 
Indian Government in 2014 and prevailing wage rate in destination countries for 
migrant workers, the Committee had recommended that the MRW should be reviewed 
annually. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has „duly noted‟ this 
recommendation. Despite the lapse of more than a year, the inability of the Ministry to 
furnish pointed reply is incomprehensible. While the Ministry has agreed about the 
necessity of reviewing the Minimum Referral Wages, no substantive action has been 
taken in that dir ection. The Ministry is, therefore,  urged to take serious cognizance of 
this matter and take concrete action with appropriate consultation and discussions with 
all the concerned stakeholders  to establish a system for reviewing the MRW on an 

28 
 
annual basis wi th the objective of striking a balance between protection of migrant 
workers and promotion of employment . The Committee also desire to be apprised 
about the outcomes of the discussions within three months. On another plane, the 
Committee find the alibi for  inaction on the instant recommendation of theirs as 
directions from Consultative Committee of External Affairs were awaited , is 
inexplicable and completely untenable. 
 (Recommendation No. 14) 
Capitalizing on competencies of returnee emigrants 
33. Migration of workers to the Gulf region is mostly temporary and they do return back 
to the country of origin. The returning of migrants after crisis situations in the Gulf countries 
puts them in a precarious position. The Committee note d that there exist ed numerous 
challenges in the resettlement of the returnees, which inter alia included difficulty in socio -
cultural reintegration, lack of employment opportunities, the absence of soft loans or other 
financial incentives, and lack of comprehensive rehabilitation package etc. Given the fact that 
resettlement of returnees is a  state subject, the Ministry had  expressed its constraints in 
playing an active role. The Ministry had  stated that it has tried to sensitize the State 
Governments through Conferences and Workshops. 
 The returnee migrant came  back with skills, work experience and savings . Their 
active participation could  give momentum to our developmental activities. In the opinion of 
the Committee, re -integration of the returnee migrants is necessary to acc rue the fruits of 
successful migration. The Committee we re not satisfied with the logic that the issue of 
returnee migrants be sidelined due to the larger responsibility of state governments. The 
Committee had, therefore, strongly recommend ed that the Gove rnment should frame a 
rehabilitation policy in consultation with the states receiving returnees to help the returnee 
emigrants to use their enhanced skill sets for contributing to the development of self and 
country. While framing such a policy, the state governments should be actively involved and 
factors such as the socio -economic profile, skill sets, country of employment and nature of 
the job of the returnee migrant be taken into account. 
 

29 
 
34. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Extern al Affairs submitted that t he 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. In this regard, Ministry 
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has conveyed that possibilities of 
utilizing i nternational experience and skill sets of the return ing migrant workers can be 
explored as Trainers and Assessors to develop International Training models for the benefit 
of future migrant workers.  
Comprehensive emphasis is being given in expanding Ministry‟ s collaboration with 
the State G overnments.  A Consultation Meeting was held with major labour -sending States 
and Assam on 3 July 2018 to sensitize them about the institutional framework on emigration 
related matters and expanding the PDO programs by the State Governments. 
35. For optimum utilization o f the skill sets, experience and potential of our 
emigrant workers, the Committee had exhorted the Government to frame a 
rehabilitation policy in consultation with State Governments. The „duly noted‟ reply of 
the Ministry is unsatisfactory and the Committe e would p refer a precise and more 
action-oriented reply after one year of making such a Recommendation. The Committee 
are satisfied to note that the Ministry of External Affairs is collaborating with the 
Ministry of Skill  Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and State Governments 
in this regard. The utilization of international experience and skill sets of the returning 
migrant workers as Trainers and Assessors to develop International Training models 
for future migrant  workers seem to be an impressive idea and the Committee would 
urge MEA to actively push forward on this matter in collaboration with MSDE as well 
as the major Labour sending state Governments and finalize a policy in this regard. 
The Committee also desire to be informed about the outcomes of such an engagement at 
their earliest. 
 
 

30 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Reducing the vulnerabilities of emigrant workers at all three stages of migration cycle 
36. The expatriate migrant workers faced various issues during the  three phases of the 
migration cycle (pre -departure, country of destination and return) both in India and abroad. 
During the pre -departure phase, the key issues related  to illegal/fake recruiting agents, non -
availability of the adequate database, lack of s kill & training and unrealistic minimum 
referral wages. In the country of destination, the migrant workers largely face d three key 
issues related to employment, welfare and psychological. Finally, in the last  phase, the 
returnee migrant had  to face the dif ficulties of rehabilitation a nd resettlement. The 
Committee were of the view that the problems faced by migrant workers in the first and the 
last phase could  be effectively tackled by the Government as th ose wer e within the 
geographical and sovereign limit s of our country. The Committee realize d that the second 
phase was the one where the onus rested mostly on the host country and the Government had 
to grapple with serious challenges in protecting and safeguarding of our workers. Those 
problems were further aggravated by the Kafala system in most of the Gulf countries, which 
left emigrant workers more vulnerable to exploitation and trafficking. 
 The Committee  had, therefore, strongly recommend ed that in order to mitigate the 
vulnerabilities faced by the migr ant workers at different stages of migration cycle, the 
Government should set up a pro -active infrastructural and institutional mechanism in all the 
Embassies/Missions that would  comprehensively look into the concerns of the workers, 
improve the quality of  services, enhance levels of welfare and respond efficiently to 
situations of di stress. A cooperative approach wa s needed between all the concerned 
stakeholders to optimize the benefits of migration while addressing its risks and challenges. 
The Government  should, thereby, endeavour to empower the emigrant workers through 
specific systemic interventions on domestic, bilateral and multilateral fronts. The 
Officers/officials posted in all the embassies/Missions should be accessible and render a 
human touch wh ile addressing the problems of migrant workers, particularly the blue collar 
workers.  
37. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that the institutional 
framework for support and welfare of migrant workers has been considerably strengthened 
during last five years. The Indian Community Welfare Fund, the MADAD portal, eMigrate  

31 
 
system, Pravasi  Bhartiya Sahayta Kendras, help -lines, shelter homes etc. are some of the 
important mechanisms to expeditiously assist Indian nationals abroad.  
 Complaints are received from Indian emigrant workers in ECR countries, from time 
to time, regarding maltreatment, violation of contractual terms, adverse working conditions, 
wage related issues, employer related problems, medical and insurance related problems and 
compensation/death claims. The Ministry is working in close coordination with foreign 
governments to address concerns related to employment and welfare of Indian workers.  
Immediately on receipt of such complaints, the same are addressed by In dian Missions by 
taking them up with the concerned foreign authorities. Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MoUs/Agreements are already in place with the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries, Jordan and Malaysia that provide the institutional framework  to comprehensively 
discuss and review these matters. The issues of migrant workers are also taken up during 
JWGs and other high level meeting with the host governments. 
 Missions/Posts conduct Open Houses for the emigrant workers where 
officers/officials meet the workers regularly. Missions/Posts have also established 24x7 help 
lines and Toll Free help lines. The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), aimed at 
assisting Overseas Indian nationals abroad in times of distress on a means tested basis in the 
most deserving cases, has already been extended to all Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The 
„MADAD‟ portal, an important initiative of the Ministry, is an effort to extend a helping hand 
to Indians abroad requiring consular assistance. It enables online logging and tracking of 
grievances including by emigrant workers and their family members. 
PravasiBharatiyaSahayataKendrashave been setup that provides guidance and counselling on 
all matters pertaining to overseas Indian workers. Shelter homes for distressed Indian 
nationals have been setup in Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE and 
Malaysia. 
38. The Committee had observed that the emigrant workers face numerous 
challenges during the three phases (pre-departure, country of destination and return) of 
migration, which directly impinged upon their welfare and rights. Taking  into account 
the challenges in protecting and safeguarding the interests of Indian workers abroad,  
the Committee had urged the Government to make systemic interventions at the 

32 
 
domestic, bilateral and multilateral levels to reduce the vulnerability of our migrant 
workers. In its reply, the Ministry has enumerated various steps taken to strengthen the 
institutional framework for support and welfare of migrant workers. Establishment of 
24*7 help lines, conducting of Open Houses at Missions/Posts abroad, Pravasi  
Bharatiya Sahayta Kendras, Shelter homes, MADAD portal, e -Migrate system, Indian 
Community Welfare Fund are some of the significant mechanisms to address concerns 
relating to employment and welfare of migrant workers. At the bilateral front, the 
Committee note that Labour and Manpower Agreements are already in p lace with six 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. The Committee note that the Ministry has 
taken a host of measures  to extend helping hand to workers abroad, however, due to 
lack of infrastructural , institutional and feedback mechanism , the  system is not so 
effective.  The Committee , therefore,  desire that such mechanism should be set up in 
order to improve upon the existing infrastructural apparatus. In addition, Labour and 
Manpower Agreements should be concluded with the remaining GCC countries at the 
earliest. 
 (Recommendation No. 19) 
Gender sensitive migration policy 
39. The Committee had observed that gender-based hierarchies that affect all women in 
general and migrant femal e workers in particular, exposed  them to greater risks and 
exploitations which  inter-alia included physical violence, sexual abuse, restrictions on 
mobility and long working hours. In th at regard, the plight of domestic service workers and 
nurses within the category of female emigrant workers were appalling and worrisome. Taking 
into account the acute problems of domestic ser vice workers, the Ministry had  made 
emigration clearance of all ECR female workers for overseas employment in 18 ECR 
countries mandatory through six State -run recruiting agencies, namely NORK A Roots & 
ODEPC of Kerala, OMCL of Tamil Nadu, UPFC of Uttar Pradesh, OMCAP of Andhra 

33 
 
Pradesh and TOMCOM of Telangana. On the issue of non -payment of salaries of Indian 
nurses working in Yemen, the Ministry had suspended the licenses of the Recruiting agen cy 
that facilitated their illegal migration. As per the data furnished by the Ministry, the number 
of female workers migrating to Gulf countries had  diminished from 21, 521 in 2013 to 6076 
in 2016. 
 The Committee had noted that the overall approach of the Government towards the 
problems confronting the female migrant workers has been largely dominated by ensuring 
their protection and safety. Such  an approach, the Committee felt  might be a short -term 
solution which also tends to impact the opportunities for women migrants vis-à-vis their male 
counterparts. Due to the protectionist nature of the policy measures mentioned above, it is 
possible that women migrants m ight be resorting to illicit channels to migrate with increased 
costs and risks. In the Committee‟ s view, there wa s an urgent need for a gender -sensitive 
migration policy which t ook into consideration the gender -specific concerns and risks. The 
lack of availabil ity of sex -disaggregated data was another challenge that weakened  the 
migration praxis frame work. The Committee  had, therefore, recommend ed that the 
Government should spell out a gender -sensitive migration policy based on sex -disaggregated 
data with the larger objective of not only protecting but also empowering women with equal 
opportunities. Establishing a 24 x 7 women helpline in the Missions/Posts abroad c ould be a 
good starting point towards that direction. 
40. In its Action Taken Reply , the Ministry of External Affairs s tated that the 
recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. The Government‟s attention has 
been drawn from time to time to the issue of exploitation of women workers leaving for 
employment to Gulf countries. The Government has taken additional measures to safegua rd 
the interests of Indian female workers migrating to ECR countries. Therefore, a decision has 
been taken to make recruitment of female workers for ECR countries mandatory through 
government agencies. Their emigration for overseas employment is permitted only through 
the seven designated state -run recruitment agencies or through the Foreign Employer 
registered on  e-Migrate system. In case of Foreign Employer, attestation of work contract by 
the Indian Mission in the destination country and submission of a  bank guarantee of US $ 
2500 is mandatory before the emigration clearance is granted by the Office of Protector of 

34 
 
Emigrants. As per extant guidelines, the minimum age of ECR category female workers 
proceeding for overseas employment to ECR countries is 30 years. 
41. Keeping in mind the acute problems faced by female migrant workers abroad, 
the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should ensure that the migration 
policy is gender -sensitive taking into account gender -specific concerns and issues. In 
this regard, the Ministry was asked to establish a 24*7 women help line  in 
Missions/Posts abroad. It is a matter of regret that the Ministry has not initiat ed any 
specific action on this R ecommendation. While regretting the lack of appropriate 
response on part of the M inistry, the Committee deem it necessary to reiterate that a 
gender-sensitive migration policy should be framed based on sex -aggregated data and 
24*7 women help line, including a mental health and counseling support channel for 
India‟s female migrant workforce, should also be established without any further delay. 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
Integration of eMigrate system with similar emigration systems in GCC countries 
42. The Government has rolled out the e -Migrate Project for all 10 Protector of 
Emigrants (PoE) offices since September, 2014. The Committee note that by providing a 
comprehensive and online database of emigrants, Recruiting Agents Foreign Employers, the 
e-Migrate Project has made the emigration cycle faster and authentication of above -
mentioned stakeholders quicker. Furthermore, the Committee observe that the integration of 
e-Migrate with Passport Sewa Project of the Ministry of External Affairs and Bureau of 
Immigration servers of MHA has led to great validation of passport details of ECR cate gory 
workers and curbing malpractices and data entry errors. The Committee were pleased to learn 
that apprehensions of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries are being addressed and the 
latter has shown willingness to integrate their system with e-Migrate. The Committee felt that 
e-Migrate Project had  streamlined the e ntire emigration process and had  brought about 
transparency, e-governance and faster processing of Emigration Clearance. For the e -Migrate 
system to be holistic its integration with GCC coun tries wa s requisite and therefore, the 
Committee had desired that the Ministry should win the confidence of GCC countries and 

35 
 
persuade them to integrate their system with e-Migrate so that the database wa s not only 
comprehensive but also well integrated. 
43. The Ministry of External Affairs in its action taken reply stated that it has already 
initiated dialogue with ECR countries for integration of eMigrate system with the systems in 
their countries. With concerted effort, the integration of eMigrate system with eTawtheeq 
system of Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and MoHRE system of United Arab Emirates  is at 
advance stage. The Bahrain authority has shown their interest in such integration. In the Joint 
Working Group meeting with ECR countries, the Ministry has put forward the proposal of 
integration of eMigrate with the technical system of the respective countries.  
44. The integration of e -Migrate system with Passport Sewa Project (PSP)  and 
Bureau of Immigration services has imparted greater efficacy, transparency and pace 
to emigration clearance and for  making the e -migrate system holistic.  The GCC 
countries have also shown their willingness to integrate their system with e -migrate. 
The Committee therefore had recommended that the GCC countries should be 
persuaded to integrate their system with e -Migrate system on priority basis . Towards 
this direction, the Ministry has informed that in the Joint Working Group Meeting with 
ECR countries , the proposal for integration of e -Migrate with technical system of 
respective countries has been put forward by MEA. T he Committee are pleased to note 
that integration of eMigrate system with eTawtheeq system of Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia and MOHRE system of United Arab Emirates is at advance stage. The 
Committee desire expeditious culmination of these two projects. They fur ther desire 
that t he Ministry should continue to make sustained efforts to impress upon the 
remaining GCC countries about the efficacy of a well -integrated emigration clearance 
system and keep the Committee informed of the developments thereon. 
 

36 
 
 (Recommendation No. 23) 
Wider Social Security Net to Emigrant Workers 
45. Launched in 2003 with successive revisions in 2006, 2008 and 2017, the Pravasi  
Bharatiya Bima Yojana was a mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) category workers going to 18 ECR countries for overseas employment. After the 
revamping of PBBY in 2017 there wa s a provision of an insurance cover of Rs.10 lakh in 
cases of accidental death and permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal 
insurance premium of  Rs.275/ Rs.375 for a period of two/three years. The Committee also 
observed that the various issues in the implementation of th at scheme such as the scope of 
coverage, no information to nominees, no facility for online renewal and difficulty in the 
certification of accidental death/permanent disability had been comprehensively addressed by 
the Ministry in consultation with all stakeholders. Given the fact that migration to GCC 
countries is temporary in nature, social security of the workers required adequate attention. In 
this regard, the Pravasi  Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) with it recent revamping wa s a step 
in the right direction. The Committee had desired that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility of a wider social security net for migrant workers  in consultation and 
collaboration with foreign employers. 
46. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that Pravasi Bharatiya 
Bima Yojana, initially launched in 2003, has been amended from time to time with the 
overarching objective of expanding the benefits for emigrant workers. The revised scheme 
PBBY , 2017, operational w.e.f. August 1, 2017, has made settlement of claims simpler for the 
benefit of our workers and is aimed at ensuring expeditious settlement of claims. The salient 
features of PBBY , 2017 are (i) the insured person is covered for a sum of Rs.10 lakhs in the 
event of accidental death or permanent disability irrespective of change of employer, 
employee‟s location and place of work, (ii) acceptance by insurance companies of 
certification of accidental death/permanent disability by Indian Missions/Posts abroad and 
(iii) facility for online renewal and copy of insurance polic y is to be made available to the 
nominee(s). 
Given the large number of migrant workers living and working in the Gulf countries, 
it would be in India‟s interest to negotiate Social Security Agreements with these countries. 
However, the domestic legislation in the GCC countries offers social security only to 

37 
 
permanent residents. There are no domestic provisions/legislations for temporary workers. 
Negotiating SSAs in the absence of domestic legislations in the GCC countries, therefore, 
becomes difficult. However, mostly Gulf countries have made insurance coverage mandatory 
for the blue collar workers.  They have established certain institutional mechanisms to protect 
the interests of the expatriate workers in case of premature termination of employment 
contracts, accidents, death or permanent disability.  The Ministry has bilater al agreements on 
labour and manpower issues with all GCC countries that provide the institutional framework 
to safeguard the interest of our nationals working in these countries.  
47. Appreciative of the  host of measures  taken by the Ministry  to address the 
implementation loopholes in the Pravasi  Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), the 
Committee note that  a mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) category workers going to 18 ECR countries for overseas empl oyment. The 
Committee had recommended that the possibility of a wider social security net for 
migrant workers should be explored in close consultation  and collaboration  with 
foreign employers. While migrant workers run the risk of losing entitlement to soc ial 
security benefits in their country of origin due to their absence, they may at the same 
time, in their country of employment, encounter exclusion from social security coverage 
as non -nationals. There is a need to ensure extension of social security cov erage and 
entitlements to migrant workers and their families. The Committee understand  that in 
the absence of a domestic legislations, negotiating Social Security Agreements (SSA) is a 
challenging task. They also note with satisfaction  that bilateral agree ments on labour 
and manpower issues with all GCC countries that provide the institutional framework 
to safeguard interests of our nationals working in  these countries  are in place . The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that adequate steps should be  taken for creation of a 
wider social securi ty net for migrant workers in consultation and collaboration with 

38 
 
foreign employers and there should be proper dissemination and awareness about these 
agreements to the concerned migrant workers. 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
Effective and time-bound grievance Redressal Mechanism 
48. The Ministry had  informed that the grievances received by the Missions/P ost abroad 
from Indian workers we re appropriately taken up on case to case basis with the 
employees/local authorities for redressal. The Committee had observed that well-established 
procedures had been established to handle recruitment related complaints against registered 
Recruitment Agents, unregistered Recruitment Agents, and Foreign Employers. In order to 
provide redressal of the grievances, series of measures , viz, MADAD portal, attestation by 
the Missions/Posts abroad, verification of foreign employers, fixation of Minimum Referral 
Wages, job contract, Overseas Workers Resource Centre and others had  been initiated by the 
Government. 
 The Committee wer e of the opinion that the existence of numerous grievance 
redressal mechanisms ma de it a cumbersome and painstaking process for the alre ady 
aggrieved migrant worker and their families. The MADAD portal and its Pravasi  Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendra represent ed a qualitative improvement over the existing procedure for 
handling of consular grievances through online forwarding tracking and escalation. However, 
the Government should establish a concrete channel for remedies and redressal, including 
fixing of a timeline and inform the migrant workers about the same through media campaigns 
and pre-departure training. 
1.49 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the 
suggestions of Hon‟ble Committee  have been noted. There is a robust grievance redressal 
system in place in this Ministry to ensure that the difficulties/problems faced by the Indian 
emigrants during their stay abroad are promptly and appropriately addressed. Ministry of 
External Affairs has been taking th e streamlined approach for the resolution of overseas 
employment related grievances of the emigrants and for faster resolution, the 24X7 PBSK 
Helpline is integrated with eMigrate grievance module. The grievances received by the 
PBSK Helpline are forwarded online to concerned officers of Overseas Employment and 

39 
 
PGE (OE & PGE) Division or to the concerned POE through eMigrate portal. Complaints 
which require the consular assistance are forwarded online to Indian Missions through 
MADAD portal. The grievances reported in eMigrate portal are monitored by the OE & PGE 
Division, while the MADAD grievances are monitored by the CPV Division. Efforts are also 
being made to online transfer the grievances seamlessly between the eMigrate and MADAD 
portal so that the time taken in resolution of the grievances is reduced with the joint efforts of 
jurisdictional POE and the Indian Mission abroad, considering the fact that in a significant 
number of cases, the details of Recruiting agent is known through the eMigrate portal. 
50. While acknowledging the existence of multiple grievance rederessal mechanisms 
(such as MADAD portal, 24*7 Pravasi  Bharatiya Sahatya Kendra, etc), the Committee 
in their Report has emphasized the necessity of a streamlined channel for effective 
remedial action in a time -bound manner. On observing the Ministry‟s Action Taken 
Reply, the Committee notice that efforts are underway for online transfer of grievances 
between eMigrate and MADAD portal to the concerned divisions with an objective to 
reduce the ti me taken in resolution of the grievances. It is, however, not clear whether 
the concerned divisions are updating the status of resolution on some platform. The 
Committee strongly desire that the Ministry should also fix a timeframe for rederessal 
of grieva nces and there should be a regular updation of the status on the Ministry‟s 
website so that aggrieved workers and their family members may be able to track  the 
status of their grievance redressal. 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
Greater Dissemination of Information and awareness 
51. The Committee had noted that in order to create awareness about safe and legal 
migration, the Government has launched a campaign „Prashikshit  Jao, Surakshit  Jao‟ on 
television and radio in Hindi and eight regional languages throughout the country and 
particularly in the major labour exporting Indian states. Further, during the Ministerial level 

40 
 
meetings with the NRI Ministers of State Go vernments, the Ministry  provided booklets and 
CDs in regional languages for wider circulation and dispe nsion. The awareness campaigns 
were being rolled out on Doordarshan, FM Gold as well as Lok  Sabha & RajyaSabha 
channels. However, the Committee we re dismayed to note the real e ffect of the awareness 
campaign in print and e lectronic media. The Committee we re surprised th at blue collar 
migrant workers we re expected to watch Lok  Sabha and Rajya  Sabha Television. The 
Committee we re apprised that the Ministry has been provided with a  budget for a media 
campaign through OEPG and OIA  Division. The Ministry required  more budget to 
vigorously roll out this campaign. Further, t he Committee we re astonished to not e that till 
now the Ministry had not initiated any help desk at the Airports. 
 In light of the fact that the ECR category migrant workers were one with low levels of 
education and skill, creating necessary awareness among them through simpler and 
accessible channel becomes a pre -requisite to protect their rights and interests, both i n the 
country of origin and destination. The Committee we re dissatisfied with the efforts made by 
Government in this regard. The Government of India is strongly recommended to carry out 
multi-media awareness campaigns to educate intending emigrants about e migration 
procedures, pitfalls of illegal migration, various welfare schemes, and grievance redressal 
mechanisms. While doing so, the Committee urge the Government to specifically focus on 
those states where problems of Migrant Workers are dominant. The Go vernment should also 
establish Migrant Help Desks at all immigration counters at airports and provide the migrant 
workers with a comprehensive manual on everything related to safe and legal migration. The 
Committee further desire that adequate budgetary su pport should be provided for these 
activities. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
52. In its Action Taken Reply , the Ministry of External Affairs s tated that during the 
financial year 2018 -19, with the approval of EAM, media campaign on „Safe and Legal 
Migration‟ of Indian workers for overseas employment was run through All India Radio, 
Doordarshan, Lok  Sabha TV and NFDC.  As maximum people who go for overseas 
employment are from UP, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, 
Kerala, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Te lengana, Maharashtra, Odisha and Karnataka, a 40 -
second and 80 -second ad on „Safe and Legal Migration‟ in Hindi and different regional 

41 
 
languages for two month on prime channels and DD News was run from 16 July, 2018 to 17 
September, 2018.   
Advertisements of „Safe and Legal Migration‟ were published in two leading dailies 
in these states once a week on Saturdays during the month of September 2018.  
The need was felt to include popular channels in this effort. Hence, with the approval 
of EAM and Minister of Information & Broadcasting, some private channels such as ETV 
Telugu, PTC Punjabi, ZEE Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand; Zee 
Rajasthan News; News 18 Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Bihar and 
Jharkhand were included and t his campaign was also run once again to ensure sufficient 
outreach for one month beginning 11 December, 2018 on Doordarshan, Lok Sabha TV , Rajya 
Sabha TV and also on above-mentioned private channels. 
Media Awareness campaign for 40 &80 second ads was run o n Regional 
Channels/Kendras of Doordarshan for 30 days from 1 st August 2019. Ads in Hindi and 
regional languages in regional and popular newspapers were published during the period 
September-October 2019.  Both A V and print advertisements were also downloa ded and 
publicized through social media.  
 Handbooks for migrant workers  have also been developed in eight languages  i.e.  
Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and Urdu. Presently, these 
handbooks are distributed to prospective migrant workers attending One Day Pre Departure 
Orientation (PDO) Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and Lucknow. 
 Setting up of help desks at the airports is also under consideration. 
53. For an effective and wider dissemination of information and awareness about 
safe and legal migration, the Committee had recommended that a multi -media 
awareness campaign should be undertaken along with provisioning of enhanced 
budgetary allocation. Towards this end, the Ministry has enumerated several measures 
such as publication of advertisements, broadcasting of awareness on popular channels, 
development of handbooks for migrant workers etc. that have been taken. The Ministry 
has also informed that setting up of help desks at airports is under consideration. The 
Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry has omitted any reference to 

42 
 
efforts made for seeking enhanced budgetary support  to carry out these activities. The 
absence of specific and comprehensive reply to this Recommendation is perplexing. The 
Committee, therefore, once again urge the Ministry to embark upon a greater 
awareness and diffusion of information programme to encompass a larger community 
of migrant workers with actionable measures with required budgetary support and 
outcome oriented approach and submit a consolidated reply to the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
Immediate finalization and introduction of a Bill on Emigration 
54. The Committee had observed that the process of emigration by Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) category workers wa s presently regulated under the Emigration Act, 1983 
and enforced by the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) with the help of 10  offices of the 
Protector of Emigrants. Successive Secretaries from the Ministry of External Affairs and 
erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have repeatedly assured the Committee about 
the earliest introduction of the Bill in the Parliament. Rece ntly, the Foreign Secretary while 
giving oral evidence before the Committee on 18 July, 2018 had given the deadline of 
November, 2018 for submission of the Bill.  Throughout the period of one and a half year of 
deliberations on this subject, the Ministry had offered numerous justifications for the delay in 
the introduction of the Bill which inter-alia included the need for harmonization of an 
international instrument, change in migration landscape, the constitution of a Committee and 
appointment of a consultant. 
 The Committee were of the strong view that in light of the momentous changes in 
migration patterns, the legal provision s contained in the present Act we re inadequate to 
effectively deal with the diverse issues confronting the migrant workers. The prolonged delay 
in the introduction of draft Emigration Bill ha d been an issue of grave concern for the 
Committee. The justifications and assurances offered by the Ministry fo r putting the bill in 
abeyance we re untenable and unconvincing. If the country of  origin is negligent about its 
duties towards its migrant workers, how can we have expectations from the destination 
countries? The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the Government should 
take serious cognizance of this matter and accord it the highest level priority. The Committee 

43 
 
had desired that the bill m ight be finalized urgently and presented to the Parliament without 
any further delay. The Committee  had also desired that the following salient features must 
form an essential part of the proposed comprehensive law on emigrants: 
a.    The proposed law must regulate visa brokers, especially by providing clear terms 
through which visa brokers may contract with recruiting agents. The law must clearly 
specify the legal duties and obligation s of brokers and the rights of migrant workers. It 
must also provide for the issuance of short term and individual licenses to visa brokers 
in order to enable them to recruit workers in collaboration with recruitment companies. 
The law must also emphasize on the onus on the recruiting agents to conduct due 
diligence on prospective working conditions, employment benefits and other related 
factors, to ensure a safe and equitable working environment for migrant workers. 
b. The law must address the asymmetry of  information between migrant workers and 
their prospective employers. It is essential that migrant workers are provided 
information about the nature and conditions of the prospective work to the fullest extent 
possible, in order to enable them to make an informed decision. A mechanism should be 
setup to enable interaction between prospective and experienced migrant workers. The 
flow of information will be valuable in improving efficiency and productivity in 
different fields. A new law must also provide for Migrant Worker Welfare Centres at 
international airports to deliver key information. These include emergency assistance, 
access to labour welfare departments and agencies etc. 
c. The law must take into account technological advancements. Digitized database s 
should be created with records of all migrant workers, their recruitment companies, 
their skills, educational qualifications etc. The law must ensure that all migrant workers 
are registered in these databases. 
d.  The law should establish a separate depa rtment with powers of enforcement 
under the Protector of Emigrants to investigate complaints of exploitation and other 
abuses by recruiters. This department must provide legal aid, translation services, and 
other forms of assistance to workers, while initi ating legal proceedings against 
recruitments engaging in illegal activities. 
e. The law should also provide for “safe migration cells” in key migrant districts across 
the country, to inform and engage migrant workers about the emigration process, 

44 
 
employment contracts, their legal rights and other essential information to protect them 
from exploitation and abuse.  
55. In its Action Taken R eply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the 
recommendation has been duly noted. Ministry is aware that there is an imperative need for 
putting in place an enabling framework, institutional and legislative, aimed at efficient 
management of emigration and to address migration related issues in a comprehensive 
manner with a holistic approach.  In this regard, consultations are ongoing to prepare a 
modern technology oriented Emigration Bill which aims at providing a comprehensive 
enabling legislative framework based on whole -of-cycle migration approach and 
empowerment of our workforce through informed choices. 
56. The inordinate delay in framing of an enabling legislative framework for dealing 
with all aspects of emigration has been a matter of serious concern for the Committee. 
The Committee had enlisted five salient features that ought to be incorporated in th e 
proposed Bill and presented to the Parliament immediately. The Ministry‟s response 
and justification on this issue is again feeble and ineffective. On the basis of the 
Ministry‟s reply, the  Committee deduce that little or  no progress have been made in 
this regard. Towards this direction, consultations with concerned stakeholders should 
be expedited and completed as soon as possible so that  a draft Bill is prepared and 
presented to the Parliament without any further delay. The Committee, therefore, deem 
it necessary to strongly reiterate that a comprehensive legal framework encompassing 
the five salient features  suggested by the Committee  should be introduced in the 
Monsoon session 2020 of the Parliament positively.  
 (Recommendation Nos. 28 and 30) 
New Domestic Law on emigration should be in line with International Instruments 
57. The Committee had noted that the recently adopted Global Compact for Migration is 
an UN-backed non -binding global agreement on a common approach to international 

45 
 
migration in all its dimensions. The Compact comprised of 23 objectives for better managing 
migration at local, national, regional and global levels. The Ministry of  External Affairs had 
also consulted other concerned Ministries and the issues taken by India are largely ba sed on 
the issues already taken up i n ILO or Geneva. The Committee we re happy to learn that India 
has played a pro -active role in negotiating the Compact and India‟s position on several 
critical issues like the distinction between migrants and refugees, th e primacy of national 
sovereignty in determining migration policies etc, have been mentioned in the agreed 
document. The Ministry had informed the Committee that active consultations were held 
with the concerned stakeholders during the negotiation phase. T he distinction betw een 
migrants and refugees raised a new the need for fresh legislation in India governing both 
emigrants from the country and refugees seeking asylum in the country. The Committee 
noted with disappointment that the former was still governed by the outdated Emigration Act 
of 1983 and t hat on the latter, India remained  one of the few democracies without an 
asylum/refugee law at all. 
 The Committee had recommended the enactment of a new law to govern emigrants, 
which must incorporate India‟s commitments to various international covenants and 
instruments, such as the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
(ICESCR), the International Covenan t on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the United 
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crimes and various standards and 
guidelines set out by the International Labour Organization (ILO). 
58. The Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular M igration is indeed a historic and 
commendable move to frame a positive narrative and agenda on migration. The Committee 
had desire that this progressive Compact on migration should be kept in mind and used as a 
guiding factor in strengthening the framework  as well as in drafting of the domestic 
legislation on migration. The Government could further utilize it as a basis for working out 
cooperative bilateral agreements with labour importing countries, particularly the GCC 
countries to protect the rights of o ur migrant workers and addressing the challenges and 
vulnerabilities faced by them. 
59. In its Action Taken R eply to Recommendation No. 28 , the Ministry of External 
Affairs submitted that the government is conscious of the imperative need for putting in place 
an enabling framework, institutional and legislative, aimed at efficient management of 

46 
 
emigration and to address migration related issues in a comprehensive manner with a holistic 
approach. Towards this end, consultations are on going to put in place a modern technology 
oriented Emigration Bill.  This Bill will look at all the recommendations made by this 
Committee including providing adequate institutional framework and other suggestions. 
60. In their Action Taken R eply to Recommendation No.30 , the Ministry of External 
Affairs stated that the Recommendations have been duly noted. Consultations are ongoing to 
put in place a modern technology oriented Emigration Bill.  These consultations  have also 
taken into account the 23 objectives laid out in the recently adopted Global Compact for 
Migration.  This Bill would be in line with International Convention and Instruments that set 
out the International Framework for Migration. 
61. Highlighting the dire need for a new law to substitute the  outdated Emigration 
Act, 1983 , the Committee had urged the Government to take cue from the existing 
international covenants and instruments, including various standards and guidelines set 
out by ILO and the recently adopted Global Compact on Migration and Refugees , in 
framing the new Bill. The Committee are d ispleased with the Ministry‟s response and 
are unable to comprehend the complacent attitude of the Ministry over such a 
significant matter. Expressing regret over the tardy progress in formulation and 
finalization of the Bill on emigration, the Committee strongly desire that the proposed 
Bill ought to be rooted in the values, commitment s and framework provided by various 
International Convention and Instruments.  
 
 
 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee observes that the size, spread and depth of migration pathways from 
India has been witnessing significant changes during the last three decades. A closer look at 
the profile of Indian emigrants points to a general trend of skilled and qualifi ed Indians 
moving to Organization for Economic Cooperation (OECD) countries while the unskilled or 
semi-skilled/low skilled workers are going to the Gulf region. The Committee, however, are 
concerned to note that the existing institutional arrangements for  the protection, safety and 
welfare of Indian emigrants are based on inadequate data infrastructure. Moreover, in the 
absence of any articulated migration policy, the country has not been able to tap in the full 
potential offered by mobility of Indians in the international labour market and the efforts 
geared in this direction appears fragmentary and myopic.  
 
 Given the compelling circumstances that drive emigration and the profound socio -
economic impact of migration, the Government ought to have had a sta ted policy on 
international migration that provided the overarching architecture for migration governance 
and institutional framework. The Committee, therefore, would strongly urge that the 
Government should undertake coordinated modes of engagement with a ll concerned 
stakeholders and enhance India‟s migration governance by framing a coherent migration 
policy. Furthermore, the Government should put in place a strong mechanism for inter -
ministerial coordination and cooperation with State Governments to impro ve the governance 
on migration, address the challenges and effectively implement the ongoing programmes for 
the protection and welfare of Indian migrants. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations made by the Committee have been duly noted. It has been the high 
priority of the government to develop a robust and responsive framework to ensure welfare, 
safety and to prevent exploitation of Indian workers going abroad in coordination with all 
stake holders including concerned Ministries in Government of India and State Governments. 
 
 Ministry has developed a robust framework for the welfare and protection of our 
migrant workers. The initiatives like MADAD, e -Migrate, Indian Community Welfare Fund, 
Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras, Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yo jana, Pravasi Kaushal Vikas 
Yojana, Pre-Departure Orientation Programmes, open houses in Mission and Posts and active 
follow up of the workers‟ grievances by the missions/posts with the local authorities of the 

48 
 
host government have played an instrumental r ole in improving the migration experience of 
Indian workers in recent years. Bilateral mechanisms with Gulf countries have also been 
strengthened by entering into MOUs/Agreements on labour and manpower cooperation 
related matters. Such MoUs/ Agreements hav e been signed with Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. The issues related to migrant workers are also 
regularly taken up during Joint Working Group Meetings that are integral part of such 
MoUs/Agreements.   
 
 The Ministry coordinate s with Bureau of Immigration, Ministry of Home Affairs, for 
clearance of emigrants before boarding flights to foreign countries through online e -Migrate 
system and also with other Ministries as and when issues arise in overseas employment such 
as with Mini stry of Shipping, for overseas deployment of Seafarers, Ministries of Home 
Affairs and Women and Child Development on the issue of human trafficking etc.  
 
 Three high -level Conference(s) of major labour sending States to promote safe and 
legal emigration and to curb the activities of the overseas recruitment business being carried 
out by illegal agents, have been convened on 9 th November, 2016, 8 th May, 2017 and 10 th 
January, 2018, in New Delhi. The state governments were represented by their Chief 
Ministers, NRI Ministers and concerned senior officers. During the conferences State 
Governments were, inter -alia, requested to pro -actively check the growth of illegal agents 
who indulge in overseas recruitment activities illegally and to take strict action agai nst them. 
They were also requested to launch awareness campaigns in vernacular medium for wider 
coverage and assimilation. The Ministry has also expanded the Pre Departure Orientation 
Training Programme in coordination with State Governments.  Under this model, one center 
each is operational in Jaipur, Sikar (Rajasthan); Hyderabad, Nizamabad and Karimnagar 
(Telangana); Gaya, Muzzafarpur, Darbhanga and Patna (Bihar), these centers are managed by 
State Government Agencies.   
 
 Protector General of  Emigrants (PGE) has been undertaking visits to various States, 
during which interaction with senior State Government officials concerned with workers 
going abroad are being held; where the issue connected with safe and legal migration with 
safeguards and ways and means to better spread awareness are discussed. In the last six 
months such visits and meetings with the State Governments of Gujarat, Goa, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka and Rajasthan have taken place.  
 
 The ext ant legislative framework of all matters related to emigration of Indian 
nationals is prescribed by Emigration Act 1983.  However, the nature, pattern, numbers and 
directions of migration of our nationals has undergone a paradigm shift during the last thre e-
and-half decades.  In this regard, the Ministry has had extensive consultations with (i) 
concerned Ministries (ii) with recruitment industry, international organizations, think -tanks, 
business organizations and academia and (iii) States and Union Territo ries.  A draft bill has 

49 
 
been put on the Ministry‟s website and social media platforms and responses and comments 
are being received from various stakeholders.  The consultation exercise is ongoing to ensure 
that all aspects to put in place a modern, techno logy oriented Emigration Bill are taken into 
consideration.  
 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
The Committee feel that without any authentic database regarding the number of 
Indian migrant workers in different countries and their employment patterns, the Government 
may not be able to reach out to the emigrant workers and ensure their safe, legal and regular 
migration. Exact official data is available only for workers registering for emigration 
clearance. The Committee are concerned to note that despite the growing scale of migratory 
flows, vital statistics and information are not readily available. Recognizing the gravity of the 
issue, the Foreign Secretary informed the Committee that recently an arrangement has been 
made between the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs to share 
data of ECNR passport holders since June, 2016. The Committee are hopeful that this recent 
arrangement would bring forth requisite database of emigration from Indi a for both ECR and 
ECNR passports and well -equip the Ministry in formulating and implementing various 
welfare measures for migrant workers. While conscious of the challenges involved, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should maintain an authentic d atabase relating to 
various aspects of migration such as the profile of migrants, their job profile, country of 
destination, complaints registered and response thereon using the data available with PGE 
and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concern of the Committee has been noted. Presently, the Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) passport holders workers going to ECR countries have to mandatorily obtain 
Emigration Clearance (EC) through MEA‟s web portal “eMigrate” before proceeding abroad 
and the data of such Indians migrating legally for overseas employment is captured on 
eMigrate portal. The Ministry has also been making efforts to devise mechanism for collating 
data with regard to Non-Emigration Check Required (ECNR) passport holding Ind ians going 
abroad. In fact, registration of ECNR category emigrants going for employment to ECR 
countries was launched on pilot basis with effect from 29.11.2017 by filling up of a single 
page form, on eMigrate portal, with minimal fields of information. E CNR passport holders 
going for employment to ECR countries currently are encouraged to register in the e -Migrate 
system. As special preventive measure, registration of ECNR passport holders going to Iraq 
for employment has been made mandatory in addition t o ECR passport holders requiring 
clearance. The Ministry is coordinating closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) for 

50 
 
making available the data on real time basis on the persons going overseas on employment 
visas. Letters have been sent at high leve l to Ministry of Home Affairs in this regard. It is the 
consistent effort of the Ministry to extend every possible help to all Indians abroad, ECR or 
ECNR, in case of any eventuality. 
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
The Committee observe that migrant workers constitute the most vulnerable section 
of Indian emigrants. A significant number of Indian workers migrate to the Gulf countries, 
particularly Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait and Oman but due to skill deficits,  general lack of 
awareness about their rights, employment contracts, customs and regulations, these emigrant 
workers are the most explicated and vulnerable at the destination countries. The Kafala 
system and issues related to Iqma further complicate the al ready precarious position of these 
workers in the Gulf region. The Committee strongly emphasize that all migrant workers are 
entitled to respect and protection of their human rights and dignity of labour. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Minist ry should ensure that concerted efforts are being made 
to reduce their vulnerabilities, curb exploitation and harassment by placing them at the centre 
of our migration policy framework. There is a strong need to enhance the quality of 
interventions to maxi mize the positive impacts of migration and minimize its negative 
consequences. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The welfare and protection of Indian workers abroad is among the highest priorities 
of the Ministry. Significant efforts have been made towards ensuing a safe, orderly, legal and 
humane migration process. Ministry has developed a robust framework for the welfare and 
protection of our migrant workers. The initiatives like MADAD, e -Migrate, Indian 
Community Welfare Fund, Pravasi Bharatiya Sa hayata Kendras, Pravasi Bharatiya Bima 
Yojana, Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana, Pre-Departure Orientation Programmes , open houses 
in Mission and Posts and active follow up of the workers‟ grievances by the missions/posts 
with the local authorities of the host  government have played an instrumental role in 
improving the migration experience of Indian workers in recent years. Bilateral mechanisms 
with Gulf countries have also been strengthened by entering into MOUs/Agreements on 
labour and manpower cooperation r elated matters. Such MoUs/ Agreements have been 
signed with Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. The issues 
related to migrant workers are also regularly taken up during Joint Working Group Meetings 
that are integral part of such MoUs/Agreements.   
 

51 
 
 The Ministry works closely with Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Home 
Affairs as well as State Governments whenever the need for a coordinated effort is 
necessitated. The Ministry also has an arrangement with Bureau of Immigra tion, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, for clearance of emigrants before boarding flights to foreign countries, 
through online e-Migrate system and coordinates with different other Ministries as and when 
issues arise in overseas employment such as Ministry of Shi pping, for overseas deployment 
of Seafarers, Ministries of Home Affairs and Women and Child Development in cases of 
human trafficking etc.   
 
Initiatives taken by the Ministry to prevent exploitation of Indian emigrant workers in 
destination countries: 
 
(i)  Most of the complaints are addressed by the Indian Missions by taking them up with 
the concerned local authorities.  Complaints pertaining to employment are taken up by the 
Indian Missions with the concerned foreign employer/Labour officials in that country. 
 
(ii)  The on-line MADAD portal enables the emigrant workers and their family members 
to register their consular grievances online and track their redressal. 
 
(iii) Grievances related  to Overseas Employment in notified Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) countries including gulf countries, can also be logged in directly by 
emigrants/relatives or through the Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) on eMigrate 
portal. These grievances are settled by respective jurisdictional Protectors of Emigrants 
(PoEs) as per laid down procedures. 
 
(iv) Missions in Gulf countries also conduct Open Houses on a regular basis where 
workers can seek redressal of their grievances. 
 
(v) A multi-lingual 24X7 Helpline of Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) earlier 
known as Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC) in New Delhi provides information, 
guidance and grievance redressal on all issues and problems pertaining to overseas 
employment of Indian nationals in several Indian languages. 
 
(vi) Missions in Gulf countries ha ve also established 24x7 helplines and Toll Free help 
lines for the benefit of Indian workers to seek help. 
 
(vii) Indian Workers Resource Centres (IWRCs), renamed as Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata 
Kendras (PBSKs) have been set up at Dubai and Sharjah (UAE), Riyadh and Jeddah 
(Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), to provide guidance and 
counseling on all matters pertaining to overseas Indian workers. 
 

52 
 
(viii) Migrant Resource Centres, renamed as Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras (KPSK) 
have also been setup in Delhi, Kochi, Hyderabad, Chennai and Lucknow to assist emigrants 
or their relatives to redress their problems/complaints regarding overseas employment. 
 
(ix) The Missions utilize the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) to provide 
assistance to overseas Indian nationals in times of distress. 
 
(x) Suitable accommodation facilities for distressed Indian nationals have been setup in 
Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE and Malaysia to provide temporary 
accommodation. 
 
(xi) Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are already in place with the 
six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries that provide the institutional framework to 
comprehensively discuss and review labour related issues. 
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
The Committee are aware that migrant workers are employed either directly by the 
employers or through outsourcing agencies and recruitment agents. In order to safeguard the 
interests of emigrants, the Emigration Act 1983 specifically stipulates that only registered 
Recruiting Agents and Foreign employers certified by the Protector General of India can 
recruit for overseas employment. There are well -established procedures for registration of 
recruiting agents which has been linked with the e -Migrate project. There are a large number 
of complaints against the Registered Recruiting Agents found indulging in malpractices in 
recruitment, but a very few of them face stringent actions like the cancellation of Registration 
Certificate; maximum number of complaints are either dropped or settled. If a similar 
complaint is received against any unregistered recruiting Agent, Police cases registered and 
prosecution is done. The Committee, therefore, desire that PGE un der provisions of law 
should take appropriate and strong action including prosecution of fraudulent Registered 
Recruiting agents, if complaints are received against them. Because if they are not punished 
stringently, there is a greater likelihood that such  agents would continue to commit similar 
frauds. The desired provisions should, therefore, be made in the Emigration Act or in relevant 
procedures. Failure to regulate and monitor the malpractices of such agents creates fertile 
ground for the development o f irregularities once the workers reach the country of 
destination. For controlling the frauds committed by foreign employers, the Committee 
desire that the relevant Missions/Posts abroad should integrate the e -Migrate project with a 
list of recruiting age nts and also authenticate the job contracts of the workers before giving 
them emigration clearance. 

53 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
In cases of complaints involving illegal emigration through an unregistered Agent, the 
concerned Police Authority in the State is requested to take action as „Law & Order‟ is a 
subject of State Government(s). Simultaneously, if the emigrant is faced with 
difficulties/distress in the destination country, the concerned Indian Mission abroad is 
requested to take up the issue with the Fo reign Employer to resolve the grievance of the 
emigrant as early as possible and if required, to arrange for his/her repatriation – irrespective 
of the fact whether the emigrant went legally or through illegal channel. 
 
Section 27 of Emigration Act, 1983 p rovides that prosecution shall not be instituted 
against any person in respect of any offence under Emigration Act, 1983 without the previous 
sanction of the Central Government, however, no sanction shall be required when an offence 
has been committed in r espect of an emigrant or an intending emigrant and the complaint is 
filed by such emigrant or intending emigrant, or on behalf of such emigrant or intending 
emigrant, by the father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister or guardian of 
such emigrant or intending emigrant, or if such emigrant or intending emigrant is a member 
of a joint Hindu family, by the manager of that family.   
 
As per the laid down procedure, on receipt of complaints against unregistered Agents, 
the concerned Police Authority will investigate the matter and after investigation will request 
the Central Government to grant prosecution sanction under Section 27 of Emigration Act, 
1983 to enable them to prosecute such unregistered Agent or a person. 
 
The Government had is sued Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to be followed by 
States on receipt of complaints against unregistered/ unscrupulous agents.  The State 
Governments were also requested to appoint „Nodal Officer‟ in their respective Stat es who 
would pursue the matter | with concerned police authorities for submitting enquiry report on 
complaints that have been forwarded to them. Majority of the State Governments have 
already appointed „Nodal Officer‟ in their States.   
 
As regards mechanism to control frauds committed by the Foreign Employers (FEs), 
there is already a mechanism, through eMigrate, whereby the credentials of the prospective 
FEs are verified by the Indian Missions/Posts before registration of the FE on eMigrate. Even 
after registration, if the dealings of the FE with Indian workers employed in his company are 
found to be detrimental to the interests of Indian workers, there is a provision to put the FE in 
“Prior Approval Category (PAC)”, which would imply that prior permission will be required 
by the concerned FE to recruit Indian workers.  
 

54 
 
All authorized Recruiting Agents are registered or figure on the eMigrate portal. Now 
the Recruiting Agents can recruit any worker having ECR passport and going to any ECR 
country, and hence requiring clearance, only through the eMigrate. In addition, even  the 
recruitment of workers not requiring clearance can be done only by a Registered or licenced 
agent who figures in the eMigrate.  
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 
 The Ministry has informed that a host of measures such as media campaigns on safe 
and legal migration, extending outreach programmes to sensitize State Governments, 
prioritizing Prosecution Sanction Requests etc have been taken to check the fraudulent 
activities by these agents. The Ministry is a lso conducting workshops known as „Videsh 
Sampark‟ and High-Level Meetings with the State Governments to sensitize them about this 
issue. But the problem of unauthorized recruitment agents is on increase and a majority of 
workers are still being sent abroad by them. 
 
 The malpractices of the unregistered recruiting agents have greatly contributed to the 
exploitation and vulnerabilities of the Indian migrant workers. The Ministry of External 
Affairs responds to these complaints received against the agents by  merely forwarding their 
names and details to the DG of the concerned State Police. The number of sanctions for 
prosecution vis -à-vis the number of complaints referred to the States is very less. The 
Committee find that steps have been taken to bring the s tate governments on board for taking 
prompt action in such matters of fraud and human trafficking, but without the desired results. 
 
 The Committee are surprised to note that even after knowing the track locations of 
such illegal agents, the Central Government or the State Governments have not been able to 
stop them. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA/PGE should take some concrete suo 
moto actions by engaging the PoE offices in such states/districts from where more 
complaints are received. By i dentifying such illegal agencies, the PoE offices should lodge 
complaints with the local police so that their illegal business of recruiting and human 
trafficking stops forever. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been duly noted. The 
Government has been receiving from time to time complaints/grievances from emigrants and 
their family members/relatives of being cheated by illegal agents. The Ministry has a robust 
grievance redressal mechanism including MADAD and e -Migrate portals for online 
registration of grievances of emigrants who have been subjected to cheating. Such 
complaints are forwarded to concerned State Governments and Police authorities urging them 

55 
 
to apprehend illegal agents and prosecute them. Wherever requi red, such complaints are also 
referred to Mission/Posts abroad for providing relief/rescue. As per the available records, the 
number of complaints against unregistered agents received and referred to the State 
Government/Police during the period of 2016-2019 is as under: 
 
Detail of Complaints forwarded to State Government from, 2016 to 2019 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Nos of 
Complaints 
received 
Cases referred to 
State Governments 
for action 
Prosecution 
Sanction sought by 
State Government 
Prosecution 
Sanction issued by 
Ministry of 
External Affairs 
1 2016 231 231 42 42 
2 2017 446 446 30 30 
3 2018 350 350 15 15 
4 2019 * 556 556 29 29 
* (Up to 30th September, 2019) 
 
 In May 2016 Ministry of External Affairs issued a Standard Operating Procedure to 
be followed by States  on receipt of complaints of cheating by illegal agents by emigrants. 
Visual and print media campaigns are also launched from time to time for promoting legal 
and safe migration and encouraging emigrants to use the services of registered Recruiting 
Agents to avoid being trapped by illegal/fake agents. 
 
 In order to promote safe and legal emigration and to curb the activities of the overseas 
recruitment business being carried out by illegal agents, three high -level Conference(s) of 
major labour sending State s were convened on 9 th  November, 2016, 8th May, 2017 and 10 th 
January, 2018, in New Delhi, with External Affairs Minister as the chairperson during which, 
State Governments were, inter -alia,  requested to pro -actively check the growth of illegal 
agents who indulge in overseas recruitment activities illegally and to take strict action against 
them. They were requested to launch awareness   campaigns in vernacular medium for wider 
coverage and assimilation, which has been done. In October, 2019, the Ministry  has created 
an online system where State Nodal Officer can login and can have access to the 
grievances/complaints received in OE & PGE Division. Accordingly, Chief Secretaries of the 
States have been requested to make the system fully functioned in order to deal with 
complaints against illegal agents for tracking periodically which will go a long way in 
quickening and making the system robust.  It is hoped that with the appropriate response 
from State Governments the system become functional.   
 
 In view of the complaints of exploitation and harassment by unscrupulous agents and 

56 
 
employers in the Gulf countries, the Government has taken additional measures to safeguard 
the interests of female workers migrating to Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries as 
Domestic Sector Workers (DSW). As per extant guidelines, the minimum age of Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category female workers (DSW) proceeding for overseas 
employment to Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries is 30 years. Their emigration for 
overseas employment is permitted only through following seven designated State - run 
recruitment agencies: 
 
(i) Non- Resident Keralites‟ Affairs Roots (NORKA), Kerala; 
(ii) Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultant (ODEPC), Kerala; 
(iii) Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd. (OMCL), Tamil Nadu. 
(iv) Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC), Uttar Pradesh; 
(v) Overseas Manpower Company A. P. Ltd. (OMCAP), Andhra Pradesh;  
(vi) Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM), Telangana; and 
(vii) Rajasthan Skil & Livelihood Development Corporation (RSLDC) 
 
 In addition, Foreign employers have to deposit US$2500 in the form of a Bank 
Guarantee with the Indian Missions in case of direct recruitment  of  female workers holding 
ECR passports, which is returned when the emigrant return safely. 
 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 The Committee find that the upgradation of skill sets and pre -departure orientation 
training of the migrant workers constitute the most effective way to lessen their 
vulnerabilities. MEA has collaborated with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) to implement the skill development programme „Pravasi Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana‟, which aims to enhance the skill sets of  prospective Indian emigrant workers 
in select job roles. The Committee observe that National Skill Development Agency, the 
implementing agency for the scheme has operationalized 15 India International Skill Centres 
so far. It is noticed that the while up -skilling of workers has largely been the task of MSDE, 
MEA‟s main responsibility is to provide pre -departure orientation training (PDOT) to the 
intending emigrants. The Ministry has also informed that the NSDC is conducting a Global 
Skill Gap Study to arrive at an updated mapping of overseas demand for various job roles. 
 
 The Ministry has informed the Committee that these orientation programmes are 
disseminated through workshops based on a comprehensive Training of Trainers (ToT) 
manual developed by the India Centre for Migration. The Committee noted that only three 
workshops have been conducted in Delhi, Hyderabad, and Vijaywada since March 2017. The 
Committee suggest that the Government should increase the number of India International 

57 
 
Skill Centres particularly in Southern States (which are major labour exporting States) and 
also expand the sectors for training after a rigorous job -mapping study. MEA is also urged to 
organize more pre-departure training programmes in view of the massive outward migration 
for overseas employment from India. The skilling of workers should also be carried out in the 
destination country and therefore the Government is strongly advised to forge cooperation 
with destination countries for further skilling. The Committee also desire to be apprised 
about the outcomes of the Global Skill Gap Study. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Since January 2018, Ministry has rolled out Pre Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) 
Programmes in a structured manner as part of the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY). In January 
2018, PDOT was started with two centers each in Mumbai and New Delhi, thereafter, two more 
PDOT centers were opened in Kochi and Lucknow for the benefit of migrant workers. Subsequently, 
Ministry also approached the State Governments to open PDOT centres. 
Presently, PDO Training is being imparted under two models:- 
(a) PDOT Centers managed by NSDC empanelled Training Partners under Pravasi Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana (PKVY), a joint collaboration between MEA and MSDE. Under this model, six 
PDOT Centers are operational, with two centers each in Mumbai and New Delhi and one 
center each in Lucknow and Kochi 
 
(b) PDOT Centers managed by State Government Agencies. Under this model, one center each is 
operational in Jaipur, Sikar (Rajasthan); Hyderabad, Nizamabad and Karimnagar 
(Telangana); Gaya, Muzzafarpur, Darbhanga and Patna (Bihar).  
 As on 6 November 2019, 66,820 emigrant workers have been imparted pre -departure 
orientation training across these fifteen PDOT centers.  
PDOT programmes are aimed at enhancing soft skills of Indian migrant workers largely going to the 
Gulf region and Malaysia, in terms of culture, language, tradition and local rules and regulations of 
the destination country, to sensitize migrant workers ab out pathways to safe and legal migration and 
various government programmes for their welfare and protection. The initiative has been a success 
and is being expanded further. 
 PDO curriculum content has been standardized all over the country. Comprehensive PDO 
Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in seven languages i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, 
Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. Similarly, Handbooks for migrant workers have also been 
developed in eight languages i.e.  Hindi, English, Bangla, Mal ayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and 
Urdu. Presently, these handbooks are distributed to prospective migrant workers attending One Day 
PDO Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and Lucknow.  
 
 Since March 2017, twenty Awareness Generation and Training of Trainers (TOT) Workshops 
have been conducted in nine states i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil 

58 
 
Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal in coordination with the concerned Departments of 
the State Government. These workshops are aime d at capacity building of States to enable them to 
take the PDO programmes at the grass -root level in the major labour sending districts. The 
participants comprised of officials from the Labour/Employment/Skill Department, local media, and 
the academia. 
 
 A Consultation Meeting was held with major labour -sending States and Assam on 3 July, 
2018 to sensitize them about the institutional framework on emigration related matters and expanding 
PDO programs by the State Governments. Ministry has also given its co ncurrence for the proposals 
received from State Governments namely Bihar, Kerala, Rajasthan, Odisha, Telangana and West 
Bengal for centers suggested by them to be designated as PDO Centers for imparting PDO training to 
migrant workers. Thus it has helped i n enhancing the outreach of the PDO program to the labour 
sending districts of these states. 
 Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has conveyed that Global Skill 
Gap Study (GSS) being conducted by the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) is in final 
stages of completion and is currently under review. The MSDE has conveyed that they will share the 
outcomes of the Global Skill Gap Study (GSS) with the Committee and the relevant stakeholders in 
due time. 
 MSDE has further conveyed  that in relation to providing upskilling opportunities in 
destination countries, NSDC is currently exploring a model for upskilling and certification for 
migrant workers in UAE. NSDC has also completed the benchmarking of 13 Qualifications across 
Automotive and Construction sectors in collaboration with the Ministry of Human Resources and 
Emiratization, Govt. of UAE and Abu Dhabi Quality& Conformity Council. A pilot program under 
the India – UAE Skill Harmonization project has been successfully conducted i n September 2019 
under which 133 candidates were certified by Indian Sector Skill Councils and mutually recognized 
by UAE Awarding entity. Out of the certified workers, 63 have already been selected for deployment 
by an UAE Employer. Government of UAE has announced incentive to employers for hiring certified 
workers from India. 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 

59 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
It is noticed that discrimination, exploitation, and trafficking of migrant workers at 
the country of destination is a recurrent challenge and constitute a serious violation of their 
basic human rights. Non -payment/delayed payment of salaries, long working hours, 
inadequate living and working conditions, non -payment of overtime allowance, non -grant of 
weekly holidays, incidences of confinement, are serious issues that not only tantamount to 
discrimination and exploitation of migrant workers but also pose a serious assault to their 
basic human rights. The Ministry has informed that when complaints about fore ign 
employers are found to be true, they are blacklisted. The Committee note that in order to 
tackle the grave issue of trafficking in the Gulf countries, the Ministry of External Affairs is 
working in close coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs, the nodal Ministry for 
human trafficking. 
 
 The Committee strongly condemn the discriminatory and exploitative treatment 
meted out to our migrant workers. It is understandable that Governmental interventions in 
such incidences are constrained by the fact t hat they occur in the territory of another country. 
However, violations of basic rights are universal and ought to be respected by all. The 
Committee, therefore, would strongly recommend that the Government should seriously raise 
the issue of basic rights of our migrant workers during all bilateral and regional interactions 
with the GCC countries. The migrant workers should be provided with a manual of their 
rights and the point of contact with Missions/Posts for redressal in case of their violation. The 
Ministry should also make it a mandatory requirement that all work contracts need to be 
attested by Indian Mission/Post in the respective destination country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Bilateral mechanisms with Gulf countries have been strengthened by entering into 
MOUs/Agreements on labour and manpower cooperation.  These Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoUs)/ Agreement on labour cooperation are signed by Government of 
India with ECR countries with the following broad principles built into the MoUs: 
a) Declaration of mutual intent to enhance employment opportunities and 
for bilateral cooperation in protection and welfare of workers; 
b) The host country to take measures for protection and welfare of the 
workers in organized sector; 
c) Statement of the broad procedure that the Foreign Employer shall follow 
to recruit Indian workers; 
d) The recruitment and terms of employment will be in conformity with the 
laws of both the countries. 
e)    To ensure implementation of the signed MoU, Joint Working Groups 
(JWG) a re constituted which meet regularly to find solutions to bilateral 
labour problems. 

60 
 
 
Such MoUs/ Agreements have been signed with Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia and UAE.  
 
The Ministry is also conducting Pre -Departure Orientation Trainin g (PDOT) for 
enhancing soft skills of potential emigrants in terms of culture, language, traditions, local 
rules and regulations of the destination country , to sensitize migrant workers about pathways 
to safe and legal migration and various government prog rammes for their welfare and 
protection. The name of important officials of the concerned Indian Missions and their 
contact numbers/ emails are shared with the workers whom they can contact when in distress 
or any clarifications with regard to their employ ment in that country is required. Presently, 
this one -day PDOT Programs are running in fifteen cities namely Mumbai, New Delhi, 
Lucknow, Jaipur, Sikar, Hyderabad, Karimnagar, Nizamabad, Patna, Muzaffarpur, 
Darbhanga, Gaya, Vijaywada, Kadapa and Cochin. Sta te governments are also being 
encouraged to initiate PDOT programs in major labour sending districts. While issuing 
emigration clearance, ID cards are also issued to the emigrants with details  
of recruiting agents, foreign employers and Indian missions etc . With the introduction of 
eMigrate system the Ministry has decided to discontinue the attestation of documents to 
make the emigration process faster, hassle -free and transparent. However, in case of direct 
recruitment i.e. without involving any Indian Rec ruiting Agents, the attestation by Indian 
Missions to some documents is still required. As a special preventive measure, attestation of 
Employment offer document by the concerned Indian Missions in Iraq subject to the 
condition that the employment is only for safe areas/provinces identified by the Government 
is required w.e.f. 1st October, 2019.  
 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
Passport is a document issued by the Government of India to an individual. It is an 
exercise of his/her constitutional right and nobody else can hold his/her passport. 
Notwithstanding this fact, seizing of passports by the employers is a common practice 
throughout the GCC countries. The workers also give their passports willingly because the 
iqama is what is sought after in those countries when caught by the police. If they are found 
without an iqama, they are put behind the bars. Another common discourse b ehind is that it 
serves as a protection against workers who want to run away from the company and look for 
another work. Taking of passports and keeping workers pay in arrears are two widespread 
methods used by employers to control workers. The Foreign Sec retary has submitted that the 
Ministry has blacklisted a lot of foreign employers for taking away the passport where they 
are not having the iqama system. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to issue an 

61 
 
advisory to GCC countries for not withholding  the passports of our Indian workers by the 
employers and using it as a method of exploitation of our migrant workers. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The local laws of GCC countries like Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia, United Arab 
Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman do not allow retention of passport of the expatriates. 
However, the Indian Missions, from time to time, receive complaints from Indian citizens 
about retention of their passport by the sponsors. T he Embassy takes up such cases with the 
concerned authorities for remedial action. In addition, the issue of passport retention are also 
raised with the GCC countries in the Joint Working Group meeting and various bilateral fora. 
 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11//2019] 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
The Committee noted that the low paid Indian workers working in GCC countries 
normally visit their home once or twice particularly to attend marriages or some seasonal 
festivals. It is disheartening to note that not only the foreign airlines but also our own airlines 
charge very exorbitant air fares adding to the financial burden on the already low paid 
workers. In this regard, the Committee are happy to note that the MEA has understood the 
issue and taken up this matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. As a welfare measure, the 
Committee desire that the MEA should engage with the Ministry of Civil Aviation more 
vigorously to find a positive solution. The efforts undertaken in this regard and the out comes 
thereof may be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted. To ameliorate such concerns, 
the Ministry took up the matter with Ministry of Civil Aviation and Air India. Based on these 
discussions, Air India has now decided to offer a flat rate for transfer of mortal remains from 
Gulf countries to various destinations in India. This addresses the complaints of variable rates 
being charged in different cases. Moreover, the flat rate implemented by Air India amounts to 
average reduction of fares of up to 30 -35% to some of the major destinations in India from 
Gulf countries. 
 
In addition, efforts continue to be made to offer free of charge transfer of mortal 
remains in cases where the deceased belo ng to economically disadvantaged families. During 
the 3 years between 2016 -2018, Air India has provided 486 such free of cost transfers. 
Assistance is also provided in such cases under the Ministry's Indian Community Welfare 

62 
 
Fund (ICWF) in deserving cases on a means -tested basis. Since the inception of ICWF, 
financial assistance has been provided for free of cost transfer of mortal remains in 2350 
cases to India. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 The Gulf region has been facing a frequent crisis in recent past. The tragic death of 39 
Indian workers in Iraq in early 2018 is a sad testimony to the security and safety challenges 
faced by them. The Committee note that during emergency situations, the Ministry m ade 
serious efforts to evacuate them by issuing travel advisories and setting up an emergency 
helpline. Non -payment of salaries, seizure of passports, lack of finances, inadequate 
communication etc further augment the security challenges of these migrant w orkers. The 
Committee recommend that the Government should chalk out an emergency plan that clearly 
delineates the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and also forge an institutionalized 
mechanism with host countries to evacuate workers. Furthermore, the mi grant workers 
should also be provided with the manner in which emergency situations can be dealt with 
during their pre-departure training phase 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Indian Missions and Posts abroad have put in place crisis management plans for 
dealing with emergency situations, taking into account the specific local conditions of 
respective countries and keeping in view the interests, safety and security of all Indian 
nationals in the countries concerned. Migrant workers proceeding overseas for employ ment 
are now being given pre -departure orientation training under which relevant information for 
dealing with emergency situations in foreign countries including emergency contact numbers 
of Indian Missions, 24x7 helpline numbers of Pravasi Bharatiya Sahay ata Kendra (PBSK), 
etc. are provided. In addition, The Handbook of Migrant Workers, which is distributed to 
migrant workers attending PDOT programme at PDOT Centres in New Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kochi and Lucknow also contains contact details of Indian Missions/Po sts in GCC countries, 
Protector of Emigrants (POE) Offices in India, Helpline numbers of PBSK and information 
about Madad Portal. 
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
 The Committee observe that repatriation of human remains is a painstaking and 
expensive process. As per the Ministry, local procedures for transportation of mortal remains 
vary from country to country. The time taken for completion of local formalities is usually 
two to four weeks and the wait i s even longer for unnatural deaths due to the procedure of 
investigation. Moreover, registration of death at the concerned Indian Mission/Post is 
essential for which too much documentation is needed. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that the extant procedur es often add to the agony of 
those who lose their family member and are left at the mercy of officials of host countries 
and the Indian Consulates and Embassies. As a humanitarian issue, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should take up this issue  with utmost seriousness and 
devise an effective mechanism with the host governments to ensure speedy repatriation of the 
mortal remains of the Indian migrants. A single window system can be set up in the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to ease the formalities and reduce the time taken for repatriation.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The government accords the highest priority to early repatriation of mortal remains. During 
around last five years, the government has taken steps to expedite and streamline the process of 
repatriation of dead bodies. Our Missions and Posts abroad also pro actively engage with the local 
authorities in these matters. As a result, the overall time taken in repatriation has come down. Certain 
delays particularly in instances of accidental and unnatural deaths do occur due to the mandatory legal 
requirements of the host countries and where Missions and Posts have to comply with the stipulated 
procedures. Bringing dead body/bodies of Indians who die abroad, involves completion of certain 
formalities before the local authorities allow such body/bodies to be transpo rted to India. In some 
cases police investigations are to be completed. Our Missions/Posts abroad extend all possible help in 
bringing back the mortal remains of Indians to the relatives of those who die abroad either naturally 
or accidentally. 
 
As soon as  the information about the death of an Indian national comes to the 
knowledge of the concerned Indian Mission/Post abroad, they take proactive action by 
seeking a report from the local Foreign Office and other concerned authorities regarding the 
cause of the death of the Indian national. Our Missions/Posts abroad also inform the next of 
kin of the deceased Indian national, and facilitate the transportation to India or local burial of 
mortal remains in accordance with the wishes of the family of the deceased . The relevant 
documents related to the deceased are attested and other assistance is provided on priority 
basis when required, including after office hours and on holidays. Under MADAD maximum 
priority is accorded to the follow up of mortal remains cases.  Anyone can directly lodge a 
grievance in MADAD portal, which flashes it immediately for action to the welfare officer of 

64 
 
the concerned Indian Mission/Post. MADAD portal also enables swift tracking and sharing 
of information among the grievant, Indian Mission/Post as well as the Ministry. 
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
The expatriate migrant workers face various issues during the three phases of the 
migration cycle (pre -departure, country of destination and  return) both in India and abroad. 
During the pre -departure phase, the key issues relates to illegal/fake recruiting agents, non -
availability of the adequate database, lack of skill & training and unrealistic minimum 
referral wages. In the country of desti nation, the migrant workers largely face three key 
issues related to employment, welfare and psychological. Finally, in the last phase, the 
returnee migrant has to face the difficulties of rehabilitation and resettlement. The Committee 
are of the view that the problems faced by migrant workers in the first and the last phase can 
be effectively tackled by the Government as these are within the geographical and sovereign 
limits of our country. The Committee realize that the second phase is the one where the o nus 
rests mostly on the host country and the Government have to grapple with serious challenges 
in protecting and safeguarding of our workers. These problems are further aggravated by the 
Kafala system in most of the Gulf countries, which leaves emigrant w orkers more vulnerable 
to exploitation and trafficking. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in order to mitigate the 
vulnerabilities faced by the migrant workers at different stages of migration cycle, the 
Government should set up a pro -active infrastructural and institutional mechanism in all the 
Embassies/Missions that will comprehensively look into the concerns of the workers, 
improve the quality of services, enhance levels of welfare and respond efficiently to 
situations of distress. A c ooperative approach is needed between all the concerned 
stakeholders to optimize the benefits of migration while addressing its risks and challenges. 
The Government should, thereby, endeavour to empower the emigrant workers through 
specific systemic interv entions on domestic, bilateral and multilateral fronts. The 
Officers/officials posted in all the embassies/Missions should be accessible and render a 
human touch while addressing the problems of migrant workers, particularly the blue collar 
workers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The institutional framework for support and welfare of migrant workers has been 
considerably strengthened during over last five years. The Indian Community Welfare Fund, the 
MADAD portal, eMigrate system, Pravasi Bhartiya Sahayta Kendr as, help-lines, shelter homes etc. 
are some of the important mechanisms to expeditiously assist Indian nationals abroad.  

65 
 
 Complaints are received from Indian emigrant workers in ECR countries, from time to time, 
regarding maltreatment, violation of contra ctual terms, adverse working conditions, wage related 
issues, employer related problems, medical and insurance related problems and compensation/death 
claims. The Ministry is working in close coordination with foreign governments to address concerns 
related to employment and welfare of Indian workers.  Immediately on receipt of such complaints, the 
same are addressed by Indian Missions by taking them up with the concerned foreign authorities. 
Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are already in pl ace with the six Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, Jordan and Malaysia that provide the institutional framework 
to comprehensively discuss and review these matters. The issues of migrant workers are also taken up 
during JWGs and other high level meeting with the host governments. 
 Missions/Posts conduct Open Houses for the emigrant workers where officers/officials meet 
the workers regularly. Missions/Posts have also established 24x7 help lines and Toll Free help lines. 
The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), aimed at assisting Overseas Indian nationals abroad in 
times of distress on a means tested basis in the most deserving cases,  has already been extended to all 
Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The „MADAD‟ portal, an important initiative of the Ministry, is an 
effort to extend a helping hand to Indians abroad requiring consular assistance. It enables online 
logging and tracking of grievances including by emigrant workers and their family members. Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras have been setup  that provide guidance and counselling on all matters 
pertaining to overseas Indian workers. Shelter homes for distressed Indian nationals have been setup 
in Bahrain, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE and Malaysia. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
The Committee are aware that a majority of migrants lives and works abroad legally. 
However, a large number of illegal/irregular workers also reside in Gulf countries. Illegal 
migrant workers includes those who are overstayers; used their tourist visas and  are engaged 
in work; student engaged in employment, trainees overstaying their visas; regular migrants 
continuing beyond the contract period especially regular migrants running away from their 
designated employer before the expiry of the contract. These i llegal/irregular migrants run 
the risk of unfair exploitation and human rights violations due to their illegal status. Since 
their employment is illegal, neither they nor their employers notify the authorities that they 
are working. Therefore, it is virtua lly impossible to keep a track of them or afford them any 
protection.  
 
 There exists a lot of difference between the rights and benefits enjoyed by nationals, 
regular emigrants and irregular emigrants in different Gulf countries. Irregular workers in 
almost all GCC countries do not have civil and human rights leading to their living and 
working in appalling conditions. During deliberations on this subject, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has tacitly acknowledged this complicated issue and the consequent 
dilemma in front of the host government in responding to their problems. The Committee, 
however, note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund offers assistance to both legal and 
illegal Indian migrants. Even during the negotiation phase of the Global Compact  of 

66 
 
Migration, the Government has contended for agreed commitments on easy and safe 
migration of economic migrants and has vouched for a distinction between legal and illegal 
migrants.  
 
 The Committee understand that the Government cannot have a stated po sition on the 
rights of illegal migrants as this might lead to its promotion. In the considered view of the 
Committee, the existence of illegal migrants, though undesirable, is a reality which cannot be 
denied. Destination countries are using their service s and they are also contributing 
significantly through remittances in India. The best way to deal with this precarious situation 
is to create legal pathways for migration and remove incentives for individuals to resort to 
irregular methods of migration. Th e Committee, therefore, urge that the Government should 
take a humanitarian perspective on this issue and strengthen the mechanism underpinning 
migration so that illegal migration and the risks associated with it is curtailed. In this regard, 
media awarene ss can play a significant role. Moreover, in providing assistance during 
distress situations from ICWF, there should not be any discrimination between regular and 
irregular migrants. Indian Missions/Posts should also facilitate them in getting the advantag e 
of Amnesty Schemes or availing any opportunity for regularization in the destination 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has strengthened the eco -system that supports migrant workers in all stages of the 
migration cycle and ensures that Indian workers migrate safely with an enhanced skills set in line 
with our motto: Surakshit Jayen, Prashikshit Jayen, Vishwas ke saath jayen. 
The Ministry is aware of the vulnerabilities of our migrant workers and at times, their 
exploitation by unscrupulous recruitment agents. While being tough on law enforcement, the Ministry 
has commenced Pre -Departure Orientation Programmes for th e first time in the country for the 
benefit of our workers largely going to the Gulf region and Malaysia. Dialogue on Labour and 
Manpower related issues with Gulf countries has also been re-energized.  
The Ministry has also rolled out one -day Pre Departure  Orientation (PDO) programme 
focusing on safe and legal migration for the benefit of migrant workers going to GCC countries and 
Malaysia. Over 66,000 migrant workers have been imparted PDO training so far. Workshops on safe 
and legal migration and PDO Trai ning of Trainers programmes have also been organized in major 
labour sending States.  Handbooks for migrant workers  have also been developed in eight languages 
i.e.  Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and Urdu. Presently, these 
handbooks are distributed to prospective migrant workers attending One Day Pre Departure 
Orientation (PDO) Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and Lucknow. 
During the financial year 2018 -19, with the approval of EAM, media campaign on „Safe and 
Legal Migration‟ of Indian workers for overseas employment was run through All India Radio, 
Doordarshan, Lok Sabha TV and NFDC.  As maximum people who go for overseas employment are 
from UP, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, 

67 
 
Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Kerala, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telengana, Maharashtra, Odisha and Karnataka, a 40 -second and 80 -second ad on „Safe and Legal 
Migration‟ in Hindi and different regional languages was run from 16 July, 2018 to 17 September, 
2018 on prime channels and DD News.   
Advertisements of „Safe and Legal Migration‟ were published in two leading dailies 
in these states once a week on Saturdays during the month of September 2018.  
The need was felt to include popula r channels in this effort. Hence, with the approval 
of EAM and Minister of Information & Broadcasting, some private channels such as ETV 
Telugu, PTC Punjabi, ZEE Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand; Zee 
Rajasthan News; News 18 Rajasthan,  Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Bihar and 
Jharkhand were included and this campaign was also run once again to ensure sufficient 
outreach for one month beginning 11 December, 2018 on Doordarshan, Lok Sabha TV , Rajya 
Sabha TV and also on above-mentioned private channels. 
Media Awareness campaign for 40 & 80 second ads was run on Regional 
Channels/Kendras of Doordarshan for 30 days from 1 st August 2019. Ads in Hindi and 
regional languages in regional and popular newspapers were published during the period  
September-October 2019.  Both Audio Visual and print advertisements were also 
downloaded and publicized through social media.  
 Indian workers in companies affected by economic downturn in the Gulf region have 
been extended assistance through waiver of fi nes on Iqama (resident permit) related 
violations, providing exit visas and one way return tickets to India as well as transfer of 
sponsorship, wherever possible, on gratis basis. Assistance from ICWF is provided to all 
Indian workers who have landed in distressed situation irrespective of the fact whether he/she 
has gone in legal way or through some illegal agents. The Government has also extended 
necessary support to facilitate return of Indian nationals who have availed amnesty offers in 
GCC countries. 
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
Majority of the workers from India migrate to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries where the working conditions are not always very conducive to their overall well 
being. Due to the existence of multiple problems such as skill deficits, general lack of 
awareness about their rights, employment contracts, customs and regulations, these workers 
are often exploited by their foreign employers making them the most vulnerab le segment of 
the Indian Diaspora. The Kafala (sponsorship) system and issues related to Iqama (resident 
permit) further complicate the already precarious position of these workers. The Ministry of 
External Affairs has also admitted the fact that its polic y priorities should be focused on this 
extremely vulnerable section of Diaspora. 

68 
 
 
 Despite the existence of a well -established mechanism and a settled pattern of 
migration to these countries, the Committee fail to understand the logic behind the absence of 
an exigency window to cater to such problems. The Committee note that while restricting 
workers mobility, the Kafala system puts the workers at the mercy of Foreign employers with 
little scope to safeguard their rights. It was relieving to learn that in r ecent years, 
governments in some GCC countries have taken measures to reform the Kafala system to 
make it more institutionalized in order to protect the interest of workers. UAE has amended 
certain features of the sponsorship system whereby the professiona l employers and degree 
holders are permitted to change their sponsors after a certain period. However, in practical 
terms, changing one‟s employer is still very difficult especially for the blue collar workers. 
 
 Given the fact that the Gulf Cooperation Co uncil (GCC) region comprises the bulk of 
India's expatriate migrant workers and contribute to more than half of our remittances, it is 
beyond comprehension that a trend of migration which is more or less well established since 
the past few decades has not drawn adequate policy attention of the Government and is being 
dealt with in an ad -hoc manner. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should forge an institutionalized arrangement with GCC countries delving upon 
the full spectrum of issues concerning our expatriate workers, their rights and safety. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There is about 9 million strong resident Indian community in the Gulf Cooperation Council 
countries. The welfare of Indian migrant workers in GCC countries is o f utmost priority. As noted by 
the Committee, the system of sponsorship remains a challenge. However, important labour reforms 
are gradually being taken in GCC countries for the benefit of expat workers. The Government has 
entered into Labour and Manpower Cooperation MOUs/Agreements with Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. These are aimed at safeguarding the interests and ensuring welfare and 
protection of Indian workers and seek to expand the institutional framework of manpower 
cooperation between India and the destination country. They comprehensively delineate the 
responsibilities of the sending and receiving country, mechanism for settlement of dispute and areas 
of cooperation. In addition, these MOUs and Agreements have the provision of implementation 
through Joint Working Groups, comprising of representatives from both sides who meet annually, 
alternately in both countries, and all prevailing labour and manpower related issues are discussed 
during these meetings. 
 Further, to safeguard t he specific interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, who are 
often the most vulnerable category; Ministry has signed separate MoUs/Agreements on domestic 
workers. Agreement on Labour Cooperation for Domestic Sector Workers Recruitment with Saudi 
Arabia was signed in January 2014. In case of UAE, there is a Protocol  on Domestic Workers 
annexed to the MOU with the UAE in the Field of Manpower that was signed in February 2018. In 
January 2019, the Cabinet has also given its approval for signing of MOU fo r Cooperation on 
Recruitment of Domestic Workers between India and Kuwait. The MOU was initialed during the visit 
of EAM to Kuwait from October 30-31, 2018.  

69 
 
 
 Further, Government is in process of integrating online labour recruitment platform eMigrate 
with online platforms of Saudi Arabia and UAE. Expanding such collaboration with other GCC 
countries are in the pipeline. Such integration takes the reference of mutually agreed Standard 
Employment Contract of the destination country in processing recruitment , which would curb 
duplicity of contracts being signed at present. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
The Committee note that the ongoing economic downturn in Gulf countries has 
adversely impacted the expatriate  migrant workers leading to loss of jobs, premature 
termination of contracts, unpaid dues/salaries etc. Furthermore, there are instances where on 
4 February, 2018 the UAE Government tried to impose a new restriction on all migrant 
workers asking them for p roducing a good conduct certificate. The Committee are happy to 
note that as a result of persistent efforts of MEA the matter has been deferred. The 
Committee are also concerned to learn about a new stipulation imposed by the Kuwaiti 
Government which requi red that for renewal of their work permit, all engineers working in 
Kuwait have to show that their degrees are recognized by the National Board of 
Accreditation. As a result, apparently, several hundred Indian engineers in their mid -40s and 
50s are not going to get their work permit renewed. 
 
 Recognizing the specificity of all these issues, the Committee understand the 
immense challenge before the Government of India in catering to the country -specific 
problems being faced by the Indian workers. In order t o deal with the recent situation in the 
Gulf region, the Committee desire that the Ministry should continue taking a two -pronged 
remedial measure of working in close coordination with the Gulf States and extending 
possible assistance to Indian nationals ab road with sincerity. As regards the issue of degree 
of Indian engineers working in Kuwait, the Committee desire that instead of waiting for the 
Government to change their law, MEA in coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development should immed iately issue a clarification and convey the same to the 
Government of Kuwait through the Kuwaiti Ambassador. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee have been duly noted. The Ministry has actively taken up 
the matter of accreditation of engineering degrees, including at the Ministerial level with the Kuwaiti 
government. 

70 
 
 In March 2018, according to a notification by the concerned authorities of the Government of 
Kuwait, due accreditation of engineering degrees has been made the main criterion for all expatriate 
engineers working in Kuwait. This rule has been made applicable to all nationalities of expatriates. In 
respect of Indian engineers, the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) has become the criterion. 
 Against the above background, a delegation from Kuwait visited India in June 2018, and held 
discussions with Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD). The issue was also raised with 
the Kuwaiti authorities at  the Joint Working Group (JWG) on Manpower Meeting and the Foreign 
Office Consultations (FOC). Former EAM had also raised this issue with highest levels of Kuwaiti 
leadership during her visit to Kuwait in October 2018, and was assured of amicable resolutio n of this 
matter at the earliest.  Subsequently, a delegation from MHRD met with the Kuwaiti authorities 
including representatives of Kuwait Society of Engineers and Foreign Ministry in March 2019.  A list 
of Indian technical institutes / universities that are considered premier institutions but not covered by 
NBA accreditation and a list of institutions of national importance, as received from MHRD, have 
been shared with Kuwaiti authorities for their consideration.  In addition, Minister of State for 
External Affairs and Parliamentary Affairs visited Kuwait in  September 2019 and raised the issue 
with Kuwaiti authorities. 
 Keeping in mind the friendly and good relations between the two countries, and as a result of 
the proactive efforts of the Ministry, Indian engineers without NBA accreditation are being allowed to 
re-designate themselves in relevant positions. Government has been actively engaging with the 
Kuwaiti authorities to ensure that no resident Indian Engineer with valid work contracts in Kuwait 
would have to leave the country due to the new ruling. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
The Committee observe that extensive measures have been taken by the Government 
to safeguard and protect the welfare of our wor kers migrating to the Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) region. These range from initiating specific schemes & projects like e -
Migrate, MADAD portal, Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), Overseas Workers 
Resource Centre (OWRCs) etc to extending outreach to S tate Governments and addressing 
issue-specific challenges during  the three phases of migration cycle. Although these efforts 
are praiseworthy, they have not been able to alleviate the plight of our migrant workers. Of 
course, MADAD is a unique experiment of providing a single -window grievance redressal 
system for migrants but it still needs to be strengthened in view of the complaints that are 
getting registered. 
 
 The Committee note that as the first point of contact between the aggrieved worker 
and the G overnment of India, the Missions/Posts abroad play a central role in protecting 
emigrants. The Ministry has informed that there are several registered and non -registered 
Indian associations in Gulf countries that act as effective mechanisms for coordinatio n 
between Missions/Posts and various Indian community organizations in the Gulf. 

71 
 
 
 The Committee are of the view that as a vulnerable section of our expatriate 
community, the migrant workers should be made the focal point of our policy response. The 
efforts and policies of the Government not only appear fragmentary and piecemeal but also 
lack adequate coordinating mechanism between various stakeholders such as the 
Missions/Posts, Recruiting Agents, Foreign Employers, country of destination and the 
migrant workers. The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should develop a 
comprehensive and multi -pronged approach to advocacy targeting the Gulf governments, 
employers, recruitment agencies and the Diaspora. Adopting a more pro -active approach t o 
migrant workers would not only safeguard India‟s economic interests but also cement a 
mutual partnership with the Gulf States and cultivate India‟s soft power in the region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly note d. The Government has a multi -
dimensional approach involving the resident Indian community, local concerned government 
authorities in different departments of the Gulf governments, recruiting agencies and other stake 
holders and works in close coordination  with them to address concerns related to employment and 
welfare of Indian workers and safeguarding the interests and welfare of the resident Indian 
community. Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are already in place with the six 
Gulf Cooperati on Council (GCC) countries and Jordan that provide the institutional framework to 
comprehensively discuss and review these matters. As part of these MoUs/Agreements, Joint 
Working Groups have been established with each GCC country in which entire gamut of labour and 
manpower cooperation related issues are discussed and sorted out in bilateral discussions.  
Indian Missions/ Posts have a pro-active approach while dealing with complaints from Indian 
emigrant workers in ECR countries. Open Houses are conducted regularly by the Missions in which 
the emigrant workers attend without any prior appointment and can discuss their issues with the 
Ambassador or any other senior officers of the Mission. Missions have provided 24x7 help lines for 
the workers. 
 Further, the Ministry works in close collaboration with all concerned stakeholders notably the 
recruitment agencies, state governments, business chambers as well as international organizations. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
The Committee note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), created in 2009 with 
the aim of assisting overseas Indian nationals in times of emergency and distress, has been recently 
revised. The revised ICWF guidelines have expanded the scope of welf are measures by covering 
three key areas namely Assisting Overseas Indian nationals in distress situations, community Welfare 
activities, and improvement in consular services. Provisions have also been made to support 
distressed Non-Resident Indian women in need under the revised ICWF guidelines. The Ministry has 
stated that ICWF is largely funded by levying service charge on Consular & Visa services rendered 

72 
 
by the Mission. While appreciating the intent of the Government behind setting up this fund to 
financially support the Overseas Indian community during emergency and distress situation on a 
means-tested basis, the Committee are of the strong opinion that mere creation of a fund without the 
availability of adequate finances can prove ineffective in dealing with the challenges faced by Indians 
abroad. The revised ICWF guidelines have expanded the outreach and scope of financial assistance, 
however, funds allocation does not commensurate with the expanding areas. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend th at the Ministry should assess the financial modalities of the expansive 
coverage of areas under the ICWF and accordingly seek budgetary support so that larger number of 
Overseas Indians can be provided with financial aids during times of need. 
Reply of the Government 
 The guidelines for Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), first created in 2009, were 
revised w.e.f. September 1, 2017, with the approval of Union Cabinet. The revised guidelines broaden 
the scope for the welfare and protection of distressed Ov erseas Indians on means tested basis. The 
fund is self-sustaining and is replenished by levying charges on Consular & Visa services rendered by 
the Missions/Posts abroad. The revised guidelines were framed taking into account the availability of 
ICWF funds as well as utilization of the Fund over the years. Presently, there is no need for budgetary 
support for the Fund and there are adequate Funds available with our Missions and Posts abroad to 
undertake various onsite welfare activities. Apart from assistin g Indian nationals in distress abroad, 
ICWF has been a critical support in emergency evacuations of Indian nationals in conflict zones in 
Libya, Iraq, Yemen and South Sudan as well as during various Amnesty schemes in the Gulf region. 
There are around 140,000 beneficiaries of the Fund.  
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
  

73 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
 Launched in 2003 with successive revisions in 2006, 2008 and 2017, the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana is a mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) category workers going to 18 ECR countries for overseas employment. After the 
revamping of PBBY in 2017 there is a provision of an insurance cover of Rs.10 lakh in cases 
of accidental death and permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal insurance 
premium of Rs.275/ Rs.375 for a period of two/three years. The Committee also observe that 
the various issues in the implementation of this scheme such as the scope of coverage, no 
information to nominees, no facility for online renewal and difficulty in the certification of 
accidental death/permanent disability have been comprehensively addressed by t he Ministry 
in consultation with all stakeholders. Given the fact that migration to GCC countries is 
temporary in nature, social security of the workers requires adequate attention. In this regard, 
the Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) with it recent re vamping is a step in the right 
direction. The Committee desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of a wider 
social security net for migrant workers in consultation and collaboration with foreign 
employers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana, initially launched in 2003, has been amended from time to 
time with the overarching objective of expanding the benefits for emigrant workers. The revised 
scheme PBBY, 2017, operational w.e.f. August 1, 2017, has made settlement of cl aims simpler for 
the benefit of our workers and is aimed at ensuring expeditious settlement of claims. The salient 
features of PBBY, 2017 are (i) the insured person is covered for a sum of Rs.10 lakhs in the event of 
accidental death or permanent disability irrespective of change of employer, employee‟s location and 
place of work, (ii) acceptance by insurance companies of certification of accidental death/permanent 
disability by Indian Missions/Posts abroad and (iii) facility for online renewal and copy of insurance 
policy is to be made available to the nominee(s). 
Given the large number of migrant workers living and working in the Gulf countries, it would 
be in India‟s interest to negotiate Social Security Agreements with these countries. However, the 
domestic legislation in the GCC countries offers social security only to permanent residents. There 
are no domestic provisions/legislations for temporary workers. Negotiating SSAs in the absence of 
domestic legislations in the GCC countries, therefore, becomes difficult. However, mostly Gulf 
countries have made insurance coverage mandatory for the blue collar workers.  They have 
established certain institutional mechanisms to protect the interests of the expatriate workers in case 

74 
 
of premature termination of emp loyment contracts, accidents, death or permanent disability. The 
Ministry has bilateral agreements on labour and man power issues with all GCC countries that 
provides the institutional framework to safeguard the interest of our nationals working in these 
countries.  
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
The Committee are aware that the most common mechanism for regulating inter -state 
migration are the various types of bilateral agreements that spell out each side‟s 
commitments. As per the Ministry, India has signed and operationalized Social Security 
Agreements (SSAs) with 18 countries – Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and South Korea. The SSAs are binding reciprocal 
instruments that help in avoiding double security contributions, easy remittances of benefits 
and aggregating contributions to prevent loss of benefits. It is disconcerting  to note that 
despite the benefits, India has not signed any SSAs with the Gulf countries, where the bulk of 
Indian migrants work. Labour and Manpower cooperation/MoUs/Agreements have been 
affected with six countries of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). 
 
 The Committee are of the view that ensuring social security of migrant workers 
working in the Gulf countries is increasingly important due to the temporary nature of their 
migration. In view of the sizeable and steady migration outflows to the Gulf Cooperati on 
Council (GCC) countries, the Government is urged to work out bilateral agreements with 
major countries of destination with the overreaching objective of balancing the welfare of 
migrant workers and economic imperatives. The positive outcomes of migratio n can also be 
used as a soft power to  further accelerate our ties with Gulf region countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Given the large number of migrant workers living and working in the Gulf countries, it would 
be in India‟s interest to negotiate Social Security Agreements (SSA) with these countries. However, 
the domestic legislation in the GCC countries offers social security only to permanent residents. 
There are no domestic provisions/legislations for temporary workers. Negotiating SSAs in the 
absence of domestic legislations in the GCC countries, therefore becomes difficult.  
Indian migrant workers are covered under the Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MOUs/Agreements that Government has in place with the 6 GCC Countries. These 
MOUs/Agreements seek to expand the institutional framework of manpower cooperation between 
India and the destination country and enhance welfare and protection for the migrant workers. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 

75 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 The Committee take note of the fact that India took the position that the Principle of 
Non Refoulement should not be included in the Global Compact on Safe, Orderly, and 
Regular Migration. The Principle of Non Refoulement states that no person shall be rejected 
or expel led in any manner which would compel him or her to remain in or to return to a 
territory where there is a likelihood of such person being subjected to torture, persecution or 
other serious human rights violations. The Office of the United Nations High Comm issioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR) in its Advisory Opinion on the Extraterritorial Application of Non 
Refoulement Obligations under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and 
its 1967 Protocol, had reasoned that the Principle of Non Refoulement is part of Customary 
International Law. The UNHCR has also taken the position that Article 6 (Right to Life) and 
Article 7 (Right to be free from Torture) of the ICCPR, embodies the Principle of Non 
Refoulement. The Human Rights Committee in General Commen t No. 31 has clarified that 
all Covenant rights are applicable to all individuals, including migrant workers. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that Government of India revises its stand on the non -application 
of the Principle of Non Refoulement in relation to migrant workers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation involves the broader question of the application of the principle 
of non-refoulement. The principle of non -refoulement is espoused by the 1951 Convention 
on Refugees. India is not a party to this Convention. Further, the applicability of the principle 
of non -refoulement is before the Honourable Supreme Court of India in the Mohammad 
Salimullah versus Government of India case and the matter is still pending before the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court. Any policy decision on the issue rests with the MHA.  
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 The Committee observe that gender -based hierarchies that affect all women in 
general and migrant female workers in particular, exposes them to greater risks and  
exploitations  which inter -alia includes physical violence, sexual abuse, restrictio ns on 
mobility and long working hours. In this regard, the plight of domestic service workers and 
nurses within the category of female emigrant workers are appalling and worrisome. Taking 
into account the acute problems of domestic service workers, the Min istry has made 
emigration clearance of all ECR female workers for overseas employment in 18 ECR 
countries mandatory through six State -run recruiting agencies, namely NORKA Roots & 
ODEPC of Kerala, OMCL of Tamil Nadu, UPFC of Uttar Pradesh, OMCAP of Andhra 
Pradesh and TOMCOM of Telangana. On the issue of non -payment of salaries of Indian 
nurses working in Yemen, the Ministry suspended the licenses of the Recruiting agency that 
facilitated their illegal migration. As per the data furnished by the Ministry, th e number of 
female workers migrating to Gulf countries has diminished from 21, 521 in 2013 to 6076 in 
2016. 
 
 The Committee note that the overall approach of the Government towards the 
problems confronting the female migrant workers has been largely domina ted by ensuring 
their protection and safety. Such an approach, the Committee feel, might be a short -term 
solution which also tends to impact the opportunities for women migrants vis-à-vis their male 
counterparts. Due to the protectionist nature of the poli cy measures mentioned above, it is 
possible that women migrants may be resorting to illicit channels to migrate with increased 
costs and risks. In the Committee‟s view, there is an urgent need for a gender -sensitive 
migration policy which takes into consid eration the gender -specific concerns and risks. The 
lack of availability of sex-disaggregated data is another challenge that weakens the migration 
praxis framework. The Committee, therefore, would recommend that the Government should 
spell out a gender-sensitive migration policy based on sex -disaggregated data with the larger 
objective of not only protecting but also empowering women with equal opportunities. 
Establishing a 24 x 7 women helpline in the Missions/Posts abroad can be a good starting 
point towards that direction. 
 
 
 

77 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. The Government‟s 
attention has been drawn from time to time to the issue of exploitation of women workers 
leaving for employment to Gulf countries. The Government has taken additional measures to 
safeguard the interests of Indian female workers migrating to ECR countries. Therefore, a 
decision has been taken to make recruitment of female workers for ECR countries mandatory 
through government agencies. Their emigration for overseas employment is permit ted only 
through the seven designated state-run recruitment agencies or through the Foreign Employer 
registered on  e-Migrate system. In case of Foreign Employer, attestation of work contract by 
the Indian Mission in the destination country and submission of a bank guarantee of US $ 
2500 is mandatory before the emigration clearance is granted by the Office of Protector of 
Emigrants. As per extant guidelines, the minimum age of ECR category female workers 
proceeding for overseas employment to ECR countries is 30 years.  
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
  

78 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 In order to reap the benefits of global migratory flows, the Committee are of the 
considered view that upgrading the skill sets of our migrant workers is essential for a labour 
exporting country like India. The limited skill sets of our migrant workers are a major 
hindrance in their quest to fin d gainful overseas employment. The Ministry of External 
Affairs has highlighted five core elements that are essential for preparing the workforce for 
global mobility. These include alignment of qualifications, curriculum, and content with 
global standards; development of infrastructure, both soft as well hard for training purpose; 
credible assessment and certification framework; pre -departure orientation training and job 
linkage. As per the Ministry, we have progressed satisfactorily on the first two elemen ts. The 
Committee have also been informed that an MoU has been signed with the Ministry of Skills 
Development and Entrepreneurship and since then fifteen Indian International Skill Centres 
have become operational. The Ministry of External Affairs has also prepared a 
comprehensive pre-departure manual in order to enhance the soft skills of migrant workers. 
This manual has been translated into Hindi and Telugu language. The Committee desire that 
the Ministry should translate the same into other major regional  languages and hand over to 
the State governments for their wider dispension. 
 
 While appreciative of the slew of measures taken by the Ministry to upgrade the skill 
sets of migrant workers, the Committee are of the opinion that much more needs to be done 
in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should establish a 
strong and multi-level engagement with all the concerned stakeholders and incorporate all the 
five elements while framing curriculum and standards for skill developm ent. The 
Government should also establish Migrant Help Desks at all major airports and handover a 
comprehensive pre-departure manual to migrants before departure to destination countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 PDO curriculum content has been standardized all over the country. Comprehensive PDO 
Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in seven languages i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, 
Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. Similarly, Handbooks for migrant work ers have also been 
developed in eight languages i.e.  Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and 
Urdu. Presently, these handbooks are distributed to prospective migrant workers attending One Day 
PDO Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and L ucknow. The translation of these handbooks and 
manuals have been carried out with assistance from the concerned State Governments. E -Books have 

79 
 
also been developed and uploaded on e-Migrate portal. All these resource materials for Pre-Departure 
Orientation Training (PDOT) program have been developed under the aegis of India Centre for 
Migration (ICM).  
 Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is working towards a system to 
ease the process of migration of highly skilled workers in line with the core elements highlighted by 
MEA. MSDE has also informed that they are progressing ahead on alignment of qualification, 
creation of training infrastructure, establishing job linkages and pre-departure orientation program.  
Setting up of help desks at the airports is also under consideration. 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 The Government of India has been fixing minimum referral wages to regulate the 
wages of Indian migrant workers employed in different countries falling under the 
Emigration Check Regulation (ECR) category. The Ministry has informed the Committee 
that on the  basis of consultation with our Missions, the minimum wage rates were fixed in 
2014 on the then prevailing wage rate. The wage structure in the Gulf countries has 
plummeted since 2014 due to the oil crisis and fall in prices. However, the minimum referral 
wages fixed by the Government has not kept pace with such changes, leading to widening of 
the wage differential between the one imposed by the Indian Government and the prevailing 
wage rate in the destination countries. Though the fixing of higher minimum referral wages 
may be justified for the protection of migrant workers; this may result not only in reduced 
preference for Indian workers but also greater exploitation through dual contracts - one for 
the e-Migrate and the other for the Government in the de stination country. The Committee 
note that the Ministry has taken due cognizance of this issue and established a Committee to 
review it.  
 
 The Committee agree with the Ministry that there is an urgent need to revisit the 
minimum referral wages and making it more realistic and up to date. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should co -ordinate with the Ministry of Labour and 
set up a Committee for reviewing the minimum referral wages at least on annual basis with 
the primary purpose of stri king a balance between protection of workers and promotion of 
employment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. Former  EAM had taken a 
meeting with the Associations/Federation of registered Recruiting Agents (R As) on 14.12.2018 on 
different issues including the reviewing of existing MRW. The associations were of view that, the 
current minimum wages, detailed category -wise and country wise, in the eMigrate system for 
emigration clearance have become unrealistic d ue to the fact that, the economies of the countries 
(mainly ECR) have stagnated and hence jobs at such wages are no more available, particularly as 

80 
 
claimed by the RA Associations/Federations, people from the neighboring countries are willing to 
work on lower wages which are still comparatively better than the wages prevalent in their countries. 
A Committee has been constituted comprising of representatives of RAs and officers of the MEA. 
However, the Consultative Committee of Ministry of External Affairs, w here revision of minimum 
wages has been deliberated upon, has not yet given any clear directions. The Ministry is seized with 
the subject and after appropriate consultations and discussions with concerned stake holders, further 
action would be taken. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 Migration of workers to the Gulf region is mostly temporary and they do return back 
to the country of origin. The returning of migrants after crisis situations in the Gulf countries  
puts them in a precarious position. The Committee note that there exist numerous challenges 
in the resettlement of the returnees which inter alia includes difficulty in socio -cultural 
reintegration, lack of employment opportunities, the absence of soft lo ans or other financial 
incentives and lack of comprehensive rehabilitation package etc. Given the fact that 
resettlement of returnees is a state subject, the Ministry has expressed its constraints in 
playing an active role. The Ministry has stated that it has tried to sensitize the State 
Governments through Conferences and Workshops. 
 
 The returnee migrant comes back with skills, work experience and savings. Their 
active participation can give momentum to our developmental activities. In the opinion of the 
Committee, re -integration of the returnee migrants is necessary to accrue the fruits of 
successful migration. The Committee are not satisfied with the logic that the issue of returnee 
migrants be sidelined due to the larger responsibility of state governme nts. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should frame a rehabilitation policy in 
consultation with the states receiving returnees to help the returnee emigrants to use their 
enhanced skill sets for contributing to the development of self and country. 
 
 While framing such a policy, the state governments should be actively involved and 
factors such as the socio -economic profile, skill sets, country of employment and nature of 
the job of the returnee migrant be taken into account. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Observation/Recommendation of the Committee have been duly noted. In this regard, 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has conveyed that possibilities of 
utilizing international experience and skill sets of the returning migrant workers can be explored as 
Trainers and Assessors to develop International Training models for the benefit of future migrant 
workers.  

81 
 
Comprehensive emphasis is being given in expanding Minist ry‟s collaboration with the State 
governments.  A Consultation Meeting was held with major labour -sending States and Assam on 3 
July 2018 to sensitize them about the institutional framework on emigration related matters and 
expanding the PDO programs by the State Governments.  
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 The Government has rolled out the e -Migrate Project for all 10 Protector of 
Emigrants (PoE) offices since September, 2014. The Committee note that by pro viding a 
comprehensive and online database of emigrants, Recruiting Agents Foreign Employers, the 
e-Migrate Project has made the emigration cycle faster and authentication of above -
mentioned stakeholders quicker. Furthermore, the Committee observe that the  integration of 
e-Migrate with Passport Sewa Project of the Ministry of External Affairs and Bureau of 
Immigration servers of MHA has led to great validation of passport details of ECR category 
workers and curbing malpractices and data entry errors. The Committee were pleased to learn 
that apprehensions of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries are being addressed and the 
latter has shown willingness to integrate their system with e -Migrate. The Committee feel 
that e-Migrate Project has streamlined the en tire emigration process and has brought about 
transparency, e-governance and faster processing of Emigration Clearance. For the e -Migrate 
system to be holistic its integration with GCC countries is requisite and therefore, the 
Committee desire that the Min istry should win the confidence of GCC countries and 
persuade them to integrate their system with e -Migrate so that the database is not only 
comprehensive but also well integrated. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has already initiated dialogue with ECR countries for integration of eMigrate 
system with the systems in their countries. With concerted effort, the integration of eMigrate system 
with eTawtheeq system of Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and MoHRE system of United Arab Emirates  is 
at advance stage. The Bahrain authority has shown their interest in such integration. In the Joint 
Working Group meeting with ECR countries, the Ministry has put forward the proposal of integration 
of eMigrate with the technical system of the respective countries.  
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 The Ministry has informed that the grievances received by the Missions/Post abroad 
from Indian workers are appropriately taken up on case to case basis with the 
employees/local authorities for redressal. The Committee observe that well -established 
procedures have been established to handle recruitment related complaints against registered 

82 
 
Recruitment Agents, unregistered Recruitment Agents, and Foreign Employers. In order to 
provide redressal of the grievances, series of measures, viz, MADAD portal, attesta tion by 
the Missions/Posts abroad, verification of foreign employers, fixation of Minimum Referral 
Wages, job contract, Overseas Workers Resource Centre and others have been initiated by 
the Government. 
 
 The Committee are of the opinion that the existence  of numerous grievance redressal 
mechanisms makes it a cumbersome and painstaking process for the already aggrieved 
migrant worker and their families. The MADAD portal and its Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata 
Kendra represent a qualitative improvement over the e xisting procedure for handling of 
consular grievances through online forwarding tracking and escalation. However, the 
Government should establish a concrete channel for remedies and redressal, including fixing 
of a timeline and inform the migrant workers a bout the same through media campaigns and 
pre-departure training. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The suggestions of Hon‟ble Committee noted. 
 There is a robust grievance redressal system in place in this Ministry to ensure that 
the difficulties/problems faced by the Indian emigrants during their stay abroad are promptly 
and appropriately addressed. Ministry of External Affairs has been taking the streamlined 
approach for the resolution of overseas employment related grievances of the emigrants and 
for faster resolution, the 24X7 PBSK Helpline is integrated with eMigrate grievance module. 
The grievances received by the PBSK Helpline are forwarded online to concerned officers of 
Overseas Employment and PGE (OE & PGE) Division or to the concerned POE through 
eMigrate portal. Complaints which require the consular assistance are forwarded online to 
Indian Missions through MADAD portal. The grievances reported in eMigrate portal are 
monitored by the OE & PGE Division, while the MADAD grievances are monitored by the 
CPV Division. Efforts are also being made to online transfer the grievances seamlessly 
between the eMigrate and MADAD portal so that the time taken in resolution of the 
grievances is reduced with the joint efforts of jurisdictional POE and the Indian Mission 
abroad, considering the fact that in a significant number of cases, the details of Recruiting 
agent is known through the eMigrate portal. 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 The Committee note that in order to c reate awareness about safe and legal migration, 
the Government has launched a campaign „Prashikshit Jao, Surakshit Jao‟ on television and 
radio in Hindi and eight regional languages throughout the country and particularly in the 

83 
 
major labour exporting Indi an states. Further, during the Ministerial level meetings with the 
NRI Ministers of State Governments, the Ministry provides booklets and CDs in regional 
languages for wider circulation and dispension. The awareness campaigns are being rolled 
out on Doordarshan, FM Gold as well as Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha channels. However, the 
Committee are dismayed to note the real effect of the awareness campaign in print and 
electronic media. The Committee are surprised that blue collar migrant workers are expected 
to wa tch Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Television. The Committee are apprised that the 
Ministry has been provided with a budget for a media campaign through OEPG and OIA 
Division. The Ministry requires more budget to vigorously roll out this campaign. Further, 
the Committee are astonished to note that till now the Ministry has not initiated any help desk 
at the Airports. 
 
 In light of the fact the ECR category migrant workers are ones with low levels of 
education and skill, creating necessary awareness among them through simpler and 
accessible channel becomes a pre -requisite to protect their rights and interests, both in the 
country of origin and destination. The Committee are dissatisfied with the efforts made by 
Government in this regard. The Government of India is strongly recommended to carry out 
multi-media awareness campaigns to educate intending emigrants about emigration 
procedures, pitfalls of illegal migration, various welfare schemes, and grievance redressal 
mechanisms. While doing so, the Committee urge the Government to specifically focus on 
those states where problems of Migrant Workers are dominant. The Government should also 
establish Migrant Help Desks at all immigration counters at airports and provide the migrant 
workers with a comprehensive manual on everything related to safe and legal migration. The 
Committee further desire that adequate budgetary support should be provided for these 
activities. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
During the financial year 2018-19, with the approval of EAM, media campaign on „Safe and 
Legal Migration‟ of Indian workers for overseas employment was run through All India Radio, 
Doordarshan, Lok Sabha TV and NFDC.  As maximum people who go for overseas employment ar e 
from UP, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Kerala, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telengana, Maharashtra, Odisha and Karnataka, a 40 -second and 80 -second ad on „Safe and Legal 
Migration‟ in Hindi and different regional languages for two month on prime channels and DD News 
was run from 16 July, 2018 to 17 September, 2018.   
Advertisements of „Safe and Legal Migration‟ were published in two leading dailies 
in these states once a week on Saturdays during the month of September 2018.  
The need was felt to include popular channels in this effort. Hence, with the approval 
of EAM and Minister of Information & Broadcasting, some private channels such as ETV 
Telugu, PTC Punjabi, ZEE Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand; Zee 
Rajasthan News; News 18 Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Bihar and 

84 
 
Jharkhand were included and this campaign was also run once again to ensure sufficient 
outreach for one month beginning 11 December, 2018 on Doordarshan, Lok Sabha TV , Rajya 
Sabha TV and also on above-mentioned private channels. 
Media Awareness campaign for 40 & 80 second ads was run on Regional 
Channels/Kendras of Doordarshan for 30 days from 1 st August 2019. Ads in Hindi and 
regional languages in regional and popular newspapers were published during the period 
September-October 2019.  Both A V and print advertisements were also downloaded and 
publicized through social media.  
 Handbooks for migrant workers have also been developed in eight languages  i.e.  
Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and Urdu. Presently, these 
handbooks are distributed to prospective migrant workers attending One Day Pre Departure 
Orientation (PDO) Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and Lucknow. 
 Setting up of help desks at the airports is also under consideration. 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
 The Committee observe that the process of emigration by Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) category workers is presently regulated under the Emigration Act, 1983 and enforced 
by the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) with the help of 10 offices of the Protector of 
Emigrants. Successive Secretaries from the Minis try of External Affairs and erstwhile 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have repeatedly assured the Committee about the earliest 
introduction of the Bill in the Parliament. Recently, the Foreign Secretary while giving oral 
evidence before the Committee o n 18 July, 2018 had given the deadline of November, 2018 
for submission of the Bill.  Throughout the period of one and a half year of deliberations on 
this subject, the Ministry has offered numerous justifications for the delay in the introduction 
of the B ill which inter -alia included the need for harmonization of an international 
instrument, change in migration landscape, the constitution of a Committee and appointment 
of a consultant. 
 
 The Committee are of the strong view that in light of the momentous c hanges in 
migration patterns, the legal provisions contained in the present Act are inadequate to 
effectively deal with the diverse issues confronting the migrant workers. The prolonged delay 
in the introduction of draft Emigration Bill has been an issue o f grave concern for the 
Committee. The justifications and assurances offered by the Ministry for putting the bill in 
abeyance are untenable and unconvincing. If the country of origin is negligent about its 
duties towards its migrant workers, how can we hav e expectations from the destination 
countries? The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should take 
serious cognizance of this matter and accord it the highest level priority. The Committee 
desire that the bill may be finalized urge ntly and presented to the Parliament without any 

85 
 
further delay. The Committee desire that the following salient features must form an essential 
part of the proposed comprehensive law on emigrants: 
 
a.    The proposed law must regulate visa brokers, especia lly by providing clear terms 
through which visa brokers may contract with recruiting agents. The law must clearly specify 
the legal duties and obligations of brokers and the rights of migrant workers. It must also 
provide for the issuance of short term and  individual licenses to visa brokers in order to 
enable them to recruit workers in collaboration with recruitment companies. The law must 
also emphasize on the onus on the recruiting agents to conduct due diligence on prospective 
working conditions, employ ment benefits and other related factors, to ensure a safe and 
equitable working environment for migrant workers. 
 
b. The law must address the asymmetry of information between migrant workers and their 
prospective employers. It is essential that migrant wor kers are provided information about 
the nature and conditions of the prospective work to the fullest extent possible, in order to 
enable them to make an informed decision. A mechanism should be setup to enable 
interaction between prospective and experience d migrant workers. The flow of information 
will be valuable in improving efficiency and productivity in different fields. A new law must 
also provide for Migrant Worker Welfare Centres at international airports to deliver key 
information. These include eme rgency assistance, access to labour welfare departments and 
agencies etc. 
 
c. The law must take into account technological advancements. Digitized databases should be 
created with records of all migrant workers, their recruitment companies, their skills, 
educational qualifications etc. The law must ensure that all migrant workers are registered in 
these databases. 
 
d.  The law should establish a separate department with powers of enforcement under the 
Protector of Emigrants to investigate complaints of expl oitation and other abuses by 
recruiters. This department must provide legal aid, translation services, and other forms of 
assistance to workers, while initiating legal proceedings against recruitments engaging in 
illegal activities. 
 
e. The law should also provide for “safe migration cells” in key migrant districts across 
the country, to inform and engage migrant workers about the emigration process, 
employment contracts, their legal rights and other essential information to protect them from 
exploitation and abuse.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation has been duly noted. Ministry is aware that there is an imperative need 
for putting in place an enabling framework, institutional and legislative, aimed at efficient 

86 
 
management of emigration and to address migration related issues in a comprehensive manner with a 
holistic approach.  In this regard, consultations are ongoing to prepare a modern technology oriented 
Emigration Bill which aims at providing a comprehensive enabling legislative framework bas ed on 
whole-of-cyle migration approach and empowerment of our workforce through informed choices. 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 The Committee note that the recently adopted Global Compact for Migration is a UN-
backed non-binding global agreement on a common approach to international migration in all 
its dimensions. The Compact comprises of 23 objectives for better managing migration at 
local, national, regional and global levels. The Ministry of External Af fairs has also 
consulted other concerned Ministries and the issues taken by India are largely based on the 
issues already taken up in ILO or Geneva. The Committee are happy to learn that India has 
played a pro -active role in negotiating the Compact and Ind ia‟s position on several critical 
issues like the distinction between migrants and refugees, the primacy of national sovereignty 
in determining migration policies etc, have been mentioned in the agreed document. The 
Ministry informed the Committee that act ive consultations were held with the concerned 
stakeholders during the negotiation phase. The distinction between migrants and refugees 
raises a new the need for fresh legislation in India governing both emigrants from the country 
and refugees seeking asyl um in the country. The Committee note with disappointment that 
the former is still governed by the outdated Emigration Act of 1983 and that on the latter, 
India remains one of the few democracies without an asylum/refugee law at all. 
 
 The Committee recomm end the enactment of a new law to govern emigrants, which 
must incorporate India‟s commitments to various international covenants and instruments, 
such as the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the 
International Cove nant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the United Nations 
Convention against Transnational Organized Crimes and various standards and guidelines set 
out by the International Labour Organization (ILO). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The government is consci ous of the imperative need for putting in place an enabling 
framework, institutional and legislative, aimed at efficient management of emigration and to 
address migration related issues in a comprehensive manner with a holistic approach. 
Towards this end, consultations are on going to put in place a modern technology oriented 
Emigration Bill.  This Bill will look at all the recommendations made by this Committee 
including providing adequate institutional framework and other suggestions. 
 
 [O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 

87 
 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
 The Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration is indeed a historic and 
commendable move to frame a positive narrative and agenda on migration. The Committee 
desire that this progressi ve Compact on migration should be kept in mind and used as a 
guiding factor in strengthening the framework as well as in drafting of the domestic 
legislation on migration. The Government can further utilize it as a basis for working out 
cooperative bilater al agreements with labour importing countries, particularly the GCC 
countries to protect the rights of our migrant workers and addressing the challenges and 
vulnerabilities faced by them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations have been duly noted. Consultations are ongoing to put in 
place a modern technology oriented Emigration Bill.  These consultations have also taken 
into account the 23 objectives laid out in the recently adopted Global Compact for Migration.  
This Bill would be in line with Inte rnational Convention and Instruments that set out the 
International Framework for Migration. 
 
[O.M No. OI/125/Parl/03/2019-OIA-I) dated 13/11/2019] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
31 August , 2020 
 Phalguna 1941 (Saka) 
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY 
Chairperson,    
Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
 
APPENDIX- I 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-THIRD 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (16TH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, and 22 
  Total- 17 
Percentage: 56.66% 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
 Recommendation No. 23, 27 and 29          
 Total - 3 
Percentage: 10% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos. 19       
Total - 1 
Percentage: 3.33% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation Nos.  6, 13, 14, 21, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 30              
   Total- 9 
Percentage: 30% 
  