 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
INDIA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW INCLUDING EXTRADITION 
TREATIES WITH FOREIGN COUNTRIES, ASYLUM ISSUES, 
INTERNATIONAL CYBER-SECURITY AND ISSUES OF FINANCIAL 
CRIMES. 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
SEPTEMBER 2021/BHADRAPADA, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-2021) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
09 


NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-2021) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
INDIA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW INCLUDING EXTRADITION 
TREATIES WITH FOREIGN COUNTRIES, ASYLUM ISSUES, 
INTERNATIONAL CYBER-SECURITY AND ISSUES OF FINANCIAL 
CRIMES. 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 10 September 2021 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 December, 2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
SEPTEMBER 2021/BHADRAPADA, 1943 (Saka) 


COEA NO. 149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by 

CONTENTS 
 
 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2020-21 ………………………………… (i) 
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………….. (ii) 
 
REPORT 
 
 
Chapter I General Overview of India and International Law ………………………. 1-9 
Chapter II Extradition Treaties …………………………………………………….. 10-16 
Chapter III Asylum Issues ……………………………………………………… . 17-20 
Chapter IV International Cyber Security …………………………………………... 21-45 
Chapter V Financial Crimes ……………………………………………... 46-57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
Annexure-I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2020 …… 58-59 
Annexure-II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 27.08.2020 …… 60-63 
Annexure-III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.11.2020  …… 64-66 
Annexure-IV Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 17.12.2020  …… 67-68 
Annexure-V Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 05.08.2021……. 69-70 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
Note of Dissent………………………………………………………. 
 
71-72 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
6. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
9. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
10. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
11. Shri P. C. Mohan 
12. Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
13. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14. Dr. K. C. Patel 
15. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17. Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
18. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
19. Shri Rebati Tripura 
20. Vacant$ 
21. Vacant* 
 
22. Shri K. J. Alphons 
23. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
24. Smt. Misha Bharti 
25. Shri P. Chidambaram 
26. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
27. Shri Swapan Dasgupta# 
28. Shri Kapil Sibal 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab@@ 
30. Shri Brij Lal 
31. Vacant@ 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C.Koul - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip- Additional Director 
4. Ms. Smita Singh - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
$ Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma passed away on 17 March, 2021. 
* Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi ceased to Member of the Committee on her appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
07.07.2021. 
# Shri Swapan Dasgupta resigned on 17.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@@ Shri Abdul Wahab retired on 21.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@ Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee on his appointment as Cabinet 
Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021. 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs, having been  authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs (2020-21) on the subject ‘India and International Law including 
Extradition Treaties with Foreign Countries, Asylum Issues, I nternational Cyber-Security and 
Issues of Financial Crimes’. 
 
2. The Committee selected the subject for detailed examination during the year 2020- 
21. The Committee  took oral evidence of  the representatives  of the  Ministry of External  
Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Ministry of  
Electronics & Information Technology on 11 August, 2020; 27 August, 2020 and 11 
November, 2020. Further, the Committee sought views of the two experts, Dr. Gulshan Rai and 
Prof. Manoj Sinh a on the subject in accordance with Rule 331 (L) of the Rules of Procedure  
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2020. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 5  
August, 2021. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs,  
Ministry of Law & Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology and the two experts for placing material information as well as 
tendering evidence and views before the Committee. 
 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have  
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
   5 August, 2021  Chairperson, 
Sravana, 1943 (Saka) Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
(ii) 

 

1  
CHAPTER 1: 
GENERAL OVERVIEW OF INDIA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW 
 
Article 51 of the Constitution of India enjoins upon the Republic to promote international  
peace and security, to maintain good relations with other nations, to settle international 
disputes by peaceful means. The Government is responsible for implementation of the 
international treaties and agreements to which India is a party. With India’s ri sing stature in  
global affairs and the country’s increasing engagements, it is pertinent to examine India’s  
position and potentials with respect to the various facets of International law, from United  
Nations related matters,  International adjudications, i .e., cases before the international courts  
and tribunals; law of the Sea and maritime affairs; international criminal law including 
terrorism and extradition; human rights and humanitarian law; trade law and taxation; space  
law; legal issues arising out of  disarmament; international cyber security; to International  
Financial crime. 
 
 On another place Article 246 (1) lays down as follows: 
 
246 (1) Notwithstanding anything in Clauses (2) and (3) Parliament has exclusive  
power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the  
Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the Union List) in the seventh  
schedule. 
The matters germane to the subject under evaluation are as follows: 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
xxxx 
9. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence, Foreign Affairs, or the 
sensitivity of India; persons subjected to such detention. 
10. Foreign affairs; all matters which bring the Union into relation with any foreign 
country. 
11. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation. 
12. United Nations organisation. 
13. Participation in international conferences, associations and other bodies and 
implementing of decisions made thereat. 
14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and implementing 
of treaties, agreements and connections with foreign countries. 
15. War and peace. 
16. Foreign jurisdiction. 
17. Citizenship, Naturalisation and aliens. 
18. Extradition 
19. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India; passports and Visas. 
20. Pilgrimages to places outside India. 
21. Piracies and crimes committed on high seas or in the air; offences against the 
law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air. 

2  
Further Article 253 of the Constitution stipulates as follows: 
 
253. Notwithstanding anything in the foreign provisions of this Chapter, Parliament 
has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for  
implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries  
or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body. 
 
India and International Law encompass a whole range of areas/subjects under International 
Law, including inter -alia, United Nations related matters; follow up of the work  of the Sixth 
Committee (Legal) of the United Nations General Assembly; International adjudications, ie., 
cases before the international courts and tribunals; law of the Sea and  maritime affairs; 
international criminal law including terrorism and extradition; human rights  and humanitarian 
law; trade law; space law and; legal issues arising out of disarmament. Also,  there is a range of 
new areas such as environment, intellectual property rights, energy security,  nuclear energy, 
cyberspace, WTO, outer space, investment and maritime affairs – all of which call for careful 
yet rapid examination from international law perspective, by taking into account country's 
interest. The Committee’s examination, however is limited to International  Law as relates to 
Extradition, Asylum, Cyber-security and Financial Crime Laws. 
 
During the first briefing of the Committee on 11 November, 2020, the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs, in his opening statement tried to capture the vast range of  India’s 
international legal engagements and stated: 
 
“India’s approach to global issues has been guided by accommodation and 
cooperation. We have also addressed with responsibility and understanding all issues of 
global interest and concern.  Our interests in this domain have grown with our rising 
stature in global affairs.  We also remain conscious of the realities of negotiations with  
sovereign governments, while upholding our national interest and priorities. Within 
the Government of India system, the Legal and Treaties Division advises  the Ministry 
of External Affairs, in particular, and other Ministries and Departments, on all issues  
pertaining to international law and treaties, including treaty negotiations, practice and  
interpretation. Our experts from the Division are also posted in  our Missions abroad,  
especially in Geneva and New York for UN issues and The Hague for ICJ and other  
issues. The Division is also the repository of all such documents entered into by the  
Government of India. As a founding member of the United Nations, India strongly  
supports the purposes and principles of the UN and has made significant contributions  
to implement the goals of the Charter,  and the evolution of the UN’s specialized  
programmes and agencies. India strongly believes that the United Nations a nd the  
norms of international relations that it has fostered remain an efficacious means for  
tackling today's global challenges. 
 
 On the role of the United Nations as the main source of international law, he added:  
“Central to promoting economic and social development, as well as to advancing 
International peace and security, many of the multilateral treaties brought by the 

3  
United Nations form the basis of the law that governs relations among nations. The  
United Nations represents our collective recognition that only cooperative and 
effective multilateralism can ensure peace and prosperity in the context of the range of  
inter-connected challenges that we face in our inter -dependent world. India strongly  
believes in multilateralism and p eaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with  
international law....The development of international law and its implementation is  
carried out by the United Nations in multiple ways -by Courts, tribunals, multilateral  
treaties and by the Security Council, which can approve peacekeeping missions, 
impose sanctions or authorize the use of force when there is threat to international  
peace and security if it deems this necessary India has been recently elected for non- 
permanent member of the UN Security Council for 2 year term beginning on 1 st 
January, 2021 . This will be the 8 th time that India will be serving in the Security  
Council. As the world’s largest democracy, a major contributor to the UN 
peacekeeping operations, strong votary of the rights of the developing countries, 
advocate for human rights and the rule of law, voice of moderation and firm believer 
in the peaceful  settlement of disputes,  India is  committed to  enhance respect for 
international law and play an active role by serving on the UN Security Council.” 
 
On India’s engagement in international efforts to develop norms, standards and laws  
governing global interactions across various sectors, the representative of the Ministry of  
External Affairs further submitted: 
 
“Implementation of the international law such as international treaties and 
Conventions at domestic level requires their incorporation into the Indian legal system  
by a legislation made by the Parliament. This is in accordance with the principle of  
‘dualism’ reflected in Article  253 of the Constitution,  which gives Parliament the 
power to make laws that implement international laws. Government of India is 
conscious that effective multilateralism and international rule of law requires the global 
governing structure to reflect contemporary realities. India continues to call for 
‘reformed multilateralism’ - one that is relevant for the age in which we live, not when  
this architecture was erected.” 
 
On India’s growing global interests and responsibilities that are reflected in the  range of 
agreements / MoUs that the country has entered into with countries or plurilateral / multilateral 
organizations, which often involve other Ministries/ Departments of the Government, he 
submitted: 
 
“In the important pillar of judicial cooperation,  we have concluded 50 Extradition  
Treaties and 11 extradition arrangements with countries and are examining 35 more  
such instruments with new partners.  We also have Mutual Legal Assistance and  
Transfer of Sentenced Persons agreements.  The economic crimes p illar has grown in  
importance. It includes cooperation on customs, financial data and fighting drugs.  
MHA has 14 MoUs and FIU has 40 MoUs. The security concerns / terrorism 

4  
cooperation have now come centre stage.  MEA has 5 MoUs for counter te rrorism 
JWGs, MHA has 17 MoUs on cyber security and there are 13 MoUs between our  
CERT groups. In recent times, labour and movement of professions has become more 
common, so Migration / Mobility Agreements as well as Social Security arrangements  
being concluded.” 
 
The representative of the Ministry of External Affairs then dwelled on India’s engagements 
with groups of Nations formed on the basis of shared interests which also are  sources of 
international obligations, responsibilities and rights and stated: 
 
“In addition to our active contribution to multilateral mechanism for progressive 
development of international law, India is also engaged in various regional / 
plurilateral approaches to strengthen international legal order. To name a few: India 
has been a founding member of G20 process and played an effective role in proposing  
new ideas and finding solutions. Many important international legal issues including 
on international taxation (Base Erosion & Profit Shifting), sharing taxation 
information (Automatic Exchange of Information), countering terrorism, financing of  
terrorism (Financial Action Task Force), fugitive economic offenders etc., are 
discussed in the G20 platform. India has been raising the call for international action  
on terrorism incl uding against financing of terrorism. India’s efforts translated into  
G20 standalone statements relating to countering terrorism that have been adopted in  
2015, 2017 and 2019. We shall be the G20 chair in the coming year.// Many important  
issues like count ering terrorism, security in use of Information and Communication  
Technology (ICT), financing of terrorism, customs cooperation, fugitive economic  
offenders, anti-money laundering, countering financing for terrorism, anti-drug 
trafficking are discussed under BRICS. This is another active action oriented 
grouping. India will assume the Chair in the coming year.// IBSA, formalized at  
Foreign Ministers’ meeting  in Brasilia in June 2003, brings together three large 
democracies and major economies from three different continents, facing similar 
challenges. IBSA is a purely South-South grouping of like-minded countries, 
committed to inclusive sustainable development, in pursuit of the well -being for their 
peoples and those of the developing world. The principles, norms and values 
underpinning the IBSA Dialogue  Forum are participatory democracy, respect for 
human rights, the Rule of Law and the strengthening of multilateralism.” 
 
After its independence in 1947, as mark of recognition of the importance of international law 
to its national policy and international relations (Article 51(c) of the Constitution of India), 
India undertook an obligation to promote and foster respect for international law and treaty 
obligations in inter-country relations. Needless to point out that  being a great country with its 
own destiny in world affairs, India has been active on the  international field even before it 
became independent. Given its size, population, stature and  significance, cultural traditions, 
India has a continuing great role to play in international relations. 

5  
The Legal & Treaties Division was established in the Ministry of External Affairs in 1957 as a 
nodal point to deal with all aspects of international law advice to the Government of  India. 
Within the Government of India's system, the Legal & Treaties Division advises the  Ministry 
of External Affairs in particular and other Ministries and Departments on issues  pertaining to 
international law and treaty, including treaty negotiations, practice and interpretations. 
 
In terms of specific work/mandate of the Division is concerned, the Ministry in a written reply 
informed the Committee the Division follows the work of the 6 th Committee (Legal) of the 
UN General Assembly. It is a nodal point for the work of the Asian African  Legal 
Consultative Organization (AALCO) whose Headquarters is in New Delhi since inception in 
1956. The work in the field of the Law of the Sea, International Criminal Law,  Terrorism and 
Extradition Legal Assistance in criminal matters, Diplomatic privileges and  immunities 
involves immense examination and advising on core legal issues. The law of the  seas field 
itself involves a vast variety of areas including Continental Shelf Claims; issues of jurisdiction 
and rights within the different maritime zones and the high seas including negotiations on 
Maritime Boundary Agreements, marine environment and marine scientific  research. The 
Division is in charge of the development and codification of International Trade  Law 
undertaken by th e United Nations through the commission on International Trade Law  
(UNCITRAL). 
 
They further submitted that the work of the Legal and Treaties Division is determined  not 
only by the ever multiplying fields of global activities involving India but also by the nature of 
the vast growing field of international law itself. The sources from which international law 
springs are indeed varied and dynamic. In order to assess the status in  international law of a 
conduct, proposal  or claim made by States,  examination of resolutions  of UN General 
Assembly, the practice and precedence which exists, decisions of the International Court of 
Justice, arbitral and other awards and general principle of law uniformly recognized by the 
state, apart from multilateral and bilateral treaties, is required. 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs in a written note submitted that, the work relating to  treaty 
law and practice i.e. examination of documents, preparing instruments of Full Powers,  
Ratification, and Accession etc., the Division, being the depository of bilateral and 
international treaties for the Government of India also liaisons with all ministries in collecting  
all treaties/agreements signed with foreign countries for safekeeping and uploading on the  
website of the ministry to make them available for use/information for all. 
 
With respect to the query about qualifications required for individual officers in the  Division 
the Ministry submitted that at the recruitment level (Grade II - Under Secretary), the  
incumbent should have minimum qualification of LLM  in international law and  5 years 
experience in the related field. The approved strength of the Division at present is 23 officers  
with Additional  Secretary heading the Division. Currently, the Division has 10 officers 
working at the headquarters, 03 are posted in the Missions abroad. 

6  
During oral evidence on  11 November, 2020, the representative of Ministry of Law  and 
Justice, explaining the relation between international and domestic law informed the  
Committee: 
 
“Many cases decided by the Hon. High Courts and the Hon. Supreme Court 
reflect the dualist approach of the Indian legal system. I had made a reference to the  
Jolly George Verghese versus Bank of Cochin. The Court held that until the municipal  
law is changed to accommodate treaty, what binds the court is the former not the latter.  
There has been some digression by the Hon. Supreme Court in this regard giving rise 
to some sort of a concern regarding the relationship between the international law and  
India’s legal system. This was in the concern of Vishaka versus State of Rajasthan, a  
1997 landmark judgment on sexual harassment of women at workplaces. In this case,  
not only did the court use the international law to find the meaning of the domestic law, 
it also held that international conventions not inconsistent with the Fundamental 
Rights, must be read. In the case of National Legal Services Authority versus Union of  
India, 2014 - recognizing transgender as a third category of gender, --the Hon. 
Supreme Court  held that if Parliament has made any legislation which is in conflict  
with the international law, then Indian courts are bound to give effect to the Indian law, 
rather than international law. However, in the absence of a contrary legislation, 
municipal courts in India would respect the rules of international law. So, there was  
some sort of a digression in the established part of the law in this regard. In most of  
these cases, the Court has relied upon the Article 51C of the Constitution read with  
Article 253 to support its reasoning. Article 51C directs the State to endeavour to foster 
respect for international law and treaty obligations. Apart from the treaties, custom is  
also a formal source of international law. Perhaps, we find a reference to the same in 
the case of Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum versus Union of India, 1996. In the said  
case, the court held  that there is no difficulty in accepting Customary  International 
Law, not contrary to domestic law, as part of the Indian legal system. Although bo th 
treaties and CIL impose equally binding obligations on a country, unlike treaties it is  
often not easy to ascertain whether a norm has indeed attained the status of Customary  
International Law. A norm becomes a part of the Customary International Law on ly if 
States customarily follow that norm from a sense of legal obligation. To conclude, I  
would say that international legal norms are not directly enforceable in Indian courts 
till there is a domestic legislation giving effect to these norms or a treaty or an 
agreement to this effect.” 
 
Replying to queries relating to codification of International law, the MEA representative, 
during oral evidence on 11 November, 2020 stated: 
 
“The UN Commission on International Trade Law was established by the UN 
General Assembly in 1966 with a view to promote the progressive harmonisation and  
unification of law of international trade. This is composed of 60 member-states elected 

7  
by the UN General Assembly for a term of six years and India has been a member o f 
UNCITL since the beginning and as a result of that we have been actively participating  
in the substantive issues on the agenda of UNCITL. I will just mention three or four  
areas which will give you an idea of the sectors in which we are now engaged in. W e 
are part of the working group on Micro, Small and Medium size enterprises; we are 
part of the working group II on Arbitration and Conciliation and Dispute Settlement;  
working group III on Investors State Dispute Settlement Reform; working group IV on  
Electronic Commerce and working group V on Insolvency law and Working Group VI  
on Judicial sale of Ships. These are some of the areas in which we are working on  
international trade law.” 
 
Explaining India's disposition towards international law and efforts made by the country 
towards reforms in the international governing structures, the MEA representative  during oral 
evidence on 11 November, 2020 stated as under: 
 
“As an ancient civilisation of immense diversity and today the world’s largest 
democracy, India has abiding faith in the spirit of multilateralism. India is committed 
to enhance respect for international law and play an active role by serving on the UN 
Security Council. The Government of India is also conscious that effective 
multilateralism and international rule of law requires global governing structures to 
reflect contemporary realities. We call for reformed multilateralism. Reformed 
multilateralism is one that is relevant for the age in which we live and contemporary 
realities and not for the time when the architecture of the international structure was 
created. In this regard, India has been working closely with other pro-reform countries 
through different platforms which include cross-regional groupings of developing 
countries, for instance the L-69, also the group known as the G-4 which have also 
sought for reforms of the UN system including of the Security Council. Besides, India 
has been raising the issue of the UN Security Council reforms and UN reforms in 
general in bilateral and multilateral discussions. India’s efforts at the United Nations 
for this kind of reform have led to the establishment of the inter-government 
negotiations at the United Nations.” 
 
The Committee recognize the critical importance of safeguarding the Country’s interests 
in the varied streams of International Law and note with satisfaction that India  is 
committed to multilateralism and enhancement of respect for International Law. They  
also laud the country’s continuing unwavering engagement with and co mmitment to the 
cause for reforms in global governing structures to reflect changing and contemporary  
realities. The Committee, however, find that India’s capacity, expertise and involvement  
in the framing and further modification of International Law in various spheres needs to 
be further strengthened. The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts towards that goal  
should not be limited to ensuring the recruitment of qualified personnel in concerned 

8  
Ministries and Divisions, but should also extend to promotion of institutions of 
international legal studies and research in the country, scholarships and funding of  
research by meritorious law students, professionals and educators. 
The Ministry should also, in coordination with Ministry of Educat ion identify  
some eminent institutions for establishing chairs for the purpose. Similarly, they should  
also establish suitable chairs in legal studies in the Foreign Service Institute and the  
Indian Council of World Affairs. They also desire the concerned ministries to promote  
and facilitate the entry of Indian international law experts into the various international  
governing bodies like the Sixth Committee (Legal) of the United Nations General 
Assembly, International Courts of Justice, International Tribunals, etc. responsible for  
framing and amending international law on the varied fields including in the areas of  
Law of the Sea and maritime affairs; international criminal law including terrorism and  
extradition; human rights and humanitarian law; tr ade law; space law; legal issues  
arising out of disarmament,  environment, intellectual property rights, energy security,  
nuclear energy, cyberspace, WTO, outer space. Moreover, the Committee desire that the  
Ministry of External Affairs, in close co-ordination with all concerned ministries, set up 
a Working Group devoted to achieving the above goals and to ensure strengthening  
India’s position in the study, framing, amending, implementing and interpretation of  
International Law adequately to protect its interests. 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee take note of the India’s growing global interests and corresponding 
efforts made by the Government that manifest themselves in the range of  agreements / 
MoUs that the country has entered into with countries or plurilateral /  multilateral 
organizations in diverse areas spanning from judicial and customs cooperation, financial 
data sharing, war on drugs, counter -terrorism, cyber security,  Migration, labour and 
movement of professionals, etc. While lauding the effo rts of the  Government in its 
endeavours, the Committee feel that the achievements in terms of the  numbers of 
agreements entered into and signed with countries and plurilateral/multilateral 
organizations in various areas of possible cooperation are still  full of possibilities, 
keeping in mind the Country’s aspirations to become a much bigger  player in 
international affairs. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs, as the 
Nodal Ministry, should vigorously explore more avenues of cooperation 

9  
with other countries and groups of countries particularly in the areas of extradition,  
economic crimes, counter terrorism and migrant mobility agreements for possible 
cooperation that a globalized economy and increasingly interconnected world that 
advances in information technology have ushered in. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
 
The Committee are of the view that India follows the principle of ‘dualism’ reflected in 
Article 253 of the Constitution, which gives Parliament the power to make laws to 
implement international laws. They also note that the Supreme Court has on  certain 
occasions and rulings digressed from this principle on the logic that Customary  
International Law, unless there exists a domestic law which contradicts the same, may be 
accepted. The Committee feel  that rather than  allowing such digression  to become a  
point of contention between the institutions of the State, the Ministry of External Affairs  
should take note of the vacuum in domestic legislation on such matters a nd make efforts 
in coordination with the concerned Ministry to have adequate domestic legislation on  
such matters that are firmly based on the established principles of jurisprudence and  
equality of rights enshrined in the Constitution. 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 

10  
CHAPTER 2: 
EXTRADITION TREATIES 
 
‘Extradition’ is a process that provides a mechanism for the surrender, upon request, of a  
person who is alleged to have committed an extraditable offence and is either wanted for trial  
or been convicted in one State and found in the territory of the other State. 
 
An extraditable offence means an offence as provided under the extradition treaty. 
Generally, any offence which is punishable with an imprisonment of one year or  a more  
severe punishment under the laws of both the States is an extraditable offence. 
 
In India, the law relating to extradition is contained in the Extradition Act, 1962. The  Ministry 
of External Affairs is the Nodal Ministry for extradition matters and for the implementation of 
the Extradition Act. 
 
Extradition of a person from India requires a legal basis, by way of an extradition treaty  or an 
extradition arrangement or an applicable international convention. Till date, India has  signed 
extradition treaties with 50 countries (Annexu re A) and has extradition arrangements  with 11 
countries (Annexure B). For its implementation, the extradition treaty or an extradition 
arrangement or an applicable international convention need to be notified in the  Official 
Gazette under section 3 of the Extradition Act, 1962. 
 
Explaining the difference between Extradition Treaties and Extradition Arrangements,  the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs, during oral evidence on 27 th August, 2020, 
stated: 
 
“... Extradition Treaty  from India requires a legal  basis by way of an Extradition 
Treaty or an Extradition Arrangement or an applicable international convention. The  
Extradition Treaty is a bilateral agreement setting out the precise terms and conditions  
for the extradition of fugitive off enders and, as I said, India has now Extradition  
Treaties with 50 countries. In the absence of an Extradition Treaty, person may be  
extradited from India on the basis of a reciprocal extradition arrangement ensuring  
reciprocity in accordance with the domes tic law of the parties. For this purpose, both  
sides agree by exchange of note verbal that they shall extradite to each other fugitive  
criminals in accordance with their domestic laws and, as you know, we have 
extradition arrangements with 11 countries at the moment.” 
 
Procedure for extradition requests 
 
The Ministry not only processes extradition requests received from concerned law 
enforcement agencies, it also assists the law enforcement agencies in the preparation of 
extradition requests and helps in providing subsequent clarifications sought by requested State 
whenever called upon to do so. To facilitate preparation of extradition requests by law 

11  
enforcement authorities, the Ministry of External Affairs has developed and put on its website 
the Guidelines for preparation of extradition requests as well as the Template of the 
extradition request. The Ministry works in close consultation with Ministry of Home Affairs  
and Ministry of Law and Justice on extradition matters. 
 
Responding to queries by Members on the inter-ministerial consultation process involved in 
signing an Extradition treaty, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs  further 
stated: 
 
“There is a standard draft Extradition Treaty which is initially forwarded to the foreign 
States for consideration. The Ministry of Home Affairs  and the Ministry of Law, 
Department of Legal Affairs are actively associated during the negotiations and 
finalisation of the Treaty. Views  of the CBI are also obtained. Once the treaty is 
initialled at the technical level, then a Cabinet Note is moved and after the approval of  
the Cabinet, the Treaty is signed and ratified. That is the procedure for inter -Ministerial 
consultation. 
 
i. Extradition requests of India 
 
On requests for Extradition and how they are sent, the Ministry stated that an extradition  
request is prepared by the concerned law enforcement agency and forwarded to the Ministry 
of External Affairs through the Ministry of Home Affairs. Thereafter, it is processed in the 
MEA and after seeking approval of the competent authority, the request is forwarded to the  
concerned Indian Mission abroad for onward transmission to the foreign State concerned. In  
urgent cases, when it is  believed that a fugitive  criminal located in a particular jurisdiction  
may flee that  jurisdiction, a request  for provisional arrest of the  fugitive may be made,  
pending presentation of the formal extradition request. 
 
Replying to queries on procedure for sending extradition requests from India, the M EA 
representative submitted: 
 
“The extradition request is prepared by the concerned law enforcement agency and  
0.forwarded to MEA. The extradition request is examined in the light of the treaty  
provisions and the evidentiary requirements. Once this is an order, the request is 
forwarded to the concerned Indian Mission abroad for transmission to the foreign 
country concerned. The MEA being the central authority in extradition matters advises  
and assists the law enforcement agency in the preparation of the extradition request and 
supplementary information as has been sought by the foreign States.” 
 
Replying to queries relating to the issue of non-bailable warrant being required to 
process an extradition request and how it reconciles with the filing of prosecution complaint, 
the representative of MHA clarified during the oral evidence held on 27th August, 2020: 

12  
“The answer is very simple that filing of prosecution complaint is not a condition  
precedent for issue of non -bailable warrant. Non -bailable warrant can be issued even  
without filing of the prosecution complaint. So, what we have suggested is this. If you  
see Article 11 (3) of the Indian Extradition Treaty between India and United Kingdom, it 
only says that requirement is not filing of the charge sheet but the material placed should 
be sufficient to justify committal for trial. That is the prima facie material to satisfy the  
requested State that fugitive is involved in an offence or offences. This is an 
interpretation given by the Hon.  Delhi High Court with regard to extradition request by  
the UK. So, UK was successful in getting an extradition process without filing the  
prosecution complaint. But when it comes to India, there is a requirement to file a  
prosecution complaint. When there is a bilateral agreement, the rule should be the same  
for both the countries. Another issue which was raised by an Hon. Member was with 
regard to non-conviction-based confiscation of the asset. If you see the Fugitive 
Offenders Act, it is very clear in terms of what the requirement is. The requirement is  
that there should be a warrant of arrest. For the issue of the warrant of arrest, you may  
require filing of prosecution complaint or you may not. The second condition is that the  
person must have left In dia so as to avoid criminal prosecution. The third condition is,  
being abroad, refuses to return to India to face a criminal prosecution.” 
 
 
ii. Processing of Extradition requests of foreign countries to India 
 
Explaining the processes and procedure involved in Extradition, the Ministry submitted  that 
an extradition request received from a foreign country is examined in the MEA to see  whether 
it conforms to all the procedural and evidentiary requirements of the relevant extradition 
treaty or arrangement. There after, if the extradition request is in order, with the  approval of 
competent authority, an inquiry magistrate is appointed. The Additional Chief  Judicial 
Magistrate (ACMM) – 01, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi is the designated inquiry  
magistrate for all extradition requests. After the Inquiry, the Inquiry magistrate submits its  
report to the Central Government, either recommending or not recommending the extradition  
of the person sought. If extradition is not recommended, the accused will be set free. Before 
recommending extradition, the Extradition Magistrate has to be satisfied by evidence that a  
prima facie case exists against the fugitive offender.  If the extradition of the fugitive is  
recommended by the inquiry magistrate, the Central Government ma y surrender the person  
sought on a date and time mutually agreed between the requesting and the requested State. 
 
After receipt of an extradition request by the Requested State, the time taken for the final 
surrender of the fugitive criminal differs in eac h country and in each case. While in a few  
cases, a very short time is taken by the requested State, in others this may prolong for years,  
depending on the internal legal system of the Requested State. 
 
Efforts made to broaden extradition network 

13  
On the ongoing efforts to broaden Extradition network, the Ministry stated that efforts are also 
underway to conclude extradition treaties with more countries, in particular, countries  having 
citizenship by investment programmes or favourable permanent residency or passport regimes 
through investment route. In this regard, extradition treaty proposals have been made  to 
countries having such programmes. This is to discourage those who seek citizenship of 
such countries and flee after committing serious economic and other crimes in India. 
 
They also submitted that as the nodal Ministry for extradition matters, the Ministry of  
External Affairs is conscious of its responsibility and continues to make consistent efforts to  
broaden the extradition base by initiating and concluding extradition treaties and arrangements 
with as many foreign countries as possible to facilitate bringing back fugitive criminals for  
trial by competent courts in India. 
 
When asked about the efforts to extend extradition treaties with more countries, the  Ministry 
official submitted as under: 
 
“In 2014, there have been four extradition treaties that have been concluded which are  
with Afghanistan, Lithuania, Malawi and Morocco.  Of course, as I said, there are  
several that are currently under discussion.” 
 
Responding to queries on Mutual Legal Assistance treaties with other countries, the  
representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs  during the oral evidence on 11 November,  
2020 submitted: 
 
“The Ministry of Home A ffairs is the central authority for dealing with requests of  
mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. As you are aware, we have signed Treaties  
with 40 countries and a little while ago, you mentioned about three countries with whom 
we have not ratified  these Treaties. They are Morocco, Cambodia and Brazil.  We have 
signed the Treaties with them but they are yet to be ratified.  As regards the purpose of  
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties, it is clearly defined in the guidelines and there are  
various types of requests which can be made under the Treaties which are about 
identification and location of persons and objects, taking evidence and obtaining 
statements, executing seizures and searches, providing information, protecting and 
preserving computer data, etc……….. There are 845 MLAT requests pending with  
various countries which include Letters Rogatory and MLA requests.  Out of these,  
important countries like USA, UAE, UK, Switzerland, Singapore and Hongkong alone  
account for more than 50 per cent and this i s an ongoing process.   Many of these  
requests get partially executed and as the investigation proceeds, supplementary 
requests are also made.   We are getting cooperation from the countries concerned and  
we are also in touch with other countries with whom we want to enter into MLATs.” 

14  
Explaining the different mutual obligations between countries under Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaties, Extradition Treaties and Extradition Arrangements, the representative of  the 
Ministry of Law and Justice during the oral evidence on 11 November, 2020: 
 
“Sir, so far as the MLATs in civil matters are concerned, it has already been pointed out 
that they are governed by Section 29 of the CPC, which provides the mechanism for 
service of foreign summons. As far as Section 44 A of the CPC is  concerned, it 
prescribes the procedure for execution of decrees passed by the courts in reciprocating 
territory. Section 47 also provides the mandate that the district court shall refuse 
execution of any such decree if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the decree 
falls within any of the exceptions and clauses of Section 13. // Sir, as far as India 
is concerned, it has also acceded to The Hague Convention of 1965 on the Service 
Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial matters and also 
Hague Convention on taking of evidence abroad in civil and commercial matters in the 
year 2007. The Ministry of Law and Justice is the central authority for both the 
conventions; and we are maintaining the correspondence record in this regard but it is 
not in the form of a list, as the same was enquired by the Hon. Chairperson. // Sir, 
so far as the role of the Department of Legal Affairs in Ministry of Law is concerned, it 
is primarily concerned with the tendering of advice in the Ministries on legal matters. 
The Department is concerned with reciprocal arrangements with foreign countries for the 
service of summons and suits for the execution of decrees of civil courts, for  the 
enforcement of maintenance orders and for the administration of the estates of foreigners 
dying in India. So, this is in regard to MLATs. //Observations have also been made with 
regard to the extradition treaties. In this regard, from the perspective of law, I would like 
to mention that unlike the treaty mechanisms, where States are obligated to consider 
request for extradition, which is a mandate, the extradition arrangements are non- 
binding. So, that is the basic difference between the treaty mechanism and the 
extradition arrangements.” 
 
When asked about that  how does the country deals with fugitives to countries India do  not 
have extradition treaties with, the representative of Ministry of Law and Justice stated: 
“Sir, wherein the treaty mechanisms and the extradition arrangements are not there,  
then we fall back to the third level and that is the multilateral conventions which India  
may have entered into with various countries which provide a binding extradition  
framework. The question was also raised and request can also be made for the 
surrender of fugitives so far as non -treaty states are concerned. So, this covers, Sir, the  
entire scenario as far as the law of extradition is concerned.  In the aforesaid context, I  
would also like to point out that the  challenges to extradition orders are also raised  
outside the treaty terms.  So, these are, generally, based on the concerns of the human  
right violations such as torture or cruel inhuman degrading statements or the existence  
of the prisons in the concerned  state. So, to that extent, the foreign courts will enquire  
into these concerns, depending upon the Judiciary’s role in domestic justice systems  
and the strength of human rights movement in that country. Apart from it, an 

15  
observation was also made regarding as to what are the principles which are governing  
in the field of extradition treaties.  In this regard, I would like to point out the three  
principles, which are, generally, prevalent and considered.  The first is the principle of  
dual criminality. This is a principle wherein the act in question has to be an offence in  
the jurisdiction of both states.   That is the treaty, the basic principle, that if it happens  
to be an offence in India, it needs to be an offence in other State too.  The seco nd 
principle which we, generally, consider is the principle of speciality.  The principle of  
speciality is, basically, that an extradited individual can be tried only for the offences  
which are specified in the extradition requests.  So, it cannot be for the  connected 
offences but it is for the specific offences  which have  been referred there in  the 
extradition treaty. The third principle which we, generally, refer to is the political  
exception. The political exception is, Sir, that request of extradition must be declined, 
if the  real purpose of the request made is to  punish the person requested for his  
political opinion rather than the crime committed by him. These are the broad 
parameters with regard to the extradition treaties which I wanted to bring to the notice 
of the Hon. Committee. 
 
The Committee note that India has signed extradition treaties with 50 countries  and has 
extradition arrangements with 11 countries and that efforts are on to extend the network 
of extradition treaties and arrangements with other countries. While appreciating these 
achievements and the efforts underway to extend India’s network of  extradition treaties 
with more countries, the Committee are concerned with the delays in  extraditing 
offenders fleeing the country and taking refuge in the countries particularly  with which 
India already has either signed an Extradition Treaty or have Extradition Arrangements 
and want that the process should be expedited in each case. Moreover, the Committee 
also observe that taking advantage of  absence of extradition treaties the  offenders are 
taking refuge in the countries having provisions for citizenship by investment 
programmes or favourable residency or passport regimes through investment routes. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  that such countries  should be 
indentified and an extradition treaty or extradition arrangement should be  
initiated/concluded on priority basis so that the cases of fleeing of offenders to those  
countries after committing serious economic and other crimes in India be prevented. 
The Committee are perturbed to observe that in certain instances, the 
requirements of the rule for India that of the other treaty Country which should be the  
same ended up being different,  and India’s request  being delayed on such un equal 
application of rules. The Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs being  
the Nodal Ministry for Extradition Treaties, should make prompt and effective efforts to 

16  
ensure equality of application of rules under the treaty with partner countries. They also 
desire that the Ministry should explore with other like -minded countries to evolve an  
international mechanism to oversee the equal application  of rules under such  treaties 
and provide relief to aggrieved countries in cases  where their treaty partners fail to  
respect the equal applicability of rules under the treaty. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that India is signatory to the Hague Convention on the  Service 
Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in civil or commercial matters.  The 
Hague Convention on taking of evidence abroad in civil and commercial matters was 
also adopted in the year 2007 under the belief that the process of service of legal  
documents would become faster than letter rogatory and In dia has also signed Mutual  
Legal Assistance treaties with 40 countries. The Committee, however, find it 
disappointing that even then there are 845 MLAT requests pending with various 
countries which include Letters Rogatory and Mutual Legal Assistance requests. The  
Committee, therefore, conclude that the desired cooperation from the countries 
concerned in honouring such requests is waiting. The Committee, therefore, desire that  
the Ministry of External Affairs should take serious cognizance of the huge pendency of 
requests and institute a task force to look into the reasons for the same and suggest  
measures for the prompt fructification of all extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance  
requests pending with various Countries. Simultaneously, more and more M LATs must 
be entered into with other important countries on priority basis. 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 

17  
CHAPTER 3 
ASYLUM ISSUES 
 
India is not a party to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 and its  Protocol 
of 1967; Convention of Reduction of Statelessness, 1961. Asylum is granted on case  to case 
basis. 
 
In his deposition during the oral evidence on 11 August, 2020, the representative of the  
Ministry of External Affairs stated: 
 
“On asylum Mr. Chairman, as you mentioned, India i s not a signatory to the 1951 UN  
Convention on the status of refugees including the 1967 protocol. Currently, refugees  
are treated at par with foreigners as per the domestic legal requirements governing 
their entry, stay and exit. The domestic legislation addressing their status are: the  
Foreigners Act, 1946; the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939; the Passport (Entry  
into India) Act, 1920, as amended from time to time; and the Passport Act, 1967. //  
Notwithstanding the fact that India is not a party to t he Refugee Convention, India has 
been practising the principle of non -refoulment. Our protection regime is based on the  
fundamental rights guaranteed under our Constitution and the relevant legal 
provisions. As you are aware, a number of cases on this subject are currently pending 
in the Supreme Court. The Ministry of Home Affairs is the administrative body in  
charge of the issue.” 
 
Pending appropriate decision on the issue of comprehensive legislation, currently refugees  are 
treated at par with foreign ers as per the domestic legal requirements governing their entry,  
stay and  exit. The domestic legislations addressing their status  are (1) The Foreigners Act  
1945 (2) The Registration of Foreigners Act 1939 (3) Passports (entry into India) Act as  
amended and (4) Passports Act 1967. 
 
Responding to a query regarding the difference between Asylum seekers and Refugees, the  
representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs during oral evidence on 11 November, 2020  
clarified: 
 
“It will depend upon their papers and claims. Refugees and asylum seekers have to establish 
on why they came to India without documents.  We have a very robust visa system.  We 
allow all foreigners to come here to do business with us, to study or to do jobs or whatever.  
But why they had to come here? Asylum seeker is a victim.   He has been hounded out of  
his country on any reason, maybe, ethnicity, language, or belonging to particular ideology,  
religion, etc.  We have to see whether that ground is correct or not.  Refugee can be an  
economic migrant.” 

18  
On the issue of India not being signatory to the UN Convention relating to the status of  
refugees 1951 and its 1967 Protocol, a representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs during  
evidence submitted: 
 
“Regarding the issue of asylum, we have sufficient legal framework at the  moment. 
We have a written Constitution, which many countries in the world do not have, where  
foreigners also have been granted certain Fundamental Rights and other rights. We 
have the Foreigners Act which covers the whole gamut of issues related to entry of  
foreigners, their stay in  India, their activities in India and their exit from India. We  
have other Acts also – the Registration of Foreigners Act, the Citizenship Act. We also  
have various other instruments. // The Central Government has passed legal orders  
under these Acts to govern this regime of legal as well as illegal foreigners. Illegal  
foreigners are those who do not have documents or whose passport or visa status is not  
clear. He can be a refugee also. For that, we have issued a protocol to various 
implementing agencies like FRRO and FROs in  the States as  well as  at the Central  
level where the status of a foreigner, who claims that he has actually been persecuted,  
can be assessed and then, in consultation wi th security agencies and the MEA, a view  
can be taken whether to let him stay on in India for a long time, to grant him a long - 
term visa. If he is found to be faking it or he is an economic migrant in the disguise of  
an asylum seeker, then action regardin g his deportation etc. can be taken. It has been  
noticed that since 1951, when this protocol came – then, this UN convention and later  
on the Protocol came – there has been a consistent view in the Government that the  
Government needs flexibility in dealin g with these matters and we have been very  
successful. There have  been lot  of incidents  of asylum  seekers coming to  India and 
they have found India a very hospitable place. We have been acclaimed internationally. 
So, there is no reason or cause for any single law. We already have enough 
administrative and legal frameworks with us.” 
 
The Committee also called select subject experts to hear their views on their areas of  
specialization. During the hearing, Prof. Manoj Kumar Sinha, an expert on Refugee Law,  
explaining the reasons for India not being a signatory of the UN Convention on the Status of  
Refugees, 1951 and the 1967 UN Protocol stated: 
 
“The concern is whether we should become a party or not a party, whether we are  
respecting the refugees in India. We see that we have a good track record in protection  
and respect of the refugees in India. All the eight SAARC members are not parties of  
the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol. If certain modification takes place what will  
happen? India for a long time is  talking about the concept of burden sharing because  
refugees will always affect the porous border or proximity.  So, India will face such a  
problem, and other African nations are also facing a similar problem because of the  
porous borders and people move from one country to another country. Refugee 
problem should be solved globally. It should not be confined to one country. Refugees 
come to my country because of porous border but refugee problem is global. It is not 

19  
the country which receives. Bangladesh has received Rohingya refugees and India is  
also helping them.  So, burden sharing concept is missing in1951 Convention.  It does 
not talk about burden sharing problem.  If burden sharing is there, then there is a  
possibility of reconsidering or revisiting the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol.” 
 
When asked about the possibility of discretionary powers of concerned officials in  dealing 
with requests of Asylum seekers in the absence of the  established procedures under  the UN 
Convention on t he Status of Refugees and the 1967 UN Protocol, the representative of  the 
Ministry of Home Affairs affirmed: 
 
“One major question was regarding the asylums that it may be possible that the lower  
officers might misuse the discretion that has been given to t hem. To regulate it, there is 
a standard operating protocol. It has been in operation since 2011. We have revised it  
last year in 2019.  It lays down the duties what the concerned FRRO who is generally  
the SP or the DCP of the area or the FRRO is a Central Government intelligence officer 
are supposed to do.  They vet the claims of the asylum claimant regarding persecution  
and see why that person has come to India without any documentation and for what  
purpose. After then, there is a further examination at the  central level and we take  
opinion of MEA also. Then if everything is found in order, then only the LTV cases are 
processed. After that, annual renewal takes place. After five years again that LTV case  
will come to the MHA and this whole process is online.  Nobody can hind when the  
documents came etc.  Regarding other claims like an asylee has been staying in India  
for a long time and then he claims citizenship, the whole procedure is online.  He can 
file review as well as revision which is available under the law.” 
 
 
The Committee are aware that India is not a signatory to the UN Convention,  1951 on 
the status of Refugees and the related 1967 UN Protocol. The Committee find the 
Government of India’s stance on the issue, that India’s Domestic laws are adequate to 
effectively handle refugee crises facing the country, as demonstrated in the past crises  
involving Tibetan refugees and Tamil refugees, not fully convincing. The Domestic Laws  
like the Foreigners Act, 1946; the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939; the Passport 
(Entry into India) Act, 1920 are legislations that govern the regulation of entry, stay and  
exit of foreign nationals during normal times and under normal circumstances, whereas  
a refugee situation demands prompt and specified response owing to th e crisis nature  
and the urgency of response required to avoid potent humanitarian crises resulting  
therefrom. However, the Committee are also taking note of the  limitations in the 1951  
UN Convention  on the Status  of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, specifically in the 
critical lack of the concept of shared responsibility of all Sovereign countries, in which 

20  
India strongly believes. The Committee, therefore, while disagreeing with the stance that  
existing Domestic Laws are adequate to deal with refugee situations, desire that the  
Ministry of External Affairs stead fastly advocate India’s stand on the concept of shared  
responsibility of all Sovereign countries in refugee crises developing anywhere in the  
world, making a strong case for review of the 1951 UN Convention and its 1967 Protocol. 
After that India can reconsider and revisit the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol. 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
The Committee are aware that in the absence of any domestic law that is  specific to 
address the situations of refugees and asylum seekers, and also in the light of  India being 
not a signatory to the 1951 UN Convention or its 1967 Protocol, requests for  asylum are 
being dealt with  existing legal framework at the moment. They  are aware  that the 
Foreigners Act covers a whole gamut of issues related to entry of foreigners,  their stay in 
India, their activities in India and their exit from India, besides other Acts  like the 
Registration of Foreigners Act, the Citizenship Act, etc. The Committee are  apprised 
that the Central Government has passed legal orders under these Acts  to govern the 
regime of legal as well as illegal foreigners, and that a protocol is issued to  various 
implementing agencies like FRRO and FROs in the States whereby the status of  a 
foreigner can be assessed and in consultation with security agencies and the MEA, a  
view is taken whether to grant her/him asylum or the status of a refugee. While 
recognizing the flexibility this approach grants, the Committee are of the opinion that it  
leaves much scope for elements of discretion  to officials. The Committee, therefore,  
recommend that in the absence of a domestic Legislation of Refugees and Asylum  
Seekers, the Ministry of External Affairs, in consultation with concerned Ministries like  
Home Affairs, Law and Justice, etc. should prepare and notify a Domestic Protocol on  
status of refugees and asylum seekers with specific responsibilities assigned to specific  
agencies. This would not only ensure prompt response but also enhance accountability in 
dealing with situations of refugees and asylum seekers in the Country. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 

21  
CHAPTER 4 
INTERNATIONAL CYBER SECURITY 
 
There is general consensus with regard to the applicability of International Law, in  particular 
the UN Charter, to Cyberspace however, the question of how International  Law shall apply is 
still under discussion. 
 
Explaining the complex questions posed by cyber warfare as against traditional warfare and 
the applicability of existing internal law which provides for the right to self  defence of 
sovereign countries under Article 51 and article 2(4) of the UN Convention, an  expert during 
the oral evidence before the Committee informed: 
 
“In a physical war, you know from where the missile is coming and where  the bomb is 
coming. In a cyber world, we do not know from where things are coming.  It is all  
virtual there.   If someone attacks me on a cyber mode, shall I attack in the nuclear  
mode or put a physical war?  These issues have become very important in this exercise 
of 2(4) and 51.” 
 
India’s stand has been that while International Law does apply to cyberspace, however, it is 
insufficient in its current form to address the issues of attribution in cyberspace, violation  of 
sovereignty in cyberspace, and the threshold for reaction and proportionality of counter - 
measures when it comes to a cyber incident, and hence more deliberations would be necessary  
to define further modalities to deal with these issues. While the objectives and principles of  
these provisions of IL remains the same in cyberspace, but their applicability, modality and  
usability would have to be customized for cyberspace. 
 
India acknowledge that States must observe sovereignty, sovereign equality, the settlement of 
disputes by peaceful means and non -intervention in the internal affairs of other  States and 
comply with their obligations under international law to respect and protect human  rights and 
fundamental freedoms. 
 
India endorses that common understanding on how international law is appli cable to State use 
of ICTS is important for promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible, inter- operable and 
peaceful ICT environment. 
 
The European Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest Convention), is an initiative of the  
Council of Europe. Many European Countries and a few non -EU countries are Party to the  
Convention. India is not a Party to the Convention. In 2018, Russia also tabled a proposal to  
address the challenges involved in cyber crime in the UN. 
 
When asked to spell out India’s cyber diplomacy s trategy, MEA stated in a written reply  that 
India has been supportive of a secure, open, accessible, peaceful and stable internet with 

22  
due respect to sovereignty of countries.  India follows a multilateral and multi -stakeholder 
approach on the matters related to Cyber space, including on cyber crime, internet governance  
etc., guided by our democratic values. // India’s stand has been that while IL did apply to  
cyberspace, it is insufficient in its current form to address the issues of attribution in 
cyberspace, violation of sovereignty in cyberspace, and the threshold for reaction and 
proportionality of counter-measures when it comes to a cyber incident, and hence more 
deliberations would be necessary to define further modalities to deal with these issues. While 
the objectives and principles of these provisions of IL remains the same in cyberspace, but  
their applicability, modality and usability would have to be customized for cyberspace. 
 
On the role of the Cyber Diplomacy Division in formulation, negotiation and implementation 
of evolving norms on cyber security, the Ministry further stated that the Cyber  Diplomacy 
Division is the nodal Division in MEA regarding India’s engagement on bilateral  and 
multilateral levels on cyber matters. The Division coordinates cyber related meetings and  
discussions between our domestic organisations/agencies like NSCS, MeitY, CERT -In, DoT, 
NCCIPC, MHA, CBI, etc. and their foreign counterparts. // As a part of its endeavour for  
cooperation with other nati ons in global cyber issues, India has established bilateral cyber  
dialogues and held regular bilateral dialogues with major global players (countries) and 
international organizations including EU, USA, UK, France, Germany, Russia, Japan, 
Sweden, Republic of Korea, Brazil and Australia. // At the multilateral level, India’s 
engagements are in the three main Groups under the UN viz., GGE, OEWG and IEG on  
matters related to cyberspace and information security. // The regional /plurilateral 
cooperations are reflected in various important regional mechanisms such as BRICS, SCO,  
ASEAN etc. // Cyber Diplomacy Division represents MEA at the UN mechanisms (the Indian  
delegation also includes the representatives from other relevant organizations/ministries such  
as NSCS, MHA, MeitY, DoT etc. // India has been actively participating in and contributing to 
Cyber Conferences and Conventions to voice its views and shape global cyber policies with a  
view to strengthen our cyber security in keeping with its commitment to a  multi-stakeholder 
model of governance. 
 
On specific query about the various issues, stakeholders, institutions and challenges relating to 
global discussions on cyber security, the Ministry informed the Committee that  India believes 
that security and safety of emerging technologies like 5G, IoT devices, AI/Machine Learning, 
neural networks, etc needs to be ensured to safeguard the national  security and public order of 
a country. India needs cooperation of the international community  on issues such as s upply 
chain vulnerabilities of ICT products/services, standardization of  equipments, and prevention 
of any software or hardware backdoor in technological tools. // As  5G (as well as the related 
supply chain risks) are a concern for all the members, it woul d be  pertinent to undertake a 
coordinated mechanism for building appropriate 5G infrastructure,  keeping the malicious 
players in check, and to strive to bring out optimal norms, rules and  principles governing the 
use of 5G and newer technologies related pr oducts and services, under the auspices of UN. // 
Data privacy, security and localization are other important areas. 
// Various stakeholders and institutions with the Government of India related to global 

23  
discussions on cyber security are DoT, MHA, MeitY, NSCS etc. // Digital divide between  
countries; proxies by states and non-state actors for cyber attacks, espionage, cyber threats and 
malicious activities; emerging technologies, supply chain vulnerabilities, backdoor installation 
of applications etc. into the ICT products and services are some of the areas of discussions. 
 
Responding to queries on the Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) signed by India  with 
various nations and stakeholders to enhance cyber security, the representative of th e Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology during oral evidence submitted: 
 
“With regard to MoUs  which MEITY has signed for  cyber security, at present, we  
have signed 17 MoUs out of which 13 are active.  The remaining four are at different  
stages of renewal. Apart from this, in the context of international cooperation, not only  
we go through the MoUs, but we are also very active members of different 
international organisations. I mentioned  about the forum of incident response and 
security teams. Then on APCERT,  we are very active members. We are also 
convenors of two technical working groups in APCERT which allows us to lead the  
efforts in cyber security in two domains, IoT Security and secured digital payments.  
Also, I would like to mention that we are currently co -chairing the global forums for  
cyber security called the GFCE which has 55 countries and 18 international and 
regional organisations. These forums provide us with very good opportunities to work  
in international cooperation in cyber sec urity domain. We are very active in these  
forums and we continue to lead in several domains in terms of our efforts to ensure that 
we are able to provide security to all the cyber systems in our country.  In GFCE, they 
unanimously endorsed the Delhi communique in 2017 which prioritises 11 topics under 
five broad themes on cyber capacity building which are under the question asked by 
the hon. Members. This includes cyber security policy strategy, cyber incident 
management and critical infrastructure protection, cyber crime, cyber security culture  
and its skills and cyber security standards.  In all the domains, we are very active in  
international forums to really ensure that our interests are protected and we are able to  
provide leadership in cyber security in international organisations.” 
 
Asked about the applicability of International law on cyberspace and the progress on  cyber 
laws internationally and India’s involvement in the process, he further stated: 
 
“On cyber, there are actually different streams that are proceeding in terms of 
developing a new framework on how to govern this. This is a new aspect that has come 
up. It also provides some opportunities as well as certain challenges…There is one  
stream that is currently under the ambit of the United Nations. In the UN process, there 
is a small group which has 25 members. India is also a member of that. They have  
concluded five sessions and the sixth session of that is currently in process and they are 
now looking at the entire range of issues that would pertain to what the concerns as 
well as the opportunities would be. The second group in the United Nations that is  
working is one that involves all the UN members. It is the open-ended working group 

24  
and they also submit reports on an annual basis. The third group that is there is an  
Inter-Governmental Meeting on cybercrimes. This is also under the UN framework and 
we are a member of that as well. We are going to submit a report at the UN in 2021 on  
what the initial outcome of all th is is….In addition to these three processes, which are  
discussion, mandate setting, and processes in small or large groups, there is also an  
initiative which was launched by the Russians at some time for an international 
convention under the United Nations  and that would in a sense provide a framework  
which would then be negotiated and be accepted by countries globally. In addition to  
this UN process, as you rightly pointed out, there are certain regional initiatives and the 
European one, the Budapest process particularly, is most notable. We are not a member 
to that. We have followed the multilateral process under the UN….The second thing  
that you have mentioned, Mr. Chairman, was about the ICANN. This is, of course, is  
something that governs the Internet. The nodal Ministry for this is MeitY. We are not a  
member on the governing board but we have made a strong pitch to become a board  
member of ICANN and MeitY and MEA are now working towards this particular  
objective….. The third aspect that you have mention ed, Mr. Chairman, was about the  
overall experience of the Internet, servers, routers and the issues pertaining to data  
protection, data security.This, of course, is a very serious issue and I think, this is  
something that concerns us not only at the micro but also at the macro/national level.  
Because at the micro level, while there may be issues of data privacy, which may be of  
concern, the concerns at the macro/national level, are of a much greater amplitude, and, 
therefore, this is something that the Government takes very seriously. I think, there is a  
lot of discussion that is going on. At the end of the day, data security is something that  
is linked to national security and we look at it in that context as well particularly when  
national security issues are concerned.” 
 
On the status of discussions being held at the United Nations to evolve architecture on  cyber 
security and India’s line of reasoning during these discussions, the Ministry of External  
Affairs in a written submission stated that under the U N Process, three principle mechanisms  
for discussions are (i) Group of Governmental Experts  (GGE) (on Advancing responsible  
State behaviour in cyberspace in the context of international security), (ii) Open-Ended 
Working Group (OEWG) (on Developments in the Field of ICTs in the Context of 
International Security), and (iii) the open -ended Inter-governmental Expert Group (IEG) (to  
conduct a comprehensive study of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member  
States, the international community and the private sector, including the exchange of 
information on national legislation, best practices, technical assistance and international 
cooperation, with a view to examining options to strengthen existing and to propose new  
national and international legal or other responses to cybercrime). // The current OEWG has 
its mandate from 2019 -20 and is expected to submit its report by 2021 (earlier marked for  
2020, but due to Covid 19 pandemic has since been postponed). The draft reports for further  
discussions on it are expected by end of 2020. // India has been a participating member of the  
Inter-governmental Expert Group (IEG) on cybercrime and attended its 6th meeting on virtual  
mode in July 2020. The Expert Group focused on two agenda items (i) international 

25  
cooperation; and (ii) crime prevention. The 7 th and last meeting will take place in 2021 for  
stock-taking and discussion of future work when the final report would be prepared. // India’s  
stance has been  an evolving one and take s the  national interest as its  foremost priority.  
Common understanding on how international law is applicable to State use of ICTs is 
important for promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible, inter -operable and peaceful ICT  
environment would be elaborat ed and made into a report. India believes that States must  
observe sovereignty, sovereign equality, the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and  
non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States and comply with their obligations under  
international law to respect and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. 
 
The Committee appreciate India’s  stance on cyber diplomacy  which is for a  secure, 
open, accessible, peaceful and stable internet respecting sovereignty of countries, and the 
multilateral approach to Cyber Space and internet governance. They also believe that 
International Law while being applicable to cyber space needs certain customization in 
modalities for effective application. The Committee are also aware of  the ongoing efforts 
and India’s active role under the UN processes and the mechanisms  for discussions for 
evolution of a global architecture for cyber Security. The Committee,  however, desire 
that the Ministry of External affairs make enhanced efforts in coordination with other 
concerned Ministries to contribute more and perhaps lead the global efforts to customize 
the modalities for application of International Law in cyber  space and internet 
governance, in building a global architecture for cyber security, as  well as  in the 
formulation of new legal regimes that will respect sovereignty of countries  and promote 
a peaceful order in cyberspace. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
the representative of the Ministry of Electronic and Information Technology, while  briefing 
the Committe e on Cyber Security mechanisms and efforts in the country, during the  oral 
evidence on 11 November, 2020 stated: 
 
“The very first one was about what are we doing to keep pace with the advancement of  
new technologies across the globe and what kind of responses are we embarked on.  We 
are trying to strengthen our legal framework keeping in view the emergence of dominant 
technology platforms across the globe which also operate within India.  Many new  
technologies are coming in very rapidly.  We are looking at amendments to IT Act.  
Currently, we are working on it.  The IT Act came in the year 2000 and was amended in  
the year 2008. We feel that now with the new developments, there is a need to bring out  
further amendments and we are working on that…. The second thing that we have done  
by way of strengthening  of the legal framework  is, to bring Personal Data Protection  
Bill before the Parliament. This is currently before the Joint Committee of the 

26  
Parliament. This will lay down the principles through  which the processing of personal  
data of Indian citizens and Indian residents is done.  All the data fiduciaries will be  
expected to abide by this law when they deal with the data of Indian citizens and Indian  
residents….One particular thing that we are tr ying to strengthen is the nature of the  
relationship.   This is something which we take pride in being the pioneer, in bringing  
out this concept. Sometimes, there is lack of balance between the size and the stature of  
huge global companies and individual w hose data is being used by them.  We are  
bringing in the concept of the entities that handle the data of Indian citizens, Indian  
residents as being data fiduciaries, which means that the data of Indian residents is  
entrusted to them in the fiduciary capacit y. They have to do such acts with that kind of  
data which are in the interest of the person whose data it is.  So, by starting with the  
definition of what that relationship is, we are trying to strengthen and lay down the  
principles by which this interaction happens between Indian users and any of the 
companies; be it Indian or global….We have also set up a Committee of Experts to  
suggest the policy and measures relating to non -personal data.   We expect that we will  
be coming out with a policy in that space . Non-personal data deals with things like data  
belonging to the community.   It is not identifiable to a single individual but it is still  
very valuable data; traffic data for a particular area or data pertaining to the level of  
pollution. We strongly bel ieve that that data also belongs to India, belongs to the  
community, the Indian ecosystem and that we should be able to take full advantage of  
that in driving our digital economy.  That is another action that we are taking…..We are  
also moving forward with strengthening our ecosystem in terms of the ability to harness  
new technologies, like artificial intelligence, IOT, augmented reality and virtual reality,  
additive manufacturing, and various other technologies that have come in alongside the  
robotics, dron es, etc.  We believe that having strength in our own data platforms is  
essential for us to continue to serve the global requirements in terms of IT.  Some of our 
companies are the best in the world in providing IT services.  We are encouraging them  
to also move into IT products and digital products.  This strengthening is another area of  
activity that we are currently embarked on…..Many of our institutions that are set up 
and are part of the Ministry of Electronics and IT play a significant role in protection 
and safeguarding the cyber space for India.  Among them, the lead institution is CERT - 
In which is led by Dr. Sanjay, who is present here. CERT-In has multiple 
responsibilities. They are the first entity to whom any cyber incident is expected to be  
reported by any of the major organisations or companies.  If any data breach happens, if  
any incident happens which is impacting our security, it is expected to be reported by  
law to CERT -In. CERT-In maintains 24x7 incident response help desk.  They issue  
alerts and advisories regarding the latest cyber threats and vulnerabilities.  They suggest 
counter measures to protect computers and networks on a regular basis.  They also  
proactively collect, correlate, contextualize, analyze and share tailored alerts with 
various organisations across sectors…..They are in touch with the key players in almost  
every major or critical domain, like the airports, ports, energy infrastructure, 
transportation infrastructure, and also with players in all those spaces. They are also in  
touch with the State Governments. They also empanel Information Security Auditing 

27  
Organisations to help our institutions undertake various kinds of security audit to protect 
themselves. CERT -In also helps us. They have a relationship with their c ounterpart 
organisations across the globe and they help us to get and to share intelligence which  
goes towards safeguarding our interests in the cyber space. They conduct regular 
training programmes and they spearhead a network of chief information security officers 
which are spread across the Ministries, State Governments and various organisations.  
They work towards conducting significant exercises so that this entire apparatus remains 
alert and capable of handling cyber  emergencies. These are some of the activities that 
are undertaken by us. Under the guidance of the Ministry of External Affairs, CERT-In 
also helps us to maintain a presence and an engagement with the UN Group of 
Governmental Experts (UN GGE), OEWG, and IG -- which are related to the  UN and 
also, with ICANN -- which is related to the governance of the internet. We also 
currently co -chairs an international organisation which is known as Global Forum on  
Cyber Expertise, which is for the capacity building measures in cyber security to be 
built across the globe. These are some of the key activities that we are engaged in. We  
have given our responses to the questions that were sent to us and we will be happy to  
respond to any other questions.” 
 
Elaborating on the transnational nature of cyber security and India’s ongoing efforts at various 
levels globally, the representative of the Ministry of Information and Technology  stated 
during oral evidence on 27 August, 2020: 
 
“On the issue of transnational nature of cyber security, I would like to m ention that in  
order to minimise the security risk and strengthen security of the cyber space, we have  
entered into international cooperation to effectively deal with cyber security issues,  
strengthening cooperation with all the stakeholders to deal with c yber security issues  
which are the main focus areas of the Government. This aspect is being dealt with by  
way of security cooperation agreements in the form of MoUs between our CERT -IN, 
that is, Indian Computer Emergency Response Team under our Ministry and its overseas 
counterpart agencies that are willing to work with us and share information in a timely  
manner...In addition to the MoUs, of which 13 are currently active with UK, Japan,  
South Korea, Israel, Australia,  Brazil, Singapore, Vietnam,  Bangladesh, Seychelles, 
Morocco, Finland and Estonia, CERT -IN also has been active in the following forums.  
The FIRST stands for the Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams. The 
membership in this forum enables incident response teams to work more ef fectively and 
respond to incidents of security in a reactive as well as proactive manner. Also CERT-IN 
is an operational member of the Asia -Pacific Computer Emergency Response Team – 
APCERT – which maintains a trusted compact network of computer security experts in 
the Asia-Pacific region to improve the region’s awareness and competency in relation to  
computer security incidents. CERT-IN is also a member of two technical working 
groups of APCERT, namely, IoT security and secure digital payments. The IoT se curity 
group is to propose solutions to address the IoT security issues and challenges in the  
Asia-Pacific region. It is a very growing area in cyber space and very important for the 

28  
emerging technologies. As Convener of these two working gro ups, CERT-IN has been  
able to understand the best practices deployed in the advanced economies as well as  
contribute positively in the growing economies.  CERT-IN is also a member of the  
APCERT Drill Working Group which organises APCERT drills across APCERT 
member countries. Also, CERT -IN has participated as an observer group in the cyber  
defence exercise Locked Shields in 2018 organised by NATO Cooperative Cyber 
Defence Centre of Excellence. Alsoin the area of hybrid threats and influencing, the  
Finland had led initiative to conduct the first joint hybrid threats workshop and table top  
exercise in India. For this, the support was provided by the Indian Bach of Finland and  
Estonia for conducting two -day Indian hybrid  CO joint -workshop....Also Sir, under  
bilateral and multilateral forums, CERT-In international counterpart agencies are 
exchanging information on latest cyber threats as and when they are observed an 
information on latest cyber trends, technical alerts on advanced cyber -attack campaigns, 
technical indicators of compromise etc....     Capacity building is another major area 
of activity for securing the cyber space and the activity is related to NATO Cyber  
Defence Exercise Lock Shields and Hybrid Threats Intelligence are aimed at capacity  
building....Then CERT -In also led the participation of India to UK in the India -UK 
bilateral cyber crisis simulation exercise. CERT -In also participated in Asian CERT -In 
Incidents Response Deal wherein the objective was to strengthen the cyber security  
preparedness of Asian member States and partners....CERT-In is very active in 
international exchange and cooperation to ensure that the cyber space is secured from  
national point of view and also, we are proactive in terms of dealing with any incoming  
and emerging threats in cyber space.” 
 
On the key issues and concerns shaping global agenda on cyber security and threat, the  
Ministry of External Affairs submitted in a note to the Committee that due to increasing  
connectivity of our critical infrastructures, fina ncial institutions, businesses and individuals,  
the vulnerability of all these entities in cyberspace also increases manifold. The level of  
connectivity, and the attendant vulnerability is bound to increase with the advent of Internet of 
Things (IoTs) and 5G connectivity. // Internationally, along with traditional forms of threats in 
cyberspace like hacking, spying and theft of critical data, a number of new forms of threats  
have risen in the recent past such as interference in national or local electoral p rocess by  
propagation of targeted information which may sway public opinion, attacks on critical 
infrastructures, etc. // In the recent past, a number of issues related to security of cyberspace  
have come up as challenges to national security and stability . Financial crimes, identity and  
monetary theft via cyber tools, fake news propagation, election interference, inflammatory  
messages on social media leading to social and civil unrest, propagation of obscene material  
over cyberspace, online radicalization of youth, etc are issues that increasingly threaten the  
safety, security and stability of nations. // In the near future, threats in cyberspace are bound to 
increasingly focus on emerging technology like IoT, 5G, AI, crypto -currencies, etc. given the  
very rapid pace of technological advancement. 

29  
In response to a question on the various international and regional instruments directly  
impinging on international cyber security and the role and status of India in these instruments,  
the Ministry of External Affairs stated that some of the international and regional instruments  
directly impinging on international cyber security are Paris call, Budapest Convention, the  
Code of Conduct for international information security i.e.  IIS as an official UN d ocument 
also called the ‘SCO Code of Conduct’ as an official UN Document (submitted in January,  
2015 by the SCO Member States), instrument under ASEAN. // India has not joined Paris call, 
nor Budapest Convention. India looks forward to a multi -lateral instrument on cyber security  
under the aegis of UN. // Pursuant to its resolution 74/247 of27 December 2019, entitled  
“Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes”,  
the General Assembly decided to establish an open-ended ad hoc intergovernmental 
committee of experts, representative of all regions, to elaborate a comprehensive international  
convention on countering the use of information and communications technologies for 
criminal purposes. // It was also decided in the same resolution that the Committee should  
convene a three -day organizational session to agree on an outline,  modalities for its further  
activities and appointing Chair and Vice -chair and it has been scheduled in New York in  
January 2020. 
 
 
On whethe r the Convention on Cybercrime of the Council of Europe, also known as the  
Budapest Convention, is the only binding international instrument on cyber security and  
whether India contemplating to become its Member, the Ministry submitted in a written reply  
that Budapest Convention (European Convention on Cybercrime) is regional initiative of  
Council of Europe and most of the European nations. A few non -EU members are also its  
signatories. The Convention is the only binding international instrument on cyber c rime. //  
While India supports the objectives of the Budapest Convention in principle, we consider it as  
a regional initiative and have reservations about some of the provisions of the Convention. We 
believe that the Convention should be more broad -based to be internationally applicable and  
acceptable. Besides, not all signatories have ratified the Convention yet since last few years  
that include countries such as Iceland, Sweden etc. Further, though it sprung at the multilateral 
platform of the Council of E urope, the Convention didn't originate under the aegis of UN that  
explains its non-acceptance in the large part. We may examine the Budapest Convention more  
closely after the deliberations of the Data Protection Bill 2019. 
 
The Committee are aware of the r ising profile of cyber security threats which are  in the 
form of financial crimes, identity and monetary theft via cyber tools, fake news  
propagation, election interference, inflammatory messages on social media leading to  
social and civil unrest, propagation of obscene material over cyberspace, online 
radicalization of youth, etc. these increasingly threaten the safety, security and stability  
of nations. The Committee, however, note that the efforts of the Ministry of External  
Affairs and other concerned agencies at various international and regional instruments 

30  
on international cyber security seem lagging due to the exclusive groupings between  
countries on a regional level or for Geo-political reasons. The Committee while 
appreciating the Country’s reliance on the processes under the UN for 
intergovernmental committee of experts towards a comprehensive international 
convention, feel that India given its rich resources in IT must attempt to leverage it to  
secure its interests by gaining entry into the various regional instruments of 
collaboration on cyber security. They recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs  
must explore all the possible ways to secure the cooperation of countries with established  
multi-lateral and regional instruments of cooperation on cyber security protocols 
through enhanced diplomatic efforts. They further desire that the Ministries concerned  
must work ceaselessly to find alternative fool proof mechanisms of securing our cyber  
space. 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
When asked about the status of India’s collaboration with ICANN (Internet Corporation  for 
Assigned Names and Numbers), whether India signed a Registrar Data Escrow (RDE)  
Agreement with I -CANN Designated RDE team and how safe our Data is with I -CAAN 
without India having a say in its operation and management, the Ministry of Electronics and  
Information Technology submitted in a note as follows: 
 
“ICANN has delegated Internationalized Domain Names (IDNs) in all Indian 22 official  
languages. Internationalized Domain  Names (IDNs) are domain names represented by  
local language characters. Such domain names could contain letters or characters from  
non-ASCII scripts (for example, Hindi or Gujarati). 
Benefit of IDNs: 
 Facilitates interaction with locals in their native languages. 
 Promotes usage of local language content. 
 Promotes reach of Internet in remote & far flung villages. 
 Enables bridging of the Digital Divide. 
 Helps in increasing the diversity of Internet through introduction of multilingual 
address. 
One can have  domain names in his/her local language for example in Hindi, that the  
domain name will look  like www.रजिस्ट्र  ी .भारत // ICANN along  with FICCI -  
Indian Language Internet Alliance (FICCI -ILIA has been playing a major role in 
bringing the  importance and significance of adopting the practice of Universal 
Acceptance and implementing technologies like Internationalized Domain Names and 
Multilingual Generic Top -Level Domain Names (gTLDs) to enable a Multilingual 
Internet for Indians in India and across the globe. ICANN has authority to design, 

31  
delegate, 

32  
manage and operate gTLDs and ‘country code top-level domain’ ccTLDs  in the 
world..in ccTLD operations by ICANN has been delegated to National Internet 
Exchange of India (NIXI) as the registry operator in India. The Govt. of India 
delegated the operations of INRegistry to NIXI in 2004 which was subsequently 
evaluated and approved by IANA (ICANN) and is listed in its Root zone database - 
https://www.iana.org/domains/root/db/in.html // Registrar Data Escrow (RDE) 
Agreement is a tripartite agreement involving individual Registrar, Registrar Data 
Escrow Agent (DEA) and ICANN. As established in the RAA and described herein,  
Registrar will send to Escrow Agent domain name registration records for each 
registered domain name with a generic top - level domain ("gTLD") under Registrar's  
sponsorship, in accordance with the RDE Specifications, as may be amended by 
ICANN from time to time. // Data Escrow is the act of storing domain registration  
(WHOIS) data with a neutral third party in case of registry or registrar failure, 
accreditation termination, or accreditation relapse without renewal. ICANN requires all  
gTLD registrars and registries to con tract with a data escrow provider in order to  
safeguard registrants. // ICANN accredited Registrars are required by their RAA 
(Registrar Accreditation Agreement) to escrow registration data of domain names with  
an ICANN - approved (or ICANN designated) Reg istrar Data Escrow Agent (DEA)  
pursuant to the Registrar Data Escrow (RDE) program as defined by the RDE 
Specifications. 
 
 
In response to the specific query regarding various issues, stakeholders, institutions and  
challenges relating to global discussions on cyber security, MEITY replied that issue and  
challenges relating to global discussions on cyber security are (i) cooperation issues among  
countries on existing and potential cyber threats (ii) norms, rules and principles of responsible  
State behaviour i n cyberspace (iii) impact of cyber crime & cyber terrorism on national,  
regional, international peace and security (iv) IoT security, (v) post quantum cryptography etc. 
These issues are discussed at various International forums such as United Nations Group  of 
Governmental Experts (UNGGE), Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG), Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) and Global Forum on Cyber 
Expertise (GFCE). Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In), MeitY is 
participating in these forums and contributing during discussions on these issues. // The issue  
of cyber security is being deliberated under various multilateral fora such as G20, BRICS,  
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) etc. Under G20, the member countries have been  
discussing Digital Security / Security in Digital Economy since 2017 in ‘Digital Economy  
Task Force’. It has been acknowledged that trust and security are vital to harnessing the  
potential of the digital economy. It has also been recognized that in the context of rapidly 
expanding digitalization and the spread of advanced technologies, enhancing security in the  
digital economy is increasingly important. Recognizing that security in the digital economy,  
the G20 member welcomed the ‘G20 Examples of Practices Relat ed to Security in the Digital  
Economy’ which highlights governmental programs and initiatives. Under BRICS, an 
Agreement between the Governments of the  BRICS States on Cooperation on Ensuring 

33  
Security in the Use of Information and Communicat ions Technologies was deliberated which  
was led by Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and Ministry of Electronics & Information  
Technology (MeitY) has provided relevant comments/ inputs on the same. 
 
When asked whether there is any institutional mechanism at the national or state level  for 
reporting of cyber crimes and threats, the Ministry informed the Committee that the Indian  
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In), Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY)  
operates the 24x7 Incident response help desk whe rein organisations and users report cyber  
security incidents like phishing, website intrusions, malware infection etc. CERT -In provides 
technical advice and remedial measures to resolve the cyber security incidents. // National  
Cybercrime Reporting Portal is an initiative of Government of India to facilitate 
victims/complainants to report cyber crime complaints online 24x7. A portal 
“cybercrime.gov.in” is operational under MHA for reporting of cyber crimes online. // The  
portal caters to complaints pertaining to cyber crimes only with special focus on cyber crimes  
against women and children. Complaints reported on this portal are dealt by law enforcement  
agencies/police based on the information available in the complaints. In the last one year more 
than 2 Lakhs Cyber incidents have been reported on portal and more than 3500 FIR 
registered. Action on complaints pertains with States/UTs matter. 
 
Regarding the security of critical security infrastructure, the sectors identified as critical  
security infrastructure and the steps being taken by the concerned Ministries to protect critical  
security infrastructure from cyber threats, the (MeitY) replied that sectors identified as critical  
security infrastructure are Transport, Power & Energy, Telecom, Government, Banking, 
Financial Services & Insurance (BFSI) , Strategic & Public Enterprises. // CERT -In, MeitY is 
taking following measures for enabling Ministries to protect critical information 
infrastructure: 
 
a. Government has formulated a Cyber Crisis Management  Plan (CCMP) for countering  
cyber attacks and cyber terrorism for implementation by all Ministries/Departments of  
Central Government, State Governments/ UTs & their organizations and critical 
sectors. Guiding template have been published to assist development and 
implementation of sectoral Cyber Crisis Management Plan. CERT -In is conducting  
workshops, providing advice and assisting entities in implementation of CCMP. 
b. Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) for countering cyber threats and cyber 
terrorism has been developed by 37 Central Government Ministries/ Departments, 17  
States/ UTs and 57 attached offices and critical sector organisations so far. 
c. To enable and assess cyber security posture of organizations and  effectiveness of  
CCMP implementation, Cyber security exercises are being conducted regularly by  
CERT-In for Government and critical sectors organisations. 
d. CERT-In is proactively collecting and sharing tailored alerts with various organisations 
across sectors and stakeholders to enable active threat prevention. 

34  
e. CERT-In conducts regular training programmes for network/system administrators and 
Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) of Government and critical sector 
organisations regarding securing the IT infrastructure and mitigating cyber attacks. 
f. CERT-In is enabling setting up of Computer Security Incident Response Teams 
(CSIRTs) and coordinating incident response across sectors. Sectoral CSIRTs are 
operational in Defence, Power and Finance sector. 
 
When asked about the major issues on which the international norms on a global architecture 
of cyber space is being negotiated and the role India is envisaged to play in it,  MeitY in their 
reply submitted the following details: 
 
“CERT-In, MeitY is participating in following international forums and providing  
inputs for discussions: 
 
A. UNGGE and OEWG 
CERT-In has been a member of United Nations Group of Governmental Experts on  
Information Security (UNGGE) and Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG) to 
contribute to cyber norms development process with  a view to promoting common  
understanding among UN member states on the existing and potential cyber threats;  
practical cooperative measures to address them and how international law applies to  
ICT domain, including developing a consensus on attribution of  cyber attacks, legality 
of use of countermeasures as well as norms, rules and principles of responsible 
behaviour of States, confidence building measures and capacity building. In addition  
issues are discussed related to impact of cybercrime and cyber terrorism on national,  
regional and international peace and security for international cooperation so as to  
facilitate building trust and confidence among member states, thereby contributing to  
international peace and security. 
 
B. ICANN 
CERT-In is a member o f the Second Security, Stability, and Resiliency (SSR2) of the  
Domain Name System (DNS) Review Group, which is mandated by Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) By laws Section 4.6(c) to  
examine how effectively ICANN is meeting its commitment to enhance the operational 
stability, reliability, resiliency, security and global interoperability of the 
systems/processes (internal/external) that affect the Internet's unique identifiers. 
 
C. WASSENAAR AGREEMENT 
CERT-In is a part of the Inter Ministerial Working Group for the WASSENAAR  
Agreement to which India became a signatory on 8 December 2017. CERT-In has been 
providing technical inputs for dual use goods and technologies while understanding  
risks associated with transfer of such items spe cifically with respect to proposals on  
Internet of Things & connected devices and post-quantum cryptography. 
 
D. GFCE 

35  
CERT-In has been participating in Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) which is  
working towards global Capacity Building Measures in cyber security. CERT-In 
conducted a scenario based interactive exercise with regards to enhancing cross -sector 
collaboration in countering these threats, key challenges such as awareness across  
sectors, political will, willingness to share information (e.g. the financial sector), 
ownership, trust and privacy, (external) media management, were highlighted. The  
exercise gave participants from countries which do not yet have a CSIRT an important  
understanding of the complexity of building out an incident response program. For  
participants from countries having a CSIRT, the workshop provided them with an  
insight of the gaps that may exist in their existing policy and / or engineering side as  
well as issues that may need to be addressed from a cross border perspective. 
CERT-In also participated in various GFCE working groups namely Cyber Security  
Policy & Strategy, Cyber Incident Management & Critical Information Protection,  
Cybercrime, Cyber Security Culture & Skills and Cyber Security Standards. 
 
On the role played by the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-IN) in effectively 
dealing with cyber security issues, it submitted in a written reply that CERT -In, MeitY is 
serving as nodal agency for cyber security incident response. The following actions are taken 
to effectively deal with cyber security issues: 
 
i.  CERT-In is operating 24X7 Incident Response Helpdesk. Organisations and users  
report cyber security incidents like phishing, malware infections, website intrusions,  
Denial of Service attacks etc to CERT-In. CERT-In proactively tracks various incidents 
by obtaining inputs from Cyber Swachhta Kendra and National Cyber Coordination  
Centre and through collaboration with Industry.  To resolve cyber security incidents  
CERT-In coordinates incident response actions with relevant stakeholders such as  
affected organisations, service providers, product and security companies, law 
enforcement agencies, international CERTs, regulators and stakeholders. 
ii. CERT-In issues alerts and advisories regarding latest  cyber threats/vulnerabilities 
and countermeasures to protect computers and networks on regular basis. A total  
number of 276, 451, 444, 806 alerts and advisories were issued during the year  
2017, 2018, 2019 and 2020 (till September) respectively. 
iii. CERT-In is proactively collecting, correlating, contextualising, analysing and 
sharing tailored alerts with various organisations across sectors and stakeholders to  
enable active threat prevention. 811 tailored alerts were shared with key 
organisations during 2017 to 2020 (till September) 
iv. CERT-In is doing empanelment of Information  security auditing organisations to  
support and audit implementation of Information Security best practices. 
v. CERT-In is enabling formulation and implementation of Cyber Crisis Management 
Plan (CCMP) for countering cyber attacks and cyber terrorism for implementation  
by all Ministries/ Departments of Central Government, State Governments and 
their organizations and critical sectors. 

36  
vi. Cyber security mock drills are being conducted by CERT -In regularly to enable  
assessment of cyber security posture and preparedness of organisations in 
Government and critical sectors such as Finance, Defence, Power, Telecom, 
Transport, Energy, Space, IT/ITeS, etc participated. 
vii. CERT-In conducts regular training programmes for network / system 
administrators and Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) of Government 
and critical sector organisations regarding securing the IT infrastructure and 
mitigating cyber attacks. 
viii. CERT-In imparts training for law  enforcement agencies and judiciary through  
workshops organised on computer forensics and mobile device forensics through  
lectures, demonstrations and hands on practical sessions, which covers seizing,  
preservation, imaging and analysis of the data retrieved from the digital data 
storage devices. CERT -In also provides support to the other training institutes in  
imparting training by delivering lectures with demonstrations on various aspects of  
cyber forensics. 
ix. The Cyber Swachhta Kendra (Botn et Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre) has  
been operationalised by CERT-In in February 2017. The centre is providing 
detection of malicious programs and free tools to remove the same for citizens and  
organisations. 
x. Cyber security cooperation arrangements in the form of Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) have been signed between CERT-In and its overseas 
counterpart agencies for collaborating and providing swift response to critical 
cyber incidents. At present, CERT -In has active MoUswith Australia, Bangladesh, 
Brazil, Estonia, Finland, France, Israel, Japan, Seychelles, Singapore, South Korea, 
United Kingdom and Vietnam. 
xi. CERT-In is member of global Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams  
(FIRST). This membership enables CERT-In to seek support in providing effective 
response to various critical cross border security incidents. 
xii. CERT-In is member of Asia Pacific Computer Emergency Response Team 
(APCERT). APCERT maintains a trusted contact network of computer security  
teams in the Asia Pacific region to improve the region's awareness and competency 
in relation to computer security incidents. CERT -In as convener is leading of two  
technical working groups across Asia Pacific CERTs namely “Internet of Things  
(IoT) Security” and “Secure Digital Payments” to evolve best practices and 
procedures for handling incidents in these domains. 
 
When specifically asked about the mechanism established for sharing of information  with the 
State governments regarding the inputs from various international meetings on cyber security, 
the Ministry submitted that CERT -In is member of Forum of Incident Response and  Security 
Teams (FIRST) and Asia Pacific CERTs (APCERT). Cyber security cooperation  
arrangements in the form of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) have been signed 
between CERT -In and its overseas counterpart agencies.  As part of activities under these  
Multilateral and Bilateral Forums, CERT-In obtains information on latest attack trends, 

37  
technical alerts on advanced cyber -attack campaigns, Techn ical Indicators of Compromises  
(IoCs), Tactics, Techniques and Procedures of various attacker groups. Further, information on 
security advisories on critical vulnerabilities and best practices for mitigating risks are also  
obtained. Based on above informat ion, CERT -In sending tailored alerts and advisories to  
CISOs of State government departments for enabling measures to prevent cyber threats. 
 
When asked whether India has signed MoUs with other countries for sharing of data and  
information on cyber threats  and risks, the Ministry replied that Cyber security cooperation  
arrangements in the form of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) have been signed 
between CERT-In, MeitY and its overseas counterpart agencies. // At present, CERT -In has 
active MoUs with Austra lia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Estonia, Finland, France, Israel, Japan, 
Seychelles, Singapore, South Korea, United Kingdom and Vietnam. // The following activities 
are carried out under the MoUs: 
 
A. Information exchanges and cooperation for incident response 
 
a. Exchange of information on latest cyber threats as and when they are observed 
b. Exchange of information on latest attack trends, technical alerts on advanced  
cyber-attack campaigns, technical Indicators of Compromises (IoCs), tactics, 
techniques and procedures of various attacker groups 
c. Security advisories on critical vulnerabilities and best practices for mitigating  
risks. 
d. Incident reporting and escalation for resolution of incidents 
e. Conducting periodical Videos Tele Conferences (VTCs)//Teleconferences/ Face 
to Face meetings for sharing experience on incident handling and discussing strategies  
for handling emerging cyber threats 
 
B. Capacity Building 
 
a. Bilateral cyber security exercises to reinforce incident response procedures and  
testing escalation mechanism 
b. Participating in cyber security drills conducted by Asia Pacific CERT 
(APCERT) and ASEAN CERTs Incident Response Drill (ACID) and The Organisation 
of The Islamic Cooperation – Computer Emergency Response Teams  (OIC-CERT) 
for strengthening cyber security preparedness 
c. Conducting Joint workshops and training on latest technologies related to: 
 Security of ICS/SCADA systems 
 Android secure coding practices 
 Cyber Defense Exercise with Recurrence (CYDER) using technologies such as 
cyber range 
 Training programs conducted under APCERT Training Working Group 
 
When asked about the mechanism for coordination and cooperation between various  
Ministries, the Ministry informed the Committee that National Cyber Security Coordinator 

38  
(NCSC) under National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) coordinates with different 
agencies at the national level for cyber security matters. // Government has set up National  
Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) to generate necessary situational awareness of existing  
and potential cyber security threats and enable  timely information sharing for proactive, 
preventive and protective actions by individual entities. Phase -I of NCCC has been made  
operational. // CERT-In, MeitY has formulated Cyber Crisis Management Plan for countering  
cyber attacks and cyber terrorism for implementation by all Ministries/ Departments of 
Central Government, State Governments and their organizations and critical sectors. // Cyber  
security mock drills are being conducted regularly to enable participating entities from 
Government and critical sectors to assess their preparedness and cyber security posture to deal  
with cyber security incidents. 
 
Replying to queries on the coordination mechanisms between various stakeholders in  
government on cyber security enforcement, the representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
stated during the oral evidence: 
 
“At national level, we have a committee under national cyber crime coordination  
coordinator. So, it is under National Security Council and all stakeholders including 
MHA meet there to discuss the issues. In MeitY, they monitor internet traffic coming to 
India and if they find any malicious activity, they take action. Response is also given  
and alert is also raised. We have national critical information infras tructure protection 
centre. So, six sectors are identified as critical information infrastructure. So they take  
care of these sectors.  These are Government sectors, power sector, telecom etc.  Then 
we have set up Indian cyber crime coordination centre…There  was no institutional  
mechanisms at all -India level where anybody can report about cyber crimes.  Now, 
interestingly, cyber crime is not a defined term under the Indian legal system. These are 
offences broadly under two categories – one where computers and networks are used to 
commit a crime or sometimes when they are targets.  So, to have a national level  
reporting mechanism, we have started this coordination centre. So, portal is there.  It is 
in place for the last one year.  Hon. HM had inaugurated it.  Less than two lakh cyber  
crimes have been reported through this portal. Interestingly, what we have done is, all  
States and UTS are part of this because ultimately crime is a State subject that needs to  
be taken up by them. So, 30 States have set up regional cy ber crime coordination  
centres also. Remaining States also have appointed nodal officers. So, when a cyber  
crime incident is reported, it is immediately accessible to all the concerned officers of  
jurisdiction and they are supposed to take action. Through this system, more than 3,000 
FIRs have also been lodged. We have data available about these things. So, 
coordination mechanism is there.” 
 
 
When asked about the status of India’s collaboration with ICANN (Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers) and whether India signed a Registrar Data  Escrow (RDE) 
Agreement with I-CANN Designated RDE team and also on how safe our 

39  
Data is  with I-CANN without India having a say in its operation and management, the 
Ministry in a written note to Committee informed that ICANN has delegated Internationalized 
Domain Names (IDNs) in all Indian 22 official languages. Internationalized Domain Names  
(IDNs) are domain names represented by local language characters. Such domain names could 
contain letters or characters from non-ASCII scripts (for example, Hindi or Gujarati). 
Benefit of IDNs: 
 Facilitates interaction with locals in their native languages. 
 Promotes usage of local language content. 
 Promotes reach of Internet in remote & far flung villages. 
 Enables bridging of the Digital Divide. 
 Helps in increasing the diversity of Internet through introduction of 
multilingual address. 
One can have domain names in his/her local language for example in Hindi, that the 
domain name will look like  www.रजिस्ट्र  ी .भारत 
ICANN along with FICCI - Indian Language Internet Alliance (FICCI -ILIA has been  
playing a major role in bringing the importance and significance of adopting the 
practice of Universal Acceptance and implementing technologies like Internationalized  
Domain Names and Multilingual Generic Top-Level Domain Names (gTLDs) to 
enable a Multilingual Internet for Indians in India and across the globe. 
ICANN has authority to design, delegate, manage and operate gTLDs and ‘country  
code top-level domain’ ccTLDs in the world..in ccTLD operations by ICANN has been 
delegated to National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI) as the registry operator in  
India. The Govt. of  India delegated the  operations of INRegistry to  NIXI in  2004 
which was subsequently evaluated and approved by IANA (ICANN) and is listed in its  
Root zone database-https://www.iana.org/domains/root/db/in.html ...Registrar Data 
Escrow (RDE) Agreement  is a tripartite agreement involving individual Registrar, 
Registrar Data Escrow Agent (DEA) and ICANN.  As established in the RAA and  
described herein, Registrar will send to Escrow Agent domain name registration 
records for each regist ered domain name with a generic top - level domain ("gTLD")  
under Registrar's sponsorship, in accordance with the RDE Specifications, as may be  
amended by ICANN from time to time..... Data Escrow is the act of storing domain  
registration (WHOIS) data with a neutral third party in case of registry or registrar  
failure, accreditation termination, or accreditation relapse without renewal. ICANN  
requires all gTLD registrars and registries to contract with a data escrow provider in  
order to safeguard registrants.. ..ICANN accredited Registrars are  required by their  
RAA (Registrar Accreditation Agreement) to escrow registration data of domain names 
with an ICANN - approved (or ICANN designated) Registrar Data Escrow Agent  
(DEA) pursuant to the Registrar Data Escrow (RDE) program as defined by the RDE  
Specifications. 
 
Responding to queries on whether India is represented on the ICANN Board, the 
Ministry representative stated during the oral evidence on 27th August, 2020: 

40  
“We did have an Indian on the Boa rd from 2006 to 2012. Currently, the Board has 21  
Members of which 15 Members have the voting rights and 6 are non -voting liaisons. 
There is a Nominating Committee which selects these Board Members. So, we do have  
a major case that we should have a Member on the Board because we are a major  
internet using nation and we have the second largest internet using population.” 
 
Asked whether we have incorporated emerging technologies such as machine learning  and 
artificial intelligence to communicate about possibl e cyber threats and to provide the  details 
thereof, MEITY submitted in a written response that tools and solutions are being used  by 
CERT-In, MeitY for Cyber Threat intelligence and Situational awareness which use Artificial 
intelligence and Machine Learni ng technologies. These technologies are being used  for 
prioritizing Indicators of Compromise, security metadata event analysis and classification  of 
malicious code. // National AI Portal has been implemented as a one stop online portal for  AI 
related developments in India, sharing of resources details of start-ups, investment funds in AI, 
companies and educational institutions related to AI in India. // Future Skill PRIME  
programme has been approved by MeitY with the objective to create a re -skilling/up-skilling 
ecosystem for B2C in emerging and futuristic technologies. The programme would provide re- 
skilling/ up-skilling opportunities in 10 Emerging Technologies – Virtual Reality, Internet of  
Things, Big Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Robotic Process Automation, Additive  
Manufacturing/ 3D Printing, Cloud Computing, Social & Mobile, Cyber Security and 
Blockchain, to facilitate continuous skill as well as knowledge enhancement of the 
professionals in line with their aspirations and aptitude in a self-paced digital skill 
environment. // Reality and Augmented Reality (VR and AR) have massive innovation 
potential across a wide range of industries and research fields. This research and innovation is  
currently in domains across a range of industries including such as product and skill 
development, Health and medical science, art and architecture, transport, construction, 
tourism, entertainment, education, and productivity software. Government of India in 
partnership with Government of Odisha, Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), IIT - 
Bhubaneshwar and a philanthropist has recently established Centre of Excellence for Virtual  
and Augmented Reality (VARCoE) at IIT-Bhubaneswar.” 
 
When asked if the CERT-IN is reactive or proactive, the Ministry representative during 
evidence averred: 
 
“Sir, if you go by its name, that is, Indian Computer Emergency Response Team, it  
becomes reactive. We do reactive things as and when incidents occur. We also provide  
best practices for others to make sure that they  are safeguarded once we learn from  
whatever happened in the incident and what was breached...The second part is the  
proactive part. We have the National Cyber Coordination Centre in place which lets us  
look at the traffic data, metadata, and with that, we  are able to look at what are the  
things which are about to emerge, whether in terms of distributed denial of service  
attacks or in terms of outbreaks of malwares and bots, and we are able to inform the  
necessary organisations to take appropriate steps. It could be attacks which are going to 

41  
emerge at an organisation level, it could be at a sectoral level or it could be across the  
country. So, we are in a position to let them know what is happening and what needs to  
be done, and if something h as to be done at ISP level, we also inform the ISPs. So, to  
answer your question, I would say, yes, we are both proactive as well as reactive. That  
is why, the advisories that we provide, and also the indicators of compromise for the  
people to safeguard themselves are both proactive as well as reactive.” 
 
Elaborating the efforts at capacity building to fight cyber crime, the representative of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs during evidence submitted: 
“So, in MHA, we are dealing with capacity building also. We realized that not only  
police officers, but even judges and public prosecutors need training. So, under this  
scheme, we are training them also. More than 15,000 such officers have been trained.  
Under NCRB, we have started a MOOC platform i.e. massive, open  online training  
content is available for these officers.  They can join sitting at their respective places  
and as per their convenience. This training is about awareness about investigation. 
The professional courses are available for them.” 
 On the legal framework to tackle cyber crime, the representative further stated: 
 
“As far as legal framework is concerned, presently we are having Information 
Technology Act. So, certain offences have been defined there. Even cyber security as a 
term has been defined there. So, under Section 43, we have certain offences.  These are 
civil in nature.  Under Section 66, they become if something is done fraudulently or  
intentionally. Then even for impersonation, breach of privacy, some provisions are  
there. Then what happens  is even in case of cyber crimes,  other sections of other Acts  
are also applied like from IPC or from any other Acts.” 
Replying to questions on the reason for India not having any of the root servers, the 
MEITY representative during evidence stated: 
“At present, there are 13 root servers in the entire world out of which ten are in the 
US. There is one each in Netherlands, Sweden and Japan.  But I would like to mention  
here that, in addition to these 13 root servers, there are over 560 instance root servers  
placed all over the world. India has nine such instances out of which three have been  
sponsored by NIXI which is a native organisation.  These are located in Mumbai, Delhi  
and Gorakhpur. The functions of these instances are through a technique called 
Anycast. They can exist on the same IP address as the 13 original root servers and they  
can resolve the traffic for domain name system within the country’s borders. They help  
us in ensuring that latency is decreased to the extent possible and all the resol ution of 
DNA system takes place within the borders. But there is a case that India should have 
a root server. For that, I would briefly say that there is a technical issue and there is a  
reason on why there are only 13 root servers in the world.  Each information packet on 
IP version IV has 512 bytes and each IPV address has 32 bytes. So, technically only 13  
root servers can exist because 13x32 becomes 416 bytes and 496 bytes are used for 

42  
internet protocol information.  Technically, in the current IPV IV system, only 13  
original root servers can exist. When we switch to IPV VI which is the next version of  
IP Indian protocol, that will allow us to have more root servers and we are making  
efforts to ensure that when the tangent happens which i s now happening at a pace, then 
India will have root servers within its own borders. That is one of the efforts which our  
country is making at present through the system of Anycast.” 
The Committee had summoned Dr. Gulshan Rai, an expert in cyber security, for advice on 17 
December, 2020. Explaining the efforts to gain representation in the internet protocol  
governing organizations and the challenges, the expert stated: 
“As far as the ICANN Board is concerned, you try it very well. We are still trying it.  
India is still trying there. But they are way sceptical about the Government kind of a  
thing. Our private sector has to come forward. That is where we have to promote a  
lobby. In terms of our participation, today we have the Indian representations on many  
of those committees there. We are trying to get on the ICANN Board. Maybe, in  
another two-three years, we will be able to succeed. But it has to be a kind of a private  
member there. The problem is that all the big captains of the IT industry are not active  
in this. As you have said that they are not active, but they need to be activated there.  
That is where we need to do that role play with them. The Ministry has to do that.” 
The Committee wanted to understand the importance of having root servers in the country, the 
possibilities thereof and the alternatives available. The witness submitted: 
“Once you have the Internet root server, you can change the traffic; you can modify 
the traffic; you can block the traffic. That is a strategic kind of application wh ich is  
there. But there are many more complications which have come up. Time factor is  
there. I personally feel that regarding the whole root server business, India will not get  
additional root server because they are not giving it. They change the entire structure 
there. We will get sub-server. We need to initiate control within our country so that we  
are able to effectively do what the root server does there...Now, how are some of the  
countries doing it? They are creating an internal network architecture. It is consolidated 
trapping at one of the gateways. They put one of the indigenous or domestic root  
servers. The traffic going out from within the country is all routed within the country. If 
you today try a search engine or you go to a search engine, say , dot-com, dot-edu, dot- 
net, when you go, the authentication traffic goes out of the country. So, we need to  
bring in that kind of a control so that any kind of a dot -com traffic or dot-edu traffic is 
all routed within the country and it does not go out. Then, we need to bring in some  
kind of an enforcement control in the law and that is going to be issued in the data  
protection law also.” 
On the issue of root servers not being in India, and whether it is imperative to have a  root 
server, or whether it is a misplaced priority, he stated: 

43  
“Today, we do not have to talk about a root server here. Absolutely, I am 100 per cent  
and entirely in agreement with you that today we need to have an internal control. How 
has China done it? How has the Russia done it? How have the Americans done that?  
They have the control servers there but they control the entire traffic. They route the  
traffic from one outlet. We have five or seven gateways. We need to restructure our  
network and route the traffic. Thi s was exactly I was saying. I agree with you 100 per  
cent. Today, they are not going to give you a root server. You tried it. The hon. Minister 
tried it. The CERT tried it. We all tried. I was part of the delegation. But we have not  
been able to succeed. But they do not want to lose their control. There is a geo politics  
there. So, we need to create our own root server which we take up to the gateway and  
thereafter, we go there....Today, the whole IP structure  needs to be relooked and 
coordinated. If you want to block, let us say, Maharashtra, you have to block it. If you  
have to block Mumbai, you have to block the entire Maharashtra because the structures 
are slightly different. That is what we need to look at today. We have to control those  
international companies. They are taking the traffic outside. If Google has implemented 
the RCS protocol right at the Android level, we need to tell Google, look, you have to  
set up the server. Authentication will happen in India and not outside India. Once my  
traffic goes outside, then there is a problem. They can do whatever they want to do.  
They can stop it. Today, you have seen how Google Play Store tried to create problem  
for the PayTM here. They have removed the App. They stopped the traffic. All kinds of 
issues are there. These have become a bigger issue. So, I agree with you that we need 
to look at alternative to root server, assuming we will not get it. But once we set up an  
alternate structure, they may be able to come forward and give it here because their  
whole job is over. So, we need to create domestic kind of a gateway.” 
Advocating accreditation rather than stress on localization of data for cyber security, the 
expert opined: 
“It is very difficult to localise any information which is lying on the Internet or on the 
public network. So, I have been suggesting this. I was a member of the Justice B.N.  
Srikrishna Committee where we drafted the law. I have been telling them, look, this  
whole localisation aspect came subsequently. It was not a clause first but tha t came  
subsequently from the Ministry. So, we need to be a little more consistent. We do not  
have to insist  on localisation. We have to say  that these are my standards like the  
GDPR has said. The Americans  are also coming with a law there. These are my  
standards which we must look at and it is inconsistent with the international 
framework. Today we have a fait accompli. We are late. So, we need to have a fait 
accompli and incorporate those provisions so that there is accreditation properly.” 
Stressing on the need to create capabilities in the country for gaining control over cyber 
space, he stated: 
“Let me take the example of WhatsApp. We say that from the mobile it gets encrypted. 
The entire signal goes to the WhatsApp server somewhere in Singapore or in the USA. 
At that point of time everything gets decrypted because it has to be so. If I am sending 

44  
a message to you, then it has to go through you and that server says that it has come  
from this number. So, it gets decrypted at WhatsApp and then it gets encrypted once  
again with a certain key….There are great challenges there. I have been to the 
WhatsApp Centre. The WhatsApp country representative took me there. I had a 
briefing in the White House ground floor there in 2007, and I came back a nd I said that 
everything is being looked by them. In 2009, I had said that it is happening there. They  
were not trying to show that it is not happening or this is happening, but we know that  
all these things are happening there today. It is going to be di fficult because we do not  
have a control. Hence, our Hon. Member had said that we need to create our 
capabilities and without that it is not going to be there.” 
Further explaining the complexities involved in data localization and security, he stated: 
 
“In an electric car which we are going to have in 2025, we are not going to have an  
engine like this. We are going to have an embedded circuit in the bonnet there. The  
embedded circuit will be controlled by software devices. The software will be 
maintained outside the country there. If something goes wrong in the car, we will have  
to make an international call and they will correct the software, reboot the software.  
How do we control the data? For Google.com, you will have to go out of the country.  
How can it be controlled? We need to look at it. We do not have to insist. One of the  
major problems is that we have said data localization, if I make a call to you whether it  
is a data call or a voice call or an internet call, there are four parameters. The mobile o r 
any device collects whole lot of parameters like your device number, time factor, geo - 
location etc. The data gets collected there and there is no provision in that Section that  
data standard will be defined by the Government. They are collecting whole l ot of  
parameters. I was in IIC one of these days and I tried to make payment there and I put 
a wrong password and my card got blocked. I telephoned to concerned people to look  
into the matter. They said I was sitting in IIC and I am having this Master Card and this 
is the time and I typed the wrong password. This was done at Singapore. How will we  
control these things? We cannot control those things there. So, it is collecting so many  
parameters for which we have not made a provision that the Government wil l define 
these things that these are the parameters in the localization.” 
The expert also expressed his opinion on the need for the country to rise to leadership  position 
in information technology and related fields like Artificial intelligence in the fast  changing 
lanes of technological progress in the world and stated: 
“I said that it is not that we are the great leaders in the Artificial Intelligence. But I said 
that we among the three countries in the world who have the basic ingredients to  
become a leader of the Artificial Intelligence. The three basic ingredients are 
manpower – we have the software programmers; algorithm – we can create those as we 
have the capability to do that and the third is demand, which is consumption. That is  
why I said that we have the potential to become a leader.” 

45  
The Committee note that major issues dominating international cyber security  concerns and 
measures discussed during conferences on cyber security relate to developing a consensus on 
attribution of cyber attacks, legality of use of countermeasures as well  as norms, rules and  
principles of responsible behaviour of  States, confidence building measures and capacity 
building. The Committee also note  that unlike physical warfare, the attribution of cyber attacks 
to attacking entities presents a very complex challenge which needs international accord on 
acceptable norms as attacking entities can be any party from professional hackers, rogue 
hackers, military establishments of an enemy nation or non -state actors,  etc. The Committee 
have also examined in detail the difficulties and complexities posed in the cyber sphere by India’s 
lack of control over the root servers. There are 13 root servers in the entire world through which 
all data on the internet has to pass through out of which ten are in US and one each in 
Netherlands, Sweden and Japan but none in India. In view of the fact  that in the current IP 
Version IV system only 13 root servers can exist and the root  servers are being monopolized 
through which controlling countries can extract tremendous strategic and security leverages. 
Thus being a huge concern, the Committee  would like that rather than working to achieve data 
localization which is proving to be  impossible in near future, the Ministries concerned must 
further strengthen our domestic laws on cyber security so that they are consistent with the 
norms in the international framework and proper accreditation is secured. Further, the 
Committee also desire that India should gradually proceed in the directi on of data localization  
leveraging its strengths like the huge availability of software programmers, huge capabilities in 
development of algorithms, etc. to become a leader in cyber space and overcome the monopoly of 
few countries till the technology switches from IPV IV system  to IPV VI when India may have  
root servers within our borders. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
The Committee note that the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) and the  
Information Technology Act are the administrative and legal me chanisms in the  country to 
respond against cyber attacks and to tackle cyber crimes. The Committee are concerned with the 
reactive disposition of CERT -In since the benefit is greater in pre - empting and preventing 
possible fraud, cyber attacks and such other cyber crimes. The Committee appreciate the efforts 
to make the CERT-in mechanism more proactive, but desire that more effort needs to be 
devoted and the Ministries concerned must work  together to attract adequate talent in IT and 
software engineering to  strengthen the  capabilities and capacity of CERT -In. They also 
recommend that the IT Act, and rules under the Act must be constantly reviewed to address fast 
changing requirements due to  ever evolving technology and progress in the information 
technology realm to keep the  country safe and in a leadership position for international 
mechanisms and instruments of cooperation. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 

46  
CHAPTER 5 
FINANCIAL CRIMES 
 
India has several mechanisms in place for domestic co -ordination and co-operation at both the 
policy and operational levels to identify new and emerging trends and to formulate  
appropriate responses to tackle financial crimes. A threat assessment regarding terrorism and  
its financing is undertaken by the Ministry of Home Af fairs (MHA) on a regular basis with  
other relevant agencies. India is a member of Financial Action Task Force (FATF), Asia  
Pacific Group (APF) and Eurasia Group (EUG). India has always been fully complying with  
the FATF recommendations from time to time. 
 
The Anti Money Laundering / Counterfinancing of Terrorsim (AML/CFT) regime in  India is 
relatively young. The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA), which  came into 
force in 2005, was further amended in 2009 following an assessment of vulnerabilities in the 
financial sector, to include Full Fledged Money Changers (FFMCs),  Money Transfer Service 
Providers (MTSP), such as Western Union, and International Payment Gateways (IPG), such 
as Visa and Master Card. Thus, since mid -2009, India has  increased its focus on money 
laundering and the use of the ML provisions and has progressively expanded and strengthened 
its preventive measures for the financial sector. 
 
India continues to be a significant target for terrorist groups and has been the victim of  
numerous attacks. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA) was amended in  
2004 to criminalise, inter alia, terrorist financing. The UAPA was further amended in 
December 2008 to broaden its scope and to bring the legislation more in line with the 
requirements of the United  Nations Convention for the Suppression  of the  Financing of 
Terrorism (FT Convention). The amendment also established the National Investigation 
Agency (NIA) which, among other actions, further strengthened the fight against terrorism 
and its financing. UAPA was further amended in August, 2019 to provide special procedures  
to deal with terrorist activities, including designation, as a terrorist, of an individual or 
organisation. The amendment also broadened the scope o f terrorist acts dealt by the Act by  
adding the International Convention for Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (2005) in 
its Schedule. The 2019 amendment also empowered NIA to attach properties acquired from  
the proceeds of terrorism. 
 
India has signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption (the Merida Convention) 
on 9 December 2005. Corruption is one of the predicate offences for money  laundering. The 
Government of India has taken steps at both the policy and law enforcement  levels to l imit 
corruption. To that end, India has established a high -level Central Vigilance  Commission 
(CVC), an independent statutory body responsible for laying down strict vigilance norms, 
which issues guidelines and conducts inquiries in this regard. In  principle, the jurisdiction of 
the CVC extends to all the organisations to which the executive power of 

47  
the Union Government extends. The CVC reports to the President through the parliament.  
Section 8(1) (d) of the Central Vigilance Commissio n Act, 2003 (CVC Act) restricts its  
jurisdiction to Group A level officers and other levels of officers as may be notified by the  
Central Government. The Commission, however, retains its residuary powers to inquire into  
any individual case in respect of any other employee. Each organisation under the advisory  
jurisdiction of the CVC has a vigilance unit headed by a Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO). The  
CVOs act as the extended arms of the CVC and represent the CVC in respect of vigilance  
matters, particularl y, with regard to junior officers who fall outside the jurisdiction of the  
CVC. The criminal sanctions for corruption (embezzlement and bribery) can be found in the  
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and range from 
confiscation of property (which is considered a fine) to fixed-term to life imprisonment. 
 
When specifically asked to provide the definition of financial crimes, the Ministry of  External 
Affairs submitted to the Committee that l egally, Financial crime is crime comm itted against 
property, involving the unlawful conversion of the ownership of property (belonging to one 
person) to one's own personal use and benefit. 
 
On the mechanisms that have been established for domestic co-ordination and co- operation at 
both the policy and operational levels to capture new and emerging trends and to  formulate 
appropriate responses to tackle financial crimes, the Ministry submitted that India  has several 
mechanisms in place for domestic co-ordination and co-operation at both the policy and 
operational levels to identify new and emerging trends and to formulate appropriate responses 
to tackle financial crimes. A threat assessment regarding terrorism and  its financing is 
undertaken by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on a regular basis with  other relevant 
agencies. 
 
On the main regulatory provisions and legislation relevant to financial/economic fraud,  they 
submitted that the Anti Money Laundering / Counter financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT)  
regime in India is relatively young. The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA)  
came into force in 2005 and was amended in 2009. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,  
1967 (UAPA) was amended in 2004 to criminalize, inter alia, terrorist financing. The UAPA  
was further amended in December 2008 to broaden its scope and to bring the legislation more  
in line with the requirements of the United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the  
Financing of Terrorism (FT Convention). 
 
When asked as to which authorities have the powers of prosec ution, investigation and  
enforcement in cases of such crimes, what these powers are and what the consequences of  
non-compliance are, they Ministry submitted in a written  reply to the Committee that India  
has signed the United Nations Convention against Cor ruption (the Merida Convention) on 9  
December 2005. Corruption is one of the predicate offences for money laundering. The  
Government of  India has taken steps at both the policy and law enforcement level to limit  
corruption. To that end, India has established a high -level Central Vigilance Commission  
(CVC), an independent statutory body responsible for laying down strict vigilance norms, 

48  
which issues guidelines and conducts inquiries in this regard. In principle, the jurisdiction of  
the CVC extends to all the organizations to which the executive power of the Union 
Government extends. The CVC reports to the President through the parliament. Section 8(1) 
(d) of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 (CVC Act) restricts its jurisdiction to  
Group ‗A‘ level officers and other levels  of officers as may be notified by the Central  
Government. The Commission, however, retains its residuary powers to inquire into any  
individual case in respect of any other employee. Each organization under the advisory 
jurisdiction of the CVC has a vigilance unit headed by a Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO). The  
CVOs act as the extended arms of the CVC and represent the CVC in respect of vigilance  
matters, particularly, with regard to junior officers who fall outside the jurisdiction of the  
CVC. The criminal sanctions for corruption (embezzlement and bribery) can be found in the  
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and range from 
confiscation of property (which is consider ed a fine) to fixed -term to life imprisonment. 15.  
Civil servants in India mainly comprise officers from All India Services (such as the Indian  
Administrative Services, the Indian Police Services, the Central Civil Services, etc.). They are  
subject to disciplinary and conduct rules and governed by All Indian Services (Conditions of  
Service-Residuary Matters) Rules, 1960 and Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964.  
Moreover, these officers are expected to maintain confidentiality and secrecy under the 
provisions of the Official Secrets Act, 1923.” 
 
 
Responding to queries on the Mechanism in place to tackle financial crimes, the 
representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted during the oral evidence on 27 th 
August, 2020: 
 
“In case of a financial  crime, in limited category where somebody has suffered losses  
due to credit card, debit card or digital banking, we have created a mechanism within 
the country where the concerned law enforcement can report that matter to the 
bank. and the bank can block that money and after sometime, money can be returned. 
Through this, we have met limited success. Now we want to roll out in an institutional  
manner across the country.  This will be a big relief to the common citizen.  Suppose 
somebody has swindled money, it  goes to account A, then to B and C and D.  Within a 
day or so, it goes to 25 accounts or so. It can be blocked even at that point also.  That 
requires coordination amongst all the banks and the RBI.  We are working out that  
system also though we have met wit h limited success. // You will be happy to note that  
Cosmos Bank case was an important case where our money of Rs. 70 crores from that  
bank was taken away by some foreign operators and we have got Rs. 5 crore back from  
Hongkong Bank.  That is the kind of co ordination we are having with some of the  
banks.” 
 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty/ Agreement in Criminal Matters  in one  of the significant 
instruments to improve and facilitate effectiveness of contracting countries in the investigation 
and prosecution of crimes. Regarding MLATS, the Ministry were asked to state the purpose 

49  
and process of entering into a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty. In response it submitted that  
India presently has MLAT in  Criminal Matters with 42 Countries. These  agreements are 
useful in enhancing mutual cooperation between countries in addressing transnational 
organised crimes and terrorism. Such treaties enable cooperation and assistance to India to  
counter organised crime, money laundering and related financial crimes. 
 
Briefing the Committee on the steps taken to strengthen capabilities to tackle financial 
crimes, the representative of the Ministry of Finance during oral evidence submitted: 
 
“Sir, in the last few years, very significant steps have been taken to strengthen the  
statutory and administrative framework to tackle various aspects of financial crime. I  
will just enlist some of them...There is comprehensive and stringent law to curb black  
money and undisclosed foreign income and assets and imposition of t ax act which has  
come into force on 1st July, 2015. 439 cases have been initiated and the amount totalling  
is more than Rs. 13,900 crore of undisclosed foreign assets and incomes on which cases  
have been initiated...We have been doing effective implementation of the Prohibition of  
Benami Property Transaction Act. As on 30 th June, 2020, provisional attachment orders  
have been passed in more than 2400 benami properties worth of Rs.13,300 crore...Hon.  
Members will be aware that SIT under the chairmanship of Hon. judge of Hon. Supreme 
Court has been monitoring the black money matters in domestic as well as international  
field....The mechanism of Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement(DTAA) was earlier  
being used only for deciding the taxation domain. Now  it is also being used for getting  
tax related information which can be used for non -tax purposes like bank accounts and  
other details....India has entered into 95 such agreements with almost all the important  
countries EU countries of the world. Apart fro m these 95 DTAAs, we also have, with  
other jurisdictions, the Tax Information Exchange Agreement. We have already entered  
into 21 years and we are also a member of the Multilateral Convention on Mutual  
Administrative Assistance. Since July, 2015, we have b een also, under the Foreign  
Account Tax Compliance Act of USA, exchanging information with the United States.... 
As far as the extradition is concerned, the Enforcement Directorate, in  the last few  
years, has been pursuing the case of economic offenders ve ry rigorously. As you kindly  
observe, out of 21 cases 2 cases have already come; 2 cases are in very advanced stage.  
Other cases are also being pursued...We have a very excellent coordination with the  
Ministry of Home Affairs. But there are certain domesti c legal requirements of host  
countries which we are facing. I will request the Enforcement Directorate to specify  
some issues related to such matters....The Fugitive Economic Offenders Act has been  
passed only  in 2018. 11 cases have already  been initiated and the matter is  being 
pursued by the Enforcement Directorate...  India signed Customs Mutual Assistance  
Agreement with 31 countries which includes EU Bloc. So, 31 plus many more countries  
have been included in it. We are in stage of negotiation with 17 mo re countries. In the  
last two years, more than 650 requests of information exchange on custom issues have  
been exchanged with other countries. India is a very active member of World Customs  
Organisation. We have been participating also in Customs Enforcement Network to 

50  
mine data for customs and other cross-border illicit trafficking and other financial 
crimes. I will request Director of Enforcement Directorate to give some specific details. 
 
During the oral evidence on 27 th August, 2020 when asked about details of confiscations  of 
property so far under the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, the representative of Enforcement 
Directorate stated: 
“This is an Act of 2018 and we have filed 11 petitions for declaring a person fugiti ve 
offender. Out of that, in two cases the order has been passed; in one case, the asset worth 
of Rs. 358 crore and in one case, the person has been declared as a fugitive offender,  
then the confiscation of assets process started, they went to the superior  court and the  
proceedings are going on. So, in all the cases the matter is under active consideration by  
the special court; it is not that there is no progress; in all the cases, progress is being  
made....A related question to this was whether the limit o f Rs. 100 crore should be  
reduced or not. At this point of time, in most of the cases of fugitive offender, the  
amount involved is more than that. So, as and when ... we find that even a person ..  
having proceed of crime less than Rs. 100 crore is a fugiti ve offender, then, at that point 
of time, this issue will be reviewed.” 
On the role of Enforcement Directorate in tackling Financial Crimes, the ED representative 
during evidence submitted: 
“As of now, we are implementing three Acts, one is the Foreign Exchange Regulation 
Act, second is the Fugitive Offenders Act and third is the Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act (PMLA). With regard to the framework as to who files the prosecution  
complaint and how the matter is being investigated, India is divided broa dly in five  
zones and each zone is headed by a Special Director rank officer who is in -charge of 
giving permission to file the prosecution complaint in each case. They are empowered to 
do arrest or seizure and they can take their own decision.” 
Clarifying to on the queries relating to the definition of financial crime, the ED representative 
also submitted: 
“Financial crime basically covers money laundering, terror financing, drug trafficking  
and financing of drugs and tax evasion. With regard to money laund ering, which is a  
core area of the PMLA, there is an international standard in the form of Financial Action 
Task Force. So, when it comes to the definition of money laundering, all the member  
countries will have the same definition because there is an inte rnational understanding, 
an agreement that we will have a common definition of money laundering.” 
Explaining the role of CBDT in fighting financial crime, the representative of CBDT  during 
evidence stated: 
“Sir, so far as the involvement of CBDT in solving  the financial crimes is concerned,  
apart from the domestic tax evasion which CBDT is primarily concerned with, we also  
deal with the administration of the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and 

51  
Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 as  also the administration of the Prohibition of  
Benami Property Transaction Act, 1988.... As on 30.6.20, under Section 10 (1) of the  
Black Money Act,  almost notices were issued in 439 cases where the undisclosed 
foreign assets or income is to the tune of Rs . 13,900 crore and out of these, almost in 96  
cases prosecutions have also been launched.” 
In a reply to a query on how many references have been made abroad seeking information 
about financial assets located outside, the representative further informed the Committee: 
“In all, so far, we have made request in 3,225 cases out of which we have received  
response in almost 2,085 cases. Many times, we face difficulty in explaining to them as  
to whether the request which has been is also covered under the domest ic law of that  
jurisdiction or not.  But gradually we are having  a better response in terms  of the 
requests which we are making.” 
On the issue of tax evasion by MNCs, the CBDT representative stated: 
“In this regard, I would say that India has been taking  a very active role in the OECD  
under the base erosion and profit shifting project.  I would like to submit that we will  
give a very detailed reply on this because India has been playing a very proactive role in  
trying to formulate some strategy to tax the profits made by the MNCs, particularly in  
the digital business part of it.” 
Replying to queries about the role of CBIT in fighting Financial Crimes, the CBIT  
representative while deposing before the Committee on 27th August, 2020 stated: 
“DRI is mandated t o collect intelligence and investigate financial crimes like outright  
smuggling, commercial frauds. These smuggling and financial frauds have international  
linkages, which often require overseas investigation and inquiry in collaboration with  
foreign customs authority. Also, there is sharing of information between India and other  
Foreign Customs Administration on a regular basis through customs enforcement 
network.” 
When asked as to how robust DRI in India is, the representative replied: 
“I assure you that the system is very robust; it is one of our premier investigation  
agencies. We have our own resources to begin with, which comprises human 
intelligence as well as electronic surveillance. There is coordination with all the 
domestic intelligence community within the country. As an international cooperation, 
we are exchanging intelligence with all foreign agencies.  So far, our experience has  
been that our system is fairly robust. Yes, we are continuously doing trend analysis and  
improving upon whatever we have.” 
Elaborating on efforts towards extraditing Fugitive Economic Offenders and the challenges 
facing the agencies, the representative of the Ministry of Finance submitted during  the oral 
evidence: 

52  
“Sir, we have started sending the extradition request only in 2017. Till date, we have 
sent extradition request in 21 cases. Two of them fugitive offenders have already 
returned back to India. In three cases, the extradition proceedings are at advance stages.  
In the remaining cases, the matter is still under consideration. The main problem in the 
extradition of the fugitive offenders is that the extradition treaty only requires that the  
requesting countries should prove the prima facie culpability of the crime. However,  
most the countries are examining the extradition request in a manner that we should  
prove the offence conclusively and that is the reason as to why a large number of  
requests is still pending....The second issue relating to extradition relates to  a very  
limited treaty network which India has with other countries. We have extradition treaties 
with 43 countries and the reciprocal arrangement with 11 countries. My suggestion is  
that, we believe that there is a United Nation Convention on Corruption. We have  
notified the United Nation Convention. But we have only notified Section 44, 46 which  
do not deal with the extradition of a person. So, a large number of countries are just  
signatories of multilateral convention. It would be appropriate, if the Section 43 of the  
United Nation Convention on Corruption is notified which deals with the extradition of  
fugitive offender. That will be quite helpful both for ED and CBI...We are receiving  
desirable support both from the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External  
Affairs. But  the matters are going through a long -drawn legal process in requested  
countries. That is the main reason for delay...  As far as the Fugitive Economic 
Offenders Act is concerned, this Act was legislated in 2018. We have filed the request in 
11 cases and th e competent court has declared two persons as fugitive offenders. As on  
date, the property of Rs.326.60 crore has been confiscated to the Government of India. 
In all other cases, the matters are at advance stage and we are hopeful that in coming  
month, we will be able to get some more cases on fugitive offenders. The requirement 
in the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act is very simile. If there is non -bailable warrant 
and we have filed the prosecution complaint, then we can file an application for 
declaration a person an economic offender....  Another problem which we are facing 
with regard to extradition is under active consideration of the Ministry of External  
Affairs. Our treaty provides for extradition of accused. Delhi High Court has examined  
the issue. The existing circular of the Ministry of External Affairs provides that we can  
an extradition request only in the cases where prosecution complaint has bene 
filed...Whereas, our treaty only talks about accused and the Delhi High Court has 
suggested that accus ed means a person against whom a non -bailable warrant has been  
issued. So, there is a need to modify the existing circular because many-a-time we need 
a person for investigation not only for trial in order to file a legally sustainable 
prosecution complaint. So, there is a need to revise the existing circular by the Ministry  
of External Affairs.  It should be in tune with the decision of the Delhi High Court,  
which has remained unchallenged till date. 
Supplementing the above submissions, another representative of the Ministry highlighted the 
efforts of the Government to prevent financial crimes through cooperation with global fora 
added: 

53  
“In addition to the steps, which have been initiated by the Government -- which have 
been outlined by Shri Jha -- I would also like to mention one very important area or  
initiative, which has recently been taken in collaboration with the OECD and G -20 
Group that India has been a very pro-active participant in developing a uniform 
standard for automatic exchange of information and in this we have had a common  
standard of reporting of financial information, which has been coming to this country  
now as we are also sharing with the other member countries. nitially, it was with 49 
countries, and gradually it has almost doubled and come to about 80 countries. But one  
very big challenge that we faced in this automatic exchange of information and under  
the Common Reporting Standard was that the data, which was made available by the  
member countries did not always conform to the requirements under the domestic law,  
particularly, in respect to identification, that is, the information relating to the 
Permanent Account Number or the Tax Identification Number in other countries, but  
India has been taking a ve ry leading role in trying to evolve those standards and now  
that commonality has been reached and the data, which now is being shared is more  
robust and action is being taken against all those persons who are not declaring under  
the domestic laws. 
The representative of the Customs department also briefed the Committee on 27th August, 
2020 about the efforts made at multi-lateral fora and stated: 
“Sir, the Customs organisation also has made use of the plural regional multilateral  
agreements that have been  signed by the Indian Government. Customs largely looks at  
two ends of the spectrum, one is, revenue assurances and the other is both the security  
and intelligence. We have a premier  investigating agency called the Directorate of  
Revenue Intelligence (DRI). The DRI operates under the framework of India and we,  
also like OECD and Income Tax, have a world organisation called World Customs  
Organisation (WCO). We are signatories, and there are 180 countries that have formed  
this little network of customs organisations that exchange data. With regard to how to 
use data in modern times, we also have the network called CEN in which the WCO  
signatories upload the offence cases and they can be shared with other countries. We  
have 42 multilateral agreement requests and we also have the customs mutual assistance  
agreements with other countries whereby we exchange data for illicit trade, narcotics,  
smuggling of gold, even the movement of people and goods, which impinges on health  
and safety, and for the request that we make through the MHA we have had a very good  
experience of exchange of data. Yes, sometimes, it takes time to put the legal issues in  
place, but yet our experience is that we do go forward in exchange of international  
intelligence in this manner and it has helped us a lot. On the facilitation side, of course, 
the Committee is not looking at facilitation, but Customs has had Customs Mutual  
Assistance Agreements with other countries including EU and the Asia -Pacific Region. 
We assure facilitation of  goods, and we also ratify through joint inspections both with  
the signatory nation coming and visiting us, and us visiting there for seizure of shipment  
logistics and also thereafter facilitation within the country for our exporters and for their  
exporters within India. Yes, we are definitely gaining through these mutual agreements 

54  
with the multilateral and plural arrangements within the fold of the customs as well as  
under the  MHA umbrella where we send  requests for Letters Rogatory  as well as 
MLATs. There are 42 such requests, and for our mutual agreements we have had 651  
exchange of data.” 
The representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs),  during 
oral evidence clarified: 
“So far as the Law Department is con cerned, MLATs with 14 countries have been  
executed. This is in relation to civil agreements. As per allocation of business rules,  
MLAT Civil is only dealt by the Law Department. This includes the service of summons 
from the courts falling within the other States. This is a brief presentation that I would  
like to make at this stage.” 
Briefing the Committee on the Civil Procedure Code as it relates to international law and 
its various applications, during the evidence the representative of the Legislative Department 
stated: 
“As far as the Legislative Department is concerned, we are looking after the Civil  
Procedure Code, which contains some provisions relating to the execution of foreign  
decrees in India and Indian judgements or Indian decrees in foreign courts. Some 
provisions of CPC contain also to issue a summons in foreign countries and foreign  
countries to India, reciprocally   It is a well-settled principle of territorial sovereignty, a 
judgement delivered in one country in the absence of internation al agreement cannot  
have a direct operation of its own in another. That is why, unless there is a reciprocal  
agreement between countries, we cannot execute decrees of foreign countries in India  
and Indian decrees in foreign countries. That means, wherever there is a reciprocal  
agreement, these provisions would come into the picture, that is, Sections 29, 44A, and  
45 of CPC. Section 44  of CPC provides  execution of decrees  passed by courts in  
reciprocation territory. Section 44A states that where a certified copy of a decree of any  
superior Court of a reciprocating territory are executable as a decree passed by the  
District Court, especially defines what is meant by reciprocating territory, as noticed by  
the Central Government. Whereas if the decree does not p ertain to the superior court of  
any reciprocating territory then a fresh suit has to be filed in India on the basis of such a  
decree or judgement which may be construed as a cause of action for the said suit.  
However, in both the cases, the decree has to p ass the test of Section 13 of the CPC  
which testifies certain exceptions under which foreign judgements become inconclusive  
and therefore not executable or enforceable in India. That means Section 13 of the CPC  
laid down certain  conditions only on fulfilme nt of  those conditions, the judgement  
becomes conclusive. If those elements are not satisfied, then the judgement is 
inconclusive and that shall not be enforceable in the court of law. For example, Section  
13 says, when it has not been pronounced by the Co urt of competent jurisdiction, where 
it has not been given on the merits of the case, where the proceedings in which 
judgement was obtained or opposed to natural justice, where it has been obtained by  
fraud, where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in India. These 

55  
are certain conditions laid down in Section 13. Only on fulfilling these conditions, the  
judgement of foreign country becomes conclusive and enforceable in the court of law.  
So, the combined reading of Sections 13 and 44A of the Code, it is clear that a decree of  
a reciprocating territory can be executed to a district court. In the same way, Section 45  
of the Code provides for execution of decrees of India in the outside India...Coming to  
Section 29, which deals with the service of foreign summons in India and Indian service  
of summons in foreign countries. It says that summons and processes issued by civil or  
any court established in any part of India to which provisions of this court does not  
extend or any other civil or any court outside India to which the Central Government  
have by notification declared that the provisions of this Section to apply, that summons  
or process issued by those courts may be sent to the court in territories in which this  
court extends and served as if they were summons issued by  such court. In the same  
way, Order 5 of the Code provides certain procedures for issue and service of summons.  
Rule 25 of the said Order provides for service where the defendant resides out of India  
and has no agent in India. As for the said Rule, if the defendant resides out of India and  
has not an  agent in India empowered to  accept the service, the summons shall be  
addressed to the defendant at a place where he is residing and sent to him by post or b y 
courier service as may be approved by the High Court or by fax message or by 
electronic mail service or any other means provided by the rules made by High 
Court...Rule 12 of the Order provides for service in the foreign territory through 
political Agent or Court. Rule 26A provides for a summons to be sent to officers of the  
foreign countries. This is briefly about CPC provisions. 
The Committee note with satisfaction that efforts of the Government to prevent financial 
crimes through cooperation with global fora which include collaboration with the OECD 
and G -20 Group, where India has been a very pro -active participant in  developing a 
uniform standard for automatic exchange of information is making good  progress. 
Further, after initial sharing of financial information with 49 countries, that the 
number now has doubled to about 80 countries is a good achievement. The Committee 
urge the Ministry of External Affairs to bring in more and more countries in  this 
network of mutual and automated exchange of financial  information critical to fight  
against financial crimes which are increasingly assuming a trans-border character. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
The Committee are apprised that, under the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act,  India 
have filed 11 petitions for declaring a person a fugitive offender, out of which, in  two 
cases orders have been passed, where assets worth of Rs. 358 crore have been confiscated 
in one case, and the person has been declared as a fugitive offender in the  other. The 
Committee also note that there is a limit of Rs. 100 Crore as the lower limit of 

56  
money involved for proceeding against offenders under this Act. The Committee are of  
the opinion that the entire judicial process for declaring a person a fugitive offender  
appears to be very slow and desire that the Ministries concerned must together examine  
possibilities of simplifying the procedures to expedite the progress in such cases. Further, 
the Committee feel that the limit of 100 crore as the limit for proceeding against such 
criminals seem to give a lot of leeway to many smaller offenders and they desire that the  
matter may be reviewed at the earliest to enable proceedings to be initiated against  
criminals involving less than 100 crore also. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA)  was 
amended in 2004 to criminalise, interalia, terrorist financing and further amended in 
December 2008 to broaden its scope and to bring the legislation more in line with the  
requirements of the United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of  
Terrorism (FT Convention). The amendment also established the National Investigation  
Agency (NIA) which, among other actions, further strengthened the fight against 
terrorism and its financing. They also note that UAPA was further amended in August,  
2019 to provide special procedures to deal with terrorist activities, including designation  
as a terrorist, of an individual or organisation. The amendment also broadened the scope 
of terrorist acts dealt by the Act by adding the International Convention for Suppression 
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (2005) in its Schedule. While the Committee appreciate the  
various amendments, especially to bring it in line with UN Convention for Suppression 
of the Financing of Terrorism, they feel that while domestic legislations are important in  
fighting financial crime, more efforts should be invested in having an international legal  
framework to tackle such crimes which are assuming increasing transnational and 
international dimensions. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
The Committee note that India presently has Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties in  
Criminal Matters with 42 Countries which are useful in enhancing mutual cooperation  
between countries in addressing transnational organised crimes and terrorism. Such  
treaties enable cooperation and assistance to India to counter organised crime, money  
laundering and related financial crimes.India has signed the United Nations Convention  
against Corruption (the Merida Convention) on 9 December 2005. Corruption is one of 

57  
the predicate offences for money  laundering. The  Committee, therefore, desire that 
efforts must be made to increase the network of MLATs in criminal matters with 
countries around the world. They also desire that India should continue to work towards 
strengthening the Merida Convention of 2005 to enhance cooperation between UN 
members in matters of international financial crimes involving various players like 
MNCs, individuals and various online vendor companies, etc. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
  August, 2021  Chairperson, 
Sravana, 1943 (Saka) Committee on External Affairs 

58  
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 11 AUGUST, 2020 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1145 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
 
 
 
2. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
3. Shri P.C. Mohan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
Present 
 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
6. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
7. Shri N. K. Premchandran, 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
8. Shri K.J. Alphons 
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10 Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
S.No Name Designation 
1 Shri Sanjay Bhattacharya Secretary(CPV & OIA) 
2 Smt. Uma Sekhar Additional Secretary (L & T) 
3 Shri Manish Chauhan Joint Secretary (UNES) 
4 Shri Mahaveer Singhvi Joint Secretary(CT) 
5 Shri Robert Shetkintong Joint Secretary(Parl & Coord) 
6 Dr. Adarsh Swaika Joint Secretary (CPV) 
7 Dr. S Janakiraman Joint Secretary (EG & IT and CD) 
8 
. 
Shri Abbagani Ramu Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 

59  
Secretariat 
1. Shri P. C. Koul - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the  
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to the Sitting of the Committee  
convened to have a briefing on the subject ‘India and International Law including its 
Extradition Treaties with foreign countries, asylum issues, international cyber -security and  
issues of financial crimes’. The Chairperson also drew attention of the representatives to  
Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining the 
confidentiality of the proceedings. 
 
3. Drawing cues from the opening remarks of the Chairperson, the representatives of the  
Ministry of External Affairs delved upon issue such as extradition treaties and arrangements;  
India’s cyber-diplomacy strategy; policy relating to asylum seekers and refugees; institutional  
mechanisms for cooperation on customs, financial data exchange, drug -trafficking; Budapest 
Convention; ICANN Board, cyber threats and challenges, data privacy and protection etc. 
 
4. During the course of discussion, the Chairperson and the Members raised queries  
impinging upon India’s broad approach to key global issues; structural and functional reforms  
of United Nations; global efforts to counter terrorism; India’s role in major multilat eral and 
plurilateral organizations; power of state governments to enter into international agreements  
and so on. 
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the queries raised  
by the Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Cha irperson directed the witnesses to  
furnish written replies to the points raised by the members of the Committee 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

60  
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 27 AUGUST, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1405 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Margani Bharat 
3. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
4. Shri P.C. Mohan 
5. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
6. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
7. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
8. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
9. Shri N. K. Premchandran 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri K.J. Alphons 
11. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1 Shri Vikas Swarup Secretary (West) 
2 Smt. Uma Sekhar Additional Secretary (L & T) 
3 Shri Manish Chauhan Joint Secretary (UNES) 
4 Shri Mahaveer Singhvi Joint Secretary (CT) 
5 Shri Abbagani Ramu Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
6 Shri Rober Shetkintong Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
7 Dr. S Jankiraman Joint Secretary (EGIT & CD) 

61  
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
1 Shri Anil Malik Additional Secretary (F) 
2 Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri Joint Secretary (F) 
3 Shri Anuj Sharka Joint Secretary (CIS) 
4 Ms. Saheli Ghosh Roy Joint Secretary (CIC) 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPT. OF REVENUE) 
 
1 Shri P.C. Modi Chairman (CBDT) 
2 Shri Anil Kumar Jha Additional Secretary (Revenue) 
3 Shri Sanjay Mishra Director (Enforcement Directorate) 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONIC & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
1 Dr. Rajendra Kumar Additional Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
 
1 Dr. G. Narayana Raju Secretary (Dept. of Legislative) 
2 Shri K. Biswal Additional Secretary 
3 Shri Anoop Kumar Mediratta Secretary (Dept of Legal Affairs) 
4 Shri R.K. Srivastava Addl. Legal Advisor 
5 Dr. R.J.R. Kashibhatla Deputy Legal Advisor 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. C. Koul Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the  
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Finance (Department of  
Revenue), Electronics & Information Technology and Law and Justice (Department of Legal  
Affairs and Legislative Department) to the Sitting of the Committee convened to take oral  
evidence on the subject ‘India and International Law, including its Extradition Treaties with 

62  
foreign countries, asylum issues, international cyber -security and issues of financial crimes’.  
The C hairperson then drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of  
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the 
proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses about the provisions of Direction 58 
of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs presented a broad  
and comprehensive overview of India’s approach towards issues impinging on international  
law, including extradition, cyber security, financial crimes. Subsequently, the other Ministries  
briefed the Committee extensively on areas within their mandate. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs  delved upon issues such as 
Mutually Legal Assistance Treaties (MLAT Ss), Foreigners Act, administrative, institutional  
and legal framework for asylum seekers etc. Then the Ministry of Electronics & Information  
Technology (MEITy) gave an exposition of the facets related to cyber-security such as 
Protection of critical security infrastructure, transnational nature of cyber -security, role of  
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-IN); arrangements for international cooperation 
on cyber security. Sharing of information and data on cyber threats and risks; capacity 
building measures and so on. 
 
5. Then, the Ministry of Finance gave an insightful account concerning issues such as  
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA); UN Convention on Corruption, Fugitive  
Economic Offenders Act, 2018; status of economic fugitives and offences committed by them; 
steps taken for strengthening existing statutory and administrative framework; measures for  
prevention of black money and tax evasion. 
 
6. Finally, the representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice apprised the Committee  
about the legal aspects of the subject which inter alia included constitutional, statutory and  
legal provisions relating to treaty making; Civil Procedure Code; judicial pronouncements;  
foreign summons. 
 
7. The representatives of the various Ministries respon ded to the queries raised by the  
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to furnish  
written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee to the Secretariat at the  
earliest. 

63  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

64  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
HELD ON 11 NOVEMBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs in Main Committee Room, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
5. Smt Meenakshi Lekhi 
6. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
7. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
8. Shri Rebati Tripura 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri K.J. Alphons 
10. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1 Shri Sanjay Bhattacharya Secretary (CPV &OIA) 
2 Smt. Uma Sekhar Additional Secretary (L & T) 
3 Shri Srinivas Gotru Joint Secretary (UNES) 
4 Shri Mahaveer Singhvi Joint Secretary (CT) 
5 Shri Vipul Joint Secretary (Gulf) 
6 Shri Anil Kumar Rai Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
7 Dr. S Jankiraman Joint Secretary (EGIT & CD) 

65  
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
1 Shri Anil Malik Additional Secretary (F) 
2 Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri Joint Secretary (F) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPT. OF REVENUE) 
 
1 Shri Anil Kumar Jha Additional Secretary (Revenue) 
2 Shri P.C. Modi Chairman (CBDT) 
3 Shri M.Ajit Kumar Chairman (CBIT) 
4 Shri Sanjay Mishra Director (Enforcement Directorate) 
5 Shri Ritvik Pandey Joint Secretary 
6 Shri Rajesh Kumar Bhoot Joint Secretary (FT &TR) 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONIC & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
1 Shri Ajay Prakash Sawhney Secretary 
2 Dr. Rajendra Kumar Additional Secretary 
3 Shri Rajiv Kumar Joint Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
1 Shri Anoop Kumar Mediratta Secretary 
(Department of Legal Affairs) 
2 Shri K. Biswal Additional Secretary 
(Legislative Department) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Additional Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the  
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Finance (Department of  
Revenue), Electronics & Information Technology and Law and Justice (Department of Legal  
Affairs and Legislative Department) to the Sitting of the Committee convened to take oral  
evidence on the subject ‘India and International Law, including its Extradition Treaties with  
foreign countries, asylum issues, internati onal cyber-security and issues of financial crimes’.  
The Chairperson then drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of 

66  
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of the 
proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses about the provisions of Direction 58 
of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At first, the Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs delved upon issues 
such as reformed multilateralism; UNSC reforms; internet governance; challenges faced in  
extradition; mechanism for inter -Ministerial coordination, initiatives to strengthen extradition  
network and so on. 
 
4. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology  
(MEITy) presented  detailed views on data privacy and protection; new technologies like  
artificial intelligence, augmented reality, Internet of Things (IoT); Information Technology  
Act, Global Forum on Cyber Expertise; non-personal data etc. 
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice apprised the Committee about 
the legal aspects of the subject which inter alia included constitutional, statutory and legal  
provisions relating to treaty making; sources of international law; Civil Procedure Code;  
judicial pronouncements; and  foreign summons. 
 
6. Subsequently, the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs elaborated upon  
Mutually Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) in criminal matters, constitutional and statutory  
rights enjoyed by foreigners; Foreigners Act, 1946; the Registration of Foreigners Act;  
administrative, institutional and legal framework for asylum seekers etc. 
 
7. Finally, the Ministry of Finance clarified on definition of financial crime, Prevention 
of Money Laundering Act; Black Money Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets Act; Central 
Excise Act; information-sharing arrangements and so on. 
 
8. During the course of discussion, the Chairperson and the Members raised a number of  
queries and the representatives of the various Ministries respon ded to them. Before the Sitting 
concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points  
raised by the Members of the Committee to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

67  
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
HELD ON 17 DECEMBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs in Main Committee Room, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
4. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
6. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
7. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
8. Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
9. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
10. Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
11. Shri K.J. Alphons 
12. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
Non-Official Witnesses/Experts 
1. Dr. Gulshan Rai 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Manoj Sinha 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the non -official Witnesses/Experts to the  
Sitting of the Committee convened to avail their opinion in accordance with the Rule 331L of  
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and for taking their evidence 
on the subject India and International Law, including its Extradition Treaties with foreign  
countries, asylum issues, international cyber -security and issues of financial crimes’. He also  
drew their attention to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speak er, Lok Sabha pertaining to  
maintaining the confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. After taking oath, the two experts shared their views/suggestions on diverse facets of the  
subject which inter-alia included cyber security and warfare; UN Charter [Article 2(4 ) and 
Article 51]; sources of international law; International humanitarian law, human rights 

68  
instruments; extradition treaties; Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT); UN Convention  
Against Torture; principle of non-refoulement etc. 
4. The Members of the Committee then raised pertinent queries impinging on issues such as  
route servers, 1951 Refugee Convention; artificial intelligence; data localization; trans -border 
inflow of information; customary international law and so on. The experts responded  to the 
queries raised by the Members of the Committee. Before the Sitting concluded, the 
Chairperson thanked the witnesses for their valuable inputs on the subject matter. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

69  
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 05 AUGUST, 2021 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, 05 August, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘1’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
3. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
6. Shri P. C. Mohan 
7. Dr. K. C. Patel 
8. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
9. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri K. J. Alphons 
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
12. Shri P. Chidambaram 
13. Shri Brijlal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on ‘India and international  
law including extradition treaties with foreign countries, asylum issues, international cyber - 
security and issues of financial crimes’. 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. After  
deliberations the Committee adopted the draft Report with four Members dissenting. 

70  
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating 
the suggestions made by the members and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 


 
 
