 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
‘WELFARE OF INDIAN DIASPORA: POLICIES/SCHEMES’. 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2022/SRAVANA, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2021-2022) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 15 

 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2021-2022) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
‘WELFARE OF INDIAN DIASPORA: POLICIES/SCHEMES’. 
 
 
                             
    
Presented to Lok Sabha on 3 August, 2022 
          Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3  August, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2022/SRAVANA, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COEA NO. 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Con duct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (____Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……............................................................  (iii)                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……............................................................  (iv)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………    (v)      
 
Chapter I Profile and Geographical Distribution of Indian Diaspora……………..……..  1 
Chapter II India’s Engagement with its Diaspora………………………………………….    6 
(A) Institutional and Administrative Frame work to Engage with Diaspora……… 6 
(i) Merger of MOIA with MEA………………………………………………………….7 
(ii) Role of Missions Abroad………………………………………………………………9 
(iii) Role of ICM, ICCR and Other Organization…………………………………………11 
(iv) One Stop Centers……………………………………………………………………….13 
(B) portals for Engagement with Indian Diaspora……………………………………15 
(i) Global Pravasi Rishta Portal…………………………………………………………..15 
(ii) Global Indian Students Portal………………………………………………………....16 
(iii) e-Sanad Project………………………………………………………………………..17 
(C) Engagement with Indian Students Abroad………………………………………..18 
(i) Cultural Engagement with Students…………………………………………………..18 
(ii) Grievance Redressal of Overseas Indian Students…………………………………….19 
(iii) Special Measures for welfare of Indian Students studying in China and Ukraine……20 
(D) Schemes to Facilitate Contributions from Diaspora Community………………..24 
(i) VAJRA Faculty Scheme……………………………………………………………….24 
(ii) PRABHASS:  Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark…………………25 
Chapter III Major Events/Programmes/Schemes for Welfare of Indian Diaspora………….  27 
(I) Events for Indian Diaspora…………………………………………………………..27 
(A) Pravasi Bharatiya Divas……………………………………..…………………………27 
(B) Special Conference- India’s Diaspora Focusing on Girmitiyas………………………..32 
(C) Bharat ko Janiye Quiz……………………………………………………………..…...33 
(D) Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) online Quiz and MEA, AKAM week………….34 
(II) Engagement with NRIs………………………………………………………………35 
(A) State outreach Programme – Videsh Sampark………………………………………..35 
(i) 

(B) Indian Community Welfare Fund……………………………………………………..37 
(i) Funds under ICWF and nature of Assistance under the Fund………………………..37 
(ii) Repatriation of Mortal Remains of Indians who die abroad………………………….40 
(C) Welfare/Protection of Indian Emigrants Holding ECR Passport………………..42 
(i) MADAD Portal and Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayatiya Kendras………………………….43 
(ii) Emigration Management Bill………………………………………………………….48 
(D) Pavasi Bharatiya Bima Yojna…………………………………….…………………  50  
(E) Pre-Departure Orientation Training…………………………………………………...53 
(F) Media Campaign………………………………………………………………………59 
(G) Mobility Agreements…………………………………………………………………..62 
(H) Simplification of Passport Services for Indian Citizens Residing outside  
India- The Passport Seva Programme………………………………………………………..64 
III. Engagements with PIOs/OCIs………………………………………………………..66 
(A) Know India Programme………………………………………………………………...66 
(B) Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana…………………………………………………………67 
(C ) Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children………………………………….……..68 
(D) Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora……………………..……………….….……72 
(E) Overseas Citizenship of India Card Scheme…………………………………………….74 
Chapter IV Welfare Measures for Migrant Workers…………………………………………….77 
  (i) Skill Development Initiatives for Migrant Workers……………………………………77 
 (ii) Welfare of Returnee Migrant Workers…………………………………………………88 
APPENDICES 
 
Annexure I Compiled Data of Indian Diaspora of NRIs/PIOs/OCIs and Students as  
on 31.12.2021………………………………………………………………………….93      
Annexure II Amount collected under ICWF during 2019-2021…………………………..............101 
Annexure III Data on Pre-Departure Orientation Training Imparted to Emigrant  
Workers going for Overseas Employment in ECR Countries………………………..112 
Annexure IV Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on  
 11January, 2021…….………………………………………………………………..114 
Annexure V Minutes of the Twenty-Third Sitting of the Committee(2020-21)  held on  
  29 June, 2021………………………………………………………………..............116 
Annexure VI  Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee (2021-22) held on   
22 December, 2021………………………………………………………………….119                                                                 
Annexure VII  Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee (2021-22) held on  
  01 August, 2022………………………………………….………………………...  122 
(ii) 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana  
17.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
18.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Vacant$ 
21.  Vacant* 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta# 
28.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
29.  Shri Abdul Wahab@@  
30.  Shri Brij Lal 
31.  Vacant@ 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.C.Koul   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
$ Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma passed away on 17 March, 2021. 
* Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi ceased to Member of the Committee on her appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
07.07.2021. 
# Shri Swapan Dasgupta resigned on 17.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@@ Shri Abdul Wahab retired on 21.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@ Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee on his appointment as C abinet 
Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021. 
 (iii) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.   Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
6.   Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
10.   Shri P. C. Mohan  
11.   Smt. Queen Oja 
12.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
13.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
15.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana  
16.   Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
17.   Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
18.   Shri Rebati Tripura 
19. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
20.   Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer* 
21.   Vacant 
Rajya Sabha  
.    
22.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
23. Shri Brijlal  
24.  Shri Abdul Wahab@ 
25.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
26.   Shri Ranjan Gogoi# 
27.   Vacant^ 
28. Vacant$ 
29. Vacant$ 
30.   Vacant$             
31.   Vacant@@    
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Reena Goplakrishnan - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
          
 
*Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 7 February, 2022. 
@Shri Abdul Wahab, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 2 May, 2022.  
#Shri Ranjan Gogoi, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  5 May, 2022.  
^ Shri P. Chidambaram, Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) resigned w.e.f. 16th June, 2022 
$  Shri K.J Alphons, Shri Kapil Sibal and Shri Sanjay Raut, Members of Parliament, Rajya Sabha ceased to be Members of the 
Committee consequent upon their retirement  on 04.07.2022. 
@@  Smt. Misha Bharti , Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon her 
retirement  on 07.07.2022. 
(iv) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report of the Committee 
on External Affairs (2021-22) on the subject ‘Welfare of Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’.  
 
2. The Committee selected the subject for detailed examination during 2020 -21 and continued 
the examination during 2021 -22. The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs on the subject on 11 J anuary, 2021. The Committee also took oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship on 29 June, 2021 and further evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of External Affairs on 22 December, 2021.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 1 August,  
2022. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee are appended to the Report.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitud e to the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship for placing material information as well as 
tendering evidence and views before the Committee.  
 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations  of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      NEW DELHI;                                                          P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
 01 August, 2022                                                Chairperson, 
    10 Sravana, 1944 (Saka)                            Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
PROFILE AND GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF INDIAN DIASPORA 
 
1.1 The Government of India conceptuali zed in 2004 that 'diaspora' word will be used as “a 
generic term to describe the people who migrated from territories that are currently within the 
borders of the Republic of India. It also refers to their descendants.” Today, ‘diaspora’ is 
commonly understood to include Non -Resident Indians (NRIs), who are citizens of India and 
Persons of Indian Origins  (PIOs), including Overseas Citizens of India  (OCI), who are foreign 
nationals. PIO and OCI card holders have been merged under one category “OCI” in 2015.  For 
the Government, the diaspora encompasses a group of people who can either trace their origins 
to India or who are Indian citizens living abroad , either temporarily or permanently. The official 
classification/categorization of Indian Diaspora , therefore, includes Overseas Citizens of 
India/Persons of Indian Origin and Non -Resident Indians . 
 
1.2 India has a large diaspora in the world with over 31 million including over 13 million 
NRIs and 18 million PIOs spread across the globe. Indian diaspora is known for their talent, 
exemplary discipline and hard -work and have made significant contributions t o science, 
technology, music, literature, politics and business.  
1.3 In regard to the profile and geographical distribution of the Indian diaspora, the Min istry, 
in a written reply furnished to the Committee has stated that the profile of our diaspora includes 
Head of Governments/Head of States and political leaders of many countries, businessmen, 
educationists, scientists, engineers, doctors, research scholars, CEOs of top global MNCs and 
professionals across the globe.  Indian diaspora is spread across  the world with major 
concentration in U.S, Canada, UK, Australia, Gulf, E.U., South & West Africa and Girmitiya 
countries. 
 
1.4 During the course of briefing on the subject on 11 January 2021, the Secretary (CPV &  
OIA) elaborated on the diverse composition of the Indian diaspora: 
 
“The NRIs and PIOs are spread across the globe. They are virtually in every country …. 
they have really been outstanding in terms of their contribution. Since they are so diverse 
in their composition, because the initial band of p eople who had gone out were people 
who had gone out under the Girmitiya arrangement as indentured labour . You will find 
such communities in the East Pacific, Fiji and some of those countries over there. You 
find them in Mauritius, the Caribbean, Suriname e tc.  They are a very distinct identity. 
We have some Girmitiya related programmes that we do; in fact, a lot of them. We have 
seen a great success in recent times in how they have preserved their culture and heritage 
and advanced it.  
The second flush was again quasi -indentured labour who went to the South–east Asia. 
For instance, a community of almost two million in Malaysia and Singapore were also 
quasi-indentured labour. They went to work in farms. But they are also a very strong 

2 
 
community of PIOs. In fact, if we look at the PIO community, that is perhaps the second 
largest that we have anywhere. Just before Independence and immediately after , we had 
the professionals going out. Most of them went to the Western countries, to Europe, 
America, etc. These were professionals. Of course, there is another community of traders 
who have been on for a very long time. These are the people who are there in various 
parts of Arabian Peninsula and in Africa as well. They are very well politically co nnected 
besides being very economically successful”. 
 
1.5 Upon enquiry regarding whether a database of our vast diaspora has been maintained and 
utilized in the preparation of schemes for their welfare, the Committee have been informed that  
the Ministry tries to maintain a comprehensive and latest database of Indian diaspora and use s 
the same in preparation of various welfare schemes. The compiled data of Indian diaspora 
comprising of NRIs/PIOs/OCIs and students as on 31 December 2021  (Annexure I ) indicate 
36347858 PIOs/OCIs, 9509865 NRIs and 1056120 students.   
 
1.6 On being asked the manner in which the Ministry would be able to undertake welfare 
activities for the Indian diaspora in the absence of an authentic database , the Ministry has stated 
that the database of Indian diaspora is regularly updated with inputs from Indian Missions and 
other sources. However, since the registration by the diaspora is voluntary, the entire diaspora 
does not register with the Embassies/Posts abroad. Th e data also varies because of the mobility 
of the diaspora. 
 
1.7 To a specific query whether the Government has any authentic data regarding the number 
of Indian students abroad, the Ministry, in its written reply has stated that they have an 
approximate data of the number of Indian students abroad. 
 
1.8 Highlighting the efforts and challenges in regard to developing a database for migrants 
including students studying overseas, the Secretary (CPV&OIA) d uring the course of evidence 
on 22 December 2021 stated: 
“…one of the efforts of the Ministry has been to develop databases for all migrants, 
including students who are going overseas. We are trying to do this in many ways. We 
have also begun a project in which we are trying to look at the practices of d ata 
management across countries so that we can learn from that and develop a module.  
Through the initiatives of the embassy and the Ambassador and his team, we go out to 
the Universities in particular where we know that Indian students are. We try and 
establish a relationship with the administration of those Universities, with the students’ 
bodies that represent the Indians who reside in those Universities. We try and involve 
them into cultural activities so that they feel more at home with the Indian embas sies. 
Then, we try through that to develop a database. Our systems currently are voluntary for 
registration of people who live overseas whether they are NRIs or students. 

3 
 
The compliance levels of our community, the Indians overseas, is not very high on thi s 
factor. So, it remains a constant challenge, but the embassy remains in touch with the 
student bodies as well as Indian associations, cultural associations so that we can try and 
develop as strong a database as possible. Every few years, through the Over seas Indian 
Division, we try and do a rough census kind of a thing of the Indians who live overseas 
and we learn, every time we do this about communities that are actually living there”  
1.9 The Committee further enquired whether the Ministry has compiled and compared data 
from across countries on the various challenges posed and opportunities provided by the 
enormous and diverse diaspora  to which the Ministry has informed that it tries to maintain an 
updated database from various reliable sources of Indian diaspora and use the same in 
preparation of various welfare schemes. The Ministry compiles the data of diaspora on a 
voluntary basis. It also uses other sources like statistical collection of data from foreign 
countries. Since the collection of data is on a voluntary basis, most of the diaspora doesn’t give 
information on the various challenges posed and opportunities provided to the enormous and 
diverse diaspora. Nevertheless, the Ministry does have inputs of various challenges f aced by the 
diaspora through grievances portals and other sources.  A number of steps have been taken by 
the Ministry and the Missions/Posts abroad to help the diaspora, including but not limited to, 
creation of MADAD portal, grievances portal, interactions with diaspora in various fora etc.   
 
1.10 Asked to elaborate upon the tangible benefits derived from the Indian diaspora in terms 
of better relations with hos t countries across the spectrum of economic, strategic and political 
relations, the Ministry has stated that Indian diaspora have established themselves as pioneers 
in every field and are holding positions of leadership in their host countries. They are known 
for their innate talent, hard  work, ethics, discipline, law abiding nature and penchant for 
success. They form the most economically progress ive minority community in their countries 
and make great contributions to the economies of their host countri es. They form the backbone 
of the healthcare services, science & technology, IT services and business communities in most  
of the countries. They serve as ambassadors of India’s interests abroad and work as bridges 
between Indian Government and their host c ountries. The Indian diaspora play s an important 
role in developing better and friendly relations with their host countries  and is a driving force 
in getting foreign remittances and investments from abroad to India.   
 
1.11 With regard to the assessment of the Ministry on the role of Indian diaspora in social and 
economic development, foreign policy agenda and cultural promotion, the Committee have been 
informed that Indian diaspora plays a very important role in social and economic development of 
India. They hold important positions in many Governments. They are the  Indian voice 
in various multilateral fora.  Their role in India’s soft power projection and in promoting Indian 
culture outside is very important. They play an important role for track II diplomacy. They are an 
important bridge between India and many foreign Governments.   Our people have reached the 
pinnacle of political power in Mauritius, Portugal, Suriname and Guyana having Indian origin 

4 
 
leaders. CEOs of top global MNCs are P IOs, for examples, Microsoft’s Satya Nadella, Google’s 
Sundar Pichai, IMF’s Geeta Gopinath, Mastercard’s Ajay Banga, Twitter’s Parag Aggarwal etc. 
 
1.12 On being asked about the remittances sent by overseas Indians, the Ministry has stated 
that no precise statistics are available on account of personal remittances sent by overseas 
Indians to their families.  However, the World Bank report on remittances suggest that India with 
US $ 87 billion of remittances is the largest recipient country of the  world in 2021 and it is 
expected to grow by 2.6% in the financial year 2022. 
 
1.13 The Committee note that the Indian diaspora comprising of over 18 million PIOs 
and 13 million NRIs spread across the globe is one of the largest overseas community of 
any country. Moreover, the composition of the Indian diaspora is diverse, consisting of 
labourers/workers, traders, political leaders, professionals and students. The Committee 
further note that as per the World Bank report on remittances, India is the largest 
recipient country of the world in 2021 and its remittances is expected to grow by 2. 6% in 
2022. The Committee are, however, surprised that authentic data of the Indian diaspora is 
not available in the Ministry. The Ministry has put forth the justification that since 
registration by the diaspora is voluntary, the entire diaspora does not r egister with the 
Indian Embassies/Posts abroad  and t he data also varies because of the mobility of the 
diaspora. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry may not be able to implement 
welfare schemes for the said community as well as address the challe nges being faced by 
them effectively in the absence of a comprehensive and up -to-date database.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Indian Embassies/Missions/Posts abroad should play 
a more pro -active role, maintain greater outreach and develop clos er contact with the 
diaspora community and encourage them  to register themselves wi th the 
Embassies/Missions/Posts in coordination with the various diaspora associations, cultural 
organizations and student bodies  so that authentic database is maintained in each 

5 
 
Embassy/Mission/Post with the Ministry and based on such authentic updated data 
received from various countries , concerted efforts may be made to collate an authentic 
database of the Indian diaspora at Ministry level and use it appropriately in preparing and 
implementing welfare scheme for diaspora community. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
1.14 The Committee observe that the Ministry had begun a project involving a study on 
the practices of data management across countries to develop a module for migrant 
workers and students studying overseas. In Committee’s view an authentic database of 
migrant workers and overseas s tudents is long overdue as they constitute t he most 
vulnerable section of the Indian diaspora . The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
conduct in-depth study regarding data management system of countries which have large 
diaspora community at the ea rliest and develop a module  for migrant workers and 
overseas students within a specified time -frame. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
1.15 The Committee observe that the profile and geographical distribution as well as the 
enormous and diverse Indian diaspora presents a great opportunity for the promotion of 
India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy abroad. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
this opportunity sh ould be tapped and the potential it provides should be harnessed to 
serve as an effective tool in furthering India’s interest and influence globally. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should prepare a policy framework in this 
regard and work out an action plan to implement the same in a time-bound manner. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 

6 
 
     CHAPTER II 
INDIA’S ENGAGEMENT WITH ITS DIASPORA 
A. Institutional and Administrative Framework to Engage with Diaspora 
2.1. The Ministry has stated that India’s engagement with its diaspora is characterized under 
the rubric of 4Cs - Care, Connect, Celebrate & Contribute. In this way, the Ministry of External 
Affairs (O verseas Indian Affairs - I, Overseas Indian Affairs - II, P assport Seva Programme, 
Consular, Passport & Visa and  Protector General & Overseas Employment  Divisions) deals 
with issues relating to engagement with Indian diaspora.  
2.2 The approach of the Government towards engagement with its diaspora has also been 
highlighted by the Secre tary (CPV &  OIA) in his opening statement during evidence on the 
subject on 22 December 2021 as under: 
“….the issue of diaspora, engagement with them, and the four ‘Cs’ that the Prime 
Minister had mentioned, that are, Connect, Care, Celebrate, and Contribute, have been a 
part of the Ministry’s primary agenda from the very outset. We believe in an All -of-
Ministry Approach, and eventually, we have also moved towards an All -of- Government 
Approach in which other wings of the Government, other Ministrie s, other departments 
as well as the State Governments are involved in the process of diaspora affairs”.  
2.3 On being asked whether there exists a policy document on our diaspora , the Ministry has 
informed that it engages diaspora through its various programmes and schemes. There are 
various programmes which the Government run for outreach to diaspora. Thus, the policy of the 
Government evolves based on the feedback which it gets from the diaspora from time to time.  
 
2.4 The Committee observe that the Ministry of External Affairs  engages with the 
diaspora through its various programmes and schemes  and the policies of the Government 
evolve based on the feedback from the diaspora from time to time.  The Committee also 
acknowledge that India’s engagement with its diaspora has moved from ‘All of Ministry 
approach’ towards an ‘All -of-Government approach’ in which other wings of the 
Government, other Ministries  and Departments as well as the State Governments are 
involved in the pr ocess of diaspora affairs. The Committee are , however, surprised that a 
clear-cut policy on its diaspora is yet to be drafted by the Government despite having a 
huge diaspora playing a very important role in the socio-economic development of the ir 

7 
 
home country. In view of the Government’s evolving policy in relation to its diaspora ,  the 
Committee, desire that the Ministry should bring out a policy document on its diaspora  to 
serve as a guiding principle for deeper and wider engagement with the diaspora 
community with an objective that all involved in the process of diaspora affairs may work 
in tandem to achieve the objectives set in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
(i) Merger of MOIA with MEA 
 
2.5 The Committee observed that the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) 
was merged with the Ministry of External Affairs  (MEA) in 2015  and a sked the MEA to 
elaborate upon the institutional, administrative and policy framework that has been set up since 
the merger. The Ministry has stated that Working Group to analyze the objectives, working and 
challenges of various schemes/programmes/initiatives for welfare of Indian diaspora has been 
recently constituted . Various Divisions have been set up under the MEA, which provides the 
requisite instituti onal and administrative support for wider engagement with diaspora and 
formulates policies for the same.  
 
2.6 When enquired whether the Government has been successful in attaining the objectives 
behind the merger and created ample policy and framework spaces for the welfare of the 
overseas Indians, the Ministry has stated that it has  been successful in attaining the objective 
behind the merger and creat ed ample policy and framework spaces for the welfare of overseas 
Indians. The concept of the merger was based on the welfare of Indian diaspora. The merger 
has reduced bureaucracy and procedural delays leading to fast response to the problem and 
welfare of  the diaspora abroad. The feedback about the more efficient outreach of the 
Government has been received from diaspora during the PM visits.  
 
2.7 During briefing on the subject on 11 January 2021, t he Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
elaborated as below  the manner in which the merger of MOIA with MEA has given a more 
holistic approach towards dealing with the issue of the Indian diaspora : 
 
“Actually, it was kind of a re -integration because as you know , it used to be two 
Divisions of OIA, which were there  and which still remain in the Ministry. But in a 
sense, we find that it now gives us a more holistic approach towards dealing with the 
issue of diaspora as well as Indians who are overseas. Now, we can have a look at this in 
a more holistic manner.  

8 
 
This time, for instance, when we celebrated the Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas a few days ago, 
this was also live -streamed on YouTube and Facebook and what our Missions overseas 
did was that they had small little events in their Embassies itself to relay the PBD 
Convention. In many cases, there were also hybrid events where they had members of the 
diaspora who were in their Community Centre or in their Auditoriums to do these 
programmes. So, I would say that in many ways the integration of the OIA Ministry back 
into the MEA has been like a re -integration. It has been successful and it has been a 
holistic approach that has developed”. 
 
2.8 With regard to the specific steps taken for wider engagement with diaspora, post merger 
of MOIA with MEA, the Committee have been informed that the scale of organization of Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas (PBD) has been revamped with much greater participation of diaspora. Among 
the programmes/schemes revamped and new schemes/programme initiated are Know India 
Programme (KIP), Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC),  Bharat Ko Janiye 
Quiz, Videsh Sampark Series and PIO Parliamentarian Conference etc. 
 
2.9 The Committee further enquired whether any evaluation study has been conducted on the 
impact of the various schemes/programmes for the welfare of the Indian diaspora , particularly 
during the period after the merger of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs with MEA. In this 
regard, the Ministry has informed that  the Government is in regular touch with Indian diaspora 
across the globe. Indian Missions from time to time provide feedback on various programmes. 
Such feedback  contributes to policy making at various levels.  The general feedback has been 
positive, which is evident on various social media platforms.  Now, a Working Group has been 
established in the Ministry to evaluate various schemes and progammes on diaspora.  
 
2.10 The Committee note that  the M inistry of Overseas Indian Affairs (M OIA) was 
merged with the Ministry of External Affairs ( MEA) in 2015  and t he merger has been 
like a re-integration bringing in a more holistic approach towards dealing with the issue s 
of the Indian diaspora . The Committee , however,  are of the view that the success and 
efficacy of the merger can only be known after proper evaluation by an independent 
body. The Ministry has recently constituted a Working Group to analyze the objectives, 
working and challenges of various schemes/progra mmes/initiatives undertaken by it for 
the welfare of the Indian diaspora. The Committee hope that the Working Group will  
specifically focus on the outreach and delivery under the said welfare schemes post 
merger of MOIA with MEA . The Committee also desire that evaluation of the said 

9 
 
schemes be completed at the earliest so as to ensure effective implementation of the 
schemes for the welfare of the Indian diaspora.   
(Recommendation No. 5) 
(ii) Role of Missions Abroad  
2.11 The Committee observe d that India has 202 Missions abroad and enquired about the 
functioning of Indian Embassies for the welfare and redressal of the grievances of Indian citizens 
abroad. T he Ministry, in a written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated that t he 
Government accords highest priority to the safety and well -being of Indian nationals 
abroad. Indian Missions/Posts abroad work with a motto: “Indian Embassy: Home Away from 
Home”. 
2.12 The institutional framework for support and welfare of Indian nationals abroad s tands 
considerably strengthened. The MADAD portal, e -Migrate, ICWF and Indian Worker Resource 
Centres are among the important mechanisms to assist Indian nationals. All Indian Missions/ 
Posts also actively engage through social media platforms. The Ministr y and Missions receive a 
large number of requests on their social media handles which were attended to immediately. The 
Government has also launched an awareness campaign ‘Surakshit Jaaye, Prasikshit Jaaye’ 
towards ensuring that Indian workers should migrate safely with an enhanced skill set. 
  
2.13 Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK) have been set up in New Delhi and at Dubai 
(UAE), Sharjah (UAE), Riyadh, Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia), to provide guidance and counseling  on all matters pertaining to overseas Indian 
workers. Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras (KPSK) have also been set up in Kochi, 
Hyderabad, Chennai and Lucknow to assist emigrants or their relatives to redress their 
problems/complaints regarding overseas employment.  
2.14 Indian Missions and Posts abroad are readily accessible to all Indian citizens within their 
jurisdiction and maintain close contact with the Indian community. There is a designated nodal 
officer in each Mission and Post to deal with emerge ncy situations. In key Missions and Posts, a 
24x7 Helpline has been established. A dedicated Community Welfare Wing has also been 
established in Missions and Posts where there is sizeable Indian community. Indian nationals 
residing abroad are advised to register with the nearest Indian Mission or Post. 
2.15 In response to a query , the Ministry has informed that m ost of the requests for 
assistance/complaints received from Indian nationals pertain to employment related issues, 
detention/arrest or death of Ind ian nationals, passport related issues, repatriation to India, non -
payment of salaries and denial of legitimate labour rights & benefits such as non -
issuance/renewal of residence permits, non -payment/grant of overtime allowance, weekly 
holidays, longer working hours, refusal to grant exit/re–entry permits for visit to India, refusal to 
allow the worker to return to India on final exit visa after completion of their contracts and non -
provision of medical & insurance facilities, not being paid compensation upon death, etc.  

10 
 
2.16 On receipt of request for help/complaints from or on behalf of the Indian nationals, the 
same are addressed quickly by the Indian Missions by taking them up with the concerned local 
Government authorities for resolution. Complaints per taining to employment related issues are 
taken up by the Indian Missions with the concerned foreign employer/ Labour Department and 
other concerned officials in that country for prompt redressal. Whenever required and possible, 
the embassy officials even contact the employers for resolution of grievances. 
2.17 When asked to state whether the Government proposes to make any assessment/conduct a 
study regarding the manner in which Indian embassies and missions/posts can play a greater and 
more effective role in the welfare of the diaspora,  in quick redressal of t heir grievances and for 
promoting Indian culture abroad, the Ministry has stated that the Government of India places 
highest importance to the welfare & safety of Indians abroad. Any issue pertaining to Indians 
abroad is dealt by the Mission/Posts on prior ity basis. Missions/Posts conduct open houses for 
NRIs to discuss issues related to their safety and security. These issues are further highlighted 
and taken up with the host Government wherever necessary for action on priority basis.  Besides, 
the Ministr y organizes awareness workshops on safe and legal migration for the welfare of 
workers and to generate awareness among them.   
 
2.18 A Pre -Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) is imparted to the workers before they 
migrate to foreign countries.  The Prava si Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) provides insurance 
for workers.  Some other initiatives like MADAD Portal, Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(ICWF), E -migrate Portal, Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK), etc. help NRIs to get 
assistance and address their grievances and ensure their safety and security. Grievances are also 
registered and responded through various channels like calls, walk -in, e -mails, Twitter, 
Whatsapp, 24 x 7 Helpline and other Social Media accounts of Missions/Posts.  Under the 
promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora, the Ministry provides grants to Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad for strengthening ties with the Overseas Indian Community to preserve, maintain and 
showcase their Indian heritage and culture.  In addition, Ministry also gives v arious grants for 
celebrating National Days, Hindi Divas, ICCR Foundation Day etc. where Indian diaspora is 
engaged in a big way. 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad work s with the motto 
‘Indian Embassies: Home away from Home’.  A robust system of grievance redressal which 
includes bringing such issues through e -mails, twitter and through CPGRAMS portal has 
been maintained. Keeping in view the fact that the Indian Missions/Posts are the direct link 
between India and its diaspora community, the Committee desire that they  should play a 
greater and effective role in the welfare of the diaspora and in reconnecting the m with the 
motherland. The Committee, however, find that a large chunk of the diaspora  community 
including migrant workers and students are yet to be registered with the Indian 

11 
 
Missions/Posts abroad . The Committee , therefore, desire that the diaspora community 
should be encouraged to register with our Missions/Posts and based on an evaluation study 
fresh initiatives be taken to bring the Indian diaspora closer to their roots may be taken so 
that the Indian Embassies could truly become a ‘Home away from Home’ for them. 
       (Recommendation No. 6) 
2.20 The Committee note that a dedicated Com munity Welfare Wing has been 
established in Missions and Posts where there is a sizeable Indian community. The 
Committee are of the view that such wings would facilitate closer contact between Indian 
diaspora and Indian Missions/Posts. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry  do 
apprise the Committee about the objectives achieved through establishing such community 
welfare wings in Missions/Posts and also  to establish Community Welfare Wing in all 
important Indian Missions/Posts on priority basis.  
      (Recommendation No. 7) 
(iii) Role of ICM, ICCR and Other Organizations 
 
2.21 The Committee observe that the work of MEA is flanked by several independent or 
semi-independent bodies especially, the India Centre for Migration (ICM) and the Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and enquired about the role of these two instituti ons 
along with that of Indian Missions/Posts abroad in the protection and welfare of Indian 
diaspora. The Ministry , in its written reply, has informed that the ICM serves as a research 
think tank to the MEA on all aspects of international migration and mob ility. It plays an 
integral role in generating ideas through panel discussions and conducting research on 
migration and diaspora issues. ICM has organized panel discussions on diaspora issues and has 
also funded diaspora conferences in India.  ICM has also  participated actively in the flagship 
event of GoI  - Pravasi Bharatiya Divas to celebrate the contribution of the overseas Indian 
community to the development of India.  
 
2.22 For the welfare of workers and to generate awareness among them, the centre org anizes 
awareness workshops on safe and legal migration and has also prepared a Pre -Departure 
Orientation Training (PDOT) manual for prospective emigrants. ICM has also conducted 
several Training of Trainers (ToT) Workshops and made informative posters on w elfare 

12 
 
schemes of the Government such as Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), PDOT, Indian 
Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) that have been widely disseminated through online and 
offline medium across the country.  
 
2.23 Under the aegis of the joint declaratio n on the India -EU Common Agenda on Migration 
and Mobility (CAMM) in which ICM is the local implementation partner representing MEA, 
studies on diaspora in Germany and Ireland have been undertaken. ICM also undertakes 
assessment of employment opportunities abroad with the help of Indian Missions. It also gives 
policy inputs to MEA from time to time to aid the efforts of the Government in protection and 
promotion of the welfare of Indian diaspora. 
 
2.24 The Ministry has further stated that under BE 2021 -2022 for ICM (think tank of the 
Ministry), 25 lakhs each for Grants -in-Aid (sub head 04.00.31) and salaries (sub head 04.00.36) 
was sanctioned. However, as sufficient unspent balance is available with ICM from the previous 
grant-in-aid provided during the tenur e of erstwhile MOIA and subsequent interest earned on it, 
it may propose to surrender the sanctioned amount. Further, on account of the restrictions due to 
COVID-19 Pandemic, ICM’s proposed seminars, workshops etc. are being conducted virtually. 
Rs.1 crore has been asked in the BE 2022-23. 
 
2.25 ICCR plays a key role in the promotion of India’s soft power abroad. It supplements the 
efforts of MEA to leverage Indian diaspora in soft power projection. Missions abroad maintain 
close contact with Indian diaspora and closely work with them to promote India’s cultural 
influence in their accredited countries. The activities of ICCR including scholarship 
programme, cultural performances by sponsored troupes, exhibitions, International Day of 
Yoga, seminars & c onferences abroad and distinguished visitors programme are organized b y 
the Missions with active participation of the local diaspora. 
 
2.26 On being asked to provide the details of funds allocated to think -tanks and organisations 
including the Antar Rashtr iya Sahayog Parishad (ARSP), Tata Institute of Social Sciences 
(TISS), Centre for Development Studies ( CDS) etc. for providing research/data output related to 
Indian diaspora from  2017 -18 to 2022-23, the Ministry has stated that it has provided financial 
grant to Antar Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad for s etting up of Diaspora Research and Resource 
Centre (DRRC) for  an amount of Rs. 21,11,000, Rs. 11,71,138 and Rs. 17,75,132 for the years 
2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 respectively.  
 
2.27 A grant of Rs. 60,00,000 has been approved to Antar Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad for 
Research Activities of Diaspora Research and Resource Centre  (DRRC) for the financial years 
2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022 -23.  Grant of Rs. 20,00,000 for 2020 -21 has already been released 
and a grant of Rs. 20,00,000 for 2021-22 is under process.  
 
2.28 The Committee note that while the ICM serves as a research think -tank to the MEA 
on all aspects of international migration as well as mobility and  the ICCR plays a key role 
in the promotion of India’s soft power abroad and supplements the efforts of MEA to 

13 
 
leverage Indian diaspora in soft power projection. The Committee feel that the ICM can 
play a greater role towards policy inputs so that the efforts of the Government for the 
welfare of the In dian diaspora is more result -oriented. Moreover, potential of ICCR being 
a bridge between India and other countries and being the ‘Indian voice’ in various 
multilateral fora, promoting India’s soft power abroad needs to be harnessed effectively. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to deepen its engagement with the ICM and 
the ICCR so that a strong and vibrant Indian diaspora can be utilized as an effective tool in 
cultural diplomacy and soft power projection abroad. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
2.29 The Committee note that the MEA has been providing funds to the India Centre for 
Migration and the Antar Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad for research/data output relating to 
the Indian diaspora. The Committee desire that the Ministry should monitor the utilizat ion 
of such funds; ensure that research activities, seminars and workshops etc. are conducted 
regularly and the funds provided are actually utilized for the said purpose. The Committee 
also urge the Ministry to ensure that the findings/data regarding such activities are 
effectively utilized for policy formulation on diaspora affairs. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
(iv) One Stop Centres 
 
2.30 During their Study visit to Leh, Chandigarh and Shimla from 17 to 21 May 2022, the 
Committee have been informed that the MEA with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development  decided in March 2021, to set up One Stop Centres (OSCs) in the respective 
jurisdictions of nine Missions/Posts abroad for helping distressed Indian women (7 OSCs with 
provision of Shelter Homes in Bahrain, Doha, Dubai, Kuwait, Muscat, Riyadh and Jeddah and 2 
OSCs without Shelter Home in Singapore and Toronto). The guidelines for estab lishment of One 
Stop Centres has been finalized with the approval of competent authority in the Ministry and 
conveyed to the Missions/Posts where OSCs are due to be opened in the first phase. The scheme 
is due to be launched shortly in the aforesaid nine countries.  

14 
 
 
2.31 In view of the increasing cases of women being deserted in NRI marriages, the 
Committee desired to know the status of the NRI Marriage Bill . To this, the Ministry has 
informed that a fter the Registration of Marriage of Non -resident Indian Bill, 2019 was 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 11 February 2019, it was referred by Rajya Sabha to the 
16th  Lok Sabha Standing Committee on External Affairs for examination. The Standing 
Committee held the first preliminary briefing on 1 March 2019. Howe ver, after the 
dissolution of the 16 th Lok Sabha and the formation of 17 th Lok Sabha, the Bill was re -
referred to the new Standing Committee for further examination.  
 
2.32 The 17 th Lok Sabha Standing Committee held its meetings on 18 November 2019, 2 
December 2019 and 27 January 2020 for examining the proposed Bill. The Standing 
Committee has submitted its final report with its recommendations on the proposed Bill to 
the Rajya Sabha  on 12 March 2020. In the recommendations, the Standing Committee has 
suggested wide -ranging changes in the Bill which involve various Departments and 
Ministries. Therefore, inputs of Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice and 
Ministry of Wo men & Child Development are awaited on the subject.  
 
2.33 The Committee have been informed that guidelines for establishment of One Stop 
Centres for helping distressed Indian women abroad has been finalized and conveyed to 
the Missions/Posts where such centres are due to be opened in the first phase. In view of the 
pivotal role likely to be played by these centres in providing timely assistance to the  
vulnerable distressed Indian women, the Committee desire that the Scheme should be 
launched without any delay and the status in this regard may be furnished to them. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
2.34 While examining ‘The Registration of Marriage of Non Resident Indian Bill, 2019’ 
referred to the Committee for examination and report, the Committee had considered all 
the issues relating to NRI marriages including the provisions for registration of NRI 
marriages in various Central legislations and made recommendations/suggested 
amendments in the Bill. The Report of the Committee was presented to Parliament on 12 
March 2020. The Committee desire that the Ministry should complete its consultations 

15 
 
with all t he concerned Ministries/Departments and stakeholders in this regard at the 
earliest and enact a Legislation for the benefit of the Indian diaspora/NRIs.  
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
B. Portals for Engagement with Indian Diaspora  
 
(i) Global Pravasi Rishta Portal 
 
2.35 The Ministry has stated that Global Pravasi Rishta Portal was launched in December 
2020 for real time engagement with diaspora.  
 
2.36 On being asked to state the response received so far regarding the Pravasi Rishta Portal, 
the Ministry has informed that the Rishta Portal (RISHTA) was launched in December 2020. 
Thereafter, the Missions and Posts have tried to popularise the Portal through various means 
such as using social media including Facebook and Twitter handles, community Whatsapp 
groups, Mission’s virtual news letters and adding the link of the Portal to the Homepage of 
the Mission’s website. Some Heads of Mission have also held meetings with the office 
bearers of the Indian Associations and prominent members of the diaspora. Intermitte ntly, 
instructions have also been issued to various Indian Associations to spread the word around 
and populari ze the Portal among Indians abroad. Missions and Posts have also been 
introducing the Portal to the Indian diaspora in various events of the Missions/Indian 
Cultural Centres such as during Pravasi Bharatiya Divas events, Hindi Divas, National Days, 
celebration of ICCR Foundation Day, various Indian festivals, etc. The response to the Portal 
has been picking up slowly as overseas Indians have st arted interacting with the Missions 
through the Portal. As of now, around 15,000 registrations have been done on the Portal.  
 
 
2.37 The Committee note that the Government had launched the Rishta Portal in 
December 2020 for real time engagement with the diaspora and around 15,000 
registrations have been done on the Portal so far. Keeping in view the huge population of 
the Indian diaspora in various countries,   the Committee find the response lukewarm and 
desire that publicity/awareness programmes about the Portal should be disseminated 
widely so that the objective behind launching of the Portal is achieved . Efforts may also be 

16 
 
made to ensure that the Portal serve as an effective tool for the diaspora to contribute to 
the National development efforts of the Government.    
(Recommendation No. 12) 
(ii) Global Indian Students’ Portal  
 
2.38 The Committee have been informed that Global Indian Students ’ Portal is being 
developed to provide complete and comprehensive information on educational facilities abroad 
to Indian Students wishing to pursue studies abroad.  
 
2.39 On being asked the status of designing, development and maintenance of Global Indian 
Students’ Portal for Indian students abroad and the extent to which it is likely to benefit the said 
students, the Ministry has informed that they had undertaken to prepare a Global Indian 
Students’ Portal to provide information to the students to assist them in taking an informed 
decision in selecting courses in Universities abroad. This is a very lengthy, domain specific and 
time consuming process as i t is the first time that the Ministry is attempting to provide such a 
platform to the students.  Ministry has already put up a data collection portal for collating the 
requisite data from various stakeholders who are involved in providing the requisite inf ormation 
and can be put on the prospective Global Indian Students’ Portal including Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad.  Once the data collection is completed , then the data will be analysed and used for 
creating a students’ portal and thereafter the data will b e uploaded in the Global Indian Students’ 
Portal.  
 
2.40 The Committee further enquired whether any time -frame has been fixed for data 
collection, collation and operationalization of the Global Indian Students ’ Portal wherein the y 
have been informed that t he Ministry has also engaged a qualified company for designing the 
Portal and sieving the data. It is hopeful that the first draft template of the Portal will be 
ready in near future.  
 
2.41 The Committee note that the Ministry has undertaken a lengthy, domain-specific 
and time -consuming exercise to prepare a Global Indian Students ’ Portal which would 
provide information to the students to assist them in taking an informed decision while 
selecting courses in universities abroad. The Ministry is hopeful th at the first draft 
template of the Portal would be ready in the near future. The Committee are of the view 
that once the portal is operationalized, cases of duping of students by fake universities and 
fraudulent agents would be reduced. They, therefore, ur ge the Ministry to expedite the 

17 
 
process of data collection, collation and operationalization of the Students’ Portal along 
with provisioning of adequate resources for the project. 
Recommendation No. 13) 
(iii) e-Sanad Project 
 
2.42 To a query regarding the progress made so far under the e-Sanad project, the Ministry has 
informed that an online portal e-Sanad (an electronic service delivery platform for Apostille and 
Attestation of documents issued by Government of India) aiming at contactless, cashless and 
paperless attestation/apostille services was introduced in 2017. On receipt of a pplication, the 
details of the documents digitally reach the concerned local authority of the State Government 
and University/Education Board for confirmation of genuineness. Once the document is digitally 
verified, the document is attested/apostilled digitally by MEA. These copies are considered legal, 
and treated as a verified original copy of the document. 
2.43 e-Sanad is currently operational in 14 Centres (Branch Secretariats/RPOs) across the 
country as well as at Attestation/OI Section of CPV Division  of MEA, New Delhi. As on 4 
January 2022, 8,16,213  documents have been successfully processed through e -Sanad 
Portal since its launch in 2017.  
2.44 The Committee note that e -Sanad, an electronic service delivery platform for 
Apostille and Attestation of d ocuments issued by the Government of India aiming at 
contactless, cashless and paperless attestation , launched in 2017 is currently operational in 
14 Centr es (Branch Secretariats/RPOs) across the country as well as at Attestation/OI 
Section of CPV Division of MEA, New Delhi. The Committee further note that si nce the 
launch of the e -Sanad Portal till 4 January 2022 , 8,16,213 documents have been 
successfully processed. The Committee feel that the project is extremely beneficial to the 
Indian diaspora community and urge the Ministry to extend the service to Indian citizens 
residing abroad at the earliest. The Committee also desire that e -Sanad should be 
operationalized in all the States and UTs of the country in a phased manner. A timeline for 
the same may be prepared and shared with the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 

18 
 
C. Engagement with Indian Students Abroad 
 
(i) Cultural Engagement with Students 
 
2.45 As per the data of Indian diaspora compiled by the Ministry, a total of 1,056,120 students 
are studying abroad as on December, 2021.  
2.46 On being asked to state the efforts being made to keep the Indian Students abroad in 
touch with the Indian Culture, the Ministry has stated that Indian Missions abroad are in constant 
touch with the students in the countries of accreditation. Students get invited to cultural events of 
Embassies and National days. Students also participate in Diwali, Holi and other cultur al & 
diaspora events.  Where there is large Indian students population, the Embassy/Consulate 
organizes Indian cultural events with the Universities/Institutes.  Donation of Indian books has 
been done at various foreign Universities.  India Corner has also  been established in many 
libraries across the globe. India Corner programme aims to introduce Indian culture and promote 
India’s presence to the outside world through donations on Indian and India related publications.  
The subjects range from arts, econo my, people, philosophy, literature, culture, folk traditions, 
biographies of great leaders and history to nature, cookery, architecture, ancient and 
contemporary India. Students are invited for celebration of Indian festivals in the Embassies.  
Indian Chairs including Sanskrit & Hindi have been established in many Universities. Cultural 
centers organize regular yoga and performing Arts classes.  Seminars & Conferences abroad and 
distinguished visitors programme are organized by the Missions with active part icipation of the 
local diaspora.   
2.47 The Committee observe that a large number of Indian students are studying abroad 
but many of them have not been registered with the Indian Missions/Posts. The Committee 
are apprehensive that without such imprint, our  Missions/Posts will not be in a position to 
reach out to them in times of need/crisis. The Committee also feel that without constant 
cultural engagement, students might lost touch with our Indian culture and ethos. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that these students should be brought into closer contact with 
the Indian Embassies. In this digital era, increasing use of ICT tools may be promoted for 
the purpose. The Committee also urge the Missions/Consulates abroad to organize more 
cultural events/themes showcasing the rich historical and cultural heritage of India on a 
regular basis. Wide publicity of such cultural programmes may be given including through 

19 
 
social media platforms  and Indian students abroad may  be encouraged to participate 
actively i n such events. The Committee further desire that Indian Embassies/Consulates 
should be very proactive in reaching out to our students in their universities/institutes  so 
that they are made to feel that our Missions/Posts are really a ‘Home away from Home’. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
(ii) Grievance Redressal of Overseas Indian Students 
2.48 When asked to state the number and nature of complaints received from Indian students 
abroad during the last four years and in the current year, the number of cases disposed of 
successfully and the efforts being made to settle all the pending cases expeditiously, the Ministry  
has stated that complaints received from Indian students have largely been on Travel Visa and 
travel issues particularly because of travel restrictions since 2020 onwards due to spread of 
COVID-19. There have been few complaints regarding recognition of t he Universities abroad, 
fee structure and students being duped by fraudulent agents.   These grievances are received 
through various Missions and platforms such as CPGRAMS, MADAD, messages to Indian 
Missions and to the Ministry. 
 
2.49 The Ministry and Missi ons make all out efforts to address these grievances  of the 
students.  As a result , travel and Visa issues of many students have been resolved in many 
countries during the past one year.   Some Missions have actively taken up the matter of fee 
structure and fake universities with the host countries and wherever the fraudulent agents have 
been functioning abroad, the host Governments have been informed about such agencies.  
 
2.50 The Committee also desired to know whether the Ministry has taken measures to ch eck 
fraudulent agents/consultants in India and abroad who duped the students going abroad wherein 
the Ministry has informed that t he Office of OE & PG and Indian Missions take stern steps and 
credential verification of various agents/consultants in India and abroad from time to time.   
 
2.51 As regards the nature of assistance given to the students who got admitted in fake or poor 
standard institutions pertaining to refund of fees etc., the number of complaints received in this 
regard and the number of cases disposed o f successfully, the MEA has informed that t here have 
been a few cases pertaining to welfare issues like inadequate hostel facilities, secu rity at the 
hostel and internal clash among students. These issues have been taken up by the Missions with 
University Administration and disposed of successfully. 
 

20 
 
2.52 Responding to a query regarding the efforts being made for redressal of com plaints of 
students who are not able to join universities and the issue of their fee refunds, the Secretary 
(CPV &OIA) during the course of evidence on 29 June 2021 stated: 
 
“This has been a very difficult issue for all of us and I think, this is something that 
pertains to several countries where this situation has been ongoing. This is a situation that 
pertains to both international as well as domestic students. The pandemic has created a 
situation where unfortunately, most of the classes have been held online and no t in the 
physical mode and therefore, there has been a case for the remission or refund of certain 
kinds of fees. This is still an ongoing exercise. Unfortunately, we still have not reached a 
resolution on this subject.  
 
We continue to pursue with them.  But I suspect that for some time, this is something that 
the Government will continue to press with the local authorities and the universities 
concerned.  Once the pandemic situation has eased somewhat, we would be able to find 
an easier solution particularly when physical classes begin”.   
 
 
2.53 The Committee note that the Ministry as well as our Missions/Posts have been 
receiving complaints from students regarding fake universities, unreasonable fee structure 
and fraudulent agents/consultants duping the students going abroad. Due to the COVID-19 
Pandemic and holding of only online classes, students are also facing difficulty in getting 
remission or refund of certain kinds of fees. The Committee desire that the issues faced by 
such students should be resol ved at the earliest  and urge the Ministry as well as Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to pursue the matter with the host countries, local authorities and 
universities to ensure prompt redressal of the grievances of the said students. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
(iii) Special Measures for Welfare of Indian Students Studying in China and Ukraine  
 
2.54 On being asked about the support system for Indian Students in China, Ukraine and other 
countries, the Ministry has informed that  China has nearly five lakh foreign students from 
various countries and most of them had gone to their respective countries in early 2020 after 
outbreak of COVID-19 epidemic in China when all universities in China had closed down. Since 
then, the universities have not reopened fully. Efforts are being made by almost all Embassies in 

21 
 
Beijing including Indian Embassy for return of foreign students to China to resume their in -
person classes as early as possible.  
2.55 Minister of State (External Affairs), Shri Muraleedharan had written to Minister of 
Health and Family Welfare, Shri Mansukh Mandaviya, to consider some options for such 
students to pursue their courses in India. However, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
has indicated that it would not be f easible to permit such students to complete their internship or 
training in India.  
2.56 The Government will continue to pursue this matter with the Chinese authorities through 
its Mission in Beijing and seek facilitation for an early return of Indian stud ents to their 
universities in China. Meanwhile, Indian students who are studying in China have been advised 
to continue checking the Embassy website for regular updates on the matter. They have also been 
advised to remain in touch with their universities for any updates. 
2.57 Approximately 20,000 Indian students study in various universities in Ukraine, out of 
which 18,000 are medi cal students.  Regular updates for students, including matters related to 
welfare are shared through Mission's website and social  media platforms, on which most Indian 
students in Ukraine are subscribed. Mission also circulates information from time to time into 
University-wise student whatsapp groups through designated persons, when the need arises.  In 
case of problems, students re ach out to Mission through MADAD portal, or through e -mail of 
Consular Wing of the Mission, or through telephone on Mission's emergency contact number or 
regular land-line number. In Ukrainian cities where there are considerable number of students, 
Mission has identified members of Indian community in the form of student contractors, as well 
as other community members, who assist the students in case of emergency under the Mission's 
guidance. Many medical students arrive in Ukraine through Indian education contractors based 
in Ukraine, who also liaise with University authorities and parents, to ensure student 
welfare. Student contractors are also made responsible by the Mission to ensure student welfare, 
and complaints by students and other issues are resolv ed through liaison with the contractors as 
well. The institutional framework for support and welfare of Indian nationals including students 
abroad stands considerably strengthened. The MADAD portal and ICWF are among the 
important mechanisms to assist Indian students.  
2.58 Under special circumstances, for instance, during Vande Bharat Mission, Mission opened 
up additional direct contact numbers to relieve student distress, in addition to reaching to 
students through special online forms in which all intere sted students registered, and student 
support and evacuation flight planning was executed. 
2.59 The Committee further enquired about the initiatives taken by the MEA in collaboration 
with the Ministries of Health & Family Welfare and Education to enable In dian students who 
could not continue their offline courses on account of closure of their universities in China and 
Ukraine during their Study visit to Leh, Chandigarh and Shimla from 17 to 21 May 2022 . They 

22 
 
have been informed that the Indian Embassy in Ukraine continues to be in touch with Ukrainian 
authorities regarding the matter of continuation of studies of Indian students enrolled in 
Ukrainian universities.  Presently, online education in respect of returnee Indian students from 
Ukraine is being conti nued by Ukrainian Universities till June, 2022 and thereafter , Ministry of 
Education of Ukraine will provide further notice. 
2.60 On March 19, 2022, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine had announced a decree 
regarding issuance of certification of higher education in the field of health.  The main outcomes 
of this order are as follows: 
 KROK-1, which is the first stage of unified examination of medical students, is 
postponed to the academic year 2022 -23 from 2021 -22.  Instead, students of the third 
year, who are usually required to undertake KROK -1, would be allowed to pass the next 
academic year based on standard completion of their course requirements. 
 
 KROK-2, for sixth year students, which is usually a mandatory pre -requisite for 
obtaining medical degree , would not be held.  Instead, respective medical universities 
would be able to award degree to students who successfully pass a comprehensive 
practice-oriented qualifying exam, or on the basis of results of assessments over the 
academic year. 
 
2.61 By thi s decree, students have been given a solution to overcome the established 
requirements of KROK-1 and KROK-2 in a manner that would not compromise the progress of 
academic year for third year students, and would also allow 6 th year students to complete thei r 
medical education and obtain necessary degree without requiring them to return to Ukraine to 
give KROK-2. 
2.62 On 28 April, 2022, MEA had conveyed to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoHFW) that while MEA, through its Embassies in countries neighbour ing Ukraine has been 
exploring the possibilities of continuation of medical programmes in different years for our 
returnee students, there will be limitations of numbers and costs in such cases.  MEA had, 
therefore, recommended to MoHFW that it may conside r allowing Indian private medical 
institutions to enroll returnee students from Ukraine in their institutions on a one -time 
exceptional basis. 
2.63 The Government of People’s Republic of China had restricted travel to China by 
suspending visa and residence  permits from 27 March 2020 due to the outbreak of COVID -19.  
As per information available, approximately 20,000 Indian students were enrolled in various 
courses including clinical medicine courses in different Chinese universities at that time.  A large 
number of them returned to India when all universities in China had closed down.  This also 
included a total of 820 students, who were evacuated through three evacuation flights and Vande 
Bharat Mission (VBM) flights in 2020. 
2.64 The Government has been taking up the matter of return of Indian students with the 
Chinese authorities both in New Delhi and through the Indian Embassy in  
China.  The matter was also discussed during the meeting between External Affairs Minister of 

23 
 
India, Dr. S. Jaishankar and the State Councilor and Foreign Minister of the People’s Republic of 
China, Mr. Wang Yi on 25 March 2022 in New Delhi.  Following this meeting, the Chinese side 
has expressed its willingness to consider facilitating the return of som e Indian students to China 
on a need-assessed basis. 
2.65 In order to facilitate this process, the Indian Embassy in Beijing is preparing a list of such 
students which will be shared with the Chinese side for their consideration.  Once the collated 
information is shared with the Chinese side, they would consult relevant Chinese departments to 
verify the list and indicate whether the identified students can travel to China to complete the 
course.  The Chinese side has also conveyed that eligible students sho uld unconditionally abide 
by the C OVID-19 prevention measures, and agree to bear all expenses related to C OVID-19 
prevention measures by themselves.  Regular updates have been given in this regard by the 
Embassy to the Indian students. 
2.66 In addition, th e Ministry of External Affairs had taken up the matter with the National 
Medical Commission and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to explore options to address 
the concerns of the affected students.  National Medical Commission has issued a circular on  04 
March 2022 stating that in view of the large number of Indian medical students in foreign 
institutions who have not been able to complete internship, National Medical Commission has 
decided to accept application from such affected foreign medical gradu ates to complete the 
remaining part of internship in India.  
 
2.67 The Committee are deeply concern ed about the plight of thousands of Indian 
students pursuing medical and other courses in Ukraine and China, who could not return 
back to these countries due to closure of their universities. These students have been left in 
a quandary as they could not re-join their courses physically or complete their internship 
or training in India. The Committee have b een informed that MEA had recommended to 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to consider allowing Indian private medical 
institutions to enroll returnee students from Ukraine in their institutions on a one -time 
exemption basis. The Committee urge the M inistry to pursue the matter with the MoHFW 
vigorously as this step alone may solve the current crisis being faced by the students 
enrolled in Ukrainian universities and enable them to complete their courses.  
With regard to the Indian students enrolled in Chinese universities, the Ministry has 
stated that the Indian Embassy in Beijing is preparing a list of students to be shared with 

24 
 
the Chinese side for consideration  for their return to China, on a need -assessed basis.   
Moreover,   National Medical Commission has issued a circular on 04 March 2022 stating 
that it has decided to accept application from such affected foreign medical graduates to 
complete the remaining part of their internship in India.  The Committee appreciate the 
efforts made in this regard and desire that the Ministry should finalize the list of students 
at the earliest and  make all out efforts to ensure their smooth return through continuous 
interaction with the Chinese authorities at the Highest level, especially as COVID -19 
related health protocols are in place and vaccination has also been widely done. Keeping in 
view the fact that China has nearly five lakhs foreign students from various countries, the 
Committee urge the MEA to get in touch with the Embassies o f other countries so that 
coordinated efforts are made to facilitate the return of such students to China for 
resumption of their in -person classes. The Committee also urge the Ministry to coordinate 
with the MoHFW and National Health Commission so as to f acilitate the medical students 
enrolled in medical colleges in China also to complete the remaining part of their 
internship in India. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
D. Schemes to Facilitate Contributions from Diaspora Community 
2.68 During the course of evidence on the subject, the Committee enquired as to how the 
MEA can facilitate the people who are living abroad, who wanted to pay back to the country . 
The Ministry, in a written reply furnished to the Committee has stated that  it is working on 
strengthening the existing bridges between India and its diaspora, with the view, inter-alia, to 
facilitate the contribution of the diaspora who wish to give back. Various programmes like 
VAJRA Faculty Scheme, PRABHASS and VAIBHAV have been formulated regarding this. 
(i)  VAJRA Faculty Scheme 
2.69 The VAJRA Faculty Scheme , launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister during the PBD in 
2017 brings an international dimension to the R&D ecosystem of India. It taps the expertise of 

25 
 
International Faculty/ scientists/technologists including NRI and PIO/ OCI in highly competitive 
areas of research and development by offering them adjunct / visiting faculty positions in Indian 
Institutions / Universities. It has special focus on engaging NRI / PIO / OCIs in Na tional R&D 
Programmes and thereby deepen their engagement for value addition to various S&T 
programmes, projects and Missions of the Government. 
(ii) PRABHASS: Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark 
2.70 PRABHASS: Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark  - Integrating Indian 
Diaspora with the Mother Land is an initiative to develop a database and a virtual platform to 
bring on board the Global Indian S&T Community to address the Indian social 
challenges/problems. The main objective of PR ABHASS is to invite and encourage Indian 
diaspora to come forward and join hands with India to help solve challenges being faced by 
Indian people, thereby making an impact on society at large. 
2.71 Under the aegis of PRABHASS, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji inaugurated the 
Vaishwik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (VAIBHAV) Summit , a global virtual summit of overseas and 
resident Indian researchers and academicians on Gandhi Jayanti, the 02nd October 2020. About 
2600 overseas Indians registered for the summit online. About 3200 panelists and about 22,500 
academicians and scientists from India and overseas participated in this month -long series of 
webinars. These deliberations were aligned with national goals and priorities of research in India. 
2.72 The Committee are pleased to note that the Government has launched v arious 
programmes like VAJRA Faculty Scheme, PRABHASS and VAIBHAV  to facilitate the 
diaspora community to contribute or give back to the country. The VAJRA Faculty 
Scheme taps the expertise of International Faculty/ scientists/technologists including NRI 
and PIO/OCI in highly competitive areas of research and developmen t by offering them 
adjunct/visiting faculty positions in Indian Institutions/Universities while PRABHASS: 
Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark – Integrating Indian diaspora with 
the Motherland is an initiative to develop a database and a virtu al platform to bring on 
board the Global Indian S&T Community to address the domestic social 
challenges/problems. Under the aegis of PRABHASS, the VAIBHAV Summit , a global 
virtual summit of overseas and resident Indian researchers and academicians was held  in 
2020. The Committee desire that more programmes should be conducted under the aegis of 

26 
 
these initiatives and wider d issemination of the Schemes should be made amongst the 
diaspora through the Indian Missions/Posts. The outcome of the deliberations held  under 
these initiatives may also be integrated into the National Development Agenda. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
      
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
     CHAPTER III 
 
MAJOR EVENTS/PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES FOR WELFARE OF INDIAN 
DIASPORA 
 
3.1 Various events , programmes and s chemes are in place for the welfare of the Indian 
diaspora. 
 
I. EVENTS FOR INDIAN DIASPORA 
 
A. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas  
 
3.2 Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is the flagship event of the Government which is 
celebrated every year on 9  January to reconnect and deepen its engagement with the diaspora. 
Since 2015, its format has been revised to celebrate the PBD once every two years and to hold 
theme-based PBD Conferences during the intervening period with participation from overseas 
diaspora exp erts, policy makers and stakeholders. The 16 thPBD was organized on 9  January, 
2021 entirely in virtual mode for the first time due to C OVID-19 restrictions and the theme was 
‘Contributing to Aatmanirbhar Bharat ’.  The event was very well received around the globe.  
Five virtual PBD conferences were also held prior to the main PBD 2021 namely , (i ) Role of 
Diaspora in Promotion of Indian Culture (ii) Dialogue with Diaspora Business Leaders & CEOs 
and targeting US $ 5 trillion economy by boosting MSMEs (iii) Regional PBD & GCC - India 
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas(iv) Forging Media & Entertainment Partnership to showcase India @ 75 
and (v) Bringing together young achievers from India & Indian Diaspora. 
 
3.3 During the course of evidence on the subject, the Committee enquired about the reasons 
for organizing regional PBD conferences. The Ministry, in a written reply furnished to the 
Committee, has stated that  Regional PBDs are largely organi zed in collaboration with the host 
Government of a major country of that particular region.  It has been seen that countries , which 
have large Indian diaspora, are usually forthcoming in collaborating with the Government of 
India in hosting a regional PBD.  However , all efforts are made to make the outreach of these 
celebrations as far and wide as possible. This enables the diaspora members who otherwise 
cannot be present physically, to participate in the event virtually/remotely.  Besides, the Ministry 
also host sectoral PBD  conferences during which they bring in experts from a specific field to 
discuss how they can better integrate. Also, when the conditions are conducive, Indian Missions 
in various countries organi ze local events  to enable the Indian diaspora to participate in these 
celebrations.  
 
3.4 To commemorate India @ 75, the following PBD Conferences have been held so far:- 
 
(i) PBD Conference on ‘Leveraging the Soft Power of India’ 
 

28 
 
3.5 A virtual PBD conference on ‘Leveraging the Soft Power of India – Goodwill through 
Craft, Cuisine and Creativity’ was organised on 16 October 2021 by Ministry of External Affairs 
in collaboration with Indian Council for Cultural Relations and Diaspora Resource and Research 
Centre (Antar Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad). 
 
(ii) PBD Conference on ‘Future of Natural Resources’ 
 
3.6 A first ever engagement with diaspora on natural resources , particularly hydrocarbons 
was organi zed through a virtual PBD on ‘Future of Natural Resources (Hydrocarbons, Rare 
Earth Metals and Blue Economy) ’ on 29 October 2021 by Ministry of External Affairs in 
collaboration with Ministry of Earth Sciences. 
 
(iii) Virtual Youth PBD Conference 
 
3.7 As a part of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) celebrations, Pravasi Bhartiya Divas was 
held on 9 January 2022 in the form of a virtual Youth PBD Conference  which focussed on 
tapping the innovative young talent in India and abroad towards India’s futuristic developmental 
agenda in the knowledge -based industry. It was held on Role of Diaspora Youth in AKAM - 
Innovation and New Technologie . T he Conference aimed  at deepening engagement with the 
rapidly growing members of diaspora  - children and to showcase the new and changing India to 
the aspirational diaspora youth abroad. The Keynote address was given by Hon’ble Minister of 
State for External Affairs Shri V. M uraleedharan, with a special address by Shri Amitabh Kant, 
Chief Executive Officer, NITI Aayog.  
 
(iv) Virtual Regional Conference on Indian Diaspora in the EU 
 
3.8 A virtual  Regional Conference on Indian Diaspora in the EU  on the theme ‘India’s 
Diaspora Dividend in the EU ’ has already been organized on 23 rd February 2022. The objective 
of the Conference was to engage effectively with the growing Indian Diaspora in the EU, who 
have begun to occupy prominent positions in their host countries, with a view to  promote greater 
economic and technological cooperation and boosting investments. 
 
3.9 The Conference was attended by prominent members of Indian diaspora from different 
countries in EU, including 3 Pravasi Bharatiya Samman awardees who spoke on subjects such as 
hospitality, agriculture, innovation, Science and Technology. 
 
3.10 The Ministry has provided the details of funds allocated and utilized for organizing 
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conference since 2015 as under:  
 
 
 
 

29 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Events Budget Allocated 
for PBD 
Celebration 
Expenditure incurred 
on PBD 
1. Pravasi Bhartiya Divas Convention 
2015 on 7-9 January, Gandhi Nagar 
(Gujarat) 
Rs. 7.53 Crore  Rs. 14.64 Crore 
2. Pravasi Bhartiya Divas Convention 
2017 on 7-9 January, Bengaluru 
(Karnataka) 
Rs. 24.33 Crore  Rs. 13.85 Crore 
3. Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 2019 on 21-
23 January, Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) 
Rs. 59.77 Crore Rs. 40.88 Crore, so far. 
4. Pravasi Bhartiya Divas, 2021 09th 
January (Virtual mode) 
Rs. 4.23 lakh Rs. 4.23 lakh 
 
 
3.11 On being asked about the level of participation of the Indian diaspora including experts, 
policy makers and stakeholders in such Conferences, the Min istry has stated that the level of 
participants include HoGs/HoSs & Ministers of Indian origin from other countries.  The 
Conferences also have businessmen, educationists, scientists, engineers, doctors, research 
scholars and members of the common diaspora. 
 
3.12 When enquired whether low/unskilled and migrant workers have also participated in such 
Conferences, the Ministry has informed that the participation is open for all diaspora including 
the migrant workers.  
 
3.13 During evidence on the subject, t he Committee further enquired whether the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas is addressing the concerns of the blue collared workers who are struggling for 
their lives in the foreign countries. In a written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
has stated that PBD is a f lagship programme for all Indian diaspora including the blue collared 
workers.  Participation is open to all diaspora. In 2021, PBD was held in virtual format with 
wider participation from a range of countries. Grievances of the Indian diaspora have been 
addressed by Indian Missions abroad, Overseas Indian Affairs Division, Pravasi Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendras and through various other platforms like CPGRAMS, MADAD etc. In the past 
two years, special flights (Vande Bharat) which had a focus to ensure the mobility of the 
diaspora even during the time of Pandemic, have been run . Various programmes like Pravasi 
Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY), Know India Programme (KIP) and Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC) have participation from mainly the blue collared working class.  
3.14 On being asked to furnish the details regarding members of the diaspora comm unity 
conferred the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards so far, the Ministry has informed that  the 
Scheme was started in 2003 and upto 15 awards were being given till the year 2015. From 2017, 

30 
 
the total number of awardees have been increased to 30, as the PBD  is being held every alternate 
year since 2015. So far, 269 members of the diaspora community have been conferred with the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards. 
 
3.15 In response to a query regarding the manner in which the issues discussed during PBD 
conferences are translated into policy, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during briefing on the subject 
on 11 January 2021 stated: 
 
“There was one more point that you had asked a bout PBD and how we translate it into 
policy.  As you know, the practice in the past had been that we would do what are called 
regional and sectoral PBDs in between the convention.  These regional and sectoral PBDs 
were held either in different parts of th e world or focused on, let us say, economy, 
banking, science and technology, and then from each of these we would generate a set of 
action points.  Just as we are now doing, for the five PBD conferences that we have held.  
We generate a set of action points and then discuss it with the other concerned Ministries, 
maybe stakeholders in that process.  For instance, on the economic side we would discuss 
with DEA, Finance, DPIIT, and so on, so that we can integrate these into the policy 
framework for the diaspora”.   
3.16 When asked about the number of rounds of discussions  held with concerned Ministries 
and stakeholders regarding the action points arising out of PBD conferences with a view to 
integrating the same into the policy framework for the diaspora and the achievement in this 
regard, the Ministry has stated that in majority of the PBD conferences, the endeavor is to get the 
participation o f the Minister, senior dignitaries and the stakeholders of t he 
Ministries/organizations the subject of which is under discussion during the conference so that 
the view expressed during these conferences become direct inputs to the concerned 
Department/Ministries to enable them to integrate into the policy formation . The Ministry also 
circulate the reports on the conference to the relevant stakeholders wherever they have not been 
able to participate. 
 
3.17 The Committee also enquired whether the Government is contemplating to review the 
PBD scheme to ensure greater outreach and participation of low and semi -skilled workers and 
bring in more transparency. To this, the Ministry has informed that it  uses the inputs of diaspora 
in deciding the future subjects of PBD conferences  and the endeavor is always to have greater 
outreach and diverse participants in the Pravasi Bharatiya Celebrations. It was further added that  
since no complaints/suggestions have been received to review the PBD scheme , as such there is 
no proposal to review the scheme. 
 
 
3.18 The Committee observe that Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is the flagship event of 
the Government to celebrate the contributions of Indian community abroad in the 
development of the country. The participants of PBDs include Head of Governments/Head 

31 
 
of States and Ministers of In dian origin from other countries besides businessmen, 
educationists, scientists, engineers, doctors, research scholars and members of the common 
diaspora. The Committee are further informed that the participation for PBD celebration 
is open for all diaspora including the migrant workers . The Committee, however, are 
apprehensive that low/semi -skilled and blue collar workers may not find place or feel 
comfortable to participate in the said celebration  as the general profile of participants is 
seen to be of very high level . The Committee have a strong view that the participation and 
involvement should be more broad -based acco mmodating the vulnerable section s of the 
diaspora community too. The Committee regret to note that at present the Ministry has no 
proposal to review the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Events. In the opinion of the Committee, 
there is a need for greater outreach and diverse participation under the PBD celebrations 
and events. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should conduct a 
review on the implementation of its flagship programme viz.  the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 
to make the ‘Divas’ truly representative of the ‘Pravasi Bharatiya’ community. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
3.19 The Committee note that the action points generat ed out of PBD Conferences are  
discussed with concerned Ministries and stakeholders so that the same could be integrated 
into the policy framework for the diaspora. The Ministry is, however, silent on t he 
achievement regarding integration of such action points into its diaspora policy.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to present a comprehensive details in this regard 
and ensure that the policy inputs out of such discussions are derived and integrated into its 
policy framework for the diaspora of concerned Departments / Ministries so that the PBD 
Conferences/Conventions become more meaningful to the diaspora community. 

32 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
B. Special Conference – India’s Diaspora Focusing on Girmitiyas 
 
3.20 The first ever Girmitiya Conference 2021 was organized virtually on 16 -17 September 
2021 by India Foundation and Ministry of External Affairs. The Conference’s theme was 
‘Changing identities, shifting trends and roles’. Participants from 18 countries delib erated on the 
issues, contributions, successes and tribulations of Girmitiyas across the world focusing on their 
history, identity formation, cultural preservation and their evolving relationship with India. 
 
3.21 During the course of evidence on 22 December 2021 , the Secretary (CPV &OIA) 
highlighted the special focus accorded to the Girmitiya community: 
 
 “….the Girmitiya countries, that is something that is a very strong and emotional bond. 
Earlier this year, we held two conferences. One of them wit h one of the NGOs based in 
Delhi and the other one which is part of our pre - PBD preparations in which the members 
of the Girmitiya community were involved. Often their situation is quite unique. The 
manner in which they went and the manner in which they h ave consolidated their 
political as well as social position is something that we are extremely proud of. So, we 
stand with them and we try to incorporate many of the things that they said into our 
policies” 
 
3.22 On being asked about the outcome of the virtual conference focusing on the Girmitiyas 
and the follow-up action taken in this regard, the M inistry has stated that there was a positive 
outcome of the first Girmitiya Conference organized in virtual mode. The following action has 
been taken on the recommendations of the Conference: 
 
(i) Ministry has written to the Ministry of Education to introduce the history of indentured 
labour in the school education. 
(ii) Ministry will try to conduct more events at regional level to promote interaction between 
India and Girmitiya countries. 
(iii) Ministry will propose to establish a Girmitiya university/faculty/chair. 
 
3.23 In response to a query  regarding special focus on Girmitiyas and involving them in our 
cultural tour, the Ministry has informed that special focus has been given on outreach to Indian 
diaspora in Girmitiya countries. Many schemes like Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY), 
Know I ndia Programme (KIP) conducted for diaspora have substantial representation for 
Girmitiya countries. ICCR from time to time sends cultural troupes to Girmitiya countries which 
includes groups of Bhojpuri artists also.  
 

33 
 
3.24 The Committee note that as an outcome of the first ever Girmitiya Conference 
organized virtually in September 2021 , the MEA has written to the Ministry of Education 
to introduce the history of indentured labour in the school education. The Ministry  would 
also try to conduct more events at regional level to promote interaction between India and 
Girmitiya countries and w ould propose to establish a Girmitiya university/faculty/ chair. 
The Committee are pleased at the positive outcome of the said Conference and urge  the 
Ministry to take follow-up action in this regard so that the  said initiatives are implemented 
at the earliest and the Committee may be apprised of accordingly.  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
C. Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz 
 
3.25 Bharat ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz is one of the important initiatives of the Government of 
India to engage Indian diaspora and friends of India.  The Quiz is held for three categories of 
participants – Persons of Indian Origin, Non Resident Indians and Foreign n ationals in the age 
group of 18 -35 years.  The winners of the preliminary round are given gold, silver & bronze 
medals.  The winners of the final round are handed over medals during PBD.  However, the third 
edition of BKJ Quiz (2020-21) was held online due to COVID-19 Pandemic.  All the 15 winners 
of the final round will be invited to India for Bharat Darshan tour after the Pandemic situation 
normalizes. 
 
3.26 Asked to state the category -wise level of participation under the Bharat ko Janiye Quiz, 
the Ministry has informed that  the Quiz is open for all young persons and foreigners whether 
students, professionals, non -professionals, householders etc. under any one of the 3 categories  
viz, PIOs/OCIs; (ii) NRIs and (iii) foreigners. 
 
3.27 The Committee note that Bharat ko Janiye Quiz is one of the important initiatives of 
the Government of India to engage Indian diaspora and friends of India. However, the 
details regarding the level of participation under the various categories has not been  
provided by the Ministry . The Committee desire that the Ministry should popularize the 
programme through wide publicity so that the number of participants, especially students , 

34 
 
is increased and the desired impact is achieved amongst the diaspora community . The 
Committee also desire that a s eparate category for school children should be introduced  
under the BKJ Quiz. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
D. Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) Online Quiz and MEA AKAM Week 
 
3.28 To commemorate the occasion of India @75, Ministry is organizing ‘Azadi ka Amrit 
Mahotsav’ (AKAM) online Quiz for the overseas Indian/Foreign youth to awaken the curiosity 
of the new generation to know more about India so that they develop an all -round understanding 
of India.  All NRIs, PIOs and foreigners between the age of 16 to 35 years are eligible. 
 
3.29 Asked to elaborate on the events organized and activities undertaken during the recently 
concluded AKAM Week along with the response received in this regard, the Ministry has stated 
that it celebrated its Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav Iconic Week from 21 to 27 February, 2022.  
Hon’ble External Affairs Minister issued a message to commence the MEA AKAM Week. The 
message brought out the essence of AKAM celebrat ions being organi zed across India and 
outside under the guidance, vision and leadership of the Prime Minister. 
  
3.30 During the MEA’s AKAM Week, a series of commemorative events and activities were 
organized by the Ministry across the country. Over 200 ev ents commemorating Azadi Ka Amrit 
Mahotsav were organi zed during the week by the Ministry, ICCR Regional Offices, Regional 
Passport Offices, Protector of Emigrants and Branch Secretariats located across the nation 
organized over 200 events commemorating Az adi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, with participation of 
various stakeholders including members of the public, dignitaries, foreign dip lomats, students, 
media etc. Events commemorating India’s Freedom Struggle, Constitution, Art and Culture, 
Environment, Cuisine etc. were organized by the aforesaid offices throughout the week. 
 
3.31 The Ministry successfully incorporated the guiding principles of ‘Jan-Bhagidari’ and 
‘Whole of Government Approach’ in the events organized during the MEA AKAM Week. Most 
of the events saw the participation of members of the public across the country. In the run -up to 
the MEA AKAM Week, Foreign Secretary had invited all Ministries of the Government of India 
to join MEA in celebrating the ICONIC WEEK and also sought support from the Ministrie s in 
promoting the commemorative events in media. 
 
3.32 In culmination, a plethora of events were organi zed by the Ministry during the MEA 
AKAM Week to celebrate and commemorate 75 years of independence and the glorious history 
of its people, culture and achievements covering the AKAM themes of Freedom Struggle, Ideas, 

35 
 
Resolve, Actions and Achievements. Ministry made a special effort to ensure an active and 
enthusiastic participation by the Foreign Missions resident in India during the MEA AKAM 
Week which made this week truly reflective of our ideals and practice of ‘Vasudhaiva 
Kutumbakam’.  
 
3.33 The Committee commend the initiative s taken by the Ministry in organizing the 
Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) online Quiz for the overseas Indian/Foreign youth and 
MEA AKAM Week to celebrate and commemorate 75 years of independence and the 
glorious history of our people, culture and achievements . It is also seen that during the 
MEA AKAM Week, a series of commemorative events and activities were organized by the 
Ministry across the country  with participation of various stakeholders including members 
of the public, dignitaries, foreign diplomats, students, media etc.  The Committee note that 
the Ministry has made special efforts to ensure active and enthusiastic participation by the 
residents of Foreign Missions in India also during the MEA AKAM Week  to make it truly 
reflective of our ideals and practice of ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’.  The Committee are of 
the view that these initiatives will bring the Indian diaspora community closer to their roots, 
foster the sense of patriotism amongst Indian nationals in the country and abroad as well 
as promote Indian culture and its soft power projection abroad. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to organize events on themes related to the history and culture of India 
annually through  the Indian Missions/Posts abroad  and make the celebration of MEA 
AKAM Week an annual affair.  
(Recommendation No. 23) 
II. ENGAGEMENTS WITH NRIs 
 
A. State Outreach Programme – Videsh Sampark 
 
3.34 The Ministry of External Affairs also commenced engagement with the State 
Governments so that more effective and efficient engagement with the diaspora can be achieved. 
Therefore, in 2017, MEA launched State outreach programme under the banner “Videsh 

36 
 
Sampark” to seek cooperation in addressing issues pertaining to welfare and protection of NRIs 
living abroad and also to brief the  State Governments about the Ministry’s initiatives pertaining 
to engagement and welfare of the overseas Indian community and curbing illegal migration. In 
2017-18, various events were organized with State Governments of Telangana, Maharashtra, 
Kerala, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh and in the year 2020, it was organized in the State of 
Karnataka. The Ministry has also sought willingness from some of the States to organize such 
events during the current financial year. 
3.35 When asked about the response from the State Governments under the Videsh Sampark 
and the action plan for greater engagement with the State Governments under the programme , 
the Ministry has informed that the Videsh Sampark Programme, initiated in the year 2017 , is an 
in-depth dialogue between the Ministry of External Affairs and the State Governments with the 
objective of welfare and protection of the Overseas Indian Community and strengthening India’s  
engagement with its diaspora. 
 
3.36 The Conference provides an opportunity to brainstorm with the State Governments about 
how to work closely with them to address the above issues. The response so far was good but the 
programmes could not be undertaken recently because of the spread of COVID Pandemic.  
 
3.37 The f irst Videsh Sampark program me was held on 13.05.2017 in Telangana .    The 
subsequent State Outreach Events were organi zed in partnership with the State Governments of 
Maharashtra (2017), Kerala  (2017), Gujarat (2018), Madhya Pradesh (2018) and Karnataka in 
2020. Under this, a day -long conference is held in the State capital to brief senior officials and 
stakeholders in the State regarding:- 
 
 the initiatives, programmes and schemes pertaining to the steps taken by the Ministry to 
expedite passport services, e -Sanad, e -Migrate, welfare and protection measures for overseas 
Indians.   
 information about diaspora engagement initiatives of the Minist ry, including Pre-
departure Orientation Training, Know India Program me, Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana, Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana, Welfare of Indian students studying abroad, speedy resolution of 
disputes related to NRI marriages etc. 
 exploring possibili ties for cooperation with the State Government in various areas 
especially enhancing delivery of consular services and effectively addressing illegal migration 
and cooperation with the State Government in taking action against unscrupulous recruiting 
agents. 
 
3.38 The Committee note that the M inistry has launched State Outreach Programme in 
2017 under the banner  ‘Videsh Sampark’ which is an in -depth dialogue between Ministry 

37 
 
of External Affairs and State Governments with the objective of seeking cooperation in 
addressing issues pertaining to welfare and protection of NRIs living abroad and also to 
brief the  State Governments about the Ministry’s initiatives pertaining to engagement and 
welfare of the overseas Indian community and curbing illegal  migration. However, only six 
States viz, Telangana, Maharashtra, Kerala, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka 
could so far be covered under the programme  because of the spread of the COVID -19 
Pandemic. The Committee are of the view that welfare and protection of Indian diaspora 
as well as deeper engagement with the said community could be effectively achieved only 
with the active participation of the State Governments and also by maintaining close 
coordination with them. The Committee, therefore urge the Ministry to organize more 
‘Videsh Sampark ’ programmes prioritizing the States with migration hotspots and 
thereafter in other States in a time bound manner since the COVID-19 Pandemic situation 
has improved. The Committee also urge the Ministry to share with this Committee the 
outcome of Videsh Sampark programmes held so far and step up its efforts of coordination 
and closer interaction with the State Governm ents for successful implementation of its 
programmes and schemes.   
(Recommendation No. 24) 
B. Indian Community Welfare Fund 
 
(i) Funds under ICWF and Nature of Assistance under the Fund 
 
3.39 Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has already been set up in all Indian Missions 
and Posts abroad to meet the contingency expenditure incurred by them for carrying out various 
on-site welfare activities for overseas Indian citizens on a means -tested bas is. The ICWF 
guidelines have been comprehensively revised w.e.f. 1 September 2017. The revised guidelines 
have considerably expanded the scope of on -site welfare activities for the benefit of distressed 
Indian nationals that could be extended through the F und. The guidelines cover three key areas 
namely; assisting overseas Indian nationals in distress situations ( boarding and lodging, air 

38 
 
passage, legal assistance, emergency medical care, transportation of mortal remains), community 
welfare activities and improvement in consular services. They now also include provisions for 
setting up of legal panels in countries with sizable Indian diaspora, payment of fines/penalty for 
petty crimes for release of prisoners and assistance to distressed Indian women abroad.   Since 
2014 till November 2020, more than INR 423 crores of fund s has been utilized  and around 
2,40,000 Indians were extended assistance.  
3.40 The amount collected/raised and utilized under the ICWF during 2019-2021 along with 
the number of beneficiaries  assisted, year and embassy/mission/country -wise is placed at 
Annexure II.  
 
3.41 Out of the total amount of Rs. 2,878,524,356.18 collected, Rs. 2,458,533,922.68 has been 
utilized for 207644 beneficiaries during the said period. An amount of Rs. 479 crores is available 
in the ICWF as on 31st December, 2021. 
 
3.42 During the current COVID -19 Pandemic, Indian Missions/Posts abroad proactively 
helped distressed/stranded Indian nationals from ICWF in accordance with extant guidelines. 
Around Rs. 43.16 crores was utilized to extend assistance as on September, 2021. 
3.43 Asked to state the country -wise number of distressed/stranded Indian nationals provided 
assistance under the Indian Community Welfare Fund along with the total funds spent in this 
regard during the C OVID-19 Pandemic, the Ministry has informed that 171,600 
distressed/stranded Indian nationals were provided assistance till 31st October 2021 and 
approximately, Rs. 44.19 crore was incurred. 
 
3.44 The Committee observe d that funds under ICWF are transferred from one Mission/Post 
to another and enquired about the reasons for the same  wherein the Ministry has informed that 
additional funds are being sought by some Missions/Post s who had to incur expenditure beyond 
the ICWF collected by them.  The fu nds are being transferred on the basis of merits and with the 
approval of the competent authority. 
 
3.45 When enquired whether complaints regarding non -disbursal of funds to the applicants 
under ICWF, particularly during the COVID -19 Pandemic and misuse of the said fund including 
for modernization and creation of more facilities for embassy buildings have been received, the 
Ministry has stated that no complaints has been received in this regard. 
 
3.46 On being asked whether the Ministry has any plan to further expand the scope under the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund and whether the allocation for ICWF has been adequate 
keeping in view the huge population of the Indian diaspora, the M inistry has stated that the latest 
guidelines of ICWF dated 1 September 2017 are exhaustive in nature and as of now , they are 
serving well.  The funds collected under ICWF have been adequate for the Indian diaspora 
abroad. 
 

39 
 
3.47 When enquired about the number of countries in which legal panels have been set up so 
far under ICWF and the number of persons assisted in this regard, the Ministry ha s stated that all 
Indian Missions/Posts where there is substantial number of Indian workers have legal panels. 
 
3.48 To a query whether the Ministry has received any complaint regarding cumbersome 
guidelines for availing assistance from overseas Indian nationals under the ICWF, the Ministry 
has stated that no specific complaint has been received. 
 
3.49 The Committee appreciate the assistance rendered to distressed/stranded Indian 
nationals abroad under the ICWF during the COVID -19 Pandemic. The funds collected 
under the ICWF have been adequate for the Indian diaspora abroad  and an amount of Rs. 
429 crore is available in the ICWF  as on 31 December 2021. The Committee also observe 
that in case some Missions/Posts had to incur expenditure beyond the ICWF collected by 
them, funds are transferred from one Mission/Post to another upon request. The 
Committee acknowledge that due to various unforeseen circumstances like the COVID -19 
Pandemic, political crisis requiring evacuation of Indian nationals, natural disasters etc. , 
some Missions/Posts might require additional funds and desire that the Ministry should 
have an institutional arrangement to assist such Missions/Posts to meet any eventuality. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should facilitate transfer of funds from one 
Mission/Post to another upon request after ensuring its merit expeditiously.  
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
3.50 The Committee note that the ICWF guidelines have been revised w.e.f 1 September 
2017 considerably expanding the scope of on -site welfare activities for the benefit of 
distressed Indian nationals who could be assisted through the Fund. The revised guidelines 
now include provisions for setting up of legal panels in countrie s with sizeable Indian 
diaspora, payment of fines/penalty for petty crimes for release of prisoners and assistance 

40 
 
to distressed Indian women abroad. The Committee further note that all Indian 
Missions/Posts, where there are a substantial number of Indian workers, have legal panels.  
However, keeping in view the fact that migrant workers and distressed Indian women , who 
are the most vulnerable sections of the diaspora community, are in almost all the countries 
but may not have the resources for legal assist ance in case of need, the Committee 
recommend that legal panels may be set up in all the Indian Missions/Posts having 
diaspora community, irrespective of the size of the diaspora.   
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
(ii) Repatriation of Mortal Remains of Indians Who Die Abroad 
 
3.51 During the course of evidence on the subject, the difficulty in bringing the mortal remains 
of Indians who died abroad was pointed out and the Ministry was asked as to how the procedure 
could be simplified. The Ministry, in a written reply, has stated that it attaches highest 
importance to the issue of repatriation of mortal remains of Indians who die d abroad and work 
earnestly through our Missions/Posts abroad to ensure the expeditious transportation of mortal 
remains to India.  Emergency contact numbers are available on the websites of all Missions/Posts 
abroad for 24X7 help to Indians. Phone numbers of Ambassador and other officers are also 
available on respective websites. 
 
3.52 The Ministry has also furnished the s alient features of the assistance provided by our 
Missions/Posts to the families of Indian nationals who died abroad as under: 
 
(i) Registration of death in the Mission/Post abroad : There exists a single window 
clearance in all Indian Missions/Posts for death cases. As soon as the Embassy 
comes to know of such unfortunate death of an Indian national, the Consular 
Wing of the Missions/ Posts immediately gets in touch with the family/relative of 
the deceased Indian national as well as the local authorities to fac ilitate the 
completion of necessary formalities in coordination with the local police 
authorities and transportation of mortal remains in accordance with the wishes of 
the family of the deceased at the earliest possible. 
 
(ii) Transportation of mortal remains: Indian Missions/ Posts liaise with different 
authorities in the foreign country and concerned State authorities for 
- Medical report / death certificate issued from the hospital concerned; 
- Police report (with English translation, if report is in som e other language), in 
case of accidental or unnatural death; 

41 
 
- Consent letter from next of kin of the deceased for local cremation/burial/ 
transportation of mortal remains; 
- Clearance and arrangements for embalming of mortal remains from the 
authorities concerned in the foreign country; 
- Clearance from local immigration/customs department. 
- Clearance from Indian customs authorities. 
3.53 These local procedures for transportation of mortal remains differ from country to 
country. The time taken in obtaining necess ary clearances etc . depends upon the local rules in 
foreign countries. However, Indian Missions/ Posts try their best to expedite the transportation. 
 
3.54 As regards whether the Ministry has any plan to simplify the ICWF guidelines including 
transportation of mortal remains, the M inistry has stated that it does not have any plan at present 
to simplify the latest guidelines issued on 1st September, 2017 as the same has simplified the 
process covering almost all aspects of ICWF including transportation of mortal remains.  H ead 
of Missions/Head of Posts have adequate delegated power to take on the spot decision without 
referring to the Ministry in most of the cases. 
 
3.55 The Committee note that though the M inistry attaches highest importance to the 
issue of expeditious transportation of mortal remains of Indians who die abroad, several 
instances of facing extreme difficulties have come to notice in bringing the dead bodies 
back home. Hence, the Committee felt the need for simplifi cation of  procedures in this 
regard. However, it is seen that at present the Ministry has no plans to simplify the latest 
guidelines of the ICWF as it has already simplified almost all aspects of ICWF guidelines 
including the process for transportation of mo rtal remains. The Ministry has also stated 
that the local procedures for transportation of mortal remains differ from country to 
country and the time taken in obtaining necessary clearances etc. , depends upon the local 
rules in foreign countries. The Commi ttee, therefore, desire that utmost priority should be 
attached to the humanitarian concerns relating to the transportation of mortal remains of 
Indian nationals who die abroad and all out efforts should be made by the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to ensur e the expeditious transportation of the mortal remains. 
Head of Missions/Head of Posts may be proactive in coordinating with the local authorities 

42 
 
for obtaining the necessary clearances and utilize their delegated powers whenever there is 
a delay.  
(Recommendation No. 27) 
C. Welfare/Protection of Indian Emigrants Holding ECR Passport 
 
3.56 The Government has taken several steps to safeguard the interests of Indian emigrants in 
the Gulf and other Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries. These include: 
 
(i) The on-line MADAD portal enables the emigrant workers and their family members to 
register their consular grievances on-line and track their redressal. 
 
(ii) Grievances related to overseas employment in notified ECR countries can also be lodg ed 
directly by emigrants/relatives or through the Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra ordinarily on\e-
Migrate  portal, relating to employment. These grievances are settled by respective jurisdictional 
Protectors of Emigrants (PoEs) as per laid down procedures. 
 
(iii) Indian Missions conduct Open Houses on a regular basis where workers can speak on 
their working conditions and seek redressal of their grievances. 
 
(iv) A multilingual 24X7 Helpline of Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra  
in New Delhi provides infor mation, guidance and grievance redressal on all issues and problems 
pertaining to overseas employment of Indian nationals. 
 
(v)  Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras have been set up abroad at Dubai (UAE), Riyadh, 
Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala L umpur (Malaysia) to provide guidance and 
counseling on all matters pertaining to overseas Indian workers. Missions have also established 
24x7 Helplines and Toll  Free Helplines for the benefit of Indian workers to seek help. 
 
(vi) Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras (KPSK) have been set  up in Kochi,  
Hyderabad, Chennai, Lucknow and Delhi to assist emigrants or their relatives to redress their 
problems/complaints regarding overseas employment. 
 
(vii) Grievances brought to the notice of the Ministry and the Missions through social media 
including twitter are promptly addressed. 
 
(viii) Women who are Emigration Clearance Required passport holders can travel abroad to 
ECR countries for employment only if they are 30 years and above through 10 State Government 
recruitment agencies. In case of Foreign Employer (FE) directly recruiting an Indian women 
emigrant, the FE must deposit a security of US$  2500 in the form of Bank Guarantee (BG) with 
the Indian Mission. POEs may seek a copy of the bank guarantee duly a ttested by the Indian 
Mission so as to ensure that emigration clearance is granted only in case the BG has been 
deposited by the FE with the Indian Mission. 

43 
 
 
(ix) Since Recruiting Agents  (RAs) are key stakeholders in the emigration process, 
relaxations hav e been given to RAs like , reduced bank guarantees and reduced office space 
requirements to tide over the financial crisis due to COVID-19. 
3.57 During the course of evidence on the subject, the Committee wanted to know the reason 
for multiplicity of complaint portals like MADAD, Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata  Kendras, e -
Migrate etc.  The Ministry, in a written reply, has stated that MADAD is for consular complaints 
in general.  Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras and e -Migrate are for complaints related t o 
workers who have emigrated abroad for employment. 
 
(i) MADAD Portal and Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata  Kendras 
 
3.58 The MADAD portal was launched in February 2015 for online redressal of consular 
grievances of Indians in distress abroad. MADAD is one of the flagship citizen services rendered 
by MEA. Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras supplement the work being done through 
MADAD portal. e-Migrate  portal is primarily for addressing all matters related to recruitment 
and employment  of emig rants and is not a general grievance redressal portal. However, it does 
handles recruitment/employment related grievances of migrant workers. e-Migrate is, thus, a 
sub-portal for MADAD, handling a specific area. MADAD and e-Migrate portals are also 
interlinked. MADAD remains the primary platform for registering grievances for Indians 
residing abroad though consular grievances are also received through CPGRAM, mainly from 
family members of NRIs residing in India. 
 
3.59 Elaborating on the mechanism for redressal of complaints of migrant workers, the 
Secretary (CPV&OIA) during the course of evidence on 29 June 2021 stated: 
 
“There are, as you know, two principal platforms on which these complaints are 
registered but for our purposes, they ar e inter-transferable and merged together. The first 
and the original one is the service called MADAD, where people can register their 
complaints. These go directly to the person, or to the Mission or to the Division where the 
complaints are to be lodged an d addressed and there is an automatic escalation process. 
The second system is through the e -Migrate. As we know, all migrant workers, 
particularly the vulnerable communities of ECR go through the e -Migrate platform. 
Therefore, they are all familiar with t he e-Migrate platform. So, we have a facility of 
registering complaints in the e -Migrate as well. Over here, a lot of the complaints which 
are then addressed, are directed to the recruiting agencies by the concerned Protector of 
Emigrants (P oEs) and the re sponses are taken. In many cases, they reside with the 
Embassies who would then respond. For our purposes, in the Ministry of External 
Affairs, the two of them actually get merged and we have a similar process for addressing 
them. The redressal process has  been very robust and because of the escalation process 

44 
 
that we have within it which goes up to the Ambassadors and the Heads of Divisions, the 
response level is very high and in fact, we have been complimented by the e -Governance 
mechanism of the Government for the very high rate of response of MADAD”. 
 
3.60 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding multiplicity of grievance portals 
during briefing on 11 January 2021, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) stated: 
 
“You mentioned about the multiplicity of portals. MADAD is the first one for grievance 
redressal. What we find often is that people are familiar with a certain portal and 
therefore we have not given up M ADAD, although we have a certain grievance 
mechanism in e-Migrate. There is another thing call ed CPGRAMS which is nationwide, 
for the entire Government goes down to the district level. In fact, it is a very effective 
mechanism. But while it is more popular over here within the country, it is not as popular 
overseas. People overseas still relate fir st to M ADAD. So, I think in some ways, despite 
the fact that we have multiplicity of portals, it serves certain segmented areas which are 
more familiar. Of course, we tell them about different portals so that they can choose 
which is the one they are familiar with. Very often for us, we find that if we have to have 
an interaction with the State Governments or district police, the CPGRAMS portal is the 
quickest way to get to them because it is connected down to the thana level. So, it has 
certain advantages.  I think each of them has their own merits. But I feel as long as it 
responds to the questions, it is okay”.  
 
3.61 The Committee enquired about the number of emigrant workers who have registered their 
grievances on the on-line MADAD portal and through the Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra/e -
Migrate portal and the status of redressal of such grievances so far. The Ministry has provided 
the following information on 11 January, 2022:- 
 
E/I, Baghdad: During the period under review, 20 redressal & grievances have been received on 
the on-line MADAD portal and work are in progress for most of them and rest are solved. Due 
care has been taken of all the grievances received by the Embassy. 
 
CGI Dubai, UAE : As per the available records, a  total of 6,428 grievances were registered  on 
MADAD Portal so far  since its inception in 2014 , out of which  4,204 grievances are registered 
by the emigrant workers.  As of date  115, grievances pertaining to emigrant workers remains 
unresolved on MADAD portal. 
 
3.62 The details of Labour Grievances registered through various channels like calls, walk -in, 
e-mails, Whatsapp and other Social Media Accounts w.e. f 01/11/2020 to 30/12/2021 are given 
below: 
S.No. Issues No. of Grievances 
1. Salary Issues 410 
2. Labour/Visa/entry permit cancellation 296 

45 
 
 
3.63 A total number of 512 legal counseling have been conducted for Labour related 
grievances and also 295 legal counseling were conducted for Labour related information. A total 
number of 4013 informative interactions were made on various labour related queries. 
 
E-migrate Portal: Country -wise data is not visible in the e-Migrate system. 
 
3.64 On receipt of grievance from public through walk -in, emails, MADAD Portal, e-Migrate, 
Social Media Accounts, PBSK toll free number, Mobile App and Whatsapp - the Consulate 
proactively takes up the matter at an appropriate level on case by case basis with the 
employer/sponsor or local authorities for earliest redressal/resolution of the public grievances. 
 
E/I, Riyadh: Till 31/12/ 2021, 20,864  Indian nationals have registered their grievances on the 
online MADAD portal and PBSK/e -Migrate portal of which 19729 have been resolved and 629 
grievances are still pending under various stages of processing. 
 
CGI, Jeddah:  Till 31/12/2021, 17,154 Indian nationals have registered their grievances on the 
online MADAD portal and PBSK/e-Migrate portal of which 14520 have been resolved and 2634 
grievances are still pending under various stages of processing. 
 
E/I, Kuwait:    The number of grievances registered and resolved on MADAD portal 
(PBSK/eMigrate) in 2021  is provided below:  
Total Grievances on MADAD Grievances registered 
through PBSK 
Emigrate linked grievances 
Registered Closed (by 
CPV division) 
Registered Closed (by 
CPV division) 
Registered Closed (by 
CPV Division) 
974 257 18 5 244 68 
 
E/I, Doha: 
Grievances 
on 
MADAD 
related to 
emigrant 
workers 
2018 2019 2020 2021 
Registered Resolved 
Closed 
Regd. Resolved 
Closed 
Regd. Resolved 
Closed 
Regd. Resolved 
Closed 
Total 12 12 152 149 230 211 137 106 
Regd. By 
PBSK 
5 5 5 5 4 3 3 3 
 
3. Passport with Employer/Immigration/Agent 270 
4. End of Service Benefit related 180 
5. Contract problems/absconding/overstay 102 
6. Worker Abuse 25 
 Total 1283 

46 
 
E/I, Beirut: On the MADAD Portal, mostly grievances pertaining to receiving of mortal remains 
from this station and settlement of Insurance claims by the relatives of the deceased are 
registered and all of them have been successfully attended to in the last couple of years. Since the 
October-19 revolution and the outbreak of  COVID-19 Pandemic in 2020, a large number of 
Indian emigrant workers who are staying illegally, directly approached this Mission for 
assistance. Their issues were taken up by this Mission with the local General Security authorities 
and more than 1000 Indian workers were evacuated by three Community Chartered flights in 
2020, after their penalties were waived by the local security authorities. No grievances were 
registered in the PBSK/e-Migrate portal. 
 
E/I, Muscat: During the period from January 2021 to December 2021, this Embassy received 
243 grievances in MADAD portal, out of which 145 complaints have been resolved and 98 cases 
are under process. 
 
PoE, Guwahati: As far as PoE Guwahati is concerned, two emigrants have registered 
grievances through on-line mode. Both have been forwarded to the concerned RA for resolution 
in a fixed timeframe.  
 
PoE, Jaipur: 
 The country-wise details of grievances registered as of now are given below:  
Country Number of GR registered Closed/Resolved  Pending  
Malaysia 1 0 1 
Canada 1 0 1 
India 2 2 0 
Oman 30 25 5 
Qatar 74 43 31 
Saudi Arabia 52 37 15 
UAE 23 20 3 
Kuwait 53 20 33 
Bahrain 2 2 0 
Total 238 149 89 
 
PoE, Bengaluru: 
 
No. of applications raised since 
inception 
No. of applications closed/ 
forwarded to other PoE offices till 
31.12.2021 
No. of applications 
pending 
27 22 5 
 
PoE, Trivandrum: 
 

47 
 
3.65 A total of 119 grievance has been registered under the jurisdiction of POE Trivandrum  
on  e - Migrate portal till date.  Curren tly, only 16 grievances are pending for redressal.  The 
following are the grievances received, country-wise: 
Name of the country No. of grievance 
received 
Grievance resolved Grievance pending 
Saudi Arabia 80 73 7 
Bahrain 4 3 1 
Canada 2 1 1 
Germany 1 1 0 
Kuwait 14 9 5 
Maldives 1 1 0 
Oman 2 1 1 
Poland 2 1 1 
Qatar 6 6 0 
UAE 7 7 0 
Total 119 103 16 
 
PoE, Hyderabad: 
 
3.66 The country-wise details of grievances registered as of now are given below:  
Country Number of GR 
registered 
Closed/Resolved  Pending  
Australia 1 1  
Bahrain 5 4 1 
Canada 4 3 1 
India 1  1 
Kuwait 203 77 126 
Lithuania 14   
Malaysia  1 1  
Oman 19 7 12 
Qatar 30 8 22 
Saudi Arabia 11 7 4 
UAE 81 55 26 
Total 370 163 193 
 
PoE, Cochin: Grievances details (w.e.f 2015 to till date) 
 
Total-246 
Closed-157 
Active -89 (as on 31.12.2021) 
 
 PoE, Cochin has taken up with all concerned RAs to redress the grievances of emigrants 
at the earliest and has also undertaken initiatives to pursue with RAs for closure of the settled 
grievances. 
 

48 
 
PoE, Delhi:770 emigrant workers have registered their grievances on the e -Migrate portal under 
the jurisdiction of PoE, Delhi as on 28.12.2021. 344  grievances have been closed and 326 
grievances are pending as on 28.12.2021. The country- wise data of  grievances is not available 
separately for PoE, Delhi on the e-Migrate portal. 
 
 
 
PoE, Chennai: Pertains to helpdesk and Missions 
 
3.67 A total of  898 grievances are pending under e-Migrate while 714 grievances have been 
solved. Under the MADAD portal, 502 grievances are pending and 226  grievances have been 
solved. The total number of grievances solved under both e-Migrate and MADAD are 947 while 
2354 grievances are pending as on 11 January 2022.  
 
(ii) Emigration Management Bill 
 
3.68 The Committee also enquired about the status of the Emigration Management Bill, the 
time by which it is likely to be introduced in Parliament and the efforts being made to make the 
Bill more comprehensive wherein the Ministry has stated that the Emigration Bill, 2022 seeks to 
replace the Emigration Act, 1983 and aims to consolidate and amend the law related to 
emigration of citizens of India. The proposed legislation seeks to establish a robust, transparent 
and compreh ensive emigration framework, liberali zes emigration clearances, facilitates hassle 
free, safe and orderly migration, harnesses our demographic dividend, empowers our migrants 
proceeding for overseas employment and strengthens their welfare and protection d uring all 
stages of migration. The framework also includes State Governments, Union Territories and 
other stakeholders.  
 
3.69 The Committee have been apprised that the Bill is in advanced stage of final 
consultations and final vetting  and once the requisite formalities are complete, the Bill will be 
presented to the Union Cabinet for seeking approval to table the Bill in the Parliament. 
 
3.70 The Committee observe that multiple grievance Portals such as MADAD, e-Migrate, 
and CPGRAMS exist in addition to Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras for online 
redressal of grievances of Indian nationals abroad.  MADAD is the primary platform for 
consular complaints in general  while e-Migrate is for addressing all matters related to 
recruitment and emplo yment of workers including related grievances. The Ministry has 
further stated that consular grievances are also received through CPGRAMS, mainly from 
family members of NRIs residing in India.  While acknowledging that MADAD and e -

49 
 
Migrate portal are interlinked and e -Migrate is also a sub -portal for MADAD handling a 
specific area, the Committee are apprehensive that multiple grievance Portals might lead to 
delay in resolving the grievances of Indian nationals abroad . The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to ensure that multiplicity of grievance portals do not lead to duplication 
or overlapping of work or difficulty in sieving the complaints/grievances registered so as to 
ensure quick and satisfactory resolution of the grievances of the Indian wor kers abroad 
and make the desired modification in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 28) 
3.71 The Committee note the CPGRAMS portal is the quickest way to interact with the 
State Governments or district police  as it is connected down to the thana level. Despite its 
advantages, the CPGRAMS portal is  not as popular overseas as it is within the country. In 
view of the fact that the resolution of grievances in most cases may require a connect with 
the local level, t he Committee desire that the Ministry should  generate more awareness 
regarding the CPGRAMS Portal among the Indian nationals abroad too so that the Portal 
can serve as an effective tool in speedy redressal of their grievances. 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
3.72 The Committee note that a large number of grievances have been registered on the 
online MADAD portal/e-Migrate portal   over the years but the status of redressal of such 
grievances has been far from satisfactory. The number of grievances unresolved/pending in 
the various Embassies, Consulates and offices of the Protector of Emigrants are quite high. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to bring about qualitative and quantitative 
improvements in the grievance redressal system so that all the pending cases are resolved 
within a specified time frame and the response time is also reduced to the minimum.  The 

50 
 
Committee may also be apprised of the specific steps being taken /proposed to achieve the 
same. 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
3.73 The Committee note that the Emigration Bill, 2022 which seeks to establish a 
robust, transparent and comprehensive  emigration framework involving State 
Governments, Union Territories and other stakeholders has been under consultation and 
vetting for long. The Committee urge the Ministry to complete all the formalities at the 
earliest and introduce the Bill in Parliament so as to ensure the welfare /protection of 
Indian migrants and empower them for overseas employment. 
(Recommendation No. 31) 
D. Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana  
 
3.74 The Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is a mandatory insurance scheme for all 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR countries. The scheme 
provides an insurance cover of INR 10 lakhs in case of accidental death or permanent disability 
and other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of INR 275/ - for two years or INR 375/ - for 
three years validity. The Scheme, initially launched in 2003, has been amended in 2006, 2008 
and 2017 with the overarching objective of expanding the benefits for emigrant workers. 
3.75 The revised PBBY, 2017 operational w.e.f.  1 August 2017 has made settlement of 
claims simpler for the benefit of workers and is aimed at ensuring expeditious settlement of 
claims. It now provides for: 
(i)  Global coverage irrespective of change of employer, employee’s location and place of  
 work 
(ii)  Acceptance by insurance companies of certification of accidental  
 death/permanent disability by Indian missions/posts abroad; and 
(iii)  Facility for online renewal and copy of insurance policy is to be made  
 available to the nominee(s). 
3.76 The Government promptly takes up the matter with the concerned insurance companies 
whenever any representation regarding settlement of claims is received. 

51 
 
3.77 The claimants under the scheme belong to various professions as defined under section 
2(o) of the Emigration Act, which are as follows: 
(i) Any unskilled work, including any form of industrial or agricultural labour; 
(ii) Any domestic service; 
(iii) Any service, not being a service in a managerial capacity, in any hotel,  
 restaurant, tea-house or other place of public resort; 
(iv)     Work as a driver of a truck or other vehicle, mechanic, technician or skilled labourer or 
artisan; 
(v) Work as an offi ce assistant or accountant or typist or stenographer or  
 salesman or nurse or operator of any machine; 
(vi) Work in connection with, or for the purposes of, any cinema, exhibition or  
entertainment; 
3.78 Since the launch of e -Migrate portal in 2014, the Government has been issuing online 
Emigration Clearance.  Under PBBY, 3,59,666 policies were issued from the Financial Year 
2010-11 till September, 2021.  
3.79 The available details regarding the number of insurance claims receiv ed, settled and 
pending  since 2017 under the Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana, year-wise are as under: 
 
Years  No. of Policies 
issued 
No. Claims received 
 
No. Claims 
Settled 
Percentage of 
Claims 
settlement 
2016-17 518961 194 109 56% 
2017-18 397157 204 89 44% 
2018-19 374874 118 81 69% 
2019-20* 389314 89 35 39% 
2020-21* 40627 72 38 53% 
2021-22* 54010 55 36 53% 
Total 6800686 2915 2112 72% 
 
* Estimated 
 
3.80 The reasons for pendency of claims and the efforts made by the Ministry to settle such 
claims expeditiously are as follows: 
 
 Copy of PBBY Policy is not given to nominee nor are they informed by any other means 
 about the purchase of the policy.  
 

52 
 
 Policy is being obtained by RA, worker not informed. They are not aware of the benefits 
 being offered. 
 
 Claims are declared Time-barred (not being submitted in 90 days) often due to situations 
 beyond the control of the emigrant worker or his nominee. 
 
 Change of Profession in Labour Card in host country is used as ground for denying the 
 claim. This should not be done as long as the profession is covered under section 2(o) of 
 Emigration Act. 
 
 Change in employer or employee location should not be used as ground for denying 
 claim. 
 
 Timely updation of data by companies on e-migrate is not done. 
 
3.81 Ministry invariably takes up the matter with the concerned insurance companies on 
receipt of any complaint. 
 
3.82 Asked to state the average time taken for settlement of claims along with the rate of 
settlement of claims under the PBBY, the Ministry has stated that the requisite information was 
sought from the insurance companies.  The response from them is awaited an d will be conveyed 
to the Standing Committee on its receipt.  
 
3.83 When enquired whether all the ECR category workers have been covered under the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana , the Committee have been informed that PBBY is a mandatory 
insurance scheme for all ECR category workers going to ECR countries. Thus all ECR category 
workers are covered under PBBY.  Since 2017, it is also available for ECNR passport holders.  
 
3.84 On being asked the number of ECR category workers and ECNR passport holders 
covered so far under the PBBY separately , the Ministry has provided the information on 22 
March 2022 as under: 
 
 ECR :  29,27,071  
 ECNR : 37,868 
 
3.85 As regards the manner in which the Ministry collate authentic information regarding all 
ECR category migrant workers going to ECR countries,  the Committee have been informed that 
all ECR passport holders going  for employment  to ECR countries  have to obtain Emigration 
Clearance from the Protector of Emigrants and henc e, their data is maintained/captured by e -
Migrate. 
 
 
3.86 The Committee note that the number of insurance policies issued under the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana has gone down since 2017 -18 with drastic reduction s in the 

53 
 
number during 2020-21 and 2021 -22 as compared to the earlier years. Since 2016-17, only 
2915 claims have been received upto 2021 -22 out of which 2112 claim s have been settled 
which is far from satisfactory. The Ministry has revealed in this regard that the insurance 
companies reject ing the claims of the migrant workers on flimsy grounds  has been the 
reasons for pendency of claims .  Keeping in view the fact that migrants  workers are the 
most vulnerable section of the diaspora community,  the Committee are of the v iew that 
special protection is needed for these poor and simple workers so that they are not left at 
the mercy of insurance companies.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up 
the cause of these workers and ensure that their claims are settl ed by the insurance 
companies expeditiously. Efforts may also be made to increase the number of insurance 
policies issued so that all the eligible workers are covered under the PBBY.  
(Recommendation No. 32) 
E. Pre-Departure Orientation Training  
 
3.87 Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) programmes are aimed at enhancing soft 
skills of Indian migrant workers largely going to the Gulf region and Malaysia, in terms of 
culture, language, tradition and local rules and regulations of the destination country, to sensitize 
migrant workers about p athways to safe and legal migration and various Government 
programmes for their welfare and protection. The initiative has been a success and is being 
expanded further. 
3.88 During the course of evidence on 22 December, 2021 the Secretary (CPV & OIA) further 
elaborated on the PDOT programme: 
 
“We, as the Ministry of External Affairs, have developed something called as PDOT, 
which is Pre -Departure Orientation Training. The PDOT is the soft skill which is 
delivered over one day. What it does is, it tells the migrant workers, particularly those 
who are going for the first time, what they would expect when they go overseas. We have 
a set of a little language help, cultural help, and how they can negotiate with their 
employers and very importantly to tell them and to assure them that the embassies 
overseas are their friends and they should always approach the embassies in case of any 
need.  

54 
 
We have also launched a very vigorous advertising campaign involving many of the 
prominent personalities in different languages to spread out this message so that w e can 
have safe and legal migration. This is particularly available for the more vulnerable 
sections. During COVID-19, we saw that there was a decline in number of people going 
overseas. Obviously, the PDOT numbers had also gone down. There was an innovati on, 
like many other innovations that came up during COVID -19. This was an online PDOT 
programme and through this programme we found that we were able to reach out to 
many, many more people. 
There were two things that were really striking about this outreac h, that I wanted to 
mention. First is that the number of women participating in the online PDOT programme 
was much higher than ever before. We were very, very enthused by it. Second was that 
people in far flung villages were also joining this particular PD OT programme. That, of 
course, was something that was very encouraging. We are also extending the PDOT 
centres. We are planning to have 100 centres by the end of next year. We are going on an 
aggressive campaign to have training of trainers so that they ca n be trained effectively, 
even for the physical format”.  
3.89 The Ministry has further stated that PDO curriculum content has been standardized all 
over the country. Comprehensive PDO Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in 
seven languages i.e.  Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. Similarly, 
Handbooks for migrant workers have also been developed in eight languages i.e.  Hindi, English, 
Bangla, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and Urdu. Presently, these handbooks are distributed 
to prospective migrant workers attending One Day PDO Training at Mumbai, Delhi, Kochi and 
Lucknow.  
3.90 Since January 2018, Ministry has rolled out PDOT Programmes in a structured manner 
as part of the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana. Till now , 31 PDOT Centres have been opened for 
Pre-Departure Orientation Training. The training continued upto 16 March 2020, after which it 
had to be stopped due to the Lockdown imposed in the country due to COVID-19 Pandemic. The 
training was resumed w.e.f 16.11.2020.  As on 30th September, 2021, 1,03,019/- migrant workers 
have undergone PDO Training. Shri V. Murleedharan, Minister of State for External Affairs 
addressed the special event on reaching of landmark figure of one lakh participants. The Ministry 
also launched the first online Pre -departure Orientation Training Programme on 7 April 2021 
with an objective to provide pre -departure orientation training to prospective migrants who are 
not in a position to attend the in-person training. 
3.91 On being asked to furnish the details regarding the budgetary allocations, major activities 
and actual expenditure incurred under each activity under the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
since its inception, the Ministry has informed  that a sum of Rs.9.99 crores had been trans ferred 
to MSDE on 23 March 2017 for implementation of PKVY.  After implementation of pilot 
project, MSDE has been using the amount for implementation of one -day PDOT through NSDC.  
No further budget was sought by MEA under PKVY since 2019-20.  As mentioned earlier, MEA 

55 
 
is implementing one -day PDOT through State Governments (17 centres), NS DCs (10 centres).  
The budget is being sought under PDOT. 
 
3.92 The year-wise budget allocation under PDOT head for MEA is as under: 
 
S. No. Financial Year Budget Estimate (in INR) 
1. 2017-18 0.5 crores 
2. 2018-19 0.5 crores 
3. 2019-20 3.0 crores 
4. 2020-21 0.2 crores* 
5. 2021-22 7.0 crores 
* The budget for 2020-21 was reduced due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
3.93 The budget for PDOT could be increased based on expansion of the project, i.e., opening 
of new centres in various States.  
 
3.94 The details of PDOT centres set up and the number of persons trained as on 28 February 
2022, year/centre and State-wise is at Annexure III. 
 
3.95 When asked about the areas and scope for expansion of PDOT, the Ministry has stated 
that through the PDOT initiative, the Ministry has been able to spread awareness about safe and 
legal migration and also acquaint workers with rules and regulation of the destination countries. 
More than 900 master trainers have been trained and certified by India Centre for Mi gration as 
on date which impart one day PDOT training at 31 PDOT centres across the country. Further, the 
Ministry is in the process of opening many more PDOT centres at major overseas migration 
specific places in the country to take the total number from 31 to 100 to cover those parts of the 
country which are not covered so far including north -eastern region. For new centres , the 
Ministry is also expanding its partners beyond NSDC to include industry bodies such as CII, 
FICCI and ASSOCHAM and Common Servic es Centre e -Governance service India Limited of 
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology and will also be working in close 
collaboration of States. 
 
3.96 On being asked about the broad parameters for selecting States for setting up P -DOT 
Centres and the basis for preparation of training module and curriculum, the Ministry has 
informed that States for setting up of PDOT Centers are being selected on the basis of number of 
workforce/emigrants going for overseas employment therefrom. The tra ining module and 
curriculum have been prepared on the basis of Ministry’s experience with the problems faced by 
the migrants in respective countries, inputs provided by respective Missions and necessary legal 

56 
 
framework for labourers and emigrants in respec tive countries. The Ministry is in touch with 
various State Governments to open new PDOT centre as per their requirements.  
 
3.97 When enquired about the response received regarding online P-DOT and the future plan 
in this regard, the Ministry has informed that online PDOT was launched in April 2021 to reach 
out to prospective emigrants who live far away from PDOT centres. 6 online PDOT centers are 
operational in 5 cities namely Mumbai, Bhubaneswar, Jaipu r, Hyderabad and Vijayawada. The 
Ministry has seen very positive response from participants especially women participants. This 
initiative is helping the Ministry in delivering training to more migrants. Ministry intends to 
continue online PDOT training po st C OVID and provide both online and in -person training 
options to prospective emigrants. 
 
3.98 During the Study visit of the Committee to Leh, Chandigarh and Shimla from 17 to 21 
May 2022, the Ministry has informed that cur rently, 31 PDOT Centres are operational in the 
country.  Further, opening of another 77 new PDOT centres is under process as proposed by 9 
State Governments viz. 1) Andhra Pradesh; 2) Tamil Nadu; 3) Uttar Pradesh; 4) Telangana; 5) 
Karnataka; 6) Haryana; 7)  Rajasthan; 8) Punjab, and 9) Bihar. The d etails of the newly 
recommended centres by the State Governments are as under:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State 
Government 
Places where opening of new PDOT Centres recommended by 
the State Governments 
1. Andhra Pradesh Srikakulam, Chittoor 
2. Tamil Nadu Madurai, Ramanathapuram, Kanyakumari, Coimbatore, Karur, 
Trichy, Salem, Thaniavur, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore 
3. Uttar Pradesh Bijnor, Deoria, Maharajganj, Kushinagar 
4. Telangana Jagitial, Rajanna Sircilla, Kama Reddy, Nirmal, Adilabad 
5. Karnataka Hubbali-Dharwad, Kalaburagi, Mangaluru (Mangalore), Belagavi 
(Belgaum) 
6. Haryana Palwal, Karnal, Yamuna Nagar, Kaithal, Ambala, Hisar, 
Mahendragarh 
7. Rajasthan Udaipur, Churu, Jhunjhunu 
8. Punjab Amritsar, Barnala,  Bathinda, Faridkot, Fatehgarh Sahib, Fazilka, 
Ferozepur, Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur, Jalandhar, Kapurthala, Ludhiana, 
Mansa, Moga, Sri Muktsar Sahib, Pathankot, Patiala, Rupnagar, SBS 
Nagar, Sangrur, Mohali, Tarn Taran 
9 Bihar Siwan, Gopalganj, Madhubani, West Champaran, Rohtas, Munger, 
Buxar, Suppaul, Nalanda, Kishangang, Sitamarhi, Banka, Purnea, 

57 
 
Katihar, Nawada, Motihari, Bhabhua, Begusarai, Bhagalpur 
 
3.99 When asked about the target for online and offline PDOT training pro grammes for the 
current year and the number of persons likely to be covered for both the training , the Ministry 
has informed that it has identified the goal of imparting PDO training to 5 lakh emigrant workers 
going for overseas employment as one of its target in the five year perspective plan, to be 
achieved before 2024. In view of the volatile situation of C OVID-19, no separate new target has 
been fixed for the current year. 
 
3.100 On the latest position on de veloping country -specific and sector -specific PDOT 
programmes, the Ministry has stated that besides developing a Training of Trainers manual on 
migration to GCC countries, ICM has also developed a PDOT manual on Japan that captures 
relevant information for living and working in Japan for individuals desirous of going there  
under the Specified Ski lled Workers scheme. Further, ICM has also been working on 7 country 
specific booklets for countries such as Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Indonesia, Malaysia, Sudan, 
South Sudan and Thailand that are in final stage of development.  
 
3.101 The Committee have als o been informed during its Study visit that the total number of 
emigrants imparted PDOT training is 1,13, 405 (upto April 2022).  Out of this, 10,369 emigrants 
have been imparted online training and 1,03,036 have been imparted offline training. The 
majority of emigrants are going to Gulf countries. 
 
3.102 When enquired about the number of country specific P -DOT manuals in the pipeline, the 
Ministry has stated that two country-specific manuals have been developed so far by ICM for 18 
ECR countries and Japan respectively.  Further, India Centre for Migration and International 
Labour Organization have also prepared a pre -departure handbook for Indians going to the 
European Union. ICM is also developing new country specific booklets for 6 GCC countries and  
8 other countries - Lebanon, Libya, Indonesia, Sudan, South Sudan, Thailand, Jordan and 
Malaysia. 
 
3.103 The Committee note that the Ministry is expanding its PDOT programme by 
opening more centres at major overseas migration hot spots in the country taking the total 
number of such centres from 31 to 100. The Committee further note that for new centres, 
the Ministry is planning to partner with industry bodies such as CII, FICCI , ASSOCHAM 
and Common Services Centre, e -Governance Service India limited of Mi nistry of 
Electronics and Information besides the NSDC. Keeping in view the fact that enhancing the 
soft skills of migrant workers is crucial for their employability and realisation of better 

58 
 
returns for their skills/jobs, the Committee desire that the modalities for imparting PDOT 
by i ndustry bodies and Government agencies should be finalized at the earliest. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to prepare a year and area -wise action plan to cover 
such parts of the country which are not covered under the programme so far, including the 
North-eastern region. Since collaboration with the State Governments is essential for the 
successful implementation of the programme, an effective mechanism for the same may 
also be evolved at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
3.104 The Committee note that online PDOT is helping the Ministry in providing training 
to more migrants even in remote areas and has drawn very positive response from 
participants, especially women participants. The Committee are happy that the Ministry 
intends to continue online PDO training post COVID and provide both online and in -
person training options to prospective emigrants.  The Committee are of the view that the 
number of prospective emigrants would increase with the opening up of international 
labour markets in the post COVID period and hence urge the Ministry to work out a target 
oriented annual action plan for imparting both offline and online PDO training and make 
provisions for adequate resources to meet the challenges.  
(Recommendation No. 34) 
3.105 The Committee note that India Centre for Migration has so far developed country-
specific two PDOT manuals for 18 ECR countries and Japan respectively.  Further, India 
Centre for Migration a nd I nternational Labour Organisation have also prepared a pre -
departure handbook for Indians going to the European Union. The Committee further note 
that ICM has also been working on 7 country - specific booklets for Jordan, Lebanon, 

59 
 
Libya, Indonesia, Malaysia, Sudan, South Sudan and Thailand and these are in the final 
stages of development. The Committee desire that the PDOT booklets should be finalized at 
the earliest so that prospective emigrants are made aware about safe and legal migration 
and are also acquainted with the rules and regulation of the destination countries. 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
F. Media Campaign 
 
3.106 Overseas Indian Affairs (OIA) II Division runs media awareness campaign with the 
objective of creating wider awareness among the general public about the processes of legal 
migration, cautioning people against the illegal processes followed by fraudulent recruitment 
agencies and to pro vide information to emigrants/potential emigrants to ensure legal and safe 
migration.  
 
3.107 The Ministry has carried out media awareness campaign on safe and legal  migration by 
publicizing ads in Hindi and 6 regional languages i.e. Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Marathi, 
Tamil and Telugu in newspapers through Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BoC) 
(formerly DAVP) for 12 weeks during  the months of September, October, November and 
December 2021.  
 
3.108 As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee on External Affairs and approval 
of competent authority in the Ministry, Impact Assessment Study has been conducted by the 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC).  Final Report has been submitted by IIMC.  
 
3.109 Asked to state the findings of the Impact Assessment Study conducted by the IIMC 
regarding safe and legal migration, the Ministry has informed as under: 
 
 Media consumption habits or media diet is unique in each State.  
 
 Greater number of men have media access.  
 
 Only  21.8% women  respondents use mobile phone.  
 
 Radio is used by a greater number of women (23.3%).  
 
 Of the media, newspaper is least accessed or read by women with 11.6% 
 respondents. Kerala is exception. 
 
 There has been a significant difference between ECR and non-ECR category in terms 
of  accessing media.  
 
 Media access and use is also influenced by age.  

60 
 
 
 Overall finding  from all the States reveal growing popularity of internet and mobile 
 technology among the young age group.  
 
 98.1 access internet from their mobile phones for various purposes. 
 
 TV is the third most popular medium with 72.9% viewers. 
 
 41.4% reads newspapers of which Telangana and Kerala have relatively more 
readers.  A wide variation was observed among the States in terms of newspaper 
reading .  
 
 Overall 3.5% respondents are found to be radio listeners.  
 
 Cinema (54.8%)  is one of the most effective modes of communication. Regional 
 films are  popular in all States. 
 
 The percentage of respondents in the unexp osed category is h igh in all the States as 
 compared to the exposed category. No exposure is found in UP and Telangana. 
 
 Exposed respondents are mostly  concentrated in young age group as compared to the 
 aged one.  
 
 An analysis of campaign exposure between men and women sh ows higher 
 percentage of exposed men, 76.1% as against 23.9 women. 
 
 A strong relationship between education and exposure is also observed in the field. 
 The higher the education is, the more is the exposure and vice versa.  
 
 Exposure to the TV ad (69.4%) is more than the newspaper ad (35.8%). 
 
 It is found that Rajasthan does not have any exposure to the print ad.  
 
 Non-exposure to TV ad in UP can be associated with the lack of parity between 
 preferred time to watch TV and time chosen for broadcasting. It is found that 60% 
 respondents in UP prefer to watch TV in the morning, while the ad was run on TV in 
 the evening.  
 
 Assessment  on recall of ad shows mixed responses from the  exposed respondents. 
 
 Opinions have been formed among the viewers on the content and presentation of the 
 ad. 71.6% respondents suggested that the ads should be published more frequently to 
 have a better impact. They also suggested that the actual beneficiaries of the MEA 
 scheme can be figured in the TV so as to build up better  credibility.  
 
 Advertising is the most preferred choice of people in TV, newspaper and radio.  A 
 sizable number of people also suggested various applications such as SMS, social 

61 
 
 media, YouTube as well cam paigning. Gram sabha, panchayat and sarpanch are also 
 mooted as suitable means of dissemination of information. 
 
 Awareness of both POEs and RAs about the media campaign was moderate in terms 
 of recall of campaign ads and messages. 50% o the POEs and 33.3% of the RAs were 
 of the view that media campaign on safe migration is not sufficient  in terms of 
 curbing the unsafe practices in migration of unskilled workers for employment. 
 
3.110 As regards the time by which the Ministry is likely to t ake a decision in this regard , the 
Committee have been informed that the report is under consideration of the Ministry.  
 
3.111 The Ministry has further stated that for safe and legal migration, media clips in Hindi and 
regional languages of celebrities such as Sachin Tendulkar, Lakhwinder Wadali in Punjabi; 
Sudarshan Pattnaik, Padma Shree Awardee, Sand Artist in Odia; Nagarjuna Akkineni, prominent 
Film Star in Telugu, Rituparna Sengupta in Bangla and Raghvendra Rajkumar in Kannada , have 
been procured and  are being used for disseminating information on safe and legal migration 
through various means.   
 
3.112 The Division also shares the campaign with the State Governments for further outreach in 
districts.   
 
3.113 The Committee note that based on a recommendation of theirs, the Ministry has got 
an Impact Assessment Study done by the IIMC regarding media awareness campaigns on 
safe and legal migration run by its OIA II Division.  The IIMC has submitted its final 
report which is under consideration by the Ministry. Based on the findings of the Impact 
Assessment Study, the Committee feel that media campaigns of the Government are not 
having the desired impact in curbing unsafe practices in migration of unskilled workers. 
The Committee are of the view tha t vigorous campaigns is required to achieve the desired 
objectives and in this digital age, there is a n urgent need to make use of social media 
platforms like  SMS, YouTube etc. in addition to advertisements in the print and the 
electronic media. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make increasing use of 
internet, mobile technology and social media platforms for greater awareness and outreach 
among prospective emigrants on safe and legal migration. A fresh strategy on media 
awareness campaig ns may also be worked out based on the findings of the IIMC . The 

62 
 
Committee also recommend that the State Governments should be made to play a greater 
role in the dissemination of information on safe and legal migration at the grass -root level 
through Gram Sabha, Panchayat and Sarpanch. 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
G. Mobility Agreements 
3.114 Migration and Mobility Partnerships are aimed at harnessing India’s demographic 
dividend and fostering mobility for students, academics, business people and professionals. Two 
such Agreements have already been signed between India and France (2018) and UK (2021). 
Labour and Manpower Cooperation M oUs/Agreements that provide the overarching framework 
for cooperation on labour and manpower related issues are in place with the G ulf Cooperation 
Council Countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates) and 
Jordan. Further specific Manpower Cooperation Agreements have been negotiated with 
Denmark (2008), Japan (2021) and Portugal (2021). 
3.115 When asked to state the impact of Migration and Mobility MoUs/Agreements on labour 
and management related issues and on migration and mobility of the migrant workers, the 
Ministry has informed that the MoUs on Migration and Mobility provide the overarching 
framework for cooperation on labour and manpower -related issues with host countries. These 
MoUs and Agreements have the provision of implementation through Joint Working Groups/ 
Joint Commission Mechanism, comprising of representatives from both sides.   All la bour and 
manpower-related issues including welfare, labour contract between employers and employees 
as part of MoU, pre -departure/post-departure assistance and hassle free movement across 
international borders of Indian workers are discussed during these meetings.   
 
3.116 During the course of evidence on 2 2 December 2021, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
elaborated on the role of Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements: 
 
“Traditionally, as you know, almost nine million of our Indian NRIs, who are working 
overseas, are in the Gulf region. We used to have Labour and Manpower Agreements. 
We have now entered into what is now known as the next generation of LMAs, the 
Labour and Manpower Agreements. We have signed one recently with Kuwait for 
domestic workers. As I said, we have also been harmoni zing the e-migrate platform with 
those of the Gulf countries, which will give us a much better platform and provide much 
greater security for our Indian migrant workers going overseas.  
We have also realized that given th e complexity and the dynamics of migration, we need 
to have something that looks more at mobility because many of these people want to go 
out for some time. They work there and then they come back home. After all, India is 
today one of the fastest growing economies in the world. So, the attraction of coming 

63 
 
back home is very, very high. So, taking advantage of that, we have been negotiating 
with a number of countries. We had something called the India -EU Common Agenda on 
Migration and Mobility. This was a p an-EU understanding in which we organi ze 
workshops. But the fallout of that was very positive because a number of countries in the 
European Union came to us and said that we would like to do Migration and Mobility 
Partnership Agreement with you. We have co ncluded several  MoUs. We have had 
understandings with France and Denmark in the past . UK which is, of course, today 
outside the European Union, and with Portugal.  
We have also commenced negotiations with a number of countries along the 
Mediterranean Coast  in Europe as well as in Eastern Europe. Mauritius is also very 
anxious to have a similar agreement with us. This shows a very high demand that 
countries across the world, particularly in the developed world, have for the Indian 
migrant workers and profess ionals. The MMPAs provide for both migrant workers and 
professionals, and in many cases, we also have a small carve out for students….  
So, these MMPAs are, as we see, the new generation of Migration Mobility Partnership 
Agreements. We had signed on to the  Global Compact for Migration as part of our 
partnership with the International Organisation for Migration, IOM and with the ILO. 
Many of those elements are now being brought into these new generation MMPAs”. 
 
3.117 Responding to a query on the status of the MoUs/Agreements under process and the 
efforts being made for speedy finalization of the same, the Ministry has informed that the MoUs 
on Migration and Mobility are under process with Germany, Mauritius, Portugal, BNL (Belgium, 
Netherlands, Luxemburg), Australia, Russian Federation etc. To expedite the M oUs towards 
conclusion, frequent rounds of negotiation including virtual discussions are held with partner 
countries in consultation with relevant MEA Divisions and other line Min istries. Ministry is 
actively following up with the countries concerned for early conclusion of MoUs/Agreements. 
 
3.118 When enquired whether the number of people who migrate to countries with which India 
has signed manpower and mobility agreements has inc reased, the extent to which the number of 
grievances has decreased as a result of the said agreements  and the manner in which the 
MoUs/Agreements on manpower and mobility signed have translated into better deals and more 
job opportunities for potential mig rant workers , the Ministry has stated that Labour and 
Manpower Cooperation M oUs/Agreements that provide the overarching framework for 
cooperation on labour and manpower related issues are in place with the Gulf Cooperation 
Council Countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates) and 
Jordan. In addition, these M oUs and Agreements have the provision of implementation through 
Joint Working Groups, comprising of representatives from both sides who meet annually, 
alternately in both countries, and all prevailing labour and manpower related issues are discussed 
during these meetings. Issues of interest to the migrant workers including grievances are taken 
up during these JWGs. 
 
3.119 Further, specific Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements were signed between India and 
Denmark on 2009 and Japan on Specified Skilled Worker in January 2021.  A similar Labo ur 
Mobility Agreement has been concluded with Portugal. These agreements aim to provide saf e 

64 
 
and legal migration opportunities to migrant workers in potential employment destinations all 
over the world. 
 
3.120 The Committee note that Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements 
that provide the overarching framework for cooperation on labour and manpower related 
issues are in place with the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries and Jordan. Specific 
Labour Mobility Partnership Agreements were signed between India and Denmark in 2009 
and with Japan on Specified Skilled Worker in January 2021.  A si milar Labour Mobility 
Agreement has been concluded with Portugal. Further, MoUs on Migration and Mobility 
are under process with Germany, Mauritius, Portugal, BNL (Belgium, Netherlands, 
Luxemburg), Australia, Russian Federation etc.  India had also signed on to the Global 
Compact for Migration as part of our partnership with the I nternational Organization for 
Migration and with the I nternational Labour Organization. The Committee acknowledge 
that Migration and Mobility Agreements are aimed at providing safe and legal migration 
opportunities to Indian workers in potential employment destinations all over the world.  
However, the impact of such MoUs/Agreements and the manner in which they have 
translated into better deals and more job op portunities for potential migrant workers are 
not known. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should carry out an impact 
assessment of the existing Migration and Mobility Agreements and monitor the 
implementation aspect of such MoUs/Agreement s and ensure that the issues of interest of 
the migrant workers including their grievances are actually addressed through the said 
MoUs/Agreements. 
(Recommendation No. 37) 
H. Simplification of Passport Services for Indians Citizens Residing Outside India – 
The Passport Seva Programme  

65 
 
3.121 The Passport Seva Programme (PSP) is an ambitious Mission Mode Programme of the 
Government of India and has emerged as one of the most successful programme delivering 
passport related services to the citizens in India and Indian diaspora living outside the  country. 
The Ministry launched the PSP at High Commission of India in London on 24 th October, 2018 
followed by Indian Consulates in Birmingham and Edinburgh. Thereafter, roll out has been 
started at all Indian Missions/Posts aboard. 
3.122 The PSP system h as streamlined and expedited the passport services at Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad. It has also helped in process transformation with its better automation 
and user friendly interface/application for the office staff. It has further strengthened the data 
integrity, information security, 24X7 availability of the system and has facilitated in quick and 
informed decision making. The outsource d agencies offering front end passport related services 
have  also been integrated with the PSP system. 
3.123 The Indian diaspora living abroad has benefited by accessing a revamped & enhanced 
Passport Application Form, Uniform Processes, Standard Documentation Requirements, 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for assistance, Quicker Redressal of their Grievances an d 
citizen friendly Web Portal. The citizens can also track their Application status through the web 
portal and avail hassle free issuance of Passport services. 
3.124 The requirement of Police Verification (PV) Process for applicants applying passport 
services at Indian Missions/Posts abroad has been simplified and integrated online with all Police 
Districts in India resulting in end -to-end receipt and submission of PV report digitally and in a 
paperless environment  thereby expediting submission of PV report.    
3.125 On being asked to state the number of Indian Missions/Posts abroad integrated with the 
Passport Seva programme (PSP) system so far, the efforts made to ensure expeditious integration 
of the remaining Missions/Posts abroad and the extent to which the PSP system has resulted in 
speedy delivery of services to the Indian diaspora , the Ministry has stated that as on 25 th 
December 2021, a total of 176 Indian Missions/Posts have been integrated into Passport Seva 
Programme through Global Passport Seva Project (GPSP). Integration for the remaining 5 Indian 
Missions/Posts is in progress. These remaining Missions/Posts are (i) Chiangmai, Thailand (ii) 
Islamabad, Pakistan (iii) Pyongyang, DPR Korea (iv) Mazar -e-Sharif, Afghanistan and (v) 
Kabul-Afghanistan. 
 
3.126 The Ministry has further stated that GPSP has brought in a standard and uniform passport 
issuance process across the globe working under one centralized application and database. This 
has helped in bringing uniformity in terms of compliance, standardization, automation, data 
consistency and s ecurity. The GPSP system has resulted in faster decision making, centralised 
visibility and expedited police verification process, thereby expediting the passport issuance 
process. It has also ensured 24X7 availability of the passport issuance system for t he Indian 
diaspora. 

66 
 
 
3.127 When enquired whether the Ministry/Indian Missions abroad have received any 
complaint regarding passport services from the Indian diaspora, the Ministry has informed that 
after the launch of GPSP system, no such grievances have been received in the Ministry. Rather, 
it has provided a platform for expedited redressal of grievances because of real time availability 
of the data points and standardized processes developed under GPSP system. The applicants can  
track their status of applications on a real time basis through the GPSP portal. The Indian 
diaspora can register their grievances, if any, through multiple channels such as GPSP portal, 
MADAD portal, CPGRAM and also through twitter which are monitored closely on a daily 
basis. 
 
3.128 The Committee are pleased to note that after the launch of the Global Passport Seva 
Project, no complaint regarding passport services has been received from the Indian 
diaspora. The GPSP system has provided a platform for expedited redressal of grievances 
because of real time availability of the data and standardized processes developed under 
the system. The Committee further note that as on 25 th December 2021, a total of 176 
Indian Missions/Posts have been integrated into the Passport Seva Programme through the 
Global Passport Seva Project and integration of the remaining 5 Indian Missions/Posts viz, 
Chiangmai, Thailand; Islamabad, Pakistan; Pyongyang, DPR Korea; Mazar -e-Sharif, 
Afghanistan and Kabul -Afghanistan is in progress. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
complete the integration of these Missions/Posts through the GPSP system within a 
specified timeframe so that the Indian diaspora community in the said countries c an enjoy 
smooth, hassle free and expedited passport services.    
(Recommendation No. 38) 
IV ENGAGEMENTS WITH  PIOs/OCIs 
A. Know India Programme.  
 
3.129 The Government of India initiated a flagship Scheme titled ‘Know India Programme ’ 
(KIP) in 2004 with an objective to reconnect young persons of Indian  origin with their 
motherland and to motivate and inspire them by the transformations taking place in 
contemporary India. The Scheme was revamped in 2016, the frequency of KIP has been 

67 
 
increased from 21 to 25 days  and the age of participants was increased from 18 -26 to 18 -30 
years. Moreover, States can now be made partners in this programme with increased duration  of 
the State leg from 7 to 10 days.  Since its inception, Ministry had, so far, conducted 59 editions 
of this programme, with the participation of a total number of 2061 diaspora youth.  
 
3.130 When asked to state the number and details of Know India Prog ramme organized during 
the COVID-19 Pandemic in 2020 and 2021, the number of PIO youths who participated in the 
programme and the number of States made partners so far under the programme , the Ministry 
has informed that s ince inception, 59 editions of KIP have been held so far with the partnership 
of 22 States & Union Territories ( Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, Rajas than, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal ).  A total of 2061 diaspora youth have participated in the KIP 
Programmes held so far. However, the Ministry could not host any KIP programme in 2020 -21 
and 2021-22 because of the ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic. 
 
3.131 The Committee note that since inception of the Know India Programme  (KIP) in 
2004,  59 editions of KIP have been held with the partnership of 22 States and Union 
Territories and a total of 2061 diaspora youth  participated in the KIPs . The Committee 
further note that the Ministry could not host any KIP edition in 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 
because of the ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic. Keeping in view its objectives of reconnecting 
young persons of Indian origin with their  motherland and motivat ing and inspiring them 
by the transformations taking place in contemporary India , t he Committee  urge the 
Ministry to conduct more editions of KIP in the current financial year, as the COVID -19 
Pandemic situation has improved . States and Union Territories who have not partnered 
with the Government so far under KIP should be pursued to ensure their active 
participation under the Scheme.  
(Recommendation No. 39) 
B. Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana   
 
3.132 Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY) was introduced in the financial year 2018 -19 for  
providing the elder generation Persons of Indian Origin in the age group of 45 -65 year an 

68 
 
opportunity to reconnect with their root. It is a 17 days programme and conduct ed with 
coordination of Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. (IRCTC). The 
programme was introduced initially for those Persons of Indian Origin in Girmitiya countries 
(Fiji, Guyana, Mauritius, South Africa, Suriname, Trinidad & Tobago, Reun ion Island) who 
belong to lower income group and are unable to afford to visit India. Now, the programme is 
open for PIOs in the age group of 45 -65 years across the globe. Four editions of this programme 
has been conducted so far successfully with the part icipation 160 PIOs. Two editions of PTDY 
are scheduled for the FY 2021-22 but have not been announced yet due to COVID-19 Pandemic. 
 
3.133 The Committee note that the Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana  (PTDY) is a fairly 
new scheme launched in the financial year 2018 -19. Only four editions of this programme 
have been conducted so far with the participation of 160 PIOs. Two editions of PTDY are 
scheduled for 2021 -22 but have not yet been announced due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should make efforts to conduct PTDY in the 
current year as the COVID-19 Pandemic situation in the country  has improved . The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to popularize the Scheme amongst the elder generation 
of the diaspora community so that they c an utilize the opportunity to reconnect with their 
roots. 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
C. Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children 
 
3.134 The Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) was introduced in the 
Academic Year 2006 -07 for the children of Persons of Indian Origin and those of Non -resident 
Indians to enable them to pursue Undergraduate courses in Indian Universities/Institutions and 
promote India as a centre of h igher studies. Under SPDC Scheme, financial assistance of upto 
US$ 4000 towards tuition fee, admission fee and post admission services is provided for 
Undergraduate courses in professional and non -professional courses (except medical and related 
courses). The Scheme was revamped in the Academic Year 2015 -16 and it was extended to 
children of Indian workers, working in 17 ECR countries ( ECR countries are; Afghanistan, 
Bahrain, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Oman, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Thailand, United Arab Emirates and Yemen ). The Ministry offers 150 
scholarship every year under the Scheme, out of which 50 are reserved for PIOs, 50 for NRIs and 
50 for children of Indian workers in ECR countries.  Out of the 50 slots wh ich is reserved for 

69 
 
children of Indian workers in ECR countries, 1/3 slots (viz., 17) are reserved for children of 
Indian workers in ECR countries who are studying in India. If any of these seats are not filled up, 
they are to be made available to applican ts from other categories under SPDC and vice -versa.  
The SPDC Scheme is applicable in selected 69 countries. 
 
3.135 The basis of selection of students under SPDC are as follows: 
 
(i) The selection process is based on Merit -cum-Means basis, meaning, where two 
candidates secure equal Marks, preference will be given to the applicant/prospective student who 
comes from lower income family. 
 
(ii) SPDC is awarded to the following four categories: 
 
 (a)  Children of PIOs/OCIs. 
 (b)  Children of NRIs. 
 (c)  Children of Indian Workers in ECR countries who studied outside India. 
 (d)  Children of Indian Workers in ECR countries who studied in India. 
 
(iii) SPDC is open to applicants in the age group of 17 to 21 years. 
 
(iv)  Children of PIO/OCI and NRI category  must have done six years consecutive schooling 
from 07th to 12th grade from selected 69 countries. Children of Indian Workers in ECR countries 
who studied outside India must have done three years consecutive schooling from 10 th to 12 th 
grade. Children of Indian Workers in ECR countries, who are left behind in India, the candidate 
must have passed the Senior Secondary (10+2) or equivalent examination from a system of 
education recognized by the Association of Indian Universities (AIU). 
 
(v) An applicant/can didate who has passed the qualifying examination and has secured 
admission in an undergraduate course in a designated Institution in India [ Central Universities of 
India offering Under Graduate Courses; ‘A’ Grade Institutions accredited by National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) and recognized by UGC; National Institutes of 
Technology (NITs); Schools of Planning and Architecture and Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology (IIITs) through DASA Scheme ] and fulfill other eligibility criteria c an apply for 
scholarship under SPDC. 
 
(vi) The candidate should not be the recipient of any other scholarship or financial assistance 
or any other assistance under any other Government of India or State Government Scheme. 
 
(vii) The total monthly income of  the parent(s) of the candidate should not exceed an amount 
equivalent to USD 5000. 

70 
 
 
(viii) Children of Indians residing in Nepal will also be eligible for SPDC on fulfillment of 
following two criteria : (a) Both parents should be registered in the Mission /Post in Nepal for a 
minimum period of four years; and (b) The applicant has done at least four years schooling 
including two years of classes XI & XII in Nepal just prior to application. 
 
3.136 The Ministry has provided the number of scholarships awarded annually and the number 
of students covered under the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children during the last five 
years, category-wise  as under:  
   
 
Batch wise – Category Grand Total 
2015-16 65 
CIWG - Studied Outside India 25 
NRI 24 
PIO 16 
2016-17 34 
CIWG - Studied in India 1 
CIWG - Studied Outside India 13 
NRI 8 
PIO 12 
2017-18 86 
CIWG - Studied in India 3 
CIWG - Studied Outside India 45 
NRI 32 
PIO 6 
2018-19 122 
CIWG - Studied in India 7 
CIWG - Studied Outside India 69 
NRI 43 
PIO 3 
2019-20 150 
CIWG - Studied in India 7 
CIWG - Studied Outside India 80 
NRI 61 
PIO 2 
Grand Total 457 
 
3.137 Asked to state the reasons for awarding less number of scholarships in some years , the 
Ministry has stated that t he SPDC Programme for the year 2020 -21 could not be announced 

71 
 
because of C OVID-19 Pandemic. SPDC Programme for the year 2021 -22 is under process at 
an advanced stage as the applications were received late because of delayed academic 
sessions i n 2021 -22.  There were less number of scholarships awarded in some earlier years 
as the applications received from eligible students were not many.   
 
3.138 To a query regarding whether the Ministry has any plan to enhance the number of 
scholarships and coverage of students in the near future, the Ministry has informed that since 
inception, they have increased the number of countries where scholarships is offered.  In case 
there will be demand from other countries, the Ministry would positively consider expanding the 
scheme to other countries.   
 
3.139 The Committee note that the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children(SPDC) 
introduced in 2006-07 was revamped in the Academic Year 2015-16 extending it to children 
of Indian workers in 17 ECR countries. Out of the 150 scholarships offered every year, 50 
are reserved for PIOs, 50 for NRIs and 50 for children of Indian workers in ECR countries. 
The Committee further note that except for the year 2019 -20, the number of slots have not 
been filled up totally. Moreover, the number of seats utilized for children of Indian workers 
who studied in India has been very low.  The Committee regret to note that the progress 
under this important Scheme has been slow from the start and the applications received 
from eligible students were not many. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
popularize the scheme through wide  publicity with the active participation of the  State 
Governments  and other stakeholders so that children of Indian workers who may not 
have the resources t o continue higher studies , may get the opportunity to do so.  
(Recommendation No. 41) 
3.140 The Committee also note that the SPDC Programme for the year 2020 -21 could 
not be announced due to the COVID -19 Pandemic while the Programme for the year 
2021-22 is under process. The Committee urge the Ministry to finalize the SPDC 

72 
 
programme for 2021 -22 and 2022-23 without delay so that the needy students belonging 
to the diaspora community are not deprived of the benefits of the Scheme.  
(Recommendation No. 42) 
D. Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora 
3.141 Under the Scheme of Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD), OIA-II Division 
provides grants to Indian Missions/Posts abroad to support their initiatives aimed at 
strengthening ties with the overseas Indian community; to preserve, maintain and showcase their 
Indian heritage and culture.  The Scheme aims to nourish  and strengthen the cultural bonds 
between India and its diaspora. The projected outcome of the scheme is to reinforce the cultural 
identity of the persons of Indian origin. Grants are also provided to think-tanks and organizations 
in India which organize events pertaining to the overseas Indian community. The Scheme for 
PCTD started in 2005.   However, the Ministry has started a concerted effort to encourage Indian 
Missions/Posts to organize activities under this Scheme.  An amount of Rs. 5 .45 crore has be en 
utilized since 2016-17 under PCTD.  
 
3.142 Sanctions for an amount of Rs. 1,92,55,000/ - (Rupees One Crore Ninety Two Lakh Fifty 
Five Thousand Only) have been issued to 69 Missions/Posts so far in the financial year 2021-22. 
 
3.143 When enquired whether the Ministry is working with Diaspora Associations for 
promotion of cultural ties and w hether such Associations exist in all the countries where Indian 
Missions are functioning , the Ministry has informed that  Mission/Posts are working with 
Diaspora Associations to support their initiatives aimed at strengthening ties with the overseas 
Indian community under PCTD. As per the details made available by the Missions, there are 
about 479 Diaspora Associations workin g with the Missions as on date. However, there are 
countries where there are no Diaspora Association (s). In many countries, Missions/Posts work 
directly with diaspora. 
 
3.144 The Committee note that under the Scheme of Promotion of Cultural Ties with 
Diaspora started in 2005, the Ministry provides grants to Indian Missions/Posts abroad to 
support their initiatives aimed at strengthening ties with the Overseas Indian Community  
and also in preserving, maintain ing and showcasing Indian heritage and culture. Grants 
are also provided to think -tanks and organizations in India which organize events 
pertaining to the overseas Indian community. The Committee further note that the 
Ministry has started a concerted effort to encourage our Missions/Posts to organize 

73 
 
activities under this Scheme  and an amount of Rs. 5.45 crore has been utilized since 2016 -
17. However, the Committee are of the view that the number of programmes and activities 
organized under the Scheme so far are not adequate and the expenditure incurred since 
2016-17 for the same is very meagre . The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
pursue the Indian Missions/Posts abroad to conduct more programmes and activities 
aimed at promoting cultural ties with our diaspora and provide sufficient funding to  think-
tanks/organizations for the same.  The Ministry may also assess the nature and types of 
programmes/activities that can be taken up to nourish and strengthen the cultural bonds 
between India and its diaspora. 
 
(Recommendation No. 43) 
 3.145 The Committee note that there are about 479 Diaspora Associations working with 
Indian Missions to support their initiatives aimed at strengthening ties with the Overseas 
Indian Community under PCTD. The Committee further note that Diaspora Association(s) 
do not exist in some countries and Missions/Posts work directly with the diaspora in many 
countries. The Committee feel that only a strong and vibrant  Diaspora Association can 
effectively coordinate and implement various programmes/activities for strengthe ning the 
cultural bonds between India and its diaspora. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Indian Mission s/Posts abroad should encourage establishment/formation of Diaspora 
Associations in those countries where no such association exist s.  The Committee also urge 
the Ministry to facilitate deeper and broader engagements with the Diaspora Associations 
by all the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.    
(Recommendation No. 44) 

74 
 
E. Overseas Citizenship of India Card Scheme 
 
3.146 The Government of India launched the Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) card scheme 
in August 2005 for Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs). OCI card is a multi-entry life-long visa for 
visiting India for any purpose.  
3.147 The erstwhile Person s of Indian Origin card scheme, launched in the year 1999 was 
merged with OCI scheme in 2015. The process of OCI card application submission has also been 
streamlined. In 2020, OCI card scheme has been extended upto 6th generation to Indian diaspora 
of St. Denis, Reunion Island. Earlier in 2017 and 2019, similar facilities were extended to Indian 
diaspora of Mauritius and Suriname respectively. 
 
3.148 On being asked the reasons for frequent revision of the OCI Card scheme, the Ministry 
has stated that over t he decades , a large number of Indian nationals have moved to foreign 
countries and acquired foreign citizenships.  In order to engage and to connect diaspora to their 
roots, Government of India introduced Persons of Indian Origin card scheme in the year 1999.   
 
3.149 In order to provide some additional benefits, the Government of India subsequently 
introduced Overseas Citizenship of India Cardholders Scheme in August 2005.  Section 7A of 
The Citizenship Act, 1955 governs registration of eligible P IOs of certain category as an OCI 
cardholder and also conferment of certain rights admissible to OCI cardholders. 
 
3.150 The Government of India , exercising relevant provisions of The Citizenship Act , 1955 
has been revising OCI card scheme guidelines with an objective of streamlining OCI registration 
processes for ease of obtaining OCI registration cards.  As a result, the documentary requirement 
in cases of re -issuance of OCI cards has been reduced.  In 2015, it was decided to merge the 
erstwhile PIO Card Sch eme with OCI card making all PIO cardholders deemed to be OCI card 
holder. Since then, the deadline for conversion of PIO card into OCI card and validity of 
handwritten PIO cards has been extended successively to facilitate unhindered entry of eligible 
foreign nationals holding PIO cards into India.  Recently, the MHA vide OM No. 
26011/Misc/71/2018-OCI dated 17 December, 2021 has extended the conversion deadline until 
31 December, 2022. Likewise, OCI registration card scheme has been extended to upto 6 th 
generations in respect of Indian diaspora in Mauritius, Suriname and St. Denis, Reunion Island in 
2017, 2019 and 2020 respectively. 
 
3.151 In September 2019 , restrictional jurisdiction in submission of OCI registration 
application within USA has been removed. As a result, the Indian-origin US nationals can submit 
their OCI registration card application as per their convenience either at Indian Embassy in 
Washington or any other Consulate irrespective of his/her place of residence. 
 
3.152 The G overnment of India i n April 2021, further relaxed the OCI guidelines by 
dispensing with mandatory requirement of re -issuance of an OCI card  each time a new passport 

75 
 
is issued to a foreigner upto  20 years of age  and once after completing  50 years of age. Now, 
OCI cardholder is required to get the OCI card re-issued only once when a new passport is issued 
after completing 20 years of age. However, OCI cardholder is required  to upload Online a copy 
of the new passport and a latest photo  each time a new passport is issued u pto 20 years of age 
and once after completing 50 years of age. Considering the ongoing COVID -19 Pandemic, 
timeline for re-issuance of OCI cards, where necessary, has also been temporarily extended until 
31st December, 2022 vide OM No. 26011/Misc/181/2019-OCI dt. 29 December, 2021. 
 
3.153 Efforts have also been made to ease the application process by making the OCI 
application process completely online  which has helped the foreigners eligible for/registered as 
OCI cardholder to a great extent. For this reason, OCI cardholder registration has been increasing 
significantly during the last few years which is explained below: 
 
Period OCI  cards issued Average cards per annum 
2005-2014 17,09,545 1,70,954 
2015-2021 (till 29.12.2021) 23,39,104 3,35,157 
Total 40,48,649  
 
3.154 When enquired regarding any complaint received in respect of this scheme  and the 
remedial steps taken in this regard , the MEA has stated that t he OCI policy falls under the 
purview of MHA while its implementation is done primarily through Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad.  CPV Division, MEA coordinates between MHA and Missions/Posts abroad. The 
difficulties faced by applicants and feedback related to lack of clarity received from 
Missions/Posts are share d with MHA regularly for guidance and necessary correction in the 
policy matters. Such procedural difficulties, technical grievances etc . received from time to time 
have been looked into and resolved in the past. 
 
3.155 As per the response received from Indian nationals abroad under the scheme, the Ministry 
has informed that the scheme is hugely popular amongst the Indian diaspora as it provides 
several benefits including life -long visa and parity with NRIs in various matters like in 
economic, financial a nd educational fields (barring a few restrictions like purchase of 
agricultural land or farm house or plantation property and requirement of obtaining a special 
permission or a Special Permit, as the case may be, from the competent authority to undertake 
research, missionary or Tabligh or Mountaineering or Journalistic activities; to undertake 
internship in any foreign Diplomatic Missions in India; to visit Protected or Restricted or 
Prohibited areas;  exemption from registration with Foreigners Regional Reg istration Office 
(FRRO) or Foreigners Registration Officer (FRO) for any length of stay in India; at par with NRI 
in the matter of inter-country adoption of Indian children; at par with resident Indian nationals in 
the matter of tariffs in air fares in domestic sectors in India ; same entry fee as domestic Indian 
visitors to visit national parks and wildlife sanctuaries in India ; eligible for appointment as 

76 
 
teaching faculty in IITs, NITs, IIMs, IISERs, IISc, Central Universities and in the new AIIMs set 
up under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY). 
 
3.156 The Committee note that the erstwhile PIO Card Scheme, launched in 1999 was 
merged with OCI Scheme in 2015. The process of submission of OCI card application has 
also been streamlined. In view of the ongoing COVID -19 Pandemic, the timeline for re -
issuance of OCI cards has also been temporar ily extended upto 31 December, 2022.  The 
Committee further note that the registration of OCI cardholder has been increas ed 
significantly during the last few years and a total of 23,39,104 OCI cards have been issued 
from 2015 till  29 December 2021 bringing the average cards issued per annum to 3,35,157. 
However, keeping in view  the fact that there are over 18 million PIOs spread across the 
globe, the Committee feel that the response under the Scheme has been slow and the 
number of OCI cards issued so far  is inadequate. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to popularize the Scheme amongs t the targeted group through wider 
dissemination of information through social media platforms also, in coordination with the 
State Governments and other stakeholders.  
(Recommendation No. 45) 
3.157 The Committee note that the OCI policy falls under the purview of MHA, while its 
implementation is done primarily through Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  The Committee 
desire that the process of registration and issuance of OCI cards should be spe d u p and 
urge the Ministry to identify all the bottlenecks including lack of clarity in policy matters, 
procedural difficulties, technical grievances etc. and resolve the same through improved 
coordination with the MHA  so that conversion of all PIO cards to OCI cards is completed 
by the deadline of 31st December 2022.  
(Recommendation No. 46) 

77 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
   WELFARE MEASURES FOR MIGRANT WORKERS 
 
(i) Skill  Development Initiatives for Migrant Workers  
 
4.1 The Committee enquired about the manner in which the Ministry conceptualize ‘skills’ 
and the methodology for skills need analysis  wherein they have been informed that a s per the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) , “Skills” can be defined as the 
ability to do something with expertise. The MSDE’s Skill India is an init iative which has been 
launched to empower the youth of the country with skill sets that make them more employable 
and more productive in their work environment. The MSDE is responsible for co -ordination of 
all skill development efforts across the country, removal of disconnect between the demand and 
supply of skilled manpower, building the vocational and technical training framework, skill up -
gradation, building of new skills and innovative thinking not only for existing jobs but also jobs 
that are to be created.   
 
4.2 When asked whether the Ministry has undertaken a study on international best practices 
on skill development and training of migrant workers in other countries and the findings of such 
a study, the Ministry has stated that as per the directions of Cabinet Secretary, a monitoring 
committee of Secretaries headed by Secretary (CPV&OIA) has been constituted to establish a 
coordinated institutional mechanism on availing employment opportunities abroad.  The 
committee also includes Secretaries of MSDE, M/o Labour & Employment, D/o Education and 
D/o School Education.  Under the mandate of this committee, the Ministry has been carrying out 
an assessment of employment opportunities abroad with the help of Indian Missions, India 
Centre for Migration, Industry bodies, State Governments etc. This endeavor is currently 
underway. 
 
4.3 The Committee observed that though the skill ecosystem in India has been strengthened , 
a number of challenges continue to persist when it comes to both inter -State and international 
migration. When t hey desired to know the challenges faced along with the remedial measures 
taken to deal with it , the MEA has stated that while the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship is the nodal Ministry governing sk ill development initiatives in India, the 
challenges in international migration are being identified by the Ministry of External Affairs. 
These challenges are mentioned as under:  
 
 Skill matching in line with international standards - The skill sets impart ed to the workers 
need to be in line with the growing demands of the international labour market. 
 
 There is a limited focus on language skills and soft skills which are increasingly gaining 
prominence in new emerging destination countries. ‘Core employabil ity skills’ should include 
not only technical skills but also critical soft skills.  

78 
 
 
 Lack of recognition of Prior Learning: Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) scheme can  
help access the existing  migrant skills and knowledge through informal/formal learning. 
 
 Challenge of ensuring equal working conditions for migrant workers in the destination 
countries. 
 
 Creating brand visibility of Indian workers as law abiding hard working individuals 
 
 Need for reliable data regarding skilled workers. 
 
 Against these challenges, certain remedial measures are suggested: 
 
 MSDE in collaboration with NSDC may develop course curriculum in line with the 
demand of the international market. 
 
 Loans should be made available for language training and incorporating a foreign 
language in the school curriculum. 
 
 State Governments have an important role to play in dissemination of opportunities and 
also regarding the availability of training courses in line with requirements of destination 
countries. 
 
 Talent acquired by returnee migra nt in the destination countries should be tapped and 
they should be given a top up training and posted to another country. There should also be 
recognition of prior learning acquired by them. 
 
 Information maintained regarding trainees can be  a useful source of data regarding the 
number of skilled manpower. 
 
4.4 On being asked to state whether the Ministry has any role in skill training of potential 
migrant workers and if so, the mechanism followed for coordination with the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship, MEA has informed that it is coordinating with MSDE and 
NSDC to develop skill training of potential migrants in collaboration with State Governments. 
MEA has signed a Memorandum of Understanding on July 2, 2016 with the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship for implementation of the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yoj ana 
(PKVY).   
 
4.5 PKVY, a joint collaborative partnership between MEA and MSDE, aims at enhancing the 
skills set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and job rol es, in line with international 
standards, to facilitate their overseas employment. The scheme comprises of two components. 
The first one is technical top -up training, involving recognition of prior learning, assessment and 
certification, to be provided by MSDE, through the National Skill Development Corporation 

79 
 
(NSDC). The second one is a one day training programme on soft skills, called Pre -Departure 
Orientation and Training (PDOT), to be imparted by MEA in collaboration with NSDC, State 
Governments and ot her partners. MSDE conducted training for the first batch on pilot basis by 
involving India International Skill Centres  (IISCs) in 2018 and on the basis of this experience 
MSDE is developing a new model on private public partnership basis.  Separately, MEA  
launched one day PDOT in 2018 under which 104, 000 migrant workers have been trained so far. 
 
4.6 During evidence on the subject on 29 June 2021, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) e laborated 
on the priority attached to improving the skills of the migrant workers:  
 
“We realise that skill is a very important factor in this particular ability of any individual 
migrant to move up the value chain to realise better return for himself or herself and 
therefore provide more returns back to the family and to the nation at the end of the day. 
Many countries called this smart mobility and that is what we are also getting into. So, 
the next gen agreements that we are negotiating with the developed countries in 
particular, which apart from the mobility aspect of the highly prof essional people and 
their social security arrangements as well also has elements which are essentially for low 
skilled people. So, with these countries we are also looking at possibilities of construction 
workers, agricultural labours, of day -care services that can be provided by Indians who 
are skilled specifically in that particular area. The agreement that we have had 
particularly with the Japanese, I think, is a trend -setter in this particular area because it 
defines 14 sectors across industries and ser vices in which Indians are now welcome. I 
think, once these Indians go there, they will carry with them the reputation that Indian 
workers have always carried, including the Gulf for being the best emigrant and the best 
worker. So, actually the Gulf has a premium for the Indians. So, we think, we are moving 
ahead”. 
 
4.7 With respect to skill training of potential migrant workers, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship during the course of evidence on 29 June, 2021 
submitted: 
  
“Under the PDOT scheme NSDC is running 14 centres - apart from other centres run by 
the MEA through the States and other organisations – and has trained around 91,000 
candidates so far.  It is a  one-day training and the feedback which we got was a mixed 
one.  In some cases, people wanted a longer training and said that five -days training 
should be there.  There were some cases, who were in abroad, came back and were 
trained again.  Generally, on an average people were happy with the kind of training 
which was given, especially for the first-timers.  First-timers have a fear of going abroad.  
Middle-class and upper -class people have fear and this kind of familiarity has helped 
them. 
Regarding training people to take skills abroad, an experiment was done through India 
International Skill Centres.  Based on the experiments, we had developed a new model 
which is a Public-Private Partnership model under which through an RFB mode, network 
partners were selected. About 95 network partners joined us in developing these c entres 

80 
 
where they give vocational training and necessary language training and they also deliver 
PDOT programme for sending persons abroad. There are 524 centres in the country. 
Most of the migration hotspots are covered by this India International Skill C entre. They 
send around 40,000 people every year”.  
4.8 The Secretary, MSDE also highlighted the efforts made for standardization of skilling 
curriculum across the country during the course of evidence on 29 June, 2021: 
“….what we have done is that we have  tried to standardize the skilling curriculum across 
the country through our national skills regulator, that is, National Council for Vocational 
Education and Training, which became operational last year. We have tried to benchmark 
our qualifications with the international qualifications in different countries and we have 
tried to have some agreements also with these countries. With UAE, we have been able to 
benchmark 15 of the qualifications with 13 of ours that these job roles qualifications are 
equivalent to those job roles which are available in UAE. The UAE has also even agreed 
that people who are qualified in this , through a common exam, will be given facilitations 
like visa rebates and other things. But the only problem is that not many candidates hav e 
come out of this. Only around 133 candidates were taken through a pilot programme, of 
which 63 candidates have been selected by UAE. After that, because of COVID and other 
issues and also due to fall in demand, I think, suddenly there was a slowdown in t he 
people going to Middle East.  
Similarly, for Saudi Arabia, we have a benchmarking of five job roles. For UK, we have 
a benchmarking of 82 job roles. But what we have found is that we cannot have a one 
size fits all kind of scenarios. Each country is different. So, we have to prepare a country-
wise policy because migration issues, visa requirements, and skill requirements are 
different. Therefore, we are in an extensive talk with the regulators and industries of 
those countries. We are taking help of the recruitment agencies here and embassies there 
and we are in the process of preparing country -wise policy for each country. So, what do 
we have to do? What kind of agreements we need to have? The MEA is on -board on that. 
We have been successful in two -three agreements. In Japan, earlier, we had this 
Technical Intern Training Programme (TITP) in which we used to send interns for three 
to five years for training in Japan and they were supposed to then come back and use the 
industrial practices here which they had learnt in Japan.  
Taking a step further, the MEA has signed an agreement with Japan on the specified 
skilled workers in which we have been permitted to send skilled workers from India in 14 
sectors. All such things like the modalities of doing that, id entifying the vacancies, 
identifying the organisations who will do the skill testing on behalf of the Japanese 
companies, and language training, etc., are getting worked out. We are trying to sign 
similar kinds of agreements with other countries so that we  can have a distinct plan for 
sending skilled workers but the basic principle is that the quality of our domestic skilling 
should improve only then we will be in a position to send people abroad. A lot of steps 
have been taken to improve the quality of the  domestic skilling, both in the long -term 
system, that is, done through ITI and the short -term system which is done through the 
PMKVYs. We are trying to improve that. This is a summary of what we are trying to do 
for sending our skilled migrants abroad”.   

81 
 
4.9 Regarding placement of migrant workers who completed the training programmes, the 
Secretary submitted: 
“….in our training programmes itself, there is a component which is linked to placement. 
Earlier it was 20 per cent, now 30 per cent of the payment goes to the training partner 
only if he/she is able to place that person and show him to be placed for a period of time. 
It is not that he/she places him and gets the money and goes away. That is there. But still 
placement is not satisfactory. It is only 5 5 per cent under PMKVY and 70 per cent under 
the ITI. What MSDE does is that those who are not placed, there is a system to make 
them available to national level organisations that are there. Last year ,what we have done 
is that we have launched a AS SEM po rtal which is a directory of all certified skilled 
personnel in the country, short -term skill, long -term skill, apprentices. Now, we are 
happy to say that within, not even one year has passed, almost where we have a directory 
of 1.3 crore people where by t he click of a mouse you can locate a skilled person …. 
Around 12 lakh jobs have been offered on that portal so far ….Regarding the 160 hours 
PDOT training, as I said earlier, we converted that into a PPP mode in the India 
International Skill Centre where tra ining takes place anywhere between 15 days to three 
months depending upon the job role. So, there are 95 training partners and 524 centres 
and they are able to send about 40,000 people abroad for jobs.  That is the position”.  
4.10 The Committee also observed that the MEA is also looking at skill training centres for 
Indian migrants in some destination countries like Japan and UAE for imparting skills as per 
local requirements . The Ministry has informed that t here is a nother programme entitled 
“Technical Intern Training Programme” (TITP)  run by MSDE, under which selected candidates 
are trained in India by the Sending Organizations (SOs) before they undergo three to five years 
of On Job Training, after which they are required to return to India and utili ze the skills acquired 
by them in Japan.  As per MSDE, 220 interns have been placed in Japan and they are pursuing 
their training in Japan in diverse industry sectors including Manufacturing, Healthcare, 
Construction, Textile, Agriculture and Food Manufacturing. 
 
4.11 The Committee further observed that under the PKVY there was an aim of setting up 
IISCs to provide skill training and certification on international standards and 14 centres were 
empanelled as IISCs and enquired whether those centres have been  started. The MEA has 
informed that as per inputs provided by the National Skill Developme nt Corporation (NSDC) of 
MSDE, 14 IISCs were recognized  in the pilot phase and international training and certifications 
were conducted for app roximately 600 candida tes which was covered under PMKVY and 
PKVY. The pilot project was successfully completed in 2018.  As of date, 100 organizations are 
part of the network operating through 557 IISCs across more than 300 trades. The top 5 sectors 
(based on the number of trai ning centres) are Construction, Electronics, Retail, Tourism and 
Hospitality and Healthcare. The IISCs are spread across 261 districts of the country, while 
covering 68% of top 50 migrating districts. 
 
4.12 When asked to furnish the details of skill training centres for migrant workers set  up in 
various countries so far, the number of such workers benefitted thereunder and the extent to 

82 
 
which such training centres have helped in improving the skills of the migrant worke rs, the 
Ministry has informed that the first Upskilling & Training Center in the UAE was inaugurated by 
Hon’ble MoS Shri V. Muraleedharan during his visit in January 2021 in Dubai. The courses in 
this upskilling session included basic Arabic & English lang uage and Computer/IT skills. Such 
upskilling sessions have also been organised in Sharjah and Ajman. Till date about 350 Indian 
workers have participated in such upskilling programmes. 
 
4.13 Regarding whether the Government is taking adequate steps to tap the potential of 
migrant workforce to make significant contributions to India’s economic development by 
investing their hard -earned savings in the country, as well as monetizing human and social 
capital acquired abroad, such as new skills and competencies,   the Ministry has stated that  
migrant workers are very important for the growth and development of Indian economy not only 
through remittances but also passing  on technical knowhow acquired at destination countries.  
During the first wave of the Pandemic, MEA in association with MSDE and Ministry of Civil 
Aviation collaborated to create a database of returnee migrant workers who have tremendous 
potential. Skilled Workers Arrival Database for Employment Support (SWADES) initiative was 
a result of this colla boration that sought to tap the skill s already acquired by Indian workers and 
post them to another destination countries. 
 
4.14 Additionally, MEA is engaging with State Governments and private industry bodies to 
explore this talent pool of our workers and to deliberate on strategies to take this initiative 
forward. A Committee is set up to create a framework to facilitate Indian Workforce to avail 
employment opportunities abroad. 
 
4.15 It has been stated during the course of evidence on 29 June 2021 that ne w migration 
corridors are emerging in Japan, Korea, Taiwan towards East Asia, in countries of Europe and in 
other places because of various reasons and accelerated by COVID. These are for both workers 
as well as highly skilled professionals. 
 
4.16 When asked about the plans/initiatives proposed to be taken by the Ministry to meet the 
new challenges for skilling of potential migrant workers and to provide matching skills with 
destination countries in the post COVID era, the Committee have been informed that with regard 
to the emerging employment opportunities, negotiations have been initiated with host countries 
to initiate text based negotiations to facilitate. In this context Migration Mobility Partnership 
Agreement/ MOUs were signed with France (20 18) and UK (2021). A limited version of these 
arrangements tailored to the preferences of the host countries has been signed with Japan (2021) 
and Portugal (2021). The negotiations are underway with various countries including Australia, 
Belgium–Netherlands-Luxembourg (BNL) countries, Italy, Germany, Malaysia etc. 
 
4.17 After approval from the Cabinet on the signing of the Memorandum of Cooperation 
(MOC) on “Specified Skilled Worker" (SSW), the agreement was signed on 18 January, 2021. 

83 
 
Following that, two r ounds of the Joint Working Group meetings on both sides were held 
virtually. The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship has nominated the National 
Skill Development Corporation as the nodal agency for implementation of SSW programme. 
Industry b odies such as the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI) and Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry 
(ASSOCHAM) have been encouraged to promote imparting training to meet the skill 
requirements for the skill tests. Multiple private sector institutions have also initiated dedicated 
SSW module based training and placement capsules for candidates interested in the employment 
opportunities under SSW in Japan. 
 
4.18 A Japan specific Pre -Departure Orientation Training manual has been designed in 
consultation with industry bodies for training candidates on aspects such as language, work 
culture, behavioral traits etc. A training of Trainers (ToT) workshop for trainers at PDOT centers 
from various Na tional and State level institutions including some private institutes from all 
across India was conducted on 07 October 2021. 
 
4.19 Cognizant of new opportunities emerging in new markets of East and South East Asia, 
ICM has done a labour market assessment study on the same. The labour market study looks at 
emerging sectors in countries like Japan, Korea etc. and identifies the opportunities for Indian 
workers therein. Further, to spread information about new opportunities in emerging labour 
markets, a high level delegation led by Secretary (CPV&OIA) visited four States – Assam, West 
Bengal, Telangana and Tamil Nadu in the month of October and December 2021 respectively to 
spread awareness about opportunities for potential migrant workers. 
 
4.20 The Committee further enquired about the latest position on SWADES including the 
details regarding data received on SWADES so far and the status of integration of the said data 
into the Aatmanirbhar Skilled Employee Employer Mapping ( ASEEM) portal of MSDE.  The 
MEA has informed that Government of India launched the Skilled Workers Arrival Database for 
Employment Support initiative for citizens  returning  under the Vande Bharat Mission at  the 
beginning  of the Pandemic. SWADES is a joint initiative of the M inistry of skill Development 
& Entrepreneurship, the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Ministry of External Affairs which 
aims to create a database of returning citizens based on their skill sets and experience. 
 
4.21 As on 28th February 2022, more than 3 3,957 candidates have registered SWADES skill 
Card. 
 
4.22 All the stakeholders have been given access to the SWADES candidate database with 
uploading of details on the ASEEM portal for employer connect under different sectors. An 
initial stage assessment s hows that job connects has been established with 7,495 candidates by 
employers registered on the ASEEM portal which is a continuous process of interaction between 
employers and candidates. 
 

84 
 
 
4.23 The Committee note that a monitoring committee of Secretaries headed by 
Secretary (CPV&OIA) has been constituted to establish a coordinated institutional 
mechanism on availing employment opportunities abroad.  The committee also includes 
Secretaries of MSDE, M/o Labour & Employment, M /o Education and D/o School 
Education.  Under the mandate of this committee, the Ministry has been carrying out an 
assessment of employment opportunities abroad with the help of Indian Missions, India 
Centre for Migration, Indu stry bodies, State Governments etc. and this endeavour is 
currently underway. The Committee desire that assessment of employment opportunities 
abroad should be completed at the earliest and an institutional mechanism to facilitate 
employment of Indian work ers abroad should be established without delay. This assumes 
greater significance and urgency in view of the easing of COVID -19 Pandemic restrictions, 
increased vaccination and opening up of labour markets in the Gulf and other countries. 
(Recommendation No. 47) 
4.24 The Committee note that MEA is coordinating with MSDE and NSDC to develop 
skill training of potential migrants in collaboration with the State Governments. Under the 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana , the MEA and MSDE are jointly collaborating as partners 
to enhance the skills set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and job roles, in line 
with international standards, to facilitate overseas employment.  MSDE conducted training 
for the first batch of 600 candidates on pilot basis in 2018. But the Committee d id not find 
any significant progress in development of new model on Private Public Partnership. T he 
Committee, therefore, desire that MEA and MSDE should work together in a time bound 
manner in overcoming the challenges in respect of international migration by redefining 
the ‘core employability skills’ to include critical soft skills besides technical skills, 

85 
 
developing skilling curriculum in line with the demand of the international labour  market, 
dissemination of labour related opportunities abroad and availability of training courses 
through the State Governments etc. The Committee also feel that adequate steps have not 
been taken so far to tap the skills and competencies acquired by Indian workers abroad 
and urge the Ministry to work out a strategy in collaboration with other stakeholders so 
that skills and technical knowhow acquired at destinatio n countries by the migrant  
workers are tapped and passed on..  The Ministry has also stated that the IISCs are spread 
across 261 districts of the country, while covering 68% of the top 50 migrating districts. 
The Committee desire that each potential migran t worker should be given the opportunity 
to receive skill training and recommend for setting up of IISCs in all the remaining 
migrating districts of the country in the shortest possible time. 
 (Recommendation No. 48) 
4.25 The Committee are pleased to note that the first Upskilling & Training Centre in 
the UAE has been set up in January 2021 in Dubai for improving the skills of the migrant 
workers. Such upskilling sessions have also been organized in Sharjah and Ajman and 
about 350 Indian workers have participated in such programmes. Keeping in view the huge 
number of migrant workers in the Gulf countries, the Committee desire that adequate 
number of such training centres should be set up in all Gulf Cooperation Countries where 
sizeable number of low skilled and semi-skilled Indian migrants are working. Efforts may 
also be made to increase the level of participation of the said workers in the upskilling 
programmes to ensure favourable condition of employment and better returns  and the 
MEA through its Missions/ Posts should actively facilitate the same.  
(Recommendation No. 49) 

86 
 
4.26 The Committee note that the international labour market is now demand driven as 
compared to the earlier supply driven system. With the emergence of new labour markets 
in East and Sou th East Asia including Japan, Korea, Taiwan etc. and in countries of 
Europe, skilling of potential migrant workers and to provide matching skills with the 
destination countries is a new challenge, especially in the post COVID era. The need of the 
hour is t o improve the quality of our domestic skilling and standardiz e curriculum across 
the country so that migrant workers can go abroad and secure employment with better 
wages.  The Committee , therefore, urge the MEA to work in close collaboration with the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in this regard and make all out 
efforts to facilitate migrant workers to go abroad with the requisite skill sets and 
competencies in line with the demand of international labour markets and the destination 
countries.  
(Recommendation No. 50) 
4.27 The Committee note that an agreement on a Memorandum of Cooperation on 
Specified Skilled Worker (SSW) was signed with Japan on 18 January, 2021. The 
Committee welcome this step as it would facilitate skilled Indian wor kers to find 
employment in select sectors and job roles with favorable condition of employment. The 
Committee further urge the MEA to actively facilitate signing of such agreements with 
other countries across various sectors for low skilled, semi -skilled, skilled workers and 
professionals so that these people can go abroad for a stable, secure and better future.  
(Recommendation No. 51) 
4.28 The Committee note that the I ndia Centre for Migration has done a labour market 
assessment study at emerging sectors in countries like Japan, Korea etc. and has identified 

87 
 
the opportunities for Indian workers therein. The Committee are of the view that the 
endeavor of the Government  should be to grasp the opp ortunities and recommend wider 
dissemination about the new opportunities in emerging labour markets to potential 
migrant workers across the country with the active participation of all concerned 
Ministries/Departments and the State Governments.  
(Recommendation No. 52) 
4.29 The Committee note that SWADES (Skilled Workers Arrival Database for 
Employment Support), a joint initiative of Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of External Affairs has been 
launched for citizens returning under the Vande Bharat Mission at the beginning of the 
Pandemic with the aim of creating a database of returning citizens based on their skill sets 
and experience. M ore than 33,957 candidates have registered SWADES Skill Car d as on 
28th February 2022. The Committee further note that all the stakeholders have been given 
access to the SWADES candidate database with uploading of details on the ASEEM 
(Aatmanirbhar Skilled Employee Employer Mapping) portal for Employer connect und er 
different sectors and as per an initial  stage assessment, job connects ha ve been established 
with 7,495 candidates by employers registered on the ASEEM portal. The Committee 
appreciate this initiative and urge the Ministry to generate more awareness ab out 
SWADES amongst the migrant workers and improve the registration, in coordination with 
the Ministries of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and Civil Aviation. Efforts may 
also be made to improve job connects between Employer and Employee and registra tion of 
Employers on the ASEEM portal so as to facilitate con tinuous interaction between 
employers and candidates. 

88 
 
(Recommendation No. 53) 
(ii) Welfare of Returnee Migrant Workers  
4.30 On being a sked whether the Ministry has an authentic data regarding the number of 
migrant workers who returned to India in the wake of the COVID -19 Pandemic, the Ministry 
has stated that  while the overall data regarding return of workers during the COVID is not 
available, about eight lakh twenty five thousand workers returned from all over the world 
through the flights arranged by the GOI under Vande Bharat Mission. The top countries from 
where these workers returned as well as the top 20 States which received these  workers are as 
under: 
 
Top 20 Countries from where Migrant  
workers returned 
Top 20 States which received Migrant  
workers 
S. No. Country No. of Workers  S. No. State Name No. of Workers 
1. UAE 330058 1. Kerala 236636 
2. Saudi Arabia 137900 2. Uttar Pradesh 122757 
3. Kuwait 97802 3. Tamil Nadu 116835 
4. Oman 72259 4. Bihar 44345 
5.  Qatar 51190 5. Punjab 34271 
6. Singapore 33595 6. Andhra Pradesh 32945 
7. Bahrain 27453 7. West Bengal 31202 
8. Italy 8036 8. Rajasthan 30131 
9. Iraq 6673 9. Telangana 29147 
10. Maldives 5202 10. Delhi 26045 
11. Nigeria 4690 11. Maharashtra 24675 
12. Germany 4333 12. Gujarat 19751 
13. USA 3597 13. Karnataka 19289 
14. United Kingdom 3270 14. Assam 10926 
15. Sri Lanka 2789 15. Odisha 8683 
16. Bangladesh 2680 16. Jharkhand 5246 
17. Japan 2156 17. Uttarakhand 4881 
18. Canada 1851 18. Jammu and 
Kashmir 
4301 
19. Indonesia 1733 19. Haryana 4161 
20. France 1577 20. Goa 2872 

89 
 
 
4.31 Focusing on the rehabilitation of the Gulf returnees as there is a huge population of them 
as a working class, the Committee enquired during the course of evidence whether there is any 
proposal for their rehabilitation, apart from an insurance scheme and s ome welfare activities 
which are very negligible and emphasize the need to formulate a comprehensive scheme for 
rehabilitation of Gulf returnees in particular and also other workers in coordination with other 
Ministries. The MEA has responded that  repatriation of workers stranded in the Gulf was an 
important issue for the Ministry.   The Vande Bharat Mission was launched in this effort. 
Government launched the Skilled Workers Arrival Database for Employment Suppor 
t(SWADES) initiative which was a skill mappi ng exercise of the Indian returnees under the 
Vande Bharat Mission to help them get jobs. As soon as conditions improved, Ministry 
negotiated with Gulf countries to start air bubble flights for the return of workers to their jobs. 
All Gulf countries have r e-opened their doors to Indian workers and the momentum of workers 
going to the Gulf and other countries has picked speed.  
4.32 The Committee also enquired about the number of migrant workers covered under the 
schemes/programmes of the Government and whether the Government has any information 
regarding the number of such workers yet to be covered under its schemes/programmes. The 
Ministry has informed that as on 28th February 2022,  1,12,212 migrants workers were imparted 
PDOT training and 68,00,686 migrant workers have taken PBBY policy, so far. 
 
4.33 On being asked about the number of migrant workers who have returned to the Gulf and 
other countries during the last two years and the current year, the steps taken by the Government 
to facilitate their return and employment abroad, the Ministry has informed that  2,26,818 
Emigration Clearances were granted in the last two years, for Gulf Countries.  
 
4.34 During the COVID-19 Pandemic, Indian Missions and Posts were engaged in facilitating 
the return of Indian workers stranded abroad under the Vande Bharat Mission. With the 
development of COVID -19 related health protocols and vaccinatio n, GOI’s focus shifted to 
pressing for return of workers and families to Gulf countries on an expeditious basis. To that end, 
all Gulf nations were pressed to establish air bubbles and ease visa, travel and health restrictions. 
All countries in the Gulf re sponded favorably to these efforts by the Government as a result of 
which, there has been a steady flow of returnees back to the Gulf countries. Under the air 
bubbles, lakhs of people including workers have travelled back to Gulf countries during the 
Pandemic. 
 
4.35 Issues related to welfare of Indian workers during the COVID Pandemic and measures to 
ensure their return were also taken up by the Government with its Gulf counterparts at the 
highest levels. Since March 2020, Prime Minister has had telephonic conversations with Crown 
Prince of Abu Dhabi (March, May 2020 & January and September 2021), King of Saudi Arabia 
(twice in September 2020) and Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia (March 2020 & March 2021), 
Amir of Qatar (March, May, December 2020 & April 2021), Sultan of Oman (April 2020 & 

90 
 
February 2021), King of Bahrain (April 2020) and Crown Prince/ Prime Minister of Bahrain 
(February 2022) and Emir of Kuwait (April 2020). The Prime Minister also held a virtual 
Summit with Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi on February 18, 2022. 
 
4.36 The External Affairs Minister visited UAE (November 2020 & April, November, 
December 2021), Qatar (December 2020 & June, August 2021 and February 2022 on transit), 
Bahrain (November 2020) and Kuwait (June 2021). He spoke to Foreign Minister s of UAE 
(April, June, August 2020 & January, April 2021 and January 2022), Saudi Arabia (April, June, 
September 2020 & January, February, May, November 2021), Qatar (April, December 2020, 
May 2021 and January 2022), Oman (April, August, September, Decembe r 2020 & September 
2021), Bahrain (April 2020 and May 2021) and Kuwait (April 2020 & March, April, May 2021 
and January 2022). The EAM also met his counterparts from Gulf countries on sidelines of other 
meetings such as Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia on sideline of G-20 meeting in Italy in June 
2021 and Foreign Ministers of Kuwait and Oman in Tehran in August 2021. 
 
4.37 India also hosted visits of Foreign Ministers of UAE (February 2021), Saudi Arabia 
(September 2021), Bahrain (April 2021) and Kuwait (March 2021) as well as Secretary General 
of Gulf Cooperation Council (November 2021). 
 
4.38 Minister of State (VM) similarly paid visits to Gulf nations UAE (January and October 
2021), Oman (December 2020) and Bahrain (August -September 2021). MOS (VM) als o held a 
virtual meeting with Indian community organisations and leaders in October 2021. 
 
4.39 The Government convened a regional (Gulf) Heads of Missions of India meetings on the 
subject of welfare of Indian workers during the COVID Pandemic and measures  to ensure their 
return inter alia physically in Kuwait in June 2021 and virtually in July 2021. The Government 
also launched in January 2021 a program to upskill Indian blue collar workers in UAE to 
enhance their employability and wages. 
 
4.40 Indian Miss ions/Posts are continuing to pursue with the Governments in the Gulf 
countries the return of Indian workers, the realization of payments due to them, new recruitment 
in the light of economic recovery, and other welfare measures as appropriate. The India -UAE 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement signed by the two countries on February 18, 
2022 should also result in greater employment opportunities for Indian workers and professionals 
in UAE. 
  
4.41 The Committee note that the Ministry d oes not possess the overall data of migrant 
workers who returned to India in the wake of the COVID -19 Pandemic. However, the 
Committee have been apprised that about eight lakh twenty five thousand workers have 

91 
 
returned from all over the world through the flig hts arranged under the Vande Bharat 
Mission. The Committee further note that with the development of COVID -19 related 
health protocols and vaccination, the Government has made efforts for the return of 
workers and their families to Gulf countries  and 2,26 ,818 emigration clearances were 
granted in the last two years. The Committee view the welfare of Indian workers and the 
issue of their employment/livelihood seriously and urge the Ministry to make all out efforts 
to ensure the expeditious return of the remaining  workers to their destination countries by 
vigorously pursuing the matter with the respective countries at the Highest level. The MEA 
may also facilitate new recruitment for such workers and the Indian Missions/Posts may 
take up the issue of realization of payments due to them on priority.   
(Recommendation No. 54) 
4.42 The Committee observe that though the Ministry is implementing various 
programmes and schemes for the welfare of the Indian diaspora , no specific scheme exists 
for the rehabilitation of the workers who lost their jobs including the huge population of 
Gulf returnees, in the wake of the COVID -19 Pandemic. The Committee are aware that 
many workers have gone back to their employment abroad with the easing of the COVID-
19 Pandemic situation and the re-opening of doors to Indian workers by the Gulf countries. 
The Committee, however, feel that a rehabilitation scheme to ensure livelihood security for 
those workers who lost their jobs/could not return/prefer to stay back in the country, is still 
needed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a comprehensive rehabilitation scheme 
may be worked out in coordination with other Ministries/Departments concerned as well as 
the State Governments for th ose workers who lost their jobs due to pa ndemics or other 
disasters to secure means of livelihood for them and their families , at the earliest.  The 

92 
 
Committee u rge the Ministry to initiate consultations with all the stakeholders in this 
regard without delay. 
(Recommendation No. 55) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      NEW DELHI;                                                          P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
 01 August, 2022                                                Chairperson, 
    10 Sravana, 1944 (Saka)                            Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

93 
 
 
 
Annexure-I  
 
 
Compilation of Indian Diaspora data of NRIs/PIOs/OCIs and Students as on 31.12.2021 
  Name of 
Missions/Posts 
No. of 
PIOs/OCIs 
No. of NRIs  No. of 
students 
Total Indian 
Diaspora 
1 CGI, Herat, AFG01 0 0 0 0 
2 EoI, Ouagadougou, 
BFA01 
0 0 0 0 
3 HCI, Yaounde, 
CMR01 
0 674   674 
4 EoI, Djibouti, DJI01 6 618 0 624 
5 EoI, Conakry, 
GIN01 
2     2 
6 EoI, Malabo, 
GNQ01 
0 110 0 110 
7 EoI, Sao Tome, 
STP01 
0 0 0 0 
8 EoI, Lome, TGO01 4 629 0 633 
9 CGI, Jalalabad, 
AFG02 
0 0 0 0 
10 EoI, Kabul, AFG03 0 0 0 0 
11 EoI, Asmara , ERI01 0 198 0 198 
12 CGI, Kandahar, 
AFG04 
0 0 0 0 
13 CGI, Mazar-e-Sharif, 
AFG05 
0 0 0 0 
14 EoI, Luanda, 
AGO01 
58 3775 0 3833 
16 UAE       3300000 
17 EoI, Buenos Aires, 
ARG01 
2230 1570 0 3800 
18 EoI, Yerevan, 
ARM01 
33 1628 8015 9676 
19 HCI, Canberra, 
AUS01 
44341 17105 13735 75181 
20 CGI, Melbourne, 
AUS02 
 139185 265000 45750 310750 

94 
 
21 CGI, Perth, AUS03 52983 16919 6733 76635 
22 CGI, Sydney, 
AUS04 
84871 84293 33791 202955 
23 EoI, Vienna, AUT01 18000 13000 350 31350 
24 EoI, Baku, AZE01 65 708 119 892 
25 EoI, Brussels, 
BEL01 
11009 16645 766 28420 
26 AHCI, Chittagong, 
BGD01 
  400 650 1050 
27 HCI, Dhaka, BGD02 0 5056 7000 12056 
28 AHCI, Rajshahi, 
BGD03 
0 193 1173 1366 
29 AHCI, Khulna, 
BGD04 
0 0 210 210 
30 EoI, Sofia, BGR01 0 0 0 162 
31 AHCI, Sylhet, 
BGD05 
0 0 275 275 
32 EoI, Bahrain , 
BHR01 
0 0 0 276634 
33 EoI, Minsk, BLR01 114 171 793 1078 
34 EoI, Brasilia, 
BRA01 
184 858 4 1046 
35 CGI, Sao Paulo, 
BRA02 
      0 
36 HCI, Brunei 
Darussalam, BRN01 
0 7500 38 7538 
37 CGI, Phuentsholing, 
BTN01 
0 0 0 0 
38 EoI, Thimphu, 
BTN02 
0 40000 2 40002 
39 HCI, Gaborone, 
BWA01 
1000 4000 200 5200 
40 HCI, Ottawa, 
CAN01 
0 0 183310 183310 
41 CGI, Toronto, 
CAN02 
217183 633720 0 850903 
42 CGI, Vancouver, 
CAN03 
608199 817030 0 1425229 
43 EoI, Berne, CHE01 7000 14735 1701 23436 
44 CGI, Geneva, 
CHE02 
406 16500 2279 19185 

95 
 
45 EoI, Santiago, 
CHL01 
2100 1400 2 3502 
46 EoI, Beijing, CHN01 222 1000 100 1322 
47 CGI, Guangzhou, 
CHN02 
384 2000 3636 6020 
48 CGI, Hong Kong, 
CHN03 
10222 40000 815 51037 
49 CGI, Shanghai, 
CHN04 
761 2262 2700 5723 
50 EoI, Abidjan, CIV01 55 3000 0 3055 
51 EoI, Kinshasa, 
COG01 
60 1777 0 1837 
52 EoI, Brazzaville, 
COG02 
0 800 0 800 
53 EoI, Bogota, COL01 410 864 0 1274 
54 EoI, Havana, CUB01 13 700 1 714 
55 HCI, Nicosia, 
CYP01 
312 5191 1961 7464 
56 EoI, Prague, CZE01 359 5115 1500 6974 
57 EoI, Berlin, DEU01 6914 131095 28905 166914 
58 CGI, Frankfurt, 
DEU02 
15536 0 0 15536 
59 CGI, Hamburg, 
DEU03 
0 0 0 0 
60 CGI, Munich, 
DEU04 
16066 54775 3000 73841 
61 EoI, Copenhagen, 
DNK01 
2755 13368 413 16536 
62 EoI, Algiers, DZA01 9 3800 0 3809 
63 EoI, Cairo, EGY01 384 3300 400 4084 
64 EoI, Madrid, ESP01 11916 39506 1383 52805 
65 EoI, Addis Ababa, 
ETH01 
110 7000 0 7110 
66 EoI, Helsinki, FIN01 3156 7237 519 10912 
67 HCI, Suva, FJI01 1367 1141 0 2508 
68 EoI, Paris, FRA01 57382 19000 10000 86382 
69 CGI, St. Denis-
Reunion Island, 
FRA02 
3364 105 3 3472 

96 
 
70 UK 0 0 0 1777000 
73 HCI, Accra, GHA01 3000 7000 0 10000 
74 EoI, Athens, GRC01 1380 15000 48 16428 
75 EoI, Guatemala City, 
GTM01 
58 125 0 183 
76 HCI, Georgetown, 
GUY01 
899 125 498 1522 
77 EoI, Zagreb, HRV01 32 2358 25 2415 
78 EoI, Budapest, 
HUN01 
137 4300 932 5369 
79 CGI, Bali, IDN01 275 200 0 475 
80 EoI, Jakarta, IDN02 4013 11831 1 15845 
81 CGI, Medan, IDN03 130 610 1 741 
82 EoI, Dublin, IRL01 27900 18500 5000 51400 
83 CoI, Bandar Abbas, 
IRN01 
1 0 0 1 
84 EoI, Tehran, IRN02 354 4000 1850 6204 
85 CoI, Zahidan, IRN03 0 0 200 200 
86 EoI, Baghdad, 
IRQ01 
1 6457 0 6458 
87 EoI, Reykjavik, 
ISL01 
242 181 16 439 
88 EoI, Tel Aviv, ISR01 86718 14148 1218 102084 
89 CGI, Milan, ITA01 36003 91940 1147 129090 
90 EoI, Rome, ITA02 8661 160000 4750 173411 
91 HCI, Kingston, 
JAM01 
0 0 0 80000 
92 EoI, Amman, JOR01 141 13080 0 13221 
93 CGI, Osaka-Kobe, 
JPN01 
305 0 0 305 
94 EoI, Tokyo, JPN02 0 35475 1302 36777 
95 EoI, Astana, KAZ01 4855 1000 3855 9710 
96 RoI, Almaty, KAZ02 4855 1000 3855 9710 
97 AHCI, Mombasa, 
KEN01 
0 0 0 0 
98 HCI, Nairobi, 
KEN02 
35957 7603 0 43560 

97 
 
99 EoI, Bishkek, 
KGZ01 
38 200 14500 14738 
100 EoI, Phnom Penh, 
KHM01 
69 1750 0 1819 
101 EoI, Seoul, KOR01 449 9968 1364 11781 
102 EoI, Kuwait, 
KWT01 
1215 1029861 0 1031076 
103 EoI, Vientiane, 
LAO01 
0 0 0 400 
104 EoI, Beirut, LBN01 54 51 2 107 
105 EoI, Tripoli, LBY01 0 0 0 1502 
106 Sri Lanka 0 0 0 767617 
110 EoI, Rabat, MAR01 0 0 0 50 
111 EoI, Antananarivo, 
MDG01 
1691 315 0 2006 
112 HCI, Male, MDV01 218 27065 0 27283 
113 EoI, Mexico City, 
MEX01 
1331 5602 108 7041 
114 EoI, Bamako, 
MLI01 
9 400 0 409 
115 CGI, Mandalay, 
MMR01 
249 212 0 461 
116 EoI, Yangon, 
MMR02 
1227 2126 0 3353 
117 EoI, Ulaanbaatar, 
MNG01 
11 150 0 161 
118 HCI, Maputo, 
MOZ01 
3421 2906 0 6327 
119 HCI, Port Louis, 
MUS01 
9225 12304 147 21676 
120 HCI, Lilongwe, 
MWI01 
8500 2452 0 10952 
121 HCI, Kuala Lumpur, 
MYS01 
27770800 185119 3331 27959250 
122 HCI, Windhoek, 
NAM01 
50 400 0 450 
123 EoI, Niamey, 
NER01 
0 250 0 250 
124 HCI, Abuja, NGA01 36 50000 0 50036 
125 O/HCI, Lagos, 
NGA02 
321 0 0 321 

98 
 
126 EoI, The Hague, 
NLD01 
22233 40000 3200 65433 
127 EoI, Oslo, NOR01 0 0 0 26900 
128 CGI, Birganj, 
NPL01 
0 0 2300 2300 
129 CO, Biratnagar, 
NPL02 
0 0 0 0 
130 EoI, Kathmandu, 
NPL03 
102 0 0 102 
131 HCI, Wellington, 
NZL01 
160000 77300 2664 239964 
132 EoI, Muscat, 
OMN01 
1606 544631 40000 586237 
133 HCI, Islamabad, 
PAK01 
0 0 0 0 
134 EoI, Panama, 
PAN01 
0 0 0 16128 
135 EoI, Lima, PER01 128 386 0 514 
136 Philippines - 130000, 
FSM - 35, Palau - 27 
1920 130062 15000 146982 
137 HCI, Port Moresby, 
PNG01 
70 4500 0 4570 
138 EoI, Warsaw, 
POL01 
1133 11000 4000 16133 
139 EoI, Pyongyang, 
PRK01 
0 0 0 15 
140 EoI, Lisbon, PRT01 9545 24550 19 34114 
141 RoI, Ramallah, 
PSE01 
3 17 0 20 
142 EoI, Doha, QAT01 0 0 0 0 
143 EoI, Bucharest, 
ROU01 
297 9600 805 10702 
144 EoI, Moscow, 
RUS01 
1791 7000 16872 25663 
145 CGI, St. Petersburg, 
RUS02 
369 129 487 985 
146 CGI, Vladivostok, 
RUS03 
30 0 680 710 
147 EoI, Riyadh, SAU01 2010 2599804 65800 2667614 
148 CGI, Jeddah, SAU02 3096 0 0 3096 
149 EoI, Belgrade, 35 775 5 815 

99 
 
SCG01 
150 EoI, Khartoum, 
SDN01 
1270 2400 3 3673 
151 EoI, Juba, SDN02 0 800 0 800 
152 EoI, Dakar, SEN01 60 3740 0 3800 
153 HCI, Kigali, RWA01 64 2940 0 3004 
154 HCI, Singapore, 
SGP01 
97387 350000 10000 457387 
155 HCI, Freetown, 
SLE01 
50 3000 0 3050 
156 EoI, Paramaribo, 
SUR01 
1744 1270 310 3324 
157 EoI, Bratislava, 
SVK01 
98 412 202 712 
158 EoI, Ljubljana, 
SVN01 
57 313 36 406 
159 EoI, Stockholm, 
SWE01 
17744 44290 250 62284 
160 HCI, Victoria 
(Mahe), SYC01 
5000 10250 0 15250 
161 EoI, Damascus, 
SYR01 
0 80 0 80 
162 EoI, Bangkok, 
THA01 
0 0 0 195140 
164 EoI, Dushanbe, 
TJK01 
0 250 1250 1500 
165 EoI, Ashgabat, 
TKM01 
8 100 0 108 
166 HCI, Port of Spain, 
TTO01 
555000 1800 0 556800 
167 EoI, Tunis, TUN01 0 0 0 90 
168 EoI, Ankara, TUR01 60 488 148 696 
169 CGI, Istanbul, 
TUR02 
105 1210 45 1360 
170 India-Taipei 
Association, Taipei, 
TWN01 
142 2187 2239 4568 
171 HCI, Dar-es-Salaam, 
TZA01 
0 0 0 15000 
172 CGI, Zanzibar, 
TZA02 
6243 200 0 6443 
173 HCI, Kampala, 6500 23500 0 30000 

100 
 
UGA01 
174 EoI, Kyiv, UKR01 589 1000 16500 18089 
175 CGI, Atlanta, 
USA01 
350000 88000 12608 450608 
176 CGI, Chicago, 
USA02 
194643 168368 33428 396439 
178 CGI, New York, 
USA04 
449667 1220000 62905 1732572 
179 CGI, San Francisco, 
USA05 
9162 196 167582 176940 
180 EoI, Washington, 
USA06 
4200000 0 189268 4389268 
181 EoI, Tashkent, 
UZB01 
52 1200 250 1502 
182 EoI, Caracas, 
VEN01 
4242 3574 93 7909 
183 EoI, Hanoi, VNM01 75 2000 2 2077 
184 CGI, Ho Chi Minh 
City, VNM02 
467 5000 2 5469 
185 EoI, Sanaa, YEM01 0 0 0 0 
186 CGI, Cape Town, 
ZAF01 
248 1500 50 1798 
187 CGI, Durban, 
ZAF02 
7539 7000 35 14574 
188 CGI, Johannesburg, 
ZAF03 
8647 0 200 8847 
189 HCI, Pretoria, 
ZAF04 
1000837 55000 50 1055887 
190 HCI, Lusaka, 
ZMB01 
24000 6000 0 30000 
191 EoI, Harare, ZWE01 5000 500 0 5500 
196 CGI, Sittwe, 
MMR03 
0 8 0 8 
197 HCI, Valletta, 
MLT01 
150 10000 450 10600 
198 HCI, Mbabane, 
SWZ01 
262 0 0 262 
199 CGI, Erbil, IRQ02 2 8000 0 8002 
  Total  36347858 9509865 1056120 53370481 
 
 
 

101 
 
Annexure -II 
 
Amount collected under ICWF during 2019-2021 
Name of the Missions/Posts 2019 2020 2021 TOTAL 
CGI, Herat, AFG01 ₹ 103,562.24 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 103,562.24 
EoI, Ouagadougou, BFA01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 20,796.61 ₹ 9,427.00 ₹ 30,223.61 
HCI, Yaounde, CMR01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 5,166.44 ₹ 139,689.95 ₹ 144,856.39 
EoI, Djibouti, DJI01 ₹ 11,873.00 ₹ 71,752.00 ₹ 79,633.63 ₹ 163,258.63 
EoI, Conakry, GIN01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 20,765.00 ₹ 82,134.00 ₹ 102,899.00 
EoI, Malabo, GNQ01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 740.00 ₹ 8,530.00 ₹ 9,270.00 
EoI, Sao Tome, STP01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 89.00 ₹ 89.00 
EoI, Lome, TGO01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 159,223.34 ₹ 159,223.34 
CGI, Jalalabad, AFG02 ₹ 7,274.87 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 7,274.87 
EoI, Kabul, AFG03 ₹ 575,635.00 ₹ 621,208.00 ₹ 500,580.00 ₹ 1,697,423.00 
EoI, Asmara , ERI01   ₹ 14,774.00 ₹ 9,824.00 ₹ 24,598.00 
CGI, Kandahar, AFG04 ₹ 56,165.00 ₹ 37,517.67 ₹ 6,750.23 ₹ 100,432.90 
CGI, Mazar-e-Sharif, AFG05 ₹ 167,056.62 ₹ 147,681.99 ₹ 141,833.60 ₹ 456,572.21 
EoI, Luanda, AGO01 ₹ 378,509.00 ₹ 107,990.00 ₹ 97,623.00 ₹ 584,122.00 
EoI, Abu Dhabi, ARE01 
₹ 15,562,767.00 
₹ 
14,222,158.00 
₹ 
13,345,025.00 ₹ 43,129,950.00 
CGI, Dubai, ARE02 
₹ 56,751,485.00 
₹ 
71,630,831.00 
₹ 
63,056,815.00 ₹ 191,439,131.00 
EoI, Buenos Aires, ARG01 ₹ 118,149.31 ₹ 621,937.21 ₹ 95,042.00 ₹ 835,128.52 
EoI, Yerevan, ARM01 ₹ 158,095.14 ₹ 1,678,594.06 ₹ 261,672.05 ₹ 2,098,361.25 
HCI, Canberra, AUS01 ₹ 3,045,629.00 ₹ 2,309,644.00 ₹ 3,174,673.00 ₹ 8,529,946.00 
CGI, Melbourne, AUS02 
₹ 10,683,353.00 ₹ 6,862,103.00 
₹ 
14,596,926.00 ₹ 32,142,382.00 
CGI, Perth, AUS03 ₹ 3,509,529.00 ₹ 2,320,676.19 ₹ 2,576,680.00 ₹ 8,406,885.19 
CGI, Sydney, AUS04 ₹ 
440,263,509.58 ₹ 7,901,923.00 
₹ 
10,446,185.00 ₹ 458,611,617.58 
EoI, Vienna, AUT01 ₹ 3,303,386.00 ₹ 752,633.00 ₹ 649,614.00 ₹ 4,705,633.00 
EoI, Baku, AZE01 ₹ 127,705.70 ₹ 56,684.00 ₹ 595,880.50 ₹ 780,270.20 
EoI, Brussels, BEL01 ₹ 2,813,353.22 ₹ 1,206,082.45 ₹ 1,408,578.35 ₹ 5,428,014.02 
AHCI, Chittagong, BGD01 ₹ 111,555.88 ₹ 53,718.24 ₹ 60,773.47 ₹ 226,047.59 
HCI, Dhaka, BGD02 ₹ 485,646.64 ₹ 180,853.00 ₹ 312,401.00 ₹ 978,900.64 
AHCI, Rajshahi, BGD03 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
AHCI, Khulna, BGD04 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Sofia, BGR01 ₹ 208,731.86 ₹ 98,105.00 ₹ 91,871.00 ₹ 398,707.86 
AHCI, Sylhet, BGD05 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Bahrain , BHR01 
₹ 11,164,902.27 ₹ 8,081,249.65 
₹ 
10,488,428.77 ₹ 29,734,580.69 
EoI, Minsk, BLR01 ₹ 930,881.00 ₹ 309,040.32 ₹ 650,636.48 ₹ 1,890,557.80 

102 
 
EoI, Brasilia, BRA01 ₹ 118,085.62 ₹ 42,279.93 ₹ 53,983.30 ₹ 214,348.85 
CGI, Sao Paulo, BRA02 ₹ 461,843.00 ₹ 130,870.00 ₹ 279,835.00 ₹ 872,548.00 
HCI, Brunei Darussalam, 
BRN01 ₹ 701,166.00 ₹ 706,250.00 ₹ 1,897,597.00 ₹ 3,305,013.00 
CGI, Phuentsholing, BTN01 ₹ 83,675.00 ₹ 104,226.00 ₹ 87,848.00 ₹ 275,749.00 
EoI, Thimphu, BTN02 ₹ 67,995.00 ₹ 29,910.00 ₹ 40,720.00 ₹ 138,625.00 
HCI, Gaborone, BWA01 ₹ 922,506.00 ₹ 870,843.00 ₹ 1,018,078.00 ₹ 2,811,427.00 
HCI, Ottawa, CAN01 ₹ 2,312,952.00 ₹ 1,852,293.00 ₹ 3,641,145.00 ₹ 7,806,390.00 
CGI, Toronto, CAN02 
₹ 21,301,985.00 
₹ 
16,065,473.00 
₹ 
34,940,483.00 ₹ 72,307,941.00 
CGI, Vancouver, CAN03 
₹ 12,841,316.00 ₹ 3,269,668.00 
₹ 
20,224,359.00 ₹ 36,335,343.00 
EoI, Berne, CHE01 ₹ 2,579,453.00 ₹ 755,818.00 ₹ 1,059,556.00 ₹ 4,394,827.00 
CGI, Geneva, CHE02 
₹ 780,844.82 
₹ 
25,124,039.12 ₹ 8,734,890.59 ₹ 34,639,774.53 
EoI, Santiago, CHL01 ₹ 220,990.00 ₹ 198,021.00 ₹ 93,786.28 ₹ 512,797.28 
EoI, Beijing, CHN01 
₹ 4,490,370.36 
₹ 
41,704,715.12 ₹ 1,275,169.52 ₹ 47,470,255.00 
CGI, Guangzhou, CHN02 ₹ 4,369,498.98 ₹ 909,976.89 ₹ 1,171,271.05 ₹ 6,450,746.92 
CGI, Hong Kong, CHN03 ₹ 2,914,058.42 ₹ 1,665,587.99 ₹ 1,711,923.31 ₹ 6,291,569.72 
CGI, Shanghai, CHN04 ₹ 3,652,123.00 ₹ 1,436,568.16 ₹ 1,127,408.56 ₹ 6,216,099.72 
EoI, Abidjan, CIV01 ₹ 794,502.32 ₹ 251,545.67 ₹ 398,921.09 ₹ 1,444,969.08 
EoI, Kinshasa, COG01 ₹ 334,122.73 ₹ 427,366.35 ₹ 629,267.35 ₹ 1,390,756.43 
EoI, Brazzaville, COG02   ₹ 3,965.00 ₹ 15,679.00 ₹ 19,644.00 
EoI, Bogota, COL01 ₹ 3,447,423.00 ₹ 20,312.00 ₹ 72,684.00 ₹ 3,540,419.00 
EoI, Havana, CUB01 ₹ 51,554.11 ₹ 13,986.91 ₹ 19,683.57 ₹ 85,224.59 
HCI, Nicosia, CYP01 ₹ 164,508.00 ₹ 251,015.00 ₹ 239,820.00 ₹ 655,343.00 
EoI, Prague, CZE01 ₹ 448,220.01 ₹ 174,274.41 ₹ 298,141.84 ₹ 920,636.26 
EoI, Berlin, DEU01 ₹ 2,365,047.32 ₹ 854,141.50 ₹ 1,122,616.19 ₹ 4,341,805.01 
CGI, Frankfurt, DEU02 ₹ 8,701,594.00 ₹ 2,406,661.00 ₹ 2,949,027.00 ₹ 14,057,282.00 
CGI, Hamburg, DEU03 ₹ 2,722,381.00 ₹ 943,766.00 ₹ 1,010,216.00 ₹ 4,676,363.00 
CGI, Munich, DEU04 ₹ 5,390,894.00 ₹ 2,473,776.00 ₹ 2,083,424.00 ₹ 9,948,094.00 
EoI, Copenhagen, DNK01 ₹ 1,629,964.00 ₹ 681,886.00 ₹ 648,112.00 ₹ 2,959,962.00 
EoI, Algiers, DZA01 ₹ 594,239.00 ₹ 162,869.00 ₹ 97,910.00 ₹ 855,018.00 
EoI, Cairo, EGY01 ₹ 1,903,655.00 ₹ 581,876.52 ₹ 3,466,084.55 ₹ 5,951,616.07 
EoI, Madrid, ESP01 ₹ 5,699,478.32 ₹ 3,499,822.00 ₹ 4,969,149.06 ₹ 14,168,449.38 
EoI, Addis Ababa, ETH01 ₹ 2,431,524.00 ₹ 676,277.00 ₹ 1,292,386.00 ₹ 4,400,187.00 
EoI, Helsinki, FIN01 ₹ 1,449,535.12 ₹ 488,316.00 ₹ 499,564.02 ₹ 2,437,415.14 
HCI, Suva, FJI01 ₹ 292,037.37 ₹ 101,440.04 ₹ 104,153.00 ₹ 497,630.41 
EoI, Paris, FRA01 ₹ 9,635,413.00 ₹ 3,585,159.25 ₹ 4,379,163.40 ₹ 17,599,735.65 
CGI, St. Denis-Reunion Island, 
FRA02 ₹ 677,466.00 ₹ 110,189.23 ₹ 55,499.59 ₹ 843,154.82 

103 
 
CGI, Birmingham, GBR01 
₹ 5,316,684.00 
₹ 
14,811,563.58 
₹ 
12,297,641.35 ₹ 32,425,888.93 
CGI, Edinburgh, GBR02 ₹ 1,675,435.00 ₹ 521,977.36 ₹ 1,096,121.90 ₹ 3,293,534.26 
HCI, London, GBR03 
₹ 34,092,342.70 
₹ 
12,796,146.00 
₹ 
22,509,267.00 ₹ 69,397,755.70 
HCI, Accra, GHA01 ₹ 883,829.00 ₹ 3,239,593.64 ₹ 1,933,728.00 ₹ 6,057,150.64 
EoI, Athens, GRC01 ₹ 1,108,778.00 ₹ 986,652.00 ₹ 244,331.00 ₹ 2,339,761.00 
EoI, Guatemala City, GTM01 ₹ 86,910.16 ₹ 39,955.04 ₹ 38,097.00 ₹ 164,962.20 
HCI, Georgetown, GUY01 ₹ 89,935.00 ₹ 46,256.00 ₹ 78,505.00 ₹ 214,696.00 
EoI, Zagreb, HRV01 ₹ 128,474.00 ₹ 58,628.00 ₹ 41,387.00 ₹ 228,489.00 
EoI, Budapest, HUN01 ₹ 247,755.62 ₹ 100,669.47 ₹ 154,465.55 ₹ 502,890.64 
CGI, Bali, IDN01 ₹ 130,632.00 ₹ 29,894.00 ₹ 33,597.00 ₹ 194,123.00 
EoI, Jakarta, IDN02 ₹ 2,005,068.00 ₹ 1,428,467.00 ₹ 1,276,438.00 ₹ 4,709,973.00 
CGI, Medan, IDN03 ₹ 75,704.63 ₹ 41,068.20 ₹ 45,668.70 ₹ 162,441.53 
EoI, Dublin, IRL01 ₹ 1,560,183.00 ₹ 1,360,646.00 ₹ 1,618,000.00 ₹ 4,538,829.00 
CoI, Bandar Abbas, IRN01 ₹ 48,425.00 ₹ 1,323,409.00 ₹ 10,337.00 ₹ 1,382,171.00 
EoI, Tehran, IRN02 ₹ 2,439,281.00 ₹ 143,464.00 ₹ 9,540,417.00 ₹ 12,123,162.00 
CoI, Zahidan, IRN03 ₹ 30,592.00 ₹ 10,980.00 ₹ 21,779.93 ₹ 63,351.93 
EoI, Baghdad, IRQ01 ₹ 10,933,281.25 ₹ 4,220,328.00 ₹ 5,245,031.00 ₹ 20,398,640.25 
EoI, Reykjavik, ISL01 ₹ 34,292.00 ₹ 17,096.00 ₹ 14,936.00 ₹ 66,324.00 
EoI, Tel Aviv, ISR01 ₹ 2,494,418.00 ₹ 684,258.00 ₹ 1,057,883.00 ₹ 4,236,559.00 
CGI, Milan, ITA01 ₹ 6,029,420.92 ₹ 3,340,328.00 ₹ 5,911,897.00 ₹ 15,281,645.92 
EoI, Rome, ITA02 ₹ 2,599,147.00 ₹ 2,304,809.00 ₹ 9,575,310.04 ₹ 14,479,266.04 
HCI, Kingston, JAM01 ₹ 140,948.00 ₹ 174,073.77 ₹ 74,729.25 ₹ 389,751.02 
EoI, Amman, JOR01 ₹ 1,086,704.00 ₹ 441,699.00 ₹ 606,635.00 ₹ 2,135,038.00 
CGI, Osaka-Kobe, JPN01 ₹ 3,223,594.00 ₹ 923,224.00 ₹ 148,626.00 ₹ 4,295,444.00 
EoI, Tokyo, JPN02 ₹ 16,501,043.00 ₹ 479,514.00 ₹ 2,552,198.00 ₹ 19,532,755.00 
EoI, Astana, KAZ01 ₹ 407,804.00 ₹ 194,315.00 ₹ 284,440.00 ₹ 886,559.00 
ROI, Almaty, KAZ02 ₹ 131,930.08 ₹ 71,373.48 ₹ 112,894.05 ₹ 316,197.61 
AHCI, Mombasa, KEN01 ₹ 543,135.00 ₹ 166,426.00 ₹ 388,506.00 ₹ 1,098,067.00 
HCI, Nairobi, KEN02 
₹ 5,632,759.15 
₹ 
21,694,992.81 ₹ 4,374,696.30 ₹ 31,702,448.26 
EoI, Bishkek, KGZ01 ₹ 472,150.00 ₹ 157,763.00 ₹ 165,404.11 ₹ 795,317.11 
EoI, Phnom Penh, KHM01 ₹ 833,943.00 ₹ 292,607.00 ₹ 193,180.75 ₹ 1,319,730.75 
EoI, Seoul, KOR01 ₹ 5,604,188.02 ₹ 1,861,774.17 ₹ 2,014,663.15 ₹ 9,480,625.34 
EoI, Kuwait, KWT01 
₹ 42,162,741.00 
₹ 
24,363,750.34 
₹ 
29,365,659.17 ₹ 95,892,150.51 
EoI, Vientiane, LAO01 ₹ 197,063.00 ₹ 38,672.00 ₹ 15,584.00 ₹ 251,319.00 
EoI, Beirut, LBN01 ₹ 762,019.00 ₹ 333,263.00 ₹ 190,586.00 ₹ 1,285,868.00 
EoI, Tripoli, LBY01 ₹ 66,937.50 ₹ 1,435.89 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 68,373.39 
HCI, Colombo, LKA01 
₹ 28,911,899.00 
₹ 
10,855,503.00 ₹ 3,208,647.00 ₹ 42,976,049.00 

104 
 
CGI, Hambantota, LKA02 ₹ 560,965.17 ₹ 19,897.95 ₹ 22,725.04 ₹ 603,588.16 
CGI, Jaffna, LKA03 ₹ 4,593,552.48 ₹ 1,262,177.02 ₹ 326,240.04 ₹ 6,181,969.54 
AHCI, Kandy, LKA04 ₹ 3,727,514.16 ₹ 357,938.68 ₹ 206,287.30 ₹ 4,291,740.14 
EoI, Rabat, MAR01 ₹ 628,490.96 ₹ 166,783.42 ₹ 103,753.61 ₹ 899,027.99 
EoI, Antananarivo, MDG01 ₹ 261,113.00 ₹ 76,215.50 ₹ 51,288.87 ₹ 388,617.37 
HCI, Male, MDV01 ₹ 450,311.58 ₹ 317,892.98 ₹ 532,963.00 ₹ 1,301,167.56 
EoI, Mexico City, MEX01 ₹ 354,738.82 ₹ 158,285.72 ₹ 276,608.40 ₹ 789,632.94 
EoI, Bamako, MLI01 ₹ 90,629.00 ₹ 85,976.28 ₹ 143,117.00 ₹ 319,722.28 
CGI, Mandalay, MMR01 ₹ 46,382.44 ₹ 25,178.47 ₹ 5,080.08 ₹ 76,640.99 
EoI, Yangon, MMR02 ₹ 244,029.00 ₹ 123,274.00 ₹ 48,744.64 ₹ 416,047.64 
EoI, Ulaanbaatar, MNG01 ₹ 57,653.00 ₹ 31,215.00 ₹ 11,412.00 ₹ 100,280.00 
HCI, Maputo, MOZ01 ₹ 771,279.32 ₹ 312,162.72 ₹ 413,990.56 ₹ 1,497,432.60 
HCI, Port Louis, MUS01 ₹ 695,463.05 ₹ 436,052.54 ₹ 411,466.68 ₹ 1,542,982.27 
HCI, Lilongwe, MWI01 ₹ 655,344.05 ₹ 347,956.34 ₹ 342,477.59 ₹ 1,345,777.98 
HCI, Kuala Lumpur, MYS01 ₹ 
131,271,072.54 ₹ 4,550,103.58 
₹ 
23,018,032.30 ₹ 158,839,208.42 
HCI, Windhoek, NAM01 ₹ 72,389.00 ₹ 40,284.00 ₹ 37,265.00 ₹ 149,938.00 
EoI, Niamey, NER01 ₹ 79,007.00 ₹ 38,937.06 ₹ 74,595.35 ₹ 192,539.41 
HCI, Abuja, NGA01 ₹ 1,303,380.33 ₹ 4,444,344.05 ₹ 9,877,825.00 ₹ 15,625,549.38 
O/HCI, Lagos, NGA02 
₹ 12,991,116.00 ₹ 1,371,622.00 
₹ 
30,933,212.00 ₹ 45,295,950.00 
EoI, The Hague, NLD01 ₹ 3,425,253.00 ₹ 1,879,522.00 ₹ 2,711,080.00 ₹ 8,015,855.00 
EoI, Oslo, NOR01 ₹ 865,636.25 ₹ 615,538.23 ₹ 694,391.18 ₹ 2,175,565.66 
CGI, Birganj, NPL01 ₹ 228,586.09 ₹ 85,897.35 ₹ 76,675.00 ₹ 391,158.44 
CO, Biratnagar, NPL02 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Kathmandu, NPL03 ₹ 6,159,009.48 ₹ 3,215,660.95 ₹ 3,500,922.15 ₹ 12,875,592.58 
HCI, Wellington, NZL01 ₹ 6,765,881.00 ₹ 4,618,291.00 ₹ 9,876,103.00 ₹ 21,260,275.00 
EoI, Muscat, OMN01 
₹ 20,607,830.17 
₹ 
19,784,072.00 
₹ 
16,358,606.00 ₹ 56,750,508.17 
HCI, Islamabad, PAK01 ₹ 2,250,151.26 ₹ 40,524.21 ₹ 255,263.10 ₹ 2,545,938.57 
EoI, Panama, PAN01 ₹ 317,758.40 ₹ 178,365.13 ₹ 242,210.41 ₹ 738,333.94 
EoI, Lima, PER01 ₹ 70,100.35 ₹ 102,408.64 ₹ 47,460.61 ₹ 219,969.60 
EoI, Ma0a, PHL01 ₹ 2,975,196.00 ₹ 2,163,781.50 ₹ 2,047,880.06 ₹ 7,186,857.56 
HCI, Port Moresby, PNG01 ₹ 76,460.00 ₹ 49,602.00 ₹ 92,726.00 ₹ 218,788.00 
EoI, Warsaw, POL01 ₹ 1,295,086.00 ₹ 932,724.78 ₹ 559,101.00 ₹ 2,786,911.78 
EoI, Pyongyang, PRK01 ₹ 2,028.00 ₹ 286.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 2,314.00 
EoI, Lisbon, PRT01 ₹ 2,020,780.00 ₹ 1,626,155.00 ₹ 2,222,446.00 ₹ 5,869,381.00 
RoI, Ramallah, PSE01 ₹ 11,857.73 ₹ 4,736.75 ₹ 24,617.07 ₹ 41,211.55 
EoI, Doha, QAT01 
₹ 21,576,032.00 
₹ 
15,646,365.00 
₹ 
19,197,359.18 ₹ 56,419,756.18 
EoI, Bucharest, ROU01 ₹ 379,918.00 ₹ 1,004,425.00 ₹ 526,996.59 ₹ 1,911,339.59 
EoI, Moscow, RUS01 ₹ 18,453,861.53 ₹ 3,339,322.81 ₹ 1,714,375.25 ₹ 23,507,559.59 

105 
 
CGI, St. Petersburg, RUS02 ₹ 2,906,890.35 ₹ 579,300.54 ₹ 172,153.23 ₹ 3,658,344.12 
CGI, Vladivostok, RUS03 ₹ 106,956.00 ₹ 60,928.68 ₹ 795,045.33 ₹ 962,930.01 
EoI, Riyadh, SAU01 
₹ 45,894,773.00 
₹ 
43,113,973.00 
₹ 
38,272,628.00 ₹ 127,281,374.00 
CGI, Jeddah, SAU02 
₹ 16,601,343.47 
₹ 
10,217,759.00 
₹ 
10,327,049.00 ₹ 37,146,151.47 
EoI, Belgrade, SCG01 ₹ 107,906.00 ₹ 41,702.00 ₹ 60,106.00 ₹ 209,714.00 
EoI, Khartoum, SDN01 ₹ 4,845,605.00 ₹ 1,487,009.12 ₹ 7,250,102.00 ₹ 13,582,716.12 
EoI, Juba, SDN02 ₹ 82,268.05 ₹ 65,190.59 ₹ 94,454.62 ₹ 241,913.26 
EoI, Dakar, SEN01 ₹ 508,562.00 ₹ 176,804.25 ₹ 197,450.00 ₹ 882,816.25 
HCI, Kigali, RWA01  ₹ 79,733.00 ₹ 180,301.00 ₹ 260,034.00 
HCI, Singapore, SGP01 
₹ 16,575,719.00 ₹ 6,878,154.00 
₹ 
14,632,307.00 ₹ 38,086,180.00 
HCI, Freetown, SLE01  ₹ 0.00 ₹ 10,355.74 ₹ 10,355.74 
EoI, Paramaribo, SUR01 ₹ 93,551.00 ₹ 43,565.00 ₹ 57,867.72 ₹ 194,983.72 
EoI, Bratislava, SVK01 ₹ 239,102.00 ₹ 76,782.00 ₹ 86,852.00 ₹ 402,736.00 
EoI, Ljubljana, SVN01 ₹ 101,600.00 ₹ 41,321.00 ₹ 50,637.43 ₹ 193,558.43 
EoI, Stockholm, SWE01 ₹ 2,279,155.59 ₹ 1,086,108.00 ₹ 1,560,607.00 ₹ 4,925,870.59 
HCI, Victoria (Mahe), SYC01 ₹ 260,401.01 ₹ 163,567.39 ₹ 307,961.48 ₹ 731,929.88 
EoI, Damascus, SYR01 ₹ 281,865.00 ₹ 197,216.00 ₹ 248,455.00 ₹ 727,536.00 
EoI, Bangkok, THA01 ₹ 5,980,995.00 ₹ 2,846,067.00 ₹ 2,001,497.00 ₹ 10,828,559.00 
CGI, Chiangmai, THA02 ₹ 45,753.00 ₹ 24,341.00 ₹ 17,917.00 ₹ 88,011.00 
EoI, Dushanbe, TJK01 ₹ 120,511.82 ₹ 83,741.45 ₹ 317,612.00 ₹ 521,865.27 
EoI, Ashgabat, TKM01 ₹ 2,804,513.00 ₹ 436,229.54 ₹ 10,033.36 ₹ 3,250,775.90 
HCI, Port of Spain, TTO01 ₹ 251,137.00 ₹ 119,420.41 ₹ 103,593.77 ₹ 474,151.18 
EoI, Tunis, TUN01 ₹ 345,710.00 ₹ 77,789.62 ₹ 51,171.40 ₹ 474,671.02 
EoI, Ankara, TUR01 ₹ 1,158,657.00 ₹ 401,151.00 ₹ 195,319.00 ₹ 1,755,127.00 
CGI, Istanbul, TUR02 ₹ 2,163,067.92 ₹ 704,835.94 ₹ 352,425.00 ₹ 3,220,328.86 
India-Taipei Association, 
Taipei, TWN01 ₹ 1,683,542.00 ₹ 595,711.00 ₹ 573,632.00 ₹ 2,852,885.00 
HCI, Dar-es-Salaam, TZA01 
₹ 9,488,977.84 ₹ 9,653,841.55 
₹ 
10,659,497.54 ₹ 29,802,316.93 
CGI, Zanzibar, TZA02 ₹ 276,285.00 ₹ 95,342.49 ₹ 96,700.38 ₹ 468,327.87 
HCI, Kampala, UGA01 ₹ 1,912,908.00 ₹ 960,674.00 ₹ 957,191.00 ₹ 3,830,773.00 
EoI, Kyiv, UKR01 ₹ 484,383.00 ₹ 525,835.00 ₹ 695,499.64 ₹ 1,705,717.64 
CGI, Atlanta, USA01 
₹ 8,269,980.20 ₹ 5,314,653.62 
₹ 
10,973,052.59 ₹ 24,557,686.41 
CGI, Chicago, USA02 ₹ 
368,033,275.00 ₹ 6,374,907.00 
₹ 
11,522,964.45 ₹ 385,931,146.45 
CGI, Houston, USA03 
₹ 12,685,836.00 ₹ 8,510,036.00 
₹ 
12,341,625.00 ₹ 33,537,497.00 
CGI, New York, USA04 
₹ 25,319,873.00 
₹ 
13,365,278.00 
₹ 
28,670,247.00 ₹ 67,355,398.00 

106 
 
CGI, San Francisco, USA05 
₹ 21,158,865.00 
₹ 
15,697,438.02 
₹ 
29,115,557.00 ₹ 65,971,860.02 
EoI, Washington, USA06 
₹ 6,708,972.00 ₹ 5,055,907.61 
₹ 
11,171,346.33 ₹ 22,936,225.94 
EoI, Tashkent, UZB01 ₹ 132,603.75 ₹ 174,138.21 ₹ 2,622,748.73 ₹ 2,929,490.69 
EoI, Caracas, VEN01 ₹ 155,891.00 ₹ 167,645.67 ₹ 73,261.95 ₹ 396,798.62 
EoI, Hanoi, VNM01 ₹ 451,003.35 ₹ 115,119.28 ₹ 95,344.44 ₹ 661,467.07 
CGI, Ho Chi Minh City, 
VNM02 ₹ 1,853,377.00 ₹ 929,254.62 ₹ 871,936.00 ₹ 3,654,567.62 
EoI, Sanaa, YEM01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 1,004,024.31 ₹ 1,004,024.31 
CGI, Cape Town, ZAF01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 31,846.00 ₹ 100,296.69 ₹ 132,142.69 
CGI, Durban, ZAF02 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 5,078,624.00 ₹ 235,880.00 ₹ 5,314,504.00 
CGI, Johannesburg, ZAF03 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 317,088.00 ₹ 632,031.32 ₹ 949,119.32 
HCI, Pretoria, ZAF04 ₹ 2,455,546.00 ₹ 908,049.00 ₹ 258,762.00 ₹ 3,622,357.00 
HCI, Lusaka, ZMB01 ₹ 1,372,553.00 ₹ 206,688.00 ₹ 1,315,043.00 ₹ 2,894,284.00 
EoI, Harare, ZWE01 ₹ 124,919.00 ₹ 65,903.00 ₹ 259,167.00 ₹ 449,989.00 
PDI, UNESCO, Paris, FRA03 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
PMI, New York, USA07 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
PMI, Geneva, CHE03 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
Indian Mission to ASEAN, 
Jakarta, IDN04 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
CGI, Sittwe, MMR03 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 0.00 
HCI, Valletta, MLT01 ₹ 3,594,804.00 ₹ 314,163.40 ₹ 296,814.38 ₹ 4,205,781.78 
HCI, Mbabane, SWZ01 ₹ 0.00 ₹ 15,000.00 ₹ 28,991.72 ₹ 43,991.72 
CGI, Erbil, IRQ02 ₹ 616,419.00 ₹ 649,573.00 ₹ 717,864.00 ₹ 1,983,856.00 
TOTAL ₹ 
2,878,524,356.18 
 
 
ICWF Utilization during 2019-2021 
Name of the Missions/posts 
No. of 
Beneficiaries Expenditure in INR 
CGI, Herat, AFG01 0 ₹ 1,171.00 
EoI, Ouagadougou, BFA01 0 ₹ 0.00 
HCI, Yaounde, CMR01 0 ₹ 7,878.00 
EoI, Djibouti, DJI01 1 ₹ 8,856.00 
EoI, Conakry, GIN01 0 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Malabo, GNQ01 0 ₹ 1,862.00 
EoI, Sao Tome, STP01 0 ₹ 1,198.00 
EoI, Lome, TGO01 10 ₹ 1,481,527.00 
CGI, Jalalabad, AFG02 2 ₹ 5,564.00 
EoI, Kabul, AFG03 10 ₹ 246,414.00 

107 
 
EoI, Asmara , ERI01 0 ₹ 10,839.00 
CGI, Kandahar, AFG04 0 ₹ 3,836.00 
CGI, Mazar-e-Sharif, AFG05 2120 ₹ 13,281,206.00 
EoI, Luanda, AGO01 2345 ₹ 42,973,283.00 
EoI, Abu Dhabi, ARE01 2623 ₹ 27,831,083.61 
CGI, Dubai, ARE02 3344 ₹ 105,355,865.21 
EoI, Buenos Aires, ARG01 2 ₹ 551,779.80 
EoI, Yerevan, ARM01 5 ₹ 1,217,062.05 
HCI, Canberra, AUS01 7 ₹ 780,163.00 
CGI, Melbourne, AUS02 5477 ₹ 3,908,175.18 
CGI, Perth, AUS03 11 ₹ 10,586,837.00 
CGI, Sydney, AUS04 1175 ₹ 28,426,683.94 
EoI, Vien0, AUT01 3 ₹ 1,229,029.60 
EoI, Baku, AZE01 35 ₹ 926,411.30 
EoI, Brussels, BEL01 43 ₹ 627,671.00 
AHCI, Chittagong, BGD01 2 ₹ 33,297.00 
HCI, Dhaka, BGD02 4 ₹ 411,165.14 
AHCI, Rajshahi, BGD03 32 ₹ 76,431.00 
AHCI, Khul0, BGD04 0 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Sofia, BGR01 1634 ₹ 4,712,060.95 
AHCI, Sylhet, BGD05 0 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Bahrain , BHR01 125 ₹ 5,159,168.85 
EoI, Minsk, BLR01 1500 ₹ 241,532.00 
EoI, Brasilia, BRA01 0 ₹ 88,121.00 
CGI, Sao Paulo, BRA02 1 ₹ 70,425.00 
HCI, Brunei Darussalam, BRN01 4 ₹ 2,834,633.00 
CGI, Phuentsholing, BTN01 4 ₹ 239,200.00 
EoI, Thimphu, BTN02 1 ₹ 1,234,760.00 
HCI, Gaborone, BWA01 14079 ₹ 6,900,562.00 
HCI, Ottawa, CAN01 0 ₹ 544,853.00 
CGI, Toronto, CAN02 67 ₹ 48,800,588.00 
CGI, Vancouver, CAN03 0 ₹ 319,080.00 
EoI, Berne, CHE01 2 ₹ 1,817,007.00 
CGI, Geneva, CHE02 728 ₹ 61,598,441.89 
EoI, Santiago, CHL01 44 ₹ 1,570,276.31 
EoI, Beijing, CHN01 30 ₹ 1,129,095.30 
CGI, Guangzhou, CHN02 31 ₹ 2,668,720.62 
CGI, Hong Kong, CHN03 32 ₹ 666,776.32 
CGI, Shanghai, CHN04 49 ₹ 4,584,933.24 
EoI, Abidjan, CIV01 24 ₹ 1,303,729.76 
EoI, Kinshasa, COG01 32 ₹ 653,990.00 

108 
 
EoI, Brazzaville, COG02 8 ₹ 838,955.48 
EoI, Bogota, COL01 5 ₹ 1,042,627.00 
EoI, Hava0, CUB01 204 ₹ 556,946.86 
HCI, Nicosia, CYP01 114 ₹ 460,931.37 
EoI, Prague, CZE01 3 ₹ 3,908,003.26 
EoI, Berlin, DEU01 11 ₹ 3,026,311.15 
CGI, Frankfurt, DEU02 16 ₹ 3,610,142.00 
CGI, Hamburg, DEU03 10 ₹ 2,171,401.00 
CGI, Munich, DEU04 408 ₹ 5,178,622.80 
EoI, Copenhagen, DNK01 9 ₹ 1,899,658.60 
EoI, Algiers, DZA01 17 ₹ 4,683,389.00 
EoI, Cairo, EGY01 22 ₹ 2,165,000.96 
EoI, Madrid, ESP01 198 ₹ 32,109,674.42 
EoI, Addis Ababa, ETH01 3 ₹ 240,261.69 
EoI, Helsinki, FIN01 2519 ₹ 3,312,091.67 
HCI, Suva, FJI01 57 ₹ 1,328,570.54 
EoI, Paris, FRA01 21 ₹ 55,665,868.95 
CGI, St. Denis-Reunion Island, 
FRA02 14 ₹ 53,026.06 
CGI, Birmingham, GBR01 16 ₹ 13,381,024.62 
CGI, Edinburgh, GBR02 10 ₹ 2,101,334.62 
HCI, London, GBR03 38 ₹ 139,937,599.54 
HCI, Accra, GHA01 18 ₹ 794,332.00 
EoI, Athens, GRC01 8 ₹ 1,129,592.61 
EoI, Guatemala City, GTM01 0 ₹ 803,586.85 
HCI, Georgetown, GUY01 9 ₹ 382,450.00 
EoI, Zagreb, HRV01 70 ₹ 126,675.00 
EoI, Budapest, HUN01 11 ₹ 185,001.92 
CGI, Bali, IDN01 11 ₹ 281,931.00 
EoI, Jakarta, IDN02 15 ₹ 515,855.89 
CGI, Medan, IDN03 928 ₹ 2,006,304.20 
EoI, Dublin, IRL01 676 ₹ 4,690,158.00 
CoI, Bandar Abbas, IRN01 417 ₹ 506,004.00 
EoI, Tehran, IRN02 84 ₹ 6,167,643.00 
CoI, Zahidan, IRN03 2 ₹ 70,450.00 
EoI, Baghdad, IRQ01 3313 ₹ 2,523,134.00 
EoI, Reykjavik, ISL01 9 ₹ 400,453.00 
EoI, Tel Aviv, ISR01 49 ₹ 6,449,564.00 
CGI, Milan, ITA01 256 ₹ 83,570,265.93 
EoI, Rome, ITA02 4 ₹ 18,943,332.60 
HCI, Kingston, JAM01 9 ₹ 216,636.70 

109 
 
EoI, Amman, JOR01 71 ₹ 2,899,915.00 
CGI, Osaka-Kobe, JPN01 217 ₹ 7,811,751.00 
EoI, Tokyo, JPN02 5 ₹ 40,342,368.00 
EoI, Asta0, KAZ01 1 ₹ 424,611.00 
ROI, Almaty, KAZ02 36 ₹ 654,840.44 
AHCI, Mombasa, KEN01 15002 ₹ 131,647.00 
HCI, 0irobi, KEN02 95 ₹ 2,100,070.94 
EoI, Bishkek, KGZ01 14 ₹ 4,010,405.18 
EoI, Phnom Penh, KHM01 4213 ₹ 28,609,082.21 
EoI, Seoul, KOR01 11 ₹ 1,126,019.85 
EoI, Kuwait, KWT01 12498 ₹ 35,601,763.92 
EoI, Vientiane, LAO01 48 ₹ 23,211.00 
EoI, Beirut, LBN01 864 ₹ 3,713,193.00 
EoI, Tripoli, LBY01 64 ₹ 21,890.88 
HCI, Colombo, LKA01 1137 ₹ 8,818,258.80 
CGI, Hambantota, LKA02 435 ₹ 427,192.22 
CGI, Jaff0, LKA03 244 ₹ 1,452,214.46 
AHCI, Kandy, LKA04 19 ₹ 36,127.28 
EoI, Rabat, MAR01 6314 ₹ 6,664,020.48 
EoI, Anta00rivo, MDG01 0 ₹ 17,141.09 
HCI, Male, MDV01 1 ₹ 282,832.00 
EoI, Mexico City, MEX01 9 ₹ 705,895.77 
EoI, Bamako, MLI01 787 ₹ 2,427,071.27 
CGI, Mandalay, MMR01 0 ₹ 47,849.00 
EoI, Yangon, MMR02 37 ₹ 1,612,401.57 
EoI, Ulaanbaatar, MNG01 385 ₹ 768,103.06 
HCI, Maputo, MOZ01 11 ₹ 721,480.74 
HCI, Port Louis, MUS01 2330 ₹ 216,029,557.98 
HCI, Lilongwe, MWI01 7 ₹ 329,626.42 
HCI, Kuala Lumpur, MYS01 3158 ₹ 89,372,426.54 
HCI, Windhoek, 0M01 82 ₹ 2,626,285.93 
EoI, Niamey, NER01 2162 ₹ 2,731,211.38 
HCI, Abuja, NGA01 294 ₹ 22,053,116.31 
O/HCI, Lagos, NGA02 31 ₹ 2,862,818.54 
EoI, The Hague, NLD01 2002 ₹ 19,430,730.02 
EoI, Oslo, NOR01 2 ₹ 220,642.96 
CGI, Birganj, NPL01 20935 ₹ 9,929,598.91 
CO, Birat0gar, NPL02 1464 ₹ 11,998,363.00 
EoI, Kathmandu, NPL03 15585 ₹ 41,250,880.42 
HCI, Wellington, NZL01 48 ₹ 9,271,038.12 
EoI, Muscat, OMN01 12322 ₹ 55,594,278.51 

110 
 
HCI, Islamabad, PAK01 522 ₹ 1,261,401.76 
EoI, Pa0ma, PAN01 10 ₹ 6,391,463.58 
EoI, Lima, PER01 2 ₹ 115,537.03 
EoI, Ma0a, PHL01 26 ₹ 5,944,199.34 
HCI, Port Moresby, PNG01 0 ₹ 21,954.00 
EoI, Warsaw, POL01 87 ₹ 3,257,864.40 
EoI, Pyongyang, PRK01 0 ₹ 690.00 
EoI, Lisbon, PRT01 18759 ₹ 21,504,875.55 
RoI, Ramallah, PSE01 262 ₹ 4,240,517.24 
EoI, Doha, QAT01 5732 ₹ 18,299,562.08 
EoI, Bucharest, ROU01 29 ₹ 2,898,777.36 
EoI, Moscow, RUS01 7 ₹ 2,547,102.09 
CGI, St. Petersburg, RUS02 2861 ₹ 20,988,516.79 
CGI, Vladivostok, RUS03 1457 ₹ 37,764,407.29 
EoI, Riyadh, SAU01 1794 ₹ 48,986,156.20 
CGI, Jeddah, SAU02 1150 ₹ 25,797,569.58 
EoI, Belgrade, SCG01 4 ₹ 125,637.00 
EoI, Khartoum, SDN01 81 ₹ 2,342,310.00 
EoI, Juba, SDN02 5 ₹ 198,531.50 
EoI, Dakar, SEN01 377 ₹ 4,020,990.00 
HCI, Kigali, RWA01 0 ₹ 0.00 
HCI, Singapore, SGP01 10 ₹ 36,153,003.00 
HCI, Freetown, SLE01 0 ₹ 17,112.00 
EoI, Paramaribo, SUR01 1 ₹ 12,963.00 
EoI, Bratislava, SVK01 972 ₹ 2,294,129.00 
EoI, Ljublja0, SVN01 2 ₹ 45,624.15 
EoI, Stockholm, SWE01 7 ₹ 3,525,082.40 
HCI, Victoria (Mahe), SYC01 869 ₹ 1,553,971.38 
EoI, Damascus, SYR01 13 ₹ 118,038.00 
EoI, Bangkok, THA01 26 ₹ 1,114,794.01 
CGI, Chiangmai, THA02 0 ₹ 0.00 
EoI, Dushanbe, TJK01 0 ₹ 1,281,134.52 
EoI, Ashgabat, TKM01 0 ₹ 0.00 
HCI, Port of Spain, TTO01 1 ₹ 56,890.00 
EoI, Tunis, TUN01 47 ₹ 1,269,018.41 
EoI, Ankara, TUR01 3 ₹ 13,513.00 
CGI, Istanbul, TUR02 12 ₹ 856,622.49 
India-Taipei Association, Taipei, 
TWN01 4 ₹ 536,125.00 
HCI, Dar-es-Salaam, TZA01 18 ₹ 1,323,390.97 
CGI, Zanzibar, TZA02 1 ₹ 24,310.00 

111 
 
HCI, Kampala, UGA01 11 ₹ 4,271,331.81 
EoI, Kyiv, UKR01 8076 ₹ 642,931,726.25 
CGI, Atlanta, USA01 8 ₹ 51,654,117.61 
CGI, Chicago, USA02 138 ₹ 9,652,539.00 
CGI, Houston, USA03 5 ₹ 11,575,620.64 
CGI, New York, USA04 21 ₹ 14,648,235.00 
CGI, San Francisco, USA05 55 ₹ 25,050,353.42 
EoI, Washington, USA06 5 ₹ 1,460,498.00 
EoI, Tashkent, UZB01 318 ₹ 1,335,268.14 
EoI, Caracas, VEN01 552 ₹ 502,911.00 
EoI, Hanoi, VNM01 2 ₹ 551,530.29 
CGI, Ho Chi Minh City, VNM02 5 ₹ 1,598,561.00 
EoI, Sa0a, YEM01 1 ₹ 12,256.84 
CGI, Cape Town, ZAF01 0 ₹ 1,581.00 
CGI, Durban, ZAF02 107 ₹ 1,367,813.00 
CGI, Johannesburg, ZAF03 1 ₹ 377,788.00 
HCI, Pretoria, ZAF04 8 ₹ 1,327,696.00 
HCI, Lusaka, ZMB01 1 ₹ 998,207.00 
EoI, Harare, ZWE01 0 ₹ 0.00 
PDI, UNESCO, Paris, FRA03 0 ₹ 0.00 
PMI, New York, USA07 0 ₹ 0.00 
PMI, Geneva, CHE03 0 ₹ 0.00 
Indian Mission to ASEAN, Jakarta, 
IDN04 47 ₹ 183,129.00 
CGI, Sittwe, MMR03 14787 ₹ 11,263.00 
HCI, Valletta, MLT01 153 ₹ 1,309,450.00 
HCI, Mbabane, SWZ01 0 ₹ 3,635.00 
CGI, Erbil, IRQ02 22 ₹ 1,094,640.00 
   
TOTAL 207644 ₹ 2,458,533,922.68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

112 
 
Annexure -III 
 
Data on Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Imparted to Emigrant  
Workers going for overseas employment in ECR Countries 
S.N. PDOT Center Agency 
Emigrant Workers Imparted PDO Training  
Total  
2018 2019 2020 
 
2021 2022 (Upto 
28 
February) 
  
1. Mumbai  
(Videsh Bhawan) 
 
NSDC 
Empanelled 
Training 
Partners under 
Pravasi Kaushal 
Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY) 
8933 12330 4646 519 111 26539  
Mumbai (Videsh 
Bhawan)- online - - - 4728 1880 6608  
2. Mumbai  (Andheri) 13616 9849 3066 1580 761 28872  
Mumbai( Andheri) 
Online  
- - 
 
- 
 
2301 684 2985  
3. Delhi  (Okhla) 6097 7088 1288 184 32 14689  
4. Delhi (Mandir Marg) 3305 5609 2067 41 0 11022  
5. Kochi  37 3446 1098 155 2 4738  
6. Lucknow 0 2069 994 145 17 3225  
Lucknow- Online    5 1 6  
7. Gorakhpur - 360 847 205 59 1471  
8. Chandigarh - 135 391 153 17 696  
9. Chennai - 210 799 246 32 1287  
10. Kolkata - - - 296 7 303  
11. Thiruvananthapuram  - - - 13 2 15  
12. Jalandhar - - - 17 19 36  
13. Amritsar - - - 7 3 10  
14. Bhubaneswar  - - - 35 5 40  
Bhubaneswar online  - - - 70 6 76  
15. Bhopal  - - - 0 0 0  
 
16. Jaipur  Rajasthan Skills 
and Livelihood 
Development 
Corporation 
(RSLDC) 
- 1095 645 79 6 1825  
Jaipur- Online    7 7 14  
17. Sikar - 690 382 120 4 1196  
Sikar- Online    2 2 4  
18. Nagaur - 54 73 10 0 137  
 
19. Hyderabad  Telangana 
Overseas 
Manpower 
Corporation 
- 754 304 252 24 1334  
Hyderabad online    52 26 78  
20. Karimnagar - 41 92 6 0 139  
21. Nizamabad  - 194 177 10 2   

113 
 
(TOMCOM) 383 
 
22. Darbhanga Labour Resource 
Department, 
Government of 
Bihar 
- 88 77 5 0 170  
23. Gaya 
- 162 265 15 0 442  
24. Muzaffarpur 
- 187 278 17 4 486  
25. Patna 
- 349 181 79 14 623  
 
26. Vijayawada Overseas 
Manpower 
Company of 
Andhra Pradesh 
(OMCAP) 
- 283 420 637 264 1604  
Vijayawada online    27 0 27  
27. Kadapa 
- 129 153 109 0 391  
28 Visakhapatnam  
   20 0 20  
29 Kakinada 
   14 0 14  
 
30. Chennai Commissionerate 
of Rehabilitation 
and Welfare of 
Non-Resident 
Tamils, 
Government of 
Tamil Nadu 
- - 422 99 3 
524 
  
 
31. Bengaluru Karnataka 
Vocational 
Training and 
Skill 
Development 
Corporation 
- - 29 11 143 183  
TOTAL 31988 45122 18694 12271 4137 112212  

114 
 
        ANNEXURE -IV 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2020-21)  HELD ON 11 JANUARY, 2021  
The Committee sat from 1700 hrs. to 1810 hrs. in Committee Room C, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
       Present 
   Shri P.P. Chaudhary  –       Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
3.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4.   Smt. Preneet Kaur   
5.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
6.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
7.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
8.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
9.   Shri Ritesh Pandey 
10. Dr. K. C. Patel 
11.  Shri N.K. Premchandran  
12.  Shri Rebati Tripura  
Rajya Sabha 
13.   Shri K.J. Alphons 
14. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
15. Shri P. Chidambaram 
16.  Shri Brijlal 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjay Bhattacharyya Secretary (CPV & OlA) 
2. Ms. Manika Jain Additional Secretary(OIA-II) 
3. ShriYogeshwar Sangwan Joint Secretary (OE & PGE) 

115 
 
4. Shri Vipul Joint Secretary (Gulf) 
5. Shri Abbagani Ramu Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
6. Shri Devesh Uttam Joint Secretary (CPV) 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1.     Dr. Ram Raj Rai              Director 
2.      Shri Aftab Alam                           Additional Director 
3.     Shri Paolienlal Haokip    Additional Director 
     
2. At the outset, the Chairperson  welcomed the Members of the  Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to have a briefing take oral evidence on the 
subject ‘Welfare of Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’. The Chairperson then drew the attention 
of all the representatives to Direction 55 ( 1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to 
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses 
about the provisions of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs provided a broad overview of the 
profile, extent, distribution and contribution of Indian Diaspora around the world. Thereafter, the 
Chairperson and the Members raised a number of queries on various issues related to the subjec t 
which inter alia included definition of the term Diaspora; role of India Diaspora in 
developmental agenda; budgetary allocation for welfare of Indian Diaspora; Pravasi Bharatiya 
Diwas (PBD), Protector General of Emigrants; e -Migrate portal; grievance red eressal 
mechanism; Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra; Indian Community Welfare Fund; Emigration 
Clearance Required system; Migration and Mobility Agreements; India Centre for Migration 
(ICM); scholarship programme, Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora;  draft Migration 
Management Bill, assistance to Indian students abroad;  Pre-Departure Orientation Training 
Programme (P-DOT) and so on. 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the concerns raised by the 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written 
replies to the points raised by the members of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 

116 
 
               ANNEXURE -V 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 29 JUNE, 2021  
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1646 hrs. in Committee Room C, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
       Present 
   Shri P.P. Chaudhary  –       Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
3.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4.   Smt. Preneet Kaur   
5.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
6.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
7.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
8.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
9.   Shri Ritesh Pandey 
10. Dr. K. C. Patel 
11.  Shri N.K. Premchandran  
12.  Shri Rebati Tripura  
Rajya Sabha 
13.   Shri K.J. Alphons 
14. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
15. Shri P. Chidambaram 
16.  Shri Brijlal 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjay Bhattacharyya Secretary (CPV & OlA) 
2. Ms. Manika Jain Additional Secretary(OIA-II) 

117 
 
3. Shri Yogeshwar Sangwan Joint Secretary (OE & PGE) 
4. Shri Vipul Joint Secretary (Gulf) 
5. Shri Abbagani Ramu Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
6. Shri Devesh Uttam Joint Secretary (CPV) 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP (MSDE) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Sh. Praveen Kumar Secretary, MSDE 
2. Ms. Juthika  Patankar Additional Secretary, MSDE 
3. Sh. Atul Kumar Tiwari Additional Secretary, MSDE 
4. Sh. Manish Kumar MD & CEO, NSDC 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1.     Dr. Ram Raj Rai       Director 
2.     K. Muanniang Tunglut      Deputy Secretary   
     
2. At the outset, the Chairperson  welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
to the Sitting of the Committee convened to take oral evidence on the subject ‘Welfare of Indian 
Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’. The Chairperson then drew the attention of all the representatives 
to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the 
confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses about the 
provisions of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. After presenting a brief overview of the mechanisms for the welfare, protection and 
engagement of Indian Diaspora, the Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs delved 
upon issues such as Pre -Departure Orientation Training Programme (P -DOT); migration trends 
accelerated by Covid; grievance redressal mechanisms; Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(ICWF); Videsh Sampark programmes; Labour & Manpower Cooperation Agreements; Pravasi 
Bharatiya DIwas (PDB), Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and so on. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of  Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
apprised the Committee about skilling curriculum and framework under PDot; National Council 

118 
 
for Vocational Education and Training; measures to improve domestic skilling; skill mapping 
and matching; Sector Skill Councils etc. 
5. During the course of discussion, the Chairperson and the Members raised a number of 
queries about PDOT Online Programme; problems faced by Indian students abroad; international 
benchmarks for skill development; rehabilitation of returnee migrants; Know India Programme 
(KIP); Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY): Media campaigns; assistance to distressed 
women etc.  
6. The representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Skill Development and Training 
responded to the concerns raised by the Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson 
directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points raised by the members of the 
Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
  

119 
 
          ANNEXURE-VI 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) HELD ON 22 DECEMBER, 2021 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1605 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri Prakash Javadekar   –  In the Chair 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
4. Shri  P.C. Mohan 
5. Smt. Queen Oja 
6. Shri Ritesh Pandey   
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
9. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
10. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri K. J. Alphons 
12.      Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
13. Shri Brijlal  

120 
 
14. Shri  Swapan Dasgupta 
15. Shri K. Somaprasad 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl.
No 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjay Bhattacharyya Secretary (CPV & OlA) 
2. Ms. Manika Jain Additional Secretary (OIA-II) 
3. Shri T. Armstrong Changsan 
Joint Secretary (PSP&CPO) /  
(OE & PGE) 
4. Shri Vipul Joint Secretary (Gulf) 
5. Shri Anil Kumar Rai Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
6. Shri Abbagani Ramu Joint Secretary (OIA-I) 
7. Shri Devesh Uttam Joint Secretary (CPV) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
  In the absence of Chairperson of the Committee, the Committee chose Shri Prakash 
Javadekar, M.P., Rajya Sabha under Rule 258(3), to act as Chairperson for the sitting.  At the 
outset, the Acting Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee convened 
to have oral evidence in connection with detailed examination of the subject ‘Welfare of 
Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’. He then drew the attention of all the wit nesses to 
Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha pertaining to maintaining the 
confidentiality of the Proceedings and Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. Outlining the issues to be discussed, he requested the wit nesses to introduce 
themselves before making submissions before the Committee.   

121 
 
2. The Secretary (CPV & OIA) highlighted the Ministry’s approach and engagement 
with the Indian diaspora through its various schemes and programmes.  
 3.  Thereafter, the Memb ers raised various issues which inter alia  included,  the 
availability of authentic statistical data of Indian diaspora in various countries, especially 
Middle East and Gulf countries; role of Indian Embassies/Missions  in the welfare and rescue 
of Indian citizens abroad; need for greater participation of NRIs in Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 
celebrations; comprehensive rehabilitation scheme for Gulf returnees and other workers; 
issue of medical graduate students studying in China who could not go back due to the  
pandemic; simplification of the procedure for issuance of OCI cards and transportation of 
dead body of Indian citizens who died abroad; nature of distress for which the Indian 
Embassies/Missions provided assistance; creation of infrastructure/support syst em for 
students studying abroad;   achievements under Videsh Sampark and Know India 
Programme, etc.  
 4.  The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries of the Members. Before 
the Sitting concluded, the Acting Chairperson directed the princip al witness to furnish 
written replies on the points raised by the Members to the Secretariat of the Committee at the 
earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
  

122 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2021-22) HELD ON 01 AUGUST, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 01 August, 2022 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
3. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
4.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
5.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
6. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
7. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
Rajya Sabha  
 
8.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
9. Shri Brijlal  
10.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 
 Secretariat 
  
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject ‘Welfare of 
Indian Diaspora: Policies/Schemes’. 

123 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer  their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. The members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Repo rt incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 