 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE ANTI MARITIME PIRACY BILL, 2019 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY 2021/MAGHA, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-2021) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 06 
 

 
SIXTTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
THE ANTI MARITIME PIRACY BILL, 2019 
 
 
 
                             
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.02.2021 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on  11.02.2021     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY 2021/ MAGHA, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by 
  
 

CONTENTS 
 
      
            PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2020-2021…………………………………   (i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2020-2021…………………………………   (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………….        (iii) 
REPORT 
 
Chapter I Introductory……………………………………………………………..    01      
 
Chapter II Clause by clause examination of 
                     The Anti-Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019 ………………………. ……….         12         
 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16.01.2020 ………..           32    
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 18.03.2020 ………..  35   
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2020………            38 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11.01.2021……….           41          
 
ANNEXURE 
  
I. The Piracy Bill, 2019………………………………………………………  42 
 
 
   

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 
 Lok Sabha   
  
2.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
3.  Shri Margani Bharat   
4.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
5.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8.  Shri Pakauri Lal Kol   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha   
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao  
16.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
17.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
18.  Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan  
19.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
21.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
  
Rajya Sabha  
  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi* 
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
29.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
31.  Vacant** 
 
 
*Shri Ranjan Gogoi, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 23.07.2020, Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 59970 and 
**Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel and Shri Sharad Pawar, Members, Rajya Sabha ceased to be Members of the Committee w.e.f. 09.04.2020. 
   
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 Lok Sabha   
 2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
11.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
12.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
13.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
14.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
15.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
16.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
17.  Shri Navneet Ravi Rana  
18.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
19.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
20.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
21.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
29.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
31.  Shri Brij Lal 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P. C. Koul     –  Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Director 
3. Sri Paolienlal Haokip    –   Additional Director  
4. Shri Maneesh Mohan Kamble -  Under Secretary 
 
 
(ii)

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Co mmittee on External Affairs (20 20-21) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Repor t on their behalf, present this Sixth               
(17th Lok Sabha) on “The Anti Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019”. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 9 December, 2019 and was referred by 
the Hon’ble Speaker to the Standing Committee  on External Affair s (2019-20) for 
examination and Report. 
 
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, t he Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Defence, Shipping, 
Law & Justice (Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs ). The 
Committee also sought written information on various aspects of the Bill from the se 
Ministries. The Committee also sough t views of Members of Parliament  representing 
constituencies in coastal regions. 
 
4. The Committee co nsidered and adopted this Re port at their Sitting held on  11 
January, 2021. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of 
Shipping, Ministry of Law & Justice  (Legislative Department and Department of Legal 
Affairs) who appeared before the Committee and  placed their considered views and also 
for furnishing background i nformation and written replies  to the points raised by the 
Committee in connection with the examination of the Bill.   
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                    P.P CHAUDHARY, 
10 February, 2021                                                                          Chairman,  
21 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 The act of ‗Piracy‘ involves two distinct offences including robbery or hijacking, wherein 
target of the attack is to capture/harm a maritime vessel or its cargo as well as kidnapping the 
vessel and its crew and threatening  them for payment of ransom. The  threat of piracy has 
mushroomed enormously in the past few years. The spread of sea piracy in contemporary times is 
not restricted to one particular sea area or zone, it has become rampant in almost each and every 
part of the world. Piracy/kidnapping attacks in the Gulf of Guinea, Malacca, Red Sea, Somalian 
waters etc. are becoming more violent with the greater tendency to attack, hijack and rob vessels 
as well as kidnap crew. After 2008, a major spurt in piracy attacks was seen in the Gulf of Aden 
by pirates operating off the coast of Somalia. This region, which connects the Arabian Sea to the 
Red Sea and to the Mediterranean Sea through the Suez Canal, has many important sea lanes for 
trade between Asia and Europe/East coas t of Africa. With the enhanced naval presence in the 
Gulf of Aden, pirates shifted their area of operations eastwards and southwards in the Indian 
Ocean with numerous piracy attempts being reported off Seychelles and Mauritius. Some piracy 
incidents at tha t time were also reported towards the western coast of India. This was countered 
successfully by the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard which enhanced their vigil and conducted 
major anti-piracy operations on the western coast of India.  After the peak of 2012, the number of 
piracy incidents off the coast of Somali a went down but a new hotspot of piracy has now 
emerged in the Gulf of Guinea off the coast of Nigeria.   
 
 
1.1 As per International Maritime Organization (IMO) promulgated report of attacks by 
pirates and robbers via the Global Integrated Shipping Information System (GISIS), the sum total 
of the number of incidents of piracy and armed robbery in West Africa, as reported by IMO in 
the 11 year period from 1 st January, 2009 to 15 th December, 2019 w as 1173. Additionally the 
number of acts of piracy and armed robbery against ships in West Africa during the same period 
was 65 (approx). During the same period over 500 Indians were captured by pirates around the 
world at various points of time. The United Nations Security Council, in a number of resolutions 
adopted since 2008, urged the UN Member States to cooperate in investigation and prosecution 
of all persons responsible for acts of piracy and further call ed upon States to criminalize piracy 
under the ir domestic law and to favourably consider the prosecution of suspected, and 
imprisonment of convicted pirates.  
 
Legal definition of Piracy 
 
1.2 India signed the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on 10 
December 1982 and ratified it on 29 June 1995. ―Piracy‖ as an offence is defined in Article 101 
of the 1982 UNCLOS as follows: 
 
―Piracy consists of any of the following acts: 
 

2 
 
(a) any illegal act of violence or detention, or any act of depredation, committed for 
private ends by the crew o r the passengers of a private ship or a private aircraft, 
and directed: 
 
(i) on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or against persons or 
property on board such ship or aircraft; 
 
(ii) against a ship, aircraft, persons or property in a place outside the jurisdiction of 
any State; 
 
(b)  any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of an aircraft with 
knowledge of facts making it a pirate ship or aircraft; 
 
(c)  any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act desc ribed in subparagraph 
(a) or (b).‖ 
 
1.3 According to the above-mentioned definition, piracy as an offence can only be committed 
in the high seas. When an offence akin to piracy takes place in the territorial sea and internal 
waters of a State , it will be called Maritime Robbery or Armed robbery against ships. ―Armed 
robbery against ships‖ is defined in the Code of Practice of the International Maritime 
Organization for the investigation of the Crimes of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships, a s 
follows:  
 
―Armed robbery against ships‖ means any of the following acts: 
 
(a)  any illegal act of violence or detention or any act of depredation, or threat thereof, 
other than an act of piracy, committed for private ends and directed against a ship 
or against persons or property on board such a ship, within a State‗s internal 
waters, archipelagic waters and territorial sea; 
(b)  any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described above. 
 
1.4 When the Committee wanted to know about the role of national legislations framed by 
some other countries in the prosecution of pirates, the representative of MEA stated as under: 
―I may also mention that while drawing up this Bill, national legislations framed by some 
other countries including Austr alia, United Kingdom, New Zealand and Sri Lanka were 
consulted. The proposed Bill contains the following main elements – 
1. The Legal Definition of ‗Piracy‘ - Piracy has been defined as given in 1982 UNCLOS and 
this definition is used to try the pirates un der national legislation. The geographical scope of 
the definition extends to the acts of piracy on the high seas and in any other place outside the 
jurisdiction of any State along with acts that occur in the States exclusive economic zone. 
Acts that occur in the territorial or inland water s of a State are termed as armed robbery and 
do not fall within the definition of the proposed Bill.  

3 
 
2. The Universal Jurisdiction - This means that even if a crime takes place outside India and it 
involves a victim who is not Indian and is committed by a person who is not Indian, Indian 
courts will have the authority to try him or her. In fact, the Bill allows for in absentia  
prosecution and also prosecution of Stateless persons.  
3. Criminalization of Policy - The proposed Bill criminalizes the acts of piracy in the Indian 
legal jurisdiction. The maximum punishment envisaged is imprisonment for life or death in 
addition to forfeiture of property involved in the commissioning of the crime. Attempts to 
commit the act of pi racy or an accessory to such an act will be liable to be punished up to 14 
years in addition to fine.  
4. Presumption - In keeping with the guidelines of the IMO, the proposed Bill contains 
provisions regarding presumption of guilt under Section 11 of the proposed Act. Under the 
circumstances listed in Section 11, the designated courts shall presume , unless contrary is 
provided, that the accused person has committed such an offence.  
5. Extradition - As per the proposed Bill, the act of piracy will be deemed as an extraditable 
criminal offence leading to extradition of suspects.  
Sir, overall, as I mentioned, earlier enactment of this legislation would provide for certainty 
and clarity in the law as well as a sound legal basis for prosecuting and punishing persons 
committing acts of piracy. The Bill will not have retrospective effect but will promote the 
safety and security of India‘s maritime trade including the safety of our vessels a nd crew 
members by acting as a strong deterrent.‖ 
 
1.5 Present Legal Mechanism to deal Piracy in India 
 
India does not have a separate domestic legislation on piracy. The provisions of the Indian 
Penal Code pertaining to armed robbery and the Admiralty jurisdiction of certain courts have 
been invoked in the past to prosecute pirates apprehended by the Indian Navy and the Coast 
Guard but in the absence of a clear and unambiguous reference to the offence of maritime piracy 
in Indian law, problems are faced  in ensuring effective prosecution of the pirates. Given the 
increasing incidence of piracy, including within India‘s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and the 
increasing number of pirates apprehended by the Indian Naval forces, the need was felt for a 
comprehensive domestic legislation on piracy.  It was decided in early 2011, that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should coordinate the inter-ministerial exercise of preparing domestic legislation 
on piracy. 
 
1.6 Explaining the problems arising due to lack of a n effective legislative framework, the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs during the course of briefing held on 
16.01.2020 stated as under: 
―……Although the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard have in the past caught many pirates on 
the high seas of the Indian coast, they could not be tried satisfactorily for their crime in the 
Indian courts for want of a separate domestic legislation on piracy in Ind ia.  Prosecution for 
piracy as a crime has not been included in the IPC or the CRPC.  This had created a problem 

4 
 
in launching an effective prosecution in the Alondra Rainbow case, the only piracy related 
case that has been tried in an Indian court so far.  In the absence of a piracy law or the 
definition of piracy in the penal law of India, other relevant provisions of the Indian Penal 
Code and Admiralty Jurisdictions were invoked to try the pirates in this particular case.  
Although the prosecution in this  case was successful in the trial court, the verdict was 
overruled by the High Court presumably on jurisdictional grounds.‖ 
1.7 On being enquired about the current system of extradition of pirates and the provisions of 
Indian/International Law under which they are covered, the MEA in its written reply submitted 
that: 
―The extradition of pirates to or from other countries is currently as per bilateral agreements, 
or on case -to-case basis in the absence of bilateral treaties. Extradition of Pirates between 
State Parties to the 1982 UN Convention of the Law of the Sea (UNC LOS) is also possible 
under this Convention.‖ 
Inter-Ministerial Consultations for Preparation of Bill 
1.8 As the subject of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) is 
dealt with by the Ministry of External Affairs under the Allocation of Business Rules, it was 
decided that MEA would undertake to pilot a separate comprehensive domestic legislation to deal 
with piracy, especially the enabling procedure and mechanism for prosecution of pirates in Indian 
courts.  Accordingly, the MEA prepared a draft anti-piracy legislation and circulated the same for 
comments of the concerned Ministries and Departments, namely, Defence, Shipping, Home 
Affairs, Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guar d and Directorate General of Shipping. The draft 
legislation was modified based on the comments received and in consultation with the 
Department of Legislative Affairs of the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
 
1.9 The then Cabinet, in its meeting held on 24 Jan uary 2012, approved the proposal to enact 
a domestic anti -piracy legislation. As approved by the Cabinet, ―The Piracy Bill 2012‖ was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24 April, 2012. It was then referred by the Hon‘ble Speaker to the 
Standing Committee on Ext ernal Affairs for examination and report. In the process of 
examination of the Bill, the Committee took oral evidence and written information from the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Defence, Shipping,  Law and 
Justice (Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs) and DG Shipping in May -June 
2012. Subsequently, the Committee submitted their final report to the Lok Sabha on 14 August 
2012 approving the Piracy Bill 2012 subject to the appropriate inclusion of it s 18 
recommendations.  
 
1.10 Taking into consideration the views of the Standing Committee, Official Amendments to 
the Bill were approved by the Cabinet on 18 March 2013 . MEA had given notices for 
introduction of Official Amendments during all the Parliament Sessions in 2013, following which 
it was listed in the Lok Sabha‘s business. However it did not come up for discussion in any of the 
Sessions of the last Parliament in 2013 because of paucity of time. 
 
1.11 ‗The Anti Maritime Piracy Bill‘ was re -drafted in 2015 by MEA with inter -ministerial 
consultations with the Ministries of Law and Justice, Defence, Home Affairs, Shipping, Civil 

5 
 
Aviation, Indian Navy and Indian Coast  Guard. After Cabinet's approval on 1 August 2018, a 
notice for its introduction was given but it could not be introduced and lapsed with the last Lok 
Sabha.  After Fresh Cabinet Approval in Nov 2019, the Anti -Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019 was re -
introduced in the Lok Sabha by EAM on December 9, 2019. The Bill has been again referred to 
the Committee on External Affairs for examination and report.  
 
Salient features of the draft Legislation 
 
1.12 Regarding the salient features of the draft Legislation, ‗The Anti-Maritime Piracy Bill, 
2019‘, the MEA submitted the following facts: 
 
i. ―Piracy is defined as given in 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) and this definition is used to try the pirates, by invoking universal 
jurisdiction, under the national legislation.  
 
ii. Using the UNCLOS definition would also enable international cooperation including 
extradition of persons involved in an act of piracy on the high seas.  
 
iii. The draft adheres to the guidelines and Model Law for national legislation for 
Maritime Criminal Acts prepared by the Legal Committee of the International 
Maritime Organization (IMO).  
 
iv. National Legislations on Piracy from Australia, UK, New Zealand, and S ri Lanka 
were also consulted in the process.‖ 
 
 
1.13 Elaborating further on the necessity of involving other agencies to frame the Bill, 
the representative of Ministry of External Affairs stated as under: 
―The Bill would also fulfil the obligations undertaken by India when it ratified the 
UN Convention on the Law of Sea  (UNCLOS) in 1995, when we had signed it in 
1982.  UNCLOS requires States to cooperate in the repression of piracy on the high 
seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of the States.   
As the subject of UNCLOS is dealt with by the Ministry of External Affairs, it was 
decided that the Ministry of External Affairs would undertake to pilot the Bill.  The 
draft Bill was prepared by MEA in consultation with the Ministries of Defence, 
Shipping, Home Affairs, Law and Justice, and Indian Navy, Coast Guard, 
Directorate General of Shipping, etc........‖   
1.14 The Committee further enquired about the clarity in area of Jurisdiction of the legi slation 
and inclusion of Exclusive Economic Zones and the representative of the MEA in his reply stated 
as under: 
―.....The question of this jurisdiction being anywhere in the open high seas is under 
Article 101 of the UNCLOS. It also talks about the fact that this is something on 

6 
 
the high seas. Piracy consists any of the following acts like any illegal acts of 
violence, detention or any act of depredation committed for private ends by th e 
crew or the passengers of a private ship or a private aircraft and directed on the 
high seas. So, Sir, technically we have taken it from the UNCLOS definition 
which has been adopted by all the countries.....‖ 
1.15 During the course of evidence, when the Committee desired to know the 
jurisdiction of the Act, the representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice stated, 
―In this regard I would like to bring to your notice the provisions of section 188 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  This will perhaps dissipate any of the doubts in 
this regard.  When an offence is committed outside India, whether on the high seas  or 
elsewhere outside India, the basic consideration is by a citizen of India  under clause 
(a). So, even under the existing provisions, the jurisdiction is there. The second part 
relates to `by a person not being such citizen on any ship or aircraft registered in India‘. 
So, even if a person is not a citizen of India, still the offence is triable by virtue of 
Section 188 of the CrPC. The only proviso to it is that it requires the sanction of the 
Central Government. So, there is nothing which debars the trial of an offence even in 
the present proposed Bill in India. I do not think that there will be any jurisdictional 
issues. Even apart from it, let us resort to Section 3 of the Indian Penal Code. That also 
speaks of punishment of offences committed beyond but which, by law, may be tried 
within India. So, by virtue of both these Sections, I do not think, there would be any 
jurisdictional issues.‖ 
1.16 Elaborating further on the same issue, the representative of Border Management, Ministry 
of Home Affairs stated that there is a legislation which covers the exclusive economic zone. This 
is the SUA Act. If you read the jurisdictional part, sub -section (2) of Section 1, it says, it extends 
to the whole of India including the limit or the territorial water with contin ental shelf, the 
exclusive economic zone or any other maritime zone of India. 
1.17 When t he Committee desired to be acquainted with the role of Ministry of Defence in 
implementation of provisions made in the Bill. The Ministry of Defence in its written reply 
submitted as under: 
―From an operational perspective, the role envisaged for the Indian Navy is broadly in 
conformity with United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the 
following clauses of the proposed Anti-Piracy Bill, 2019, specify the exact role:- 
- Clause 6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the Central Government 
may, for the purpose of this Act, by notification, confer the powers of arrest, 
investigation and prosecution of any person exercisable by a police officer under the 
Code on any of its Gazetted officer or such officer of a State Government. 
- Clause 7(1). On the high seas, or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of India, a 
pirate-ship or aircraft, or any ship or aircraft taken for privacy and under th e control of 
pirates may be seized and the persons on board may be arrested and the property on 
board may be liable to be seized. 

7 
 
- Clause 7(2). A seizure on account of piracy under sub -section (1) may be carried out 
only by warships or military aircraft o f the Indian Navy or the ships or aircrafts of the 
Coast Guard or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on 
Government service and authorised for such purpose. 
- Clause 9.(1) The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try an offence 
punishable under this Act where such offence is committed- 
(i) by a person who is apprehended by, or is in the custody of, the Indian Navy or the 
Coast Guard, regardless of the nationality or citizenship of such person;‖ 
Thus, the primary role of t he Indian Navy, for implementation of this Bill, would be 
seizure/apprehension of person(s)/vessel(s) suspected to be involved in piracy related 
activities in accordance with clauses 7(1) & (2).‖ 
1.18 On being questioned about the role of Ministry of Shipp ing in implementation of 
provisions of the Bill, the Ministry of Shipping in a written note submitted and stated as under: 
―Ministry of Shipping is the nodal Ministry along with Directorate General of Shipping 
as the nodal agency for dealing with welfare of seafarers and issues related to hostages, 
insurance and shipping and will co -ordinate and deal with other 
Ministries/Departments as may be required.‖ 
1.19 In response to the specific query about  the role of various Ministries/Departments in 
formulation and implementation of various provisions of the Bill, t he Ministry of External 
Affairs in its written reply, submitted as under: 
―The subject of Piracy involves many Ministries and Agencies. 
(i) The nodal Ministry dealing with the issue of piracy in the international context is 
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). MEA will be involved in all cases requiring 
international cooperation or coordination with other countries.  
(ii) The nodal Agency dea ling with welfare of seafarers and issues related to hostages, 
insurance and shipping is the Ministry of Shipping along with its Directorate General 
of Shipping. 
(iii)The nodal Agencies for conducting action against suspected pirates on sea are the 
Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy and Coast Guard.  
(iv) The nodal Agencies for prosecution of pirates are the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
State authorities where pirates are being tried.‖  
 
1.20 When the Committee desired to know from the Ministry of External Affairs the role of 
each Ministry/Department/Agency in prosecution of pirates and Standard Operation Procedures 
(SOPs) to be framed, the representative of MEA during the course of evidence stated as under: 

8 
 
―The respective role of each ministry, department and agency in prosecution of pirates is 
clear and has been aligned with their standard duties and jurisdiction, that is to say, 
Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard will be responsible for taking 
action to apprehend suspected pirates at sea , to transport such persons to the next port of 
call and for handing apprehended suspects over to State law enforcing authorities for 
prosecution. MHA and State law enforcement authorities would then make arrangements 
for detention of suspected pirates and  to bring them to trial by the designated court. The 
convicted pirates would serve the sentences in Indian jails as directed by the designated 
courts. They would then be deported to their countries of origin upon completion of their 
sentences. MEA would be  required to intervene in such cases where Indian authorities 
seek extradition of a pirate held by another country or if a request for extradition of a 
pirate in India‘s custody is received from another country.‖ 
1.21  Elaborating further on SOPs he submitted as under: 
―In this context, Ministry of Home Affairs has conveyed that Standard Operating 
Procedures regarding deportation and extradition are already in place. Further, 
SOPs, if required, will be designed and notified by that Ministry.‖ 
 
General Observations 
1.22 The Committee observe that after a major spurt in piracy attacks in the extended 
region  of Indian Ocean after 2008, United Nations Security Council (UNSC) recognized  
piracy as a crime having universal jurisdiction under customary international Law and was 
codified under UN Convention of Law of the sea (UNCLOS), 1982.  In a number of adopted 
resolutions, the UNSC urged the Member States to cooperate in Investigation and 
prosecution of all persons responsible for acts of Piracy and further called upon States to 
criminalize piracy under their domestic law and to favourably consider the prosecution of 
suspected and imprison ed pirates.  India does not have a separate domestic Legislation on 
piracy and prosecution for piracy as a crime h as not been included in the IPC or CrPC. 
Thus, in the same backdrop, the Ministry of External Affairs on 24 th April 2012 had piloted 
a separate comprehensive domestic Anti -Piracy legislation to deal with piracy, especially 
the enabling procedure and mechanism for prosecution of pirates in Indian courts. The Bill 
was referred to the Standing Committee on External Affairs and the Committee had 
approved the Bill with suggestions which included 18 recommendations and submitted their 

9 
 
Report on 14 th August 2012. The Bill was again approved by the Cabinet on 18 th March, 
2013, incorporating the recommendations of the Committee and introduced in the 
Parliament. The Committee, however, find that such an important and urgent Bill lost its 
pace and urgency due to reluct ance of the Government as it did not come up for discussion 
during 1 5th Lok Sabha, it was redrafted in 2015, approved again by the Cabinet on 1 st 
August, 2018 but could not be introduced and lapsed with the last Lok Sabha and finally 
after fresh Cabinet ap proval in November, 2019, Anti -Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019 was re -
introduced in Lok Sabha on December, 2019. The Committee deplore such lackadaisical 
approach of the government in bringing such an important legislation when there is an 
urgent need of the co mprehensive domestic legislation on Piracy which can provide the 
necessary framework within the country for prosecution in piracy related crimes. The 
Committee are also not aware about the other efforts made in between by the Government 
to enhance international cooperation on the issue of maritime piracy as well as to address 
the factors that have led to rise and spread of piracy in many more regions. The Committee, 
therefore, would like that the Government should , now, make all possible efforts  for an 
earlier enactment of anti-piracy legislation so that India becomes a part of an international 
endeavour to combat piracy as well as it may provide for a sound legal basis for prosecuting 
and punishing persons committing acts of piracy and also safety a nd security of India‟s 
maritime trade including the safety of our vessels and crew members. Further , the 
Committee would also like to reiterate their recommendation made in the 16 th Report on 
the Piracy Bill 2012, and desire that MEA should make sincere ef forts to enhance 
international cooperation on maritime piracy and by taking adequate and proactive 
measures to ensure the welfare of Indian seafarers captured by pirates simultaneously. 
 (Recommendation No. 1) 
 

10 
 
1.23  The Committee observe that the subject of Piracy involves several Ministries like 
MEA, MHA, Defence, Shipping, Law and Justice, etc. and each Ministry / Department has 
been assigned with specific duties and jurisdictions, right from apprehending the suspected 
pirates till conviction of pirates by designated courts. Various clauses of the Bill specifically 
address the issues of arrest, investigation and seizure of property, designated court and its 
jurisdiction and trial of the offences by the designated cou rt.  The Bill as a whole is a minor 
criminal Law and  in that case Ministry of Law and Justice and MEA have opined that the 
rule making powers of the Government are restricted to recruitment of human resources or 
regulation of their service condition s. However, as suggested by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, the Committee desire that the clear cut roles of various agencies /departments 
should also be defined and reflected appropriately in the Rules with establishment of an 
effective coordination mechanism involving al l concerned agencies including  State 
Governments. The Committee also desire that the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP‟s) 
regarding dep ortation and extradition of pirates should be designed by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in a specific time frame so that by the day the enactment of La w is completed 
the SOPs are  ready to be  notified immediately and there is no delay in implementation of 
the Law. 
(Recommendation No.2) 
1.24 The Committee observe that the Bill has been drafted in accordance with UNCLOS 
1982 i.e. the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea adopted by India in 1982 and 
ratified in 1995. The Committee now hope that the new proposed legislation will definitely 
enable the authorities to prosecute the apprehended pirates irrespective of their 
nationalities. The Committee also note that a number of UN resolutions have been passed to 
facilitate the Nations to enact legislation on piracy by adopting the definition of UNCLOS, 
so that the process of trying foreign nationals is in accordance with internationally accepted 

11 
 
provisions of law and procedure. The Committee desire that in addition to an anti -piracy 
domestic legislation, the Government should also make efforts on the issue of extradition of 
persons of Indian origin suspected for acts of piracy on high seas. The Committee  have a 
strong view in this regard that India must also be a part of every international co-operation 
created to combat piracy and smooth extradition of the guilty persons/agencies involved. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF 
‗THE ANTI-MARITIME PIRACY BILL, 2019‘ 
 
I. Nomenclature and Preamble of the Bill 
 
The Preamble of the Anti-Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019 reads as under: 
 
THE ANTI-MARITIME PIRACY BILL, 2019  
 
“A Bill to make special provisions for repression of piracy on hi gh seas and to provide 
for punishment for the offence of piracy and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
  
WHEREAS India is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
adopted by the United Nations on the 10th December, 1982 and has ratified the same on 
the 29th June, 1995;  
 
AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Convention, among other things, states th at all States 
shall co-operate to the fullest possible extent in the repression of piracy on high seas or 
any other place outside the jurisdiction of any State;  
 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the provisions relating to 
piracy contained in the aforesaid Convention.” 
 
Clause 1 – Short Title and Commencement of the Act 
 
2.2 This clause provides for the definition of maritime – piracy so as to include the definition 
of piracy given in UNCLOS which is used to try the pirates under national  legislation and reads 
as under:- 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
(1) This Act may be called the Anti-Maritime Piracy Act, 2019. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to all parts of the sea adjacent to and beyond 
the limits of Exclusive Economic Zone of India. 
During the course of evidence the Committee pointed out about n on clarity of area of 
jurisdiction in section 1 sub clause 3 (i) of the Bill.  The representatives of the MEA explaining 
on the provision stated as under: 
―I will request my colleagues to supplement. But let me just say that the definition of 
‗high seas‘ in UNCLOS is ‗anywhere in the high seas‘. That is the definition which has 
been laid down by UNCLOS. The question of this jurisdiction being anywhere in the 

13 
 
high seas is under Article 101 of the UNCLOS. It also talks about the fact that this is 
something on the high seas.‖  
 
2.3 The Committee first and foremost recommend that the word „Seventieth Year‟ may 
be substituted by the word „Seventy second year‟ of Republic of India in the long title of the 
Bill as it would synchronise with the current year of now 2021. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
2.4 While discussing the nomenclature of the Bill, the Committee considered the scope 
and aims of the legislation and noted that the Bill provides legal framework for prosecution 
and punishment for an act of maritime piracy.  Therefore, the nomenclature should reflect 
both the issues  appropriately. The Committee, therefore, desire that to connote the 
complete and perfect sense for which the Bill is being brought,  the word Anti-Piracy should 
be in centre and the nomenclature of the Bill should be „Maritime Anti -Piracy Bill, 2019 in 
place of „Anti -Maritime Piracy, 2019 and accordingly the name of the Act in Clause 1(1) 
may be modified as „Maritime Anti -Piracy Act, 2020‟ in place of „Anti-Maritime P iracy 
Act, 2019‟.  
(Recommendation No.5) 
 
2.5 In the Clause 1(3) of the Bill the Committee find that it limits India‟s ability to 
undertake Anti-Piracy operations beyond EEZ as its application part mentions „shall apply 
to all parts of the sea adjacent to and beyond the limits of EEZ of India. The Committee 
also refer that the meaning of Article 58(2) of UNCLOS, 1982 is that the EEZ retains the 
characteristics of high seas barring the sovereign rights of the Coastal State. Moreover, in 
the definition in Sec tion 2(i)(f) of the Bill „Piracy‟ is considered as an act on high seas.  The 
Committee, therefore,  desire that it should be amended to bring it in consistent with the 

14 
 
title and definition of „piracy‟ in the Bill as well as Article 58(2) of UNCLOS, 1982. The 
article (3) may be worded as under: 
 Clause 1 (3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to the high seas, which for the purposes 
of this Act, includes Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) in accordance with paragraph 2 of 
Article 58 of the Convention. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Clause 2 – Definitions 
2.6 The Clause provides for the definitions of various terms used in the provisions of the Bill.  
In sub-clauses (f) and (g) the definition of ‗piracy‘ and ‗pirate ship or aircraft‘ is provided for and 
reads as under: 
     (f)"piracy" means— 
(i) any illegal act of violence or detention or any act of depredation committed for 
private ends by the crew or any passenger of private ship or a private aircraft and 
directed— 
(A) on the high seas against another ship or aircraft  or against person or property on board 
such ship or aircraft; 
(B) against a ship, aircraft, person or property in a place outside the jurisdiction of India; 
(ii) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of an aircraft with 
knowledge of facts, making it a pirate ship or aircraft; 
(iii) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in 
sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii); or 
(iv) any act which is deemed piratical under the international law including customary 
international law; 
 (g)  "pirate ship or aircraft" means a ship or aircraft which— 
(i)    is intended by the person in dominant control to be used for the purposes of committing    
any of the acts referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (iv) of clause (f); or 
(ii)  has been used to commit any such act, referred to in sub-clause (i) of this clause, so 
long as it remains under the control of the person guilty of that act. 
 
2.7 When the Committee raised their concern over the implications arising out of the 
provision of word ‗ship‘ which required to be defined, the representative of the MEA clarified as 
under, 
“I have taken your point, Sir. If in the Indian Penal Code, the definition of ‗ship‘ 
includes a boat, it will also apply here. If there is a need to include within the 
definition of ‗ship‘ a boat, we will immediately do that.‖ 
2.8 Explaining further the position in this regard the Secretary (Department of Legal Affairs) 
stated as under: 

15 
 
―We can also consider adding the word ‗vessel‘. This will perhaps include any sort 
of ship or boat.‖ 
 
2.9 The Committee observe that piracy has been defined in the clause 2 (f) of the Bill in 
accordance with UNCLOS, 1982. Clause 2 (f) (i) defines the nature of act by individuals on 
the ship or aircraft. The Committee, however, find that in  the definition, words ship has 
been used but a ship has not be defined anywhere.  Mention of word „ship‟ does not include  
yacht, boat or watercraft etc. of any description. The Committee, therefore, desire that to 
cover all the means of transport on wate r  and sea the word „vessel‟ should be added along 
with ship and aircraft.   Moreover, alongwith crew and passengers the presence of any 
other person on ship/aircraft and private ship  is also possible .  The Committee, therefore, 
would like that the words „ any person‟ should also be incorporated suitably and „ship‟ and 
„aircraft‟ should also be defined in two separately sub clauses in the light of definition  of 
these objects in other relevant act s to cover all types of possibilities.  To incorporate all the 
suggestions of the Committee the Clause 2 (f) may be amended as under: 
 (i)  Any illegal act of violence or detention or any act of depredation committed for 
private ends by any person or the crew or any passenger of a private ship or vessel or 
a private aircraft and directed- 
(A)    on the high seas including a EEZ against another ship or aircraft or against and 
person or property on board such ship, vessels or aircraft; or 
(B)     against a ship,  vessels aircraft, person or property in a place outside the  
jurisdiction of any State; 
(ii)    any act of voluntary participation on the operation of a ship or vessel or of an aircraft 
with knowledge of facts, making it a pirate ship or aircraft; 

16 
 
(iii) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in sub clause (i) or  
sub clause (ii) or  
(iv) any other act which is deemed piratical under the international law including 
customary international law.   
Further, as agreed the Committee desire that the definition of „ship‟ and „aircraft‟ may be 
incorporated in clause as 2(f) sub clause (i) and (j) as mentioned below: 
 (i)   “Ship” means „vessel‟ or water craft  of every description , including non 
displacement craft and sea planes, used or capable of being used as a means of 
transportation on water or engaged in any operations at sea. 
 (j)  “Aircraft” has the same meaning as mentioned under section 2 (1) of the Aircraft 
Act, 1934.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
2.10 The Committee note that the Clause 2 (2) is a general clause which refers the other 
related legislations for the meaning of the words and expressions which have been used in 
this Act but not defined here.   But surprisingly, it does not mention the „UN Convention‟ 
which is the most i mportant reference in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, suggest 
that the word „the Convention‟ should be added in the first line after „defined in‟ and also 
before the word „code or the Act‟ in the last line of clause 2 (2). 
(Recommendation No.8) 
Clause 3 – Punishment for Piracy 
 
2.11 Clause 3 of the Bill makes a provision of punishment for the acts of piracy and reads as 
under: 
 
Whoever commits any act of piracy, shall be punished—  
(i) with imprisonment for life; or  

17 
 
(ii) with death, if such person in committing the act of piracy causes death or an attempt 
thereof,  
and in addition shall also be subject to restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the 
commission of such offence. 
 
2.12 The Committee note d that while drawing up this Bill, Na tional legislations framed by 
some other countries like Australia, UK, New Zealand etc.,  have been considered and hence the 
Bill carries a Universal Jurisdiction for prosecution of pirates alongwith the power of Death 
penalty as provisioned in Clause 3 (ii) of the Bill. The representative of Ministry of External 
Affairs during the course of oral evidence held on 18 March, 2020 submitted as under: 
 
―…we are saying death has been caused either by piracy or by attempt to commit 
piracy. That is why, we have now made it clear.   
 
With death, if such person is committing the act of piracy or an attempt thereof which 
causes death.‖ 
 
 
2.13 The representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice further opined an d elaborated on 
Section 307 IPC in connection with the punishment provisions made in this clause  and stated as 
under: 
 
―Whoever does any act with suc h intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances 
that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine; and, if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be 
liable either to imprisonment for life , or to such punishment as is hereinbefore 
mentioned.‖ 
 
So, punishment, in case of an attempt to murder, it would be an imprisonment for life, as  
per Section 307.‖ 
 
2.14 The Committee specifically referred to the instances where problems are faced by the 
Government in extradition of accused due to death penalty clause in Indian Law. During the 
course of briefing, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs stated as under:  
―We had got some cases earlier where we waived the death penalty in order to enable 
them to extradite the accused to us. So, we gave a commitment that ‗Please extradite. 
We will ensure that the death penalty is not imposed.‘ We have given that com mitment 
and ensured that extradition has taken place.‖ 
2.15 Elaborating further on the provision of death penalty, the representative of Ministry of 
External Affairs explained as under, 
―...coming back to the issue of death penalty, penalty per-se is not abolished under 
international law.  In fact, many of the countries like Singapore, Thailand and 
Malaysia have death penalty for the crime of piracy in their domestic legislations 

18 
 
and Unites States though have not abolished death penalty, but the pu nishment for 
the crime of piracy is 20 years.  It is beyond 14 years life imprisonment.‖ 
   
―I would just like to submit for the consideration of the Committee that firstly we 
are not imposing mandatory death penalty because our courts have very clearly 
said that it will be only in the rarest of rare cases.‖ 
    
2.16 The Committee observe that the Bill has been drafted in accordance with the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) adopted by India in 1982 and ratified 
in 1995. The Committee further observe that countries such as USA, Australia, Italy and 
Sri Lanka do not provide for death penalty inspite of passing anti -maritime law similar to 
India.  Under this, if a person while committing an act of Piracy causes or attempts to cause 
death, he will be punished by death. The Committee also note that t he Supreme Court of 
India has ruled that awarding a mandatory death penalty for an offence violates the 
Articles 14 and 21 of the Indian Constitution and hence it is arbitrary and unfair in na ture.  
Even the Section 303 of IPC and Section 27(3) of the Arms Act 1959 which provided 
mandatory death penalty for offenders has been struck down by the Supreme Court. 
  The Committee, however, feel that committing an act of piracy in itself is a crime 
and to the top it if  the act of  accused causes a death it will be a double crime in nature  and 
should be viewed very seriously as a crime nothing short of one against humanity.  
The Committee , therefore, recommend that  clause 3 should be reframed to make a 
provision of punishment for death when death of any person is caused while committing or 
making an attempt of piracy. It may be reworded as under: 

19 
 
 „Whoever commits any act of piracy, shall be punished – 
 (i) with imprisonment for  life or  
(ii) with death if such person in committing the act of piracy, or an attempt thereof, 
causes death of a person and in addition shall also be subject to restitution or 
forfeiture of property involved in the commission of such offence. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
Clause 4 – Punishment for attempt to commit piracy, etc. 
2.17 This clause contains provision of punishment for the Act of Piracy with an imprisonment 
for a term extendable to fourteen years with time and reads as under,  
Whoever attempts to commit the offence of piracy or aids or abets or counsels or procures  for 
the commission of such offence shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which  may 
extend to fourteen years and shall also be liable to fine. 
2.18 The Committee during the course of evidence enquired the Secretary Law (Department of 
Legal Affairs) whether the work to counsel also includes conspiracy and he replied as under: 
 
―...Section 120A of IPC talks of conspiracy. It defines conspiracy. It is like when two 
or more persons agreed to do or cause to be done , an illegal act , or an act which is 
not illegal by illegal means, this is criminal conspiracy. The word ‗counsel‘ is 
normally not used in our IPC‖. 
 
2.19 Clause (4) relates to puni shment for all concerned persons responsible for an 
attempt to commit the offence of piracy etc. It includes punishm ent for everyone either who 
attempts to commit the offence or aids or abets or counsels or procures for commission of 
offence. 
The Committee find that the word „counsels‟ is used in the clause for the 
person/persons who „conspires‟ in the crime .  S ection 120A of the IPC defines conspiracy 
and specifies that when two or more person s agree to cause an illegal act by illegal means it 
is „criminal conspiracy‟.  The Committee , therefore, recommend that the  word „counsels‟  

20 
 
in this clause may be substituted  with  the word „conspires‟ to convey the exact meaning of 
the purpose to use this word in this Clause. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Clause 7 – Arrest and seizure of property 
 
2.20 The Clause empowers the State to arrest and seize property in the high seas. It can only be 
carried out by warships or military aircraft of the Indian Navy or the ships/aircraft of Indian 
Coast Guard clearly marked and identifiable as being on Government service and authorized for 
such purpose, it reads as under, 
 
(1) On the high seas, or  in any other place outside the jurisdiction of India, a pirate ship or 
aircraft, or any ship or aircraft taken for piracy and under the control of pirates may be 
seized and the persons on board may be arrested and the property on board may be liable to 
be seized. 
 
(2) A seizure on account of piracy under sub -section (1) may be carried out only by warships 
or military aircraft of the Indian Navy or the ships or aircraft of the Indian Coast Guard or 
other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on Government service and 
authorized for such purpose. 
 
2.21 Referring to the jurisdiction mentioned in the clause 2 (i) of the Bill, the Committee 
pointed out towards ‗any other place outside the jurisdiction of India‘ as inappropriate and the 
jurisdiction of India should be replaced with the words ‗any State‘.  In response thereto,  the 
representative of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs during the course of oral 
evidence before the Committee on 18.3.2020 agreed to the suggestion and clarified that we will 
substitute ‗India‘ with ‗any State‘.   
 
2.22 On being asked to further elaborate on the Clause 7 (i) where definition of ship/vessel is 
concerned, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs explained as under: 
 
―As far as definition of ‗ship‘ or ‗vessel‘ is concerned, that is already taken care of 
in the definitions aspect where we say ‗ship‘ means ‗vessel‘ or ‗watercraft‘ of every 
description including non -displacement craft and sea planes used or capable of 
being used as a means of transportation on water or engaged in any operations at 
sea‖.  
 
2.23 Explaining further, the Secretary of Law Ministry (Department of Legal Affairs) 
commented as under: 
 

21 
 
―As per the conventions, the definition of a ship means all the things as brought out 
by the Secretary, MEA. It is a clear statement as per the international norms. 
‗Displacement‘ means it is submerged partially in water and if it does not displace 
means it is above water. Over craft can also be used. So, all terminologies are in sync 
with the international definitions‖.  
 
2.24 Elaborating further on the provisions in Clause 7(2) the representative of MEA stated  that 
a seizure on account of piracy under sub -section (1) may be carried out only by warships or 
military aircraft of the Indian Navy or the ships or aircraft of the Indian Coast Guard or other 
ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on Government service a nd authorised 
for such purpose. 
 
2.25 Clause 7 (i) relates to the provision of arrest and seizure of property pertaining to 
the pirate ship or aircraft.  The Committee, however, find that the mention of jurisdiction 
from where pirates ship/vessels/aircrafts be apprehended is not complete as it denotes the 
term on „high seas or in any other place  outside the jurisdiction of India ‟.  Agreeing to the 
suggestion made  by the Navy and Coast Guard , the Committee desire that in place of 
„India‟ it should be „a ny State‟ to make this clause i n consistency with the universal 
jurisdiction to permit such seiz ure in waters outside the jurisdiction of any State  as well as 
Article 105 of UNCLOS may be inserted.    Similarly, word „vessel‟ in between the word              
„pirate ship‟ and word  „any vessel‟ in line 17 and 18 respectively as the words ship/vessel 
will encompass every kind of watercraft including non -displacement craft and sea -planes 
capable of being used as means of transportation on water.  The Committee also note that 
in this clause there is no provision about the procedure for disposal of property  after 
seizure of the ship or the property on board.  Therefore, the Committee desire that a 
sentence „and such ship, vessel, aircraft or property may be disposed off by the order of 
Court‟ should be added after the last word „seized‟ in the clause 7 (1) in the Bill. 

22 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
2.26 Clause 7 (2) empowers the warship o r military aircraft of Indian Navy or the ships 
or aircraft of Indian Coast Guard or other ships or aircrafts on Government service to 
carry out the seizure.  Howeve r, it does not mention „boarding‟ and there is  no specific 
mention of the role of officers/sailors assigned to ships or aircrafts and  also of the members 
of Indian Coast guard in the process of arrest and seizure of offenders. 
The Committee, therefore desire that all these should be incorporated and the clause may 
be amended as under: 
Clause 7 (2):  A  boarding and seizure on account of piracy under sub -section (1) may be 
carried out by officers or sailor assigned to warships or military aircraft of the Indian Navy 
or members of the Coast Guard assigned to ships or aircraft of the Indian Coast Guard or 
other authorised personnel of other  ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as 
being on Government service and authorised for such purpose.   
Moreover, the Bill specifically mentions that only pirate ship or aircraft or pirates 
may be arrested thus the person committing offence under definition of piracy is only liable 
for arrest.  No scope of suspicion is allowed.  Under these circumtances  enforcement 
agencies may not initiate any action based on initial suspicion.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that a separate clause 7 (3) may be incorporated to allow a right of 
visit by Indian Naval Ships or Indian Coast G uard or aircraft based on suspicion of act of 
piracy.  The Clause 7 (3) may be framed as under: 
(3)  Authorized personnel under such section (2) may also exercise the right of visit on 
reasonable grounds for suspicion that a ship or vessel is engaged in piracy. 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
Clause 8 – Designated Court  
 
2.27 This clause provisions for providing speedy trial of offences under this Act, the Central 
Government shall, after consulting the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by notification, 
specify as under—  
 
(i) one or more Courts of Sessions in a State, to be the Designated Court for the purposes 
of this Act; and 
(ii) the territorial jurisdiction of each such court. 
 
 
Clause 9 – Jurisdiction of Designated Courts 
 
2.28 The Clause covers the territorial jurisdiction of the Designated Courts and states as under,   
 
(1) The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try an offence punishable under 
this Act where such offence is committed— 
(i) by a person who is apprehended by, or is in the custody of, the Indian Navy or the 
Indian Coast Guard, regardless of the nationality or citizenship of such person; 
(ii) by a person who is a citizen of India or a resident foreign national in India or any 
stateless person: 
 
Provided that where such offence is committed on board a foreign flag ship, such court shall 
not have  jurisdiction to try such offence unless the law enforcement agency or the public 
authority of the port or place, where the ship is located, has been requested to intervene by 
the concerned State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly or by the owner of th e ship or its 
master or any other person on board the ship: 
 
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a warship or its auxiliary ship 
or a Government owned ship employed for non-commercial service and 
is under the control of Government authorities at the time of commission of the offence of 
piracy. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
Designated Court shall have the jurisdiction to try a proclaimed offender in absentia. 
 
2.29 A significant aspect of the Bill is that it seeks to allow in -absentia prosecution and trial of 
a proclaimed offender. On being asked about the nodal agency to ensure prosecution of pirates in 
case of ‗in-absentia‘, the Ministry of Law and Justice in a written reply stated as under: 
―Sub-Clause (3) of clause 10 of the Bill provides that a Designated Court may, upon a 
perusal of a complaint made by an officer of the Central Government, as the case may 
be, authorized in this behalf, take cognizance of that  offence without the accused bing 

24 
 
committed to it for trial.  Hence, the nodal agency is the authorized officer of the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.‖ 
 
2.30 During the course of oral evidence held on 18.03.2020, the represe ntative of Ministry of 
Law and Justice elaborated on the subject as under:  
 
“I have already expressed my reservations in this regard for trying a proclaimed offender in -
absentia. You see, till the extent he is declared as a proclaimed offender, the answer is yes.  
But, where a punishment or death penalty has been provided, a person may not be available 
for reasons a, b or c. But, inflicting a punishment or something in absentia, I think that 
requires the consideration by the Committee.‖ 
 
2.31 Explaining further on the reasonable opportunity of hearing to be afforded for a person 
undergoing in-absentia trial, the Law Secretary during the course of evidence stated as under: 
 
“The basic rule of natural justice is to afford an opportunity of hearing. Here, the 
opportunity is being denied for the reason a, b and c and we are presuming that he is a 
proclaimed offender.  
After the trial has been held what sort of opportunity would you give to a person?  
I think that it may not be feasible. Even in the laws relating to terrorism no such clause 
has been incorporated. It is well and good for the purpose of declaring proclaimed 
offender and that is settled.” 
 
2.32 On the issue of legal positions of the trial in -absentia in India and international law, the 
Ministry of law and Justice submitted its views as under: 
―Trial in absentia is a criminal proceeding in a court of law in which the person who is 
subject to it is not physically presen t at those proceedings.  In common law legal 
system, conviction for a trial in which the accused/defendant is not present to answer 
the charges is held to be violation of natural justice.  Specifically, it violates the 
principle of natural justice, audi alteram partem(no one shall be condemned unheard). 
 In some legal systems as that of Italy, absentia is a recognized and accepted defensive 
strategy.  Such trials may require the presence of the defendant‘s lawyer depending 
upon the country in which trial is proceeded with. 
 In Hussain and Another v. Union of India (2017) 5 SCC 702, it was observed that 
timely delivery of justice is a part of human rights and denial of speedy justice is a 
threat to public confidence in the administration of justice.  In the context of speedy 
conclusion of criminal trials and appeals, a suggestion cropped up as referred in para 23 
during hearing of the case relating to remedying the situation of delay in trial on account 
of absconding of one or the other accused during trial.   
 In aforesaid context, attention of Hon‘ble Court was drawn to an amendment in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 of Bangladesh by way of adding Section 339 -B to 
the following effect : 

25 
 
“339-B. Trial in absentia. -(1) Where after the compliance with the requirements of 
Section 87 and Section 88, the Court has reason to believe that an accused person has 
absconded or concealing himself so that he cannot be arrested and produced for trial 
and there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court taking  cognizance of the 
offence complained of shall, by order published in at least two national daily Bengali 
Newspapers having wide circulation, direct such person to appear before it within such 
period as may be specified in the order, and if such person fai ls to comply with such 
direction, he shall be tried in his absence.” 
 Hon‘ble Supreme Court in para 24 observed as under: 
“24. It is for the authority concerned to take cognizance of the above amendment which 
may considerably reduce delay in cases where on e or the other accused absconds 
during the trial.” 
 In the aforesaid context, it may also be observed that presently Section 82 & 83 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.)deal with the provisions for proclamation for 
person absconding and attachment o f property of such absconding person.  Further, 
Section 299 of Cr.P.C. deals with record of evidence in absence of accused; 
 “299.  Record of evidence in absence of accused. - (1) If it is proved that an accused 
person has absconded, and that there is no im mediate prospect of arresting him, the 
Court competent to try , or commit for trial such person for the offence complained of 
may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the 
prosecution, and record their depositions and any suc h deposition may, on the arrest of 
such person, be given in evidence against him on the inquiry into, or trial for, the 
offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving 
evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be p rocured without an amount of 
delay, expense or inconvenience which , under the circumstances of the case, would be 
unreasonable. 
 (2) It may also be n oticed that Section 273 of Cr.P C. provides for evidence to be 
taken in presence of accused or when his per sonal attendance is dispensed with, in the 
presence of his pleader.  As such, presence of accused is warranted during the course of 
trial in order to enable him to answer the charges, failing which entire process may 
stand vitiated. 
 As such, presently the re does not appear to be any provision relating to trial and 
sentencing of accused in absentia.  It may also be appropriate to notice that Article 21 of 
the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life or liberty except 
according to the procedure established by law.‖ 
 
2.33 The Ministry of Law and Justice candidly submitted their view about the inclusion of 
some of the provisions in the Bill as under: 

26 
 
―The matter, as such, needs to be appropriately considered by the Hon‘ble 
Committee in case the provision for trial in absentia needs to be incorporated subject 
to suitable safeguards.  Further, it needs to be considered whether such a mechanism 
needs to be incorporated in respect of persons, who right from the inception failed to 
participate during the stage of investigation and remained untraceable or in respect 
of accused who participated and appeared during the course of investigation and 
subsequently failed to appear before the competent court of law.  The clause, if 
incorporated, would  be subject to procedure/provisions in respect of the offences 
relating to Anti-Maritime Piracy Bill.‖ 
 
2.34 The Committee note that the clause 9 relates to jurisdiction of Designated Court to 
try an offence punishable under this Act and 9 (i) mentions the name of Indian Navy or the 
Indian Coast Guard for the purpose of apprehension and custody of pirates but there is no 
mention of police  because state police may also be engaged in the process of apprehension 
in many cases . The Committee, therefore, desire that alongwith Indian navy and Indian 
Coast Guard „or the Police‟ may be inserted in 9 1 and (ii). 
 The Committee also find that 9 (1) (ii) has two proviso. In view of long disc ussion 
with the Committee and as agreed during inter-ministerial discussion the Committee desire 
that the First proviso may be deleted completely.  The Committee, however desire that since 
second proviso corresponds to Article 95 and 96 of UNCLOS which gives complete 
immunity to wars hip and ships owned and operated  by the Government from the 
jurisdiction of any State ordered in the flagged  State, it should remain the part of clause 9 
(1) (ii) except deleting the word „further‟ in view of removal of first proviso and substituting 
the word „nothing in this sub section‟ with provision of this Act. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 

27 
 
2.35 The Committee note that clause 9 (2) makes a provision for trials of proclaimed 
offender in-absentia. The Committee, however, feel that for the principle of natural justice 
to prevail , this provision should provide  some reasonable opportunity of hearing to the 
person under trial at some stage prior to execution of his sentence. Further , the Committee 
also understand  that in-absentia trial will not wit hstand the scruti ny of law being  in 
contradiction to Article 21 of the Indian Constitution which provides that no person shall 
be deprived of his life or liberty except according to the procedure established by law .  This 
right is available to all persons , citizens as well  as non-citizens of India. Moreover, t he 
Committee also note that in -absentia trials are barred in some of the member States of 
European Union and if the convicted person is brought back to India to serve his sentence, 
he can again access his right to basic principle of natural justice. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that in view of well settled principles already laid down by the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court on the rights of accused person during the course of trail.  Clause 9 (2) should at least 
incorporate  the following suitable safeguards  under which the trials in-absentia may be 
recognized: 
(i) If the person can be said to have been aware of the trail; 
(ii) If a counselor took their place at the trial; 
(iii) If they do not request an appeal in due time; and 
(iv) If they are to be offered an appeal. 
 Further, the Committee desire that  such a mechanism needs to be incorporated in respect 
of persons who right from the inception failed to participate during the stage of 

28 
 
investigation and remained unreachable  or in respect of accused who participated and 
appeared during the course of investigation and subsequently failed to appear before the 
competent court of law. 
 (Recommendation No. 14) 
 
2.36 Clause 12 – Provisions as to bail- This clause provides for grant of bail to the accused for 
the Crimes of Piracy and also an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor to oppose it reads as under: 
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an offence 
punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless—  
 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely 
to commit any offence while on bail.  
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High 
Court regarding grant of bail under section 439 of the Code. 
 
2.37 The Significant aspect of the Bill is that it provides for grant of bail to the accused after 
hearing both the parties and affording a reasonable opportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor 
to oppose the application for such release. 
 
2.38 On the particular issue of grant of bail to the accused, the representative of Ministry of 
External Affairs during the course of oral evidence stated as under: 
 
―The second clause clearly ensures that any limitations placed at the level of 
subordinate courts will not be taken up to the High Court.  It is just clarificatory 
in nature‖. 
 
2.39 During the course of evidence held on 29.07.2020 the Committee pointed out that the 
provision made the clause 12 (2) was of superfluous nature a nd it ensured that any limitation 
placed at the level of subordinate courts will not be taken up to the High Court. 
  
The representative  of Law Ministry was in consonance with Committee ‘s observations 
and submitted as under: 
―--- I concur with your observation.  It appears to be superfluous because the powers 
of High Court cannot be curtailed in any manner.‖ 
 

29 
 
2.40 Agreeing with the Committee‘s suggestion the representative of Ministry of External 
Affairs stated that as under: 
―we concur with the suggestion.  We will delete it.‖ 
 
2.41 Clause 12 (i) of the Bill deals with the provision of release on bail of the accused and 
sub clause (a), provides an opportunity to be given to the Public Prosecutor to oppose such 
release.  In Committee‟s view  the  accused may  be granted bail only when the court is 
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of 
such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail and to plead the 
case, the Public Prosecutor may need sufficient opportunity.  The Committee , therefore,  
desire that the  word „an opportunity‟ being given to the  Public Prosecutor may be  
substituted with a word  „a reasonable opportunity ‟ for the public prosecutor so that the 
bail can be opposed appropriately. The Committee, further note that clause 12 (2) is of 
clarificatory nature as the powers of High Court may not be curtailed in any manner.   The 
Committee, therefore find the clause 12 (2) as of superfluous nature and as  agreed by the 
Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice, it may be deleted completely. 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
Clause 14 - Provision as t o extradition 
 
2.42 This clause provides for the extradition of offenders and specifies extradition treaties 
between India and other Convention states and states as under: 
 
 
“(1) The offences under this Act shall be deemed to have been included as extraditable offences 
and provided for in all extradition treaties made by India with Convention State and which 
extend to and are binding on India on the date of commencement of this Act.  

30 
 
(2) In the absence of a bilateral extradition treaty, the offences under this Act shall be 
extraditable offences between India and other Convention State on the basis of reciprocity. 
 (3) For the purposes of application of the provisions of the Extradition Act, 1962 to the offences 
under this Act, any ship registered in a Convention State shall, at any time while that ship is 
plying, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that Con vention State whether or not it is for 
the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other State.” 
 
2.43 During the course of evidence held, the Committee pointed out the discrepancy in clause 
14 (3) wherein the word ‗Convention was to be required to be placed before the word ‗State‘  the 
representative of Ministry of External Affairs replied as under: 
 ―Because of the application of the extradition act, I believe so.‖ 
 
2.44 Elaborating further, representative of Ministry of External Affairs state, 
 
 ―We want to remove the word Convention State. We just say State.‖ 
 
 
2.45 Agreeing with the Committee‘s suggestion the representative of Ministry of External 
Affairs stated, 
 
 ―In clause 14, the language will be changed for clarity regarding extradition‖. 
 
2.46 The Committee find that clause 14 specifically relates to the provision to extradition 
and refers treaties with other countries  in clause 14 (2) for the reference of other countries 
word „Convention State‟ has been used. In view of deletion of definition of Convention State 
in the definition  of clause (2) of the Bill  the word „Convention State‟ used in clause              
14 (1) may be substituted with the word „other States‟ and similarly for similar terms of 
„Convention State‟ word in sub clause (2) and (3) „States‟ and in sub clause (3) „a state‟ and 
„state‟ may also be substituted.   The Committee also desire that for the word „ plying‟ used 
in sub clause (3) word „operating‟ may be used to make it more appropriate. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
Clause 15 – Protection of action taken in good faith 
 
 2.47 This clause states that no legal proceedings will be undertaken against a person or Central 
Government for any damage caused due to an act of good faith and reads as under, 

31 
 
 
(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Cent ral Government for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act. 
2.48 Elaborating  on the provision during the course of briefing, the representative of Ministry 
of External Affairs stated as under: 
 
―In 15 (2), why the State Government is not mentioned is because any damage caused 
or likely to be caused is normally only by central forces.  The State forces are not 
going to take action piracy.  Therefore, here the damage caused or likely to be caused 
in good faith, done or intended to be done, that normally lies only with the central 
forces.‖ 
 
2.49 The Committee observe that the crime of piracy itself is of heinous in nature and all 
the efforts made to comb at piracy should be applauded and supported with provisions for 
legal immunity for acts done in good faith.  Although the Committee find that this kind of 
legal immunity is inherent in the body of main Bill, the Committee strongly recommend 
that the  Security personnel of all State Governments should also be covered along with the 
Central Government personnel under immunity provisions and no legal proceedings should 
be undertaken against all of them for acts done in good faith.  Accordingly in clause 15 (2) 
after „against the Central Government‟ words „or any State Government‟ should be added 
to protect all the concerned agencies.  
(Recommendation No. 17) 
2.50 The Committee, therefore approve, the “Anti -Maritime Piracy Bill 2019‟ subject to 
the appropriate inclusion of suggestions/recommendations made by the Committee in the 
preceeding paragraphs of the current Bill or through other appropriate methods like Rules 
or Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to be executed in connection therewith. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                 P.P.CHAUDHARY, 
 10 February, 2021                                                      Chairperson,  
 21 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                     Committee on External Affairs 

32 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 16 JANUARY, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‗D‘, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
3. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey   
5. Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
6. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri K. J. Alphons 
8. Shri P. Chidambaram 
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
      
 
Sl. No.  Name & Designation 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri Shri T.S. Tirumurti - Secretary (ER)  
2. Ms. Uma Shekar  - Additional Secretary (L & T) 
3. Shri Mayank Joshi  - Director (D & ISA) 
4. Shri Sanjay Rana  - Joint Secretary (UNP) 
5. Shri Robert Shetkingtong - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. General Bipin Rawat  - Chief of Defence Staff  
2. Shri Ajay Kumar  - Defence Secretary  
3. Ms. Richa Misra  - Joint Secretary (Navy) 
4. Vice Admiral M A Hampi Holi- Vice Admiral, (DGNO, NHQ) 
5. Commander Himadri Das - Commander (NHQ) 
6. IG K R Suresh   - DDGI (Ops & CS), Coast Guard 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya - Additional Secretary (Shipping) 
2. Shri Satinder Pal Singh - Joint Secretary (Shipping) 
 
 
 

33 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 
 
1. Shri Nagendra Nath Sinha - Secretary (BM) 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
 
1. Shri K. Biswal  - Additional Secretary 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
 
1. Shri Anoop Kumar Mendiratta  Secretary (LA) 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                - Director  
2. Shri Paolienlal Hoakip  - Additional Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee, Chief of 
Defence Staff, Secretary and other officers of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, 
Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department and Legal Affairs) and drew their attention towards Direction 55 (I) of the Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Chairperson informed the Committee that the ‗Anti Piracy 
Maritime Bill 2019‘, as introduced in Lok Sabha was referred to Standing Committee on External 
Affairs for examination and Report thereupon. 
 
3. After introductions, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs briefed the 
Committee on the ‗Anti Maritime Piracy Bill 2019‘ and the benefits of enactment of this 
legislation including the greater degree certainty and clarity in law and legal basis it would 
provide for prosecuting and punishing persons committing acts of piracy in high seas.   The 
aggregation of the problem of piracy in the areas in immediate proximity to India‘s Exclusiv e 
Economic Zone was elaborated upon.  The purpose for enacting new domestic legislation on 
piracy for more effective prosecution of pirates apprehended by Indian Navy and the Coast Guard 
was discussed wherein Indian Courts will have authority of in absentia prosecution of pirates. 
 
4. During deliberations, the Members of the Committee inter-alia raised various queries 
related to the subject particularly, MEA‘s involvement in piloting the Bill, nomenclature of the 
Bill, geographical scope of the Bill, substi tution of death penalty under clause 3 by life 

34 
 
imprisonment and its ramifications for extradition of the pirates, etc. Other issues discussed 
included such other national legislations, structural arrangements and institutional framework to 
deal with the is sue of maritime piracy.   The witnesses were asked to furnish written replies on 
some queries to which replies were not readily available. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
  

35 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 18 MARCH, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in Committee Room ‗B‘, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4. Shri Pakauri Lal Kol 
5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
6. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
9. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
10. Shri Rebati Tripura 
11. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri K. J. Alphons 
13. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
14. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
15. Shri Abdul Wahad 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Vikas Swarup Secretary (West)  
2. Shri Indra Mani Pandey Additional Secretary (D&ISA) 
3.  Shri Vikram Doraiswami Additional Secretary 
(BM,IO&Sumrnits) 
4. Ms. Uma Sekhar Additional Secretary (L&T 
 
5. Shri Sanjay Rana Joint Secretary (UNP) 
6 Shri Robert Shetkintong Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
 
 

36 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Nagendra  Nath Sinha Secretary (Border Management)   
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Satinder Pal Singh Joint Secretary 
MINISTRY OF LAW &  JUSTICE (LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Anoop Kumar Mendiratta Secretary  
MINISTRY OF LAW &  JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri  S.R. Mishra Addl. Secretary (LA)  
2. Shri R.K. Srivastava Addl. L.A 
3. Shri N.R Battu JS&LC 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri  P.C. Koul   - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Home Affairs, Law and Justice, Shipping 
and Defence to the Sitting of the Committee convened to have evidence on the ‗Anti -Maritime 
Piracy Bill, 2019. After giving cue of the forthcoming deliberations, the Chairperson drew t he 
attention of all the witnesses about the provisions of Direction 55(1) and Direction 58 of 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain confidentiality of the proceedings. 

37 
 
3. Thereafter, the representative of Ministry of External Affairs briefed the Committee about 
their written responses to the List of Points received from the Secretariat and the purpose and the 
contours of the ‗Anti-Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019. 
4. The Committee then took up Bill for clause by clause discussion with the representatives 
of Ministries/Departments concerned. The major among issues discussed during the evidence 
inter-alia included incorporation of word ‗Anti‘ in the title of the Bill, the nomenclature of the 
Bill, jurisdiction of the courts in India, expressi on of ‗outside the jurisdiction of India, treatment 
of Exclusive Economic Zone as high seas, United Nations Conventions on the issue, definition of 
‗Ship‘ in the Bill,  definition of ‗drone‘ under aircraft, definition of ‗small island‘ under high 
seas, use of word ‗conspire‘ in place of ‗counsel‘, role of agencies in the Bill, judicial scrutiny in 
absentia etc. The witnesses also responded to the queries/suggestions of the Members. 
5. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to c ompile the 
suggestions of the Members of the Committee and furnish them with their comments on clauses 
that remained to be discussed to the Secretariat in tabular format at the earliest. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  

38 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 29 JULY, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
3. Shri P.C. Mohan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey   
5. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
6. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri K. J. Alphons 
8. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
9. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
10. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
 
Sl. No.  Name & Designation 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Vikas Swarup Secretary (West) 
 
2. Shri Vikram Doraiswami Additional Secretary 
(IO & Summits) 
3. Ms. Uma Sekhar Additional Secretary 
(L & T) 
4. Shri Sanjay Rana Joint Secretary 
(UNP) 
5. Shri Robert Shetkingtong Joint Secretary  
(Parl & Coord) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Piyush Goyal Joint Secretary 
(BM) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Dr. Ajay Kumar Defence Secretary 
2. Vice Admiral R. Harikumar CISC 
3. DG K Natarajan DGICG 
4. Ms. Richa Mishra Joint Secretary 
(AF) 
5. RAdm K.M. Dhir, Joint Secretary 
(Navy) 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Ranjan Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya Additional Secretary 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri K. Biswal Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Pattanayak Additional Legislative Counsel 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul    - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                - Director  
3. Shri Paolienlal Hoakip  - Additional Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee, JS (West) and 
other officers of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Shipping, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department and Legal 
Affairs) and drew their attention towards Direction 55 (I) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha.   
 
3. After introductions, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs briefed the 
Committee on the clauses 2,7 and 12 of the  ‗Anti Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019‘ and changes 

40 
 
incorporated in the draft Bill as per the suggestions of the Committee made during previous 
Sittings, consultations held with other concerned Ministries and changes made in definition of 
Piracy under clause 2 (i) ( f) as per guidance of Committee Members.  The purpose for enacting 
new changes in the various Clauses of the Bill were in accordance with Articles of United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) that has been accepted by other Nations 
for drafting of their own Anti-Piracy Laws. 
 
4. During deliberations, the Members of the Committee inter-alia raised various queries 
related to the subject particularly, various Articles of UNCLOS, in absentia trails of pirates, 
involvement of Navy and Coast Guard in apprehension of pirates etc. Other issues discussed 
included such other national legislations, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and institutional 
framework to deal with the issue of maritime piracy.   The witnesses were asked to furnish 
written replies on some queries to which replies were not readily available. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

41 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS    
(2020-21) HELD ON 11 JANUARY, 2021 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 11 January, 2021 from 1630hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‗D‘ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2.     Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
3.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
4.     Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
5.     Shri P.C. Mohan 
6.  Dr. K.C Patel  
7.     Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
8.    Shri K. J. Alphons  
9.     Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
10.   Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
11.   Shri Brijlal 
Secretariat 
  
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Director 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Additional Director  
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on ‗The Anti-Maritime Piracy 
Bill, 2019‘. 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee 
adopted the draft Report with the minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the members and present the same to Parliament.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  

42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 369 of 2019 
 
 
 
THE ANTI-MARITIME PIRACY BILL, 2019 
 
A 
 
BILL  
to make special provisions for repression of piracy on high seas and to provide for 
punishment for the offence of piracy and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS India is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
adopted by the United Nations on the 10th December, 1982 and has ratified the same on 
the 29th June, 1995;  
AND WHEREAS  the aforesaid Convention, among other things, states that all States 
shall co-operate to the fullest possible extent in the repression of piracy on high seas or 
any other place outside the jurisdiction of any State;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to implement the provisions relating to 
piracy contained in the aforesaid Convention.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—  
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Maritime Piracy Act, 2019. 
 
Short title,  
commencement  
and  
application. 

43 
 
2 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to all parts of the sea adjacent to and 
beyond the limits of Exclusive Economic Zone of India. 
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 
 
(b) "Convention" means the United Nations Convention on the Law of the 
Sea, 1982; 
 
(c) "Convention State" means a State party to the United Nations Convention 
on the Law of the Sea, 1982; 
 
(d) "Designated Court" means a Court of Session specified as such under 
section 8; 
 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; (f) "piracy" means— 
 
(i) any illegal act of violence or detention or a ny act of depredation 
committed for private ends by the crew or any passenger of private ship or a 
private aircraft and directed— 
 
(A) on the high seas against another ship or aircraft or against 
person or property on board such ship or aircraft; 
 
(B) against a ship, aircraft, person or property in a place outside 
the jurisdiction of India; 
 
(ii) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of an 
aircraft with knowledge of facts, making it a pirate ship or aircraft; 
 
(iii) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in 
sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii); or 
 
(iv) any act which is deemed piratical under the international law 
including customary international law; 
 
(g) "pirate ship or aircraft" means a ship or aircraft which— 
 
(i) is intended by the person in dominant control to be used for the purposes of 
committing any of the acts referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (iv) of clause (f); or 
 
(ii) has been used to commit any such act, referred to in sub -clause (i) 
of this clause, so long as it remains under the control of the person guilty of 
that act. 
 
(h) "stateless person" means a person who is not considered as a national by 
any country by virtue of its laws. 
 
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, the Code or the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive 
Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in such Code or the Act. 
 
(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in any area, shall, in 
relation to that area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force 
in that area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
45 of 1860.  
80 of 1976. 
 
 
40 

44 
 
3 
 
3. Whoever commits any act of piracy, shall be 
punished— (i) with imprisonment for life; or 
 
 
Punishment  
for piracy. 
 
(ii) with death, if such person in committing the act of piracy causes death or 
an attempt thereof, 
 
5 and in addition shall also be subject to restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the 
commission of such offence. 
 
4. Whoever attempts to commit the offence of piracy or  aids or abets or counsels or 
procures for the commission of such offence shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
10 5. Whoever participates or organises or directs other person to p articipate in an act 
of piracy shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
 
 
 
 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the Central Government may, for  
the purposes of this Act, by notification, confer the powers of arrest, investigation and  
15 prosecution of any person exercisable by a police officer under the Code on any of its 
Gazetted officer or such officer of a State Government. 
 
7. (1) On the high seas, or in any other plac e outside the jurisdiction of India, a pirate 
ship or aircraft, or any ship or aircraft taken for piracy and under the control of pirates may be  
seized and the persons on board may be arrested and the property on board may be liable to  
20 be seized. 
 
(2) A seizure on account of piracy under sub -section (1) may be carried out only by 
warships or military aircraft of the Indian Navy or the ships or aircraft of the Indian Coast 
Guard or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on Governm ent 
service and authorised for such purpose.  
25 8. For the purposes of providing speedy trial of offences under this Act, the Central  
Government shall, after consulting the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by notification, 
specify— 
 
(i) one or more Courts of Sessions in a State, to be the Designated Court for 
the purposes of this Act; and  
30 (ii) the territorial jurisdiction of each such court. 
 
9. (1) The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try an offence punishable 
under this Act where such offence is committed—  
(i) by a person who is apprehended by, or is in the custody of, the Indian Navy or 
the Indian Coast Guard, regardless of the nationality or citizenship of such person; 
 
35 (ii) by a person who is a citizen of India or a resident foreign national in India 
or any stateless person: 
 
Provided that where such offence is committed on board a foreign flag ship, such 
court shall not have jurisdiction to try such offence unless the law enforcement agency 
or the public authority of the port or place, where the ship is located, has been  
40 requested to intervene by the concerned State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly 
or by the owner of the ship or its master or any other person on board the ship:  
 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a warship or its 
auxiliary ship or a Government owned ship employed for non-commercial service and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punishment 
for attempt 
to commit 
piracy, etc.  
Punishment  
for  
organising,  
directing  
others to  
participate in  
an act of  
piracy. 
 
Conferment  
of power of  
arrest,  
investigation,  
etc. 
 
Arrest and 
seizure of 
property. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designated 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jurisdiction of 
Designated 
Court. 

45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trial of 
offences by 
Designated 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presumption. 
 
4  
is under the control of Government authorities at the time of commission of the offence   
of piracy.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,   
the Designated Court shall have the jurisdiction to try a proclaimed offender in absentia.  
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code,— 5 
(a) all offences under this Act shall be tried by the Designated Court notified as   
such under sub-section (1) of section 8;  
(b) where a person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of an offence  
under this Act is forwarded to a Magistrate under sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A)  
of section 167 of the Code, such Magistrate may authorise the detention of such 10 
person in such custody, as he thinks fit, for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the   
whole, where such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, and seven days in the whole   
where such Magistrate is an Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that where such Magistrate considers—  
(i) at the time when such person is forwarded to him under this 15 
sub-section; or  
(ii) at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by  
him,  
that the detention of such person is  not necessary, he shall order such person to be forwarded   
to the Designated Court having jurisdiction. 20 
(2) The Designated Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to him  
under clause ( b) of sub-section (1), the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction   
to try a case may exercise under section 167 of the Code, in relation to an accused person in   
such case who has been forwarded to him under that section.  
(3) A Designated Court may, upon a perusal of a complaint made by an officer of the 25 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, authorised in this behalf,   
take cognizance of that offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.   
(4) While trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence  
under any other law, other than an offence under this Act, with which the accused may be   
charged at the same trial under the Code. 30 
 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, a Designated Court shall, as 
far as practicable, hold the trial on a day-to-day basis. 
 
11. Where a person is accused of having committed an offence punishable under 
this Act and, if,— 
 
(a) the arms, ammunitions, explosives and other equipments are recovered from 35 
the possession of the accused, and there are reasonable grounds to believe that such 
arms, ammunitions, explosives or other equipments of similar nature were used or 
intended to be used in the commission of the offence; 
 
(b) there is evidence of use of force, threat of force or any other form of 
intimidation caused to the crew or passengers of the ship in connection with the 40 
commission of the offence; or 
 
(c) there is evidence of an intended threat of using bombs, arms, firearms, 
explosives or committin g any form of violence against the crew, passengers or 
cargo of a ship, 

46 
 
5 
 
then, the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused 
person had committed such offence. 
 
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an 
offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond 
5 unless— 
 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the 
application for such release; and 
 
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence   
10 and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.  
 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers 
of the High Court regarding grant of bail under section 439 of the Code.  
 
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code shall apply to the 
proceedings before a Designated Court and the person conducting a prosecution before  
15 a Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor appointed under the said 
Code. 
 
 
14. (1) The offences under this Act shall be deemed to have been included as extraditable 
offences and provided for in all extradition treaties made by India with Convention State and which extend to 
and are binding on India on the date of commencement of this Act. 
 
20 (2) In the absence of a bilateral extradition treaty, the offences under this A ct shall be 
extraditable offences between India and other Convention State on the basis of reciprocity. 
 
(3) For the purposes of application of the provisions of the Extradition Act, 1962 to the 
offences under this Act, any ship registered in a Convention State shall, at any time while that 
ship is plying, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that Convention State whether 
25 or not it is for the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other State.  
 
15. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedin gs shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this 
Act. 
 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government for any  
30 damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions as 
to bail. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application 
of Code in 
proceedings 
before 
Designated 
Court. 
 
Provision as  
t o 
extradition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
34 of 1962. 

47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
In today's times, the menace of piracy is growing. The Gulf of Aden, which 
separates Somalia and Yemen and connects the Arabian Sea to the Red Sea and through 
the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean Sea, has seen a major spurt in attacks by pirates 
operating from Somalia since 2008. This route is used by about 2000 ships each month 
for trade between Asia and Europe and East coast of Africa. With the enhanced naval 
presence in the Gulf of Aden, pirates shifted their area of operations eastwards and 
southwards. This led to a flurry of piracy incidents towards the western coast of India as 
well. 
 
2. India does not have a separate domestic legislation on pir acy. The provisions 
of the Indian Penal Code pertaining to armed robbery and the Admiralty jurisdiction of certain courts 
have been invoked in the past to prosecute pirates apprehended by the Indian Navy and the Coast 
Guard but in the absence of any specif ic law relating to the offence of maritime piracy in India, 
problems are being faced in ensuring effective prosecution of the pirates. 
 
3. Given the increasing incidences of piracy, including within India's Exclusive 
Economic Zone, and the increasing number o f pirates apprehended by the Indian Naval forces, the 
need is felt for a comprehensive domestic legislation on piracy, which is an outcome to the 
commitment made by India by signing the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) in the year 1982 and ratified in the year 1995.  
4. In view of the above, it has been decided to bring about a domestic anti -
piracy legislation for the prosecution of persons for piracy -related crimes and to promote the safety 
and security of India's maritime trade including the safety of our vessels and crew members.  
5. Accordingly, the Anti-Maritime Piracy Bill, 2019, inter alia, provides for the  
following.  
(a) to make the provisions of the proposed legislation applicable to all parts 
of the sea adjacent to and beyond the limits of Exclusive Economic Zone of India;  
(b) to make the act of piracy on high seas as an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for life or with death;  
(c) to provide for punishment for attempt to commit offence of piracy or 
being an accessory to the commission of offence;  
(d) to provide for presumption of guilt in case certain conditions are satisfied; 
(e) to make the offence extraditable; 
 
(f) to enable the Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of 
the concerned High Court, to  specify certain courts as Designated Courts for 
speedy trial of offences of piracy under the proposed legislation.  
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; DR. S. JAISHANKAR  
The 2nd December, 2019. 
 
 
 
6 

 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to make special provisions for repression of piracy on high seas and to provide for 
punishment for the offence of piracy and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dr. S. Jishankar, Minister of External Affairs) 
 
 
MGIPMRND—4017LS—03-12-2019. 
 