 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee 
on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2021-22] 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
September, 2021/ Bhadrapada, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
11 


ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2020-21) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
the year 2021-22] 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 10 September 2021      
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 December,2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06 December, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 2021/ Bhadrapada, 1943 (Saka) 


 
 
COEA NO. 151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by 

CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)        (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION             (iii)     
 
Chapter I Report               1  
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted                  41                
  by the Government              
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do      93  
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies       
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the     94 
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee         
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final     100 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited                  
  
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty-Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2021                  106        
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/                                108 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs.   
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. List of RIS Institutional Partners in various countries. 
II. List of ICWA Institutional Partners in various countries. 
III. Survey of Grand Foreign Policy Documents/Strategy in countries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
6. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
9. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
10. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
11. Shri P. C. Mohan 
12. Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
13. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14. Dr. K. C. Patel 
15. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16. Shri Navneet Ravi Rana 
17. Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
18. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
19. Shri Rebati Tripura 
20. Vacant$ 
21. Vacant* 
 
22. Shri K. J. Alphons 
23. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
24. Smt. Misha Bharti 
25. Shri P. Chidambaram 
26. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
27. Shri Swapan Dasgupta# 
28. Shri Kapil Sibal 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab@@ 
30. Shri Brij Lal 
31. Vacant@ 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C.Koul - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Smita Singh - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
$ Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma passed away on 17 March, 2021. 
* Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi ceased to Member of the Committee on her appointment as Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021. 
# Shri Swapan Dasgupta resigned on 17.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@@ Shri Abdul Wahab retired on 21.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@ Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee on his appointment as Cabinet Minister w.e.f. 
07.07.2021. 
 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2020 -21) having  been authorized by the  
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report on Action Taken by the  
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on  
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2021-22. 
 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Parliament on 17 March, 2020. The Action Taken Replies 
of the Government on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on  
24 June, 2021 (English version) and 5 July December, 2021 (Hindi version). 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report  on action taken  at their Sitting held on  
11.08.2021. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI P.P.CHAUDHARY 
11 August, 2021 Chairperson, 
Shravana (Saka),1942 Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 | P a g e  
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the Action Taken by the  
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Eighth Report on Demands  
for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2021 -22 which was presented to Lok  
Sabha and laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all 
the 41 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as  
follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: - 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39 and 41.. 
Total- 34 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government's replies:- 
NIL 
Total- NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos. 17 and 40 
Total- 2 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government are 
still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos.  4, 9, 10, 11 and 36 
Total- 5 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in Chapter -I and 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished 
to them at an early date. 

2 | P a g e  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their  
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO 3) 
INCORPORATION OF ZERO-BASED BUDGETING AND GENDER BUDGETING 
 
 
5. Recognizing the significance of a focused budgetary planning process, the Committee had  
emphatically stressed upon the need to develop a well -defined and focused budgetary planning  
(including Zero- Based Budgeting). In its replies, the Ministry had informed that a rigorous 
mechanism of Quarterly Budget Management Meeting has been developed whereby detailed 
exercise for head-wise evaluation of projects under various Heads are carried out. Furthermore, the  
overarching principle of Zero-Based Budgeting guided the continuous evaluation and assessment 
of budgetary allocation as against fund 
utilizationinMinistry’sbudgetmanagement.AppreciatingtheMinistry’s efforts to incorporate the idea  
of Zero -Based Budgeting in the budgetary planning process, the Committee had suggested that  
sustained endeavour should  be made to  make precise, objective and realistic demands  by all 
Divisions/Spending Units to diminish the gap between budgetary demand and allocation. The  
Committee had noted lack of gender budgeting dimension in MEA’s scheme of things. The 
Committee had, therefore, urged the Ministry to constit ute a Gender Budget Cell in line with the  
2007 Guidelines of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. In Committee’s view as a  
powerful instrument for  achieving gender mainstreaming, the  concept of Gender budgeting, must 
be integrated in the Ministry’s policy formulation, implementation and review. 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated  that it appreciates  
the Hon’ble Committee’s recognition of its efforts in incorporating the principle of zero -based 
budgeting in the budgetary planning process. Ministry would like to reaffirm its focused efforts to  
make precise, objective and realistic demands by all Divisions/Spending Units to diminish the gap  
between budgetary demand and allocation. 
As far as the aspect of Gen der Budgeting is concerned, Ministry would like to apprise the  
Hon’ble Committee that as per the 2007 Guidelines of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry has 
constituted a Gender Budget Cell (with the latest Cell being reconstituted in September 2020),  
headed by an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary. In addition, Ministry administers a number of 

3 | P a g e  
fully women-centric schemes (100 % provision towards women) and pro -women schemes (at least 
30% provision towards women) under its different Aid Heads. Some instances of such schemes in  
the Current Financial Year are - construction of Girls Hostel Building for Nepal APF School in  
Kathmandu, Special Programme for Women Correspondents, India Palestine Centre for 
Empowering Women in Palestine, Assistance for Livelihood Improvement, Women Empowerment 
and Awareness Programme, etc. 
7. In order to make the process of budgetary planning more astute and inclusive, the  
Committee had urged the Ministry to incorporate the principle of zero -based budgeting and 
gender budgeting. The Committee are happy to learn that the Ministry has embraced the 
idea of zero based budgeting by undertaking focused measures to make precise, objective and 
realistic demands by all Divisions/Spending Units with the objective of reducing the gap  
between budgetary demand and allocation. As regards the Committee’s recommendation  
related to constitution of a Gender Budget Cell in accordance with 2007 Guidelines of the  
Department of Expenditure,  Ministry of Finance, the M inistry has  submitted that such a  
Cell, headed by a Joint Secretary has been already constituted. The Ministry has also 
informed that it administers a number of fully women -centric schemes (100 % provision  
towards women) and pro -women schemes (at least 30%  provision towards women) under its  
different Aid Heads. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to continue making sustained efforts towards 
realistic budgetary demands, efficient implementation and optimum utilization of resources.  
While appreciating the gender inclusive measures taken by the Ministry, the Committee are  
of the opinion that more can be done. One of the most important functions of the Ministry is  
protection and welfare of Indian woman. The Ministry should in such endeavours emphasize  
on the problems faced by women emigrants, students and Overseas Indians and also allocate  
sufficient budgetary resources allocation for their mitigation. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO 4) 
CROSS COUNTRY COMPARATIVE STUDY 
8. While examining the Demands for Grants of the Mini stry of External Affairs for the past  
four years, the Committee had been recommending that the Ministry should conduct a cross - 
country comparative study of budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments entrusted with the  
task of managing foreign affairs. In their initial replies, the Ministry had submitted that the 

4 | P a g e  
preliminary report of a study conducted by Research and Information System for economic 
development (RIS) is under examination. On further probing, the Ministry had informed that a  
comprehensive assessment of the preliminary report has been completed and more comparative  
study variables are being included in the report. The Committee did not approve such casual  
approach of the Ministry in furnishing replies to the Com mittee on such serious matters. The  
Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that the findings of the preliminary Report 
should be furnished to the Committee instantly and final report should be compiled within three  
months. The Ministry should also ensure that the comparative data and figures are used to bolster 
its case for enhanced budgetary allocation in the next financial year. 
9. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the 
recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. Ministry would like to assure  
the Committee that the Report of the study conducted by the Research and Information System for  
economic development (RIS) is under active consideration. As submitted earlier, a comprehe nsive 
assessment of the preliminary report has been completed. Further, Ministry has convened a few  
rounds of meetings with representatives of RIS to exchange views on the areas which need further  
work and the addition of more parameters to make the Study more relevant and contemporary. The 
Ministry will endeavour to complete the final draft of the Study in the current calendar year. 
10. Over the past few years, the Committee have been persistently recommending that the  
Ministry of External Affairs should undertake a cross-country comparative study of 
budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments entrusted with the task of managing foreign  
affairs. The Ministry in its replies has maintained its previous position that the Report of the  
study conducted by the Research and Information System for economic development (RIS) is  
under active consideration.  Further, the Ministry was specifically asked to make the Report  
available within three months. The Committee decry such nonchalant and evasive at titude of 
the Ministry. Expressing their strong disapproval of the Ministry’s lack of action taken on 
this aspect of the Committee’s recommendation, they desire that the information, complete in  
all aspects should be furnished at the final reply stage, without fail. 

5 | P a g e  
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 6) 
SCHEME SECTION 
11. The Committee had noted that an allocation of Rs.  7635.15 crore and Rs. 10,519.58crore  
has been made at BE 2021 -22 for Scheme and Non -Scheme Sections, respectively. In terms of  
distribution about 42% of MEA’s budget was on Scheme side, which primarily constituted 
Technical and Economic Cooperation with other countries. The Non -Scheme Section included  
Passport Sewa Project, Missions/Post abroad, obligatory as well as voluntary con tributions to UN  
and other International Organizations. 
The Committee w e r e  aware that both the Scheme and Non -Scheme sections are vital in  
their own right. However, by virtue of catering to international aid and assistance programmes that  
directly impinged upon our international credentials; the Committee were of the considered view  
that the Scheme section should be given requisite priority in budgetary allocations. The Committee  
were pleased to learn that there had been intensive monitoring and review o f technical aid and  
assistance programmes in the past year, including at the level of External Affairs Minister and  
Foreign Secretary. Those institutionalized reviews had led to identification of several new 
initiatives and projects. While maintaining a fine balance between our aid and non -aid outlays, the 
Committee were hopeful that the Scheme section would be kept unaffected from budgetary cuts.  
The Committee had therefore, recommended that the Ministry should ensure that funds are  
available for smooth and efficient implementation of our international projects without any cost 
and time over -runs. The Committee had also desired thatthe Ministry should prepare a detailed  
timeline for initiation and completion of the newly identified projects and initiatives. 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that it would like to reaffirm its focused  
efforts to ensure adequacy of funds for its international projects and robust utilization of allocated  
funds in an efficient and timely manner. Minis try would like to also reassure Hon’ble Committee  
that it will continue to engage with Ministry of Finance to keep them informed of funds required to  
meet our international commitments and to emphasize the importance of providing adequate 
budgetary allocations to the Ministry. Further, Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble 
Committee that it will continue its endeavour to complete projects within the timelines envisaged  
while also addressing the inherent political, security, geological a nd other challenges faced by the  
Ministry in implementing projects abroad. 

6 | P a g e  
13. With the bifurcation of the Ministry’s Budget Heads into Revenue and Capital Heads  
and Scheme and Non- Scheme sections, the Committee were optimistic about enhanced 
budgetary allocation to MEA, especially for its international aid and assistance programmes.  
Keeping in view the significance of effective and timely implementation of our developmental  
assistance programmes, the Committee had recommended that the  Ministry should ensure  
that requisite funds are available under the Scheme section to circumvent any cost and time  
over-runs. The Ministry was also asked to prepare a detailed timeline for initiation and  
completion of the newly identified projects and ini tiatives. In its Action Taken Replies, the  
Ministry has assured that it will continue to engage with Ministry of Finance to keep them  
informed of funds required to meet our international commitments and also continue its  
endeavour to complete projects within the timelines envisaged. The Committee has duly 
noted the Ministry’s written assurance and are optimistic that international projects will be  
accorded due importance in terms of fiscal allocation, effective monitoring of physical 
progress and timely completion under regular intimation to them. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 9) 
INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD 
14. Highlighting the significance of Missions and Posts, the Committee had opined that  
opening of Indian Missions would help in expanding India’s diplomatic footprint, deepen political  
relations, enable growth of bilateral trade, investments and economic engagements, facilitate 
stronger people -to-people contacts, bolster political outreach in multilateral fora and help garner  
support for India’s foreign policy objectives. The Union Cabinet had accorded approval for 
opening up of 18 new Indian Missions in Africa in a phased manner between 2018 -2021. Of these 
15 Missions - Conakry (Guinea), Djibouti (Djibouti), Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), Brazzaville 
(Republic of Congo), Malabo (Equatorial Guinea) and Kigali (Rwanda), Yaounde (Cameroon),  
Asmara (Eritrea) and Mbabane (Eswatini), Monrovia (Liberia), Freetown (Sierra Leone), Sao 
Tome (Sao Tome and Principe), Nouakchott (Mauritania), Lomé (Togo) and N’djamena (Chad) are 
in various stages of functioning. Efforts are ongoing to operationalize the last three remaining  
Missions viz., Mogadishu (Somalia), Bissau (Guinea Bissau) and Praia (Cape Verde).Ministry had  
also informed that there are 48  countries where India did not have resident Indian Missions.  
Furthermore, the Committee also note that in December 2020, the Cabinet has approved opening of 
three new Indian Missions in Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican Republic. 

7 | P a g e  
Standing by the Ministry’s own admission about the imperative of having presence in 
all UN countries for attaining our goal of UNSC permanent seat, the Committee h a d  strongly felt 
that India should have a resident Mission in all UN Member countries. The Committee had 
appreciated that opening of a resident Indian Mission or Post is a time-taking exercise which entails 
internal planning and approvals as well as coordination and liaising with the host Government.  
While lauding the timely completion of the 15 Missions in Afr ican countries, the Committee had  
strongly recommended that the Ministry should complete the remaining three Missions in Africa  
and the newly approved 3 Missions in Latin America in 2021. The Ministry should also seek  
additional finances to that end, if required, at the RE stage. 
 
15. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted that a mong the 18 Missions approved by  
Cabinet in March, 2018, 15 Missions are in various stages of functioning and all efforts are being  
made to operationalize the last 3 Missions viz, Mogadishu, Bissau and Praia. Appropriate 
budgetary provisions are projected as per the expected timeline of operationalization of the 
Missions, in consultation with the Internal Finance Division of the Ministry. 
Cabinet approval has been received in December, 2020 to open 3 new Indian Missions in  
Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican Republic and administrative processes for implementation of  
these decisions are underway. Recently on 25 May, 2021, Cabinet has approved opening of 
Consulate in Add u, Maldives. Opening of  a resident Indian Mission or Post is a time -taking 
exercise requiring internal planning for logistics, deployment, infrastructure and approvals as well  
as coordination and liaisoning with the host Government and Ministry would follo w it up closely  
with the relevant authorities. As recommended by Hon’ble Committee, Ministry would seek 
additional budgetary allocations under head Embassies & Missions, if necessary, for early 
operationalization of newly approved Missions/Posts. 
 
16. The Committee had observed that the Union Cabinet had approved the opening of  
eighteen Missions in Africa during a period of four years from 2018 -2021. Out of these, 15  
Missions were in various stages of implementation and efforts were underway to 
operationalize the remaining three. It was also learnt that in December 2020, the Cabinet has 
approved opening of three new Indian Missions in Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican 
Republic. The Committee had therefore recommended that Ministry should seek additional  
finances, if needed to ensure that the three Missions each in Africa and in Latin America are 

8 | P a g e  
completely in a time - bound manner. In its Action Taken Reply the Ministry has submitted  
that appropriate budgetary provisions are being projected as per the expected timeline of  
operationalization of the Missions, in consultation with the Internal Finance  Division of the  
Ministry. The Committee desire that  the Ministry should ensure that requisite steps are  
taken for operationalization of the newly approved Missions/Posts in Africa and Latin 
America within the stipulated time and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 10) 
INSPECTION OF MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD 
17. The Committee had observed that the Directorate General of Inspections (DGI) was 
setupin2014in the system of regular inspection of Indian Missions/Posts abroad and in 2016 also 
introduced a web portal named Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) for 
selection of Missions/Posts for on-site inspections. But the Committee were astonished to note that  
after all these efforts, only eight Missions/Posts were inspected in 2018 and two in 2019 and during 
2020 not a single on -site or off-site inspection took place. The Committee were not at all satisfied  
with such tardy progress in such an important process of performance evaluation and monitoring.  
Emphasizing the im perative of periodic inspection and monitoring in increasing the efficacy of  
Indian Missions/Posts abroad, the Committee  had recommended that the Ministry should launch  
the revamped PEMS  portal at the earliest since it  had already missed several timelines. The 
Ministry should also compile an annual data on country-specific challenges faced by the 
Missions/Posts abroad so that the evaluation exercise could result in positive outcomes and 
suggestions. 
 
18. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply stated that due to various reasons, only eight  
Missions/Posts could be inspected in 2018 and two Missions/Posts were inspected in 2019. Due to  
COVID-19 pandemic and revamping process of PEMS portal, inspection could not be conducted  
during 2020.The Ministry has launched the revamped portal of Performance Evaluation and 
Monitoring System (PEMS -2.0) on 07.06.2021. The evaluation exercise will be done in a time - 
bound manner followed up by off -site and on -site inspection, where required, for improving the  
functioning of our Missions/Posts. 
19. Recognizing the imperative of regular monitoring and evaluation in improving the  
functioning of the Mission/Posts, the Committee had desired that the revamped Performance 

9 | P a g e  
Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) portal should be launched at the earliest. The  
Committee are glad to know that after missing several deadlines, the revamped portal of  
Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS-2.0) was launched in June 2021. The 
Committee note that due to the ongoing Co vid pandemic onsite inspections could not be done  
in 2020. As regards the Committee’s recommendation on  compilation of annual data on  
country-specific challenges faced by the Missions/Posts abroad, the Ministry has not 
mentioned anything in its replies. While disapproving the tendency on part of the Ministry to  
furnish incomplete replies, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that data  
should be prepared to understand the country specific challenges faced by Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad. The Committee also desire that that the Ministry should prepare a  
time-bound action plan for covering all the Missions/Embassies through on -site or off -site 
annual inspections once normalcy is restored. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 11) 
ESTABLISHMENT OF VIDESH BHAWANS 
20. The Committee had observed that the budget head ‘Passport and Emigration’ catered to  
expenditure on Passport offices, printing of travel documents, lease/purchase of passport printers,  
payments to State and Union territo ries Governments for verification, expenses of pre -departure 
orientation and skill up -gradation of emigrant workers. The budgetary allocation under that sub - 
head has witnessed a decline from Rs. 1348.59 crore (BE 2020 -21) to Rs. 1328.63 crore (BE 2021- 
22). As per the Ministry the reduction in projections and allocation was primarily on account of  
slow progress due to COVID -19 pandemic under printing and procurement of travel documents,  
Postal and Freight charges, Office Expenses and Information Technology head. 
The Committee h a d  observed that the budget sub -head ‘ Passport and Emigration’  
catered to two diverse but crucial set of items and directly affect on public services delivery and  
welfare of Overseas Indians. Keeping this in mind, the Committee felt that provision of adequate  
funds is essential. The Committee had therefore, recommended that the Ministry should ensure  
timely delivery of public services in terms of passport and emigration support and if required, seek  
additional funds at the RE stage. The Committee had also desired that Videsh Bhawans should be  
established as a one stop service center in every state capital. The Ministry should work out a  
detailed proposal in that regard and apprise the Committee at the soonest. 

10 | P a g e  
21. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry stated that t he observation of the Committee  
have been noted and based on need assessment of funds and efficient utilization pattern, Ministry  
shall seek additional funds at the RE stage for passport an d emigration services. Ministry initiated  
process for establishment of Videsh Bhawans (VB) in Indian States capitals in June, 2016. The  
proposal was to bring all subordinate offices of MEA such as Branch Secretariat, Passport office,  
ICCR Centre and POE un der one roof to enhance the efficiency of service to be provided to the  
public of the respective state/ union territory (UT) and also for better coordination among the State/  
UT administration and the Ministry.Initially, efforts were made to identify the places where space 
is available in the existing RPO that can be used for VB after making required modifications and  
rest of the state governments were requested to allot suitable land (free of cost) for construction of  
VB. Presently, all propo sals for Videsh Bhawan have been put on hold where no construction has  
commenced so far. The construction on only those projects which commenced as RPO (Bhopal,  
Kolkata, Ranchi) and were later modified as VideshBhawan are being continued. 
22. Regarding the Com mittee’s recommendation for adequate provisioning of funds for  
the budget sub-head ‘Passport and Emigration’, the Ministry in its Action Taken Replies has  
submitted that based on need assessment of funds and efficient utilization pattern, Ministry  
shall seek additional funds at the RE stage for passport and emigration services. The 
Committee had also desired that Videsh Bhawans should be established in all state capitals as  
a one stop organization to bring all subordinate offices of MEA such as Branch Secretariat, 
Passport office, ICCR Centre and POE under one roof to enhance the efficiency of service to  
be provided to the public of the respective state/ union territory (UT) and also for better  
coordination among the State/ UT administration and the Min istry. The Committee note that 
efforts were made at the initial stage to identify available spaces in the existing Regional  
Passport Offices that can be used for Videsh Bhawans after making required modifications  
and rest of the state governments were requ ested to allot suitable land (free of cost) for its  
construction . In its Action Taken Replies, the Ministry has informed that in the present  
situation all proposals for Videsh Bhawan have been put on hold where no construction has  
commenced. The construct ion on only those projects which commenced as RPO (Bhopal,  
Kolkata, Ranchi) and were later modified as Videsh Bhawans are being continued. The  
Committee can understand the current halt in construction works related to Videsh Bhawans  
in some state capitals,  however, the Ministry should strive to complete the establishment of  
the Videsh Bhawans in all state capitals within fixed timelines. 

11 | P a g e  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 12) 
PASSPORT SERVICES 
23. The issuance of passports in a timely, seamless and hassle free manner is the most  
citizen-centric service provided by the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee were also  
aware that there are 93 Passport Seva Kendras (PSK) and 426 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras  
(POPsK) functioning under the supervision of the 36 Passport Offices in the country to handle this  
important work. The Passport Seva Programme(PSP) had been extended to the Missions/Posts  
abroad in order to provide better and smoother service to Indian diaspora living abroad. So far, 1 53 
Missions/Posts have been integrated into Passport Seva Project and integration of 26 other 
Missions/Posts is underway. It was seen that MEA maintains a centralized database of passports – 
Passport Related Information Data Exchange (PRIDE). It has established a robust grievance 
rederessal mechanism with a multi -lingual call centre operating in 17 languages on a 24x7 basis.  
Additionally, a Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism had also been set up in all Passport Offices  
to attend and redress any complaint w ithin a time-frame. The Ministry had further informed that in  
the States/UTs where mPassport Police app has been launched, the time of average Police 
Verification Report (PVR) has been reduced to 18 days. 
The Committee were pleased to learn about a plethora of measures taken by the 
Ministry to make qualitative and quantitative improvements in passport services in recent times.  
The vast expanse of our passport office network is laudable. The Committee had, however, urged  
the Ministry to ensure that th ere is a PSK/POPKs in every parliamentary constituency. While  
appreciating the progress made in integration of Passport Seva Projects (PSP) with Missions/Posts  
abroad, the Committee had desired that the remaining Missions/Posts were integrated at the 
earliest. The Ministry should also make consistent efforts to encourage States/UTs to launch the  
‘mPolice App’ so that the time taken for submission of Police Verification Report is reduced to the  
minimum. 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that a s on 17 May 2021, 519 Passport  
Kendras, including 93 Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) and 426 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras  
(POPSKs), are functioning in the country as an extended arm of 36 Passport Offices (POs). By  
opening of 93 PSK and 426 POPSKs, the Min istry has covered 489 Lok Sabha Constituencies  
where there is at least one Passport Kendra. The Ministry of External Affairs and the Department 

12 | P a g e  
of Posts are working together to ensure operationalization of a POPSK in the remaining 54 
LokSabha Constituencies. 
Ministry had advised 189 Missions/Posts to acquire the necessary IT equipment for  
integration into the PSP system. Out of these 189 Missions/Posts, 4 Missions/Posts are temporarily  
closed and 5 Missions/Posts do not issue passports. As on current date, 166 Missions/Posts have been 
successfully integrated into the Passport Seva Project. 7 Missions/Posts have procured the requisite IT 
equipment and the integration process is currently in progress. Remaining 7 Missions/Posts are in  
process of acquiring the necessary IT equipment and Ministry is coordinating with them to expedite 
the process. Once the availability of the IT equipment is confirmed by the remaining 7 Missions/Posts 
to the Ministry, the integration process would be started remotely. 
25. The Committee are aware that the issuance of passport constitutes the most citizen- 
centric function of the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee are pleased to know that  
519 Passport Kendras, including 93 Passport Seva  Kendras (PSKs) and 426  Post Office  
Passport Seva Kendras (POPSKs), are functioning in the country as an extended arm of 36  
Passport Offices (POs). As regards the Committee’s recommendation of opening of 
PSK/PoPSKs in every parliamentary constituency, the Committee were pleased to note that  
the Ministry has covered 489 Lok Sabha Constituencies and is working with the Department  
of Posts to ensure operationalization of a POPSK in the remaining 54 Lok Sabha 
Constituencies. The Ministry has further informed that so far 166 Missions/Posts have been  
successfully integrated into the Passport Seva Project. However, the Ministry has not submitted 
any information about efforts made to encourage States/UTs to launch the ‘mPolice App’. The 
Committee are happy to learn that out of 189 Missions/Posts,166 have been successfully  
integrated into the Passport Seva Project and the remaining ones have either acquired or are in 
the process of acquiring IT equipment for integration. 
The outreach of Passport services in India through an extensive network of PSKs/PoPSks is a  
laudable feat. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry will operationalize PoPSks in the  
remaining 54 Lok Sabha constituencies and integrate the re maining Missions/Posts abroad  
with the Passport Seva Portal in a time -bound manner. The Committee would like to be kept  
apprised of the developments made in this regard. The Committee also recommend that the  
Ministry should take proactive measures to reach out to all the State Governments to launch  
mPolice app to make the verification process seamless, swift and contactless. 

13 | P a g e  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 13) 
SHORTAGE OF STAFF IN PASSPORT OFFICES 
26. The Committee had observed that the shortage of personnel is one of the key challenges  
faced by the Ministry in expansion of Passport Seva Project (PSP). Against the sanctioned strength  
of 2,741,the actual  working strength of Central  Passport Organization (CPO) is  1,789 (as on 
01.02.2021).The difficulty in filling the vacant posts in CPO cadre was attributable to the extant  
Recruitment Rules, which allows direct recruitment only in the grades of Office Assistant, Junior  
Passport Assistant (JPA), Stenographer, Junior Translator and Assistant Superintendent. MEA has  
been indenting Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for recruitment in these grades as per available  
vacancies. Against an indent of 310 posts that was made in 2017, SSC had recommended only 118  
persons till date. As an interim measure the Ministry had engaged 347 Data Entry Operators to ease 
the pressure created due to shortage of staff. During examination of Demands for Grants for the  
past few years, the Ministry had informed that a proposal for physical inspection and staffi ng study 
of CPO by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure has been sent to  
Ministry of Finance in November 2019.The Committee  had desired to be apprised  about the 
progress made in that regard. The Committee had also recommended th at the issue of human  
resource shortage must be taken up with Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) at the  
highest level and a lasting solution be worked out. 
27. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry stated  that t he sanctioned strength of Central  
Passport Organisation is 2741 and the actual working strength of the Central Passport Organisation  
(CPO) Cadre is 1783, as on 1 May, 2021. In addition, 21 posts (including 15 Technical and 6  
supporting staff) were created by the Union Cabinet decision in 2007 to man the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) of the Passport Seva Project. Recently, dossiers for 31 Junior Translators  
from Staff Selection Commission have been received and appointment letters issued to the 
candidates, out of which 5 have joined. Dossie rs for 6 Stenographers (Grade “D”) and 24 Office  
Assistant (MTS) grade are awaited from the Staff Selection Commission (SSC).  The break-up of 
the vacancies is as under: 
 
Sl. No. Group 'A' Group 'B' Gazetted Group 'B' and Group 
'C' non Gazetted 
1 Sanctioned Working Sanctioned Working Sanctioned Working 

14 | P a g e  
 Strength Strength strength strength strength strength 
Total 226 192 565 362 1950 1229 
Vacancy 34 203 721 
 
Group 'A' posts : Eligible Officers from feeder post are not  available, hence needed to fill up  
vacancies on deputation, in consultation with the UPSC. 
Group 'B' (Gazetted) posts: No one is eligible from feeder grade, hence vacant. 
Group 'B' (Non-gazetted) and Group 'C' Posts: 199 vacancies have been indented for direct 
recruitment to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for the vacancy years 2018, 2019 & 2020.  SSC 
has also been requested to either conduct the Limited Departmental Competitive Examination  
(LDCE) or allow Ministry to conduct the LDCE for 151 vacancies. The rest of the vacancies are  
due to following reasons: 
(i) Direct recruit vacancies for the year 2021 are yet to be indented to SSC when called for. 
(ii) The employees with requisite qualifying service in the feeder grade are not available to fill  
the promotion vacancies. 
(iii) Recently, 17 appointment letters were issued to the candidates against which they are yet to  
join. 
2.         A proposal for the physical inspection and staffing study of CPO by the Staff Inspection  
Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure has been sent to the Ministry of Finance in November 
2019. In March 2021, Ministry of Finance has been requested to accord priority to this matter and  
consider undertaking Physical Inspection & Staffing Study of Central Passport O rganisation on an 
urgent basis. 
28. In their DFG  Report, the Committee had  recommended that the issue of human  
resource shortage in CPO must be taken up with Department of Personnel and Training  
(DoPT) at the highest level and a lasting solution be worked out. The Committee note with  
concern that against th e sanctioned strength of 2741, the actual working strength of the  
Central Passport Organisation (CPO) Cadre is 1783, as on 1 May, 2021. In order to fill these  
posts, the Ministry has submitted dossiers for the posts of Junior Translators and 
Stenographers from Staff Selection Commission and made a proposal for the physical 
inspection and staffing study of CPO by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of  
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 

15 | P a g e  
In the considered opinion of the Committee, a consistent deficit in personnel in CPO, may  
adversely impact the overall functioning of existing PSKs/POPSKs. The Committee find that  
the efforts made by the Ministry are inadequate as it has not yielded desired outcomes in the  
past few years. The Committee therefore, desire that Ministry may impress upon the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to complete the staffing study of CPO on  
priority basis so that the vacant posts can be fi lled. The Committee further desire that if  
necessary, the recruitment through lateral entry of qualified and experienced individuals  
from academic, private and other cadres of the Ministries may also be undertaken. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 17) 
DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP 
29. The Committee had noted that development partnership projects were rooted firmly in the  
underlying principle of South-South Cooperation, viz. mutual benefit, solidarity, free of 
conditionality, voluntary and demand driven cooperation. The assistance was implemented with the 
long-term goal of generating goodwill and generating a positive leverage to drive foreign policy  
objectives. The Committee, however, felt that the fluctuating budgetary demands and allocations  
convey a different picture. The Committee were happy to note that international projects are being  
reviewed and monitored through institutional mechanisms such as Joint Project Monitoring 
Committees (JPMCs) and Project steering Committees as well as to effectively h andle India’s  
developmental aid project Development Partnership Administration (DPA) has been created. The  
Committee had also noted that various challenges often impede the execution of international  
projects, including delays in land acquisitions and approval of local permits; procurement 
challenges; occasional reluctance and apathy of host governments; political uncertainties security  
threats; natural calamity, etc. Keeping these extraneous challenges in mind, the Committee had  
desired that the Ministry should undertake an assessment and  accordingly re-orient our approach  
for project formulation, appraisal, implementation monitoring and evaluation, to overcome such  
challenges. In the firm opinion of the Committee, the Ministry should frame a deve lopmental aid 
policy along with a separate aid disbursal body/subsidiary organ within DPA with a specialized and 
focused mandate of streamlining and evaluating the various projects. 
30. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that India’s development partnership 
cooperation is integral part of India’s foreign policy. The inalienable component of our 

16 | P a g e  
development cooperation is “partnership”. India’s economic cooperation through development 
partnership is demand driven. For example, India’s Grants -in-aid projects and capacity building  
programs are demand driven and are based on local demand/priority of the partner countries.  
Through development cooperation, Government aims to give fillip to South-South Cooperation. 
Development assistance is offered on the request of the host government, which is scrutinized by  
the Ministry in consultation with concerned Territorial Division from  foreign policy perspective  
and also the line ministries.  Feasibility study / DPR is under taken by the project implementation  
agency, which is vetted by the line ministries.  Physical and financial progress is monitored at  
various levels, including our Missions abroad as well as Project Monitoring Committees (PMC)  
constituted for this specific p urpose. Additionally, expert advice of consultants and technical  
advisors on deputation from other specialized organizations outside the Ministry is also taken  
regarding implementation of these projects. Moreover, period reviews of the development 
assistance programs,  viz., comprehensive review of ITEC, CEITs, etc are undertaken  to attune 
these programs from impact and outcome perspective. Budgetary outlays are pre-fixed and 
payments are released on milestone basis. 
Delay in the implementation schedule in some of the development assistance projects is  
apparently due to extraneous factors, viz., lack of appropriate interest /alacrity demonstrated by the  
host government in implementation of the project, once MoU is signed, non-identification and non- 
availability of project site for a considerable period of time, civil wars / internal strife prevalent in  
some of the African countries,  local epidemics, inability to identify and nominate local project  
implementation agency for the project by the host  government, etc. These factors lead to delay in  
the implementation schedule of the project and non -utilization of budget allocated for the relevant  
FY. However, efforts are made to periodically update and revise our budget projections and  
requirement for development assistance to other countries taking into account the overall 
perspectives of a dynamic and fluid nature.  All efforts are being made to limit delays to only  
extraneous factors and due diligence is done at every stage of the process. 
As regards Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation of instituting an autonomous aid  
disbursal body similar to USAID for development assistance partnership, the Ministry is fully  
seized of the matter and is periodically reviewing all aspects of development cooperat ion and aid  
delivery. 
31. With the larger objective of making India’s developmental partnership more 
meaningful and predictable, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to formulate a 

17 | P a g e  
developmental aid policy along with a separate aid disbursal body/subsidiary organ within  
Development Partnership Administration (DPA)  with a specialized and focused mandate of  
streamlining and evaluating various projects. In response to the Committee’s specific 
recommendation, the Ministry has furnished a  general Action Taken Reply illustrating the  
premise, challenges faced and review mechanism of India’s developmental cooperation. 
While understanding the significance of nature, context and contour of our developmental  
cooperation, the Committee are disappointed with the evasive reply of the Ministry. Merely  
acknowledging does not amount to Action Taken and such tendency on part of the Ministry 
is unacceptable. The Ministry ought to provide a convincing case for adhering to the status  
quo and not havi ng a policy or an autonomous aid disbursal body for international projects.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that a thorough review of  
our developmental cooperation should be carried out and on the basis of such an analysis,  a 
call may be taken on establishment of a separate aid disbursal body. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 26) 
AID TO AFRICAN COUNTRIES 
32. The budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to African countries’ catered to setting up of institutes,  
various scholarships/training programmes; ICCR scholarships; food aid, books, medical aid, cash  
grants etc. An allocation of Rs. 300 crore had been provisioned for BE 2021-22. India’s partnership 
with Africa is based on a consultative model of cooperation and sharing of development 
experiences and is focused on addressing the priorities and needs of African countries. The three  
India Africa Forum Summits (IAFS -I, II and III) in 2008, 2011 and 2015 have further reinforced  
development partnership with the country. The Committee had noted that the progress in various  
projects under India Africa Summits was reviewed regularly in consultation with concerned 
Ministries and relevant stakeholders. The Committee had noticed that so far 17 African countries  
have joined the e-VidyaBharti and e-arogyaBharti Network project (e-VBAB) which was approved 
in 2015 to provide quality education to African students. The declining trend of allocation to  
African countries had been a source of great discontentment to the Committee. The Foreign 
Secretary asserted that Africa is a key foreign policy priority and our engagement has been 
intensifying, albeit the budgetary allocations speak otherwise. The Committee had strongly 
recommended that the budgetary allocation for African countries should be in alignment with the 

18 | P a g e  
importance, size and extent of the region. There is an urgent need to intensify our diplomatic  
presence in the region. The Ministry should also take all requisite steps, including seeking 
enhanced allocation and effective utilization of funds, for expeditious implementation of our 
diverse ongoing projects in Africa. 
33. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted that it has sincerely noted the concerns  
and recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee. The Ministry would like to reassure the Hon’ble  
Committee that Africa is receiving very high priority by the Government. 
2. India has maintained a vibrant relationship with African countries, which is evident  
with 34 outgoing visits since 2 014 [President (13), Vice President (12) and Prime Minister  
(9)] and more than 100 incoming visits at ministerial level from African nations. The 10  
guiding principles enunciated by honourable Prime Minister in Uganda in 2018, will 
continue to guide India-Africa relations and take our engagement to the next higher level.  
These guiding principles have been given ‘top priority’ in identifying key areas of 
cooperation with Africa including digital & IT, agriculture, trade & investment, 
development partnership especially designing people-centric projects, building local 
capacity and assisting African youth through training programmes, cooperation in 
security, terrorism & maritime issues, international cooperation in climate change, etc.  The 
Ministry is in the process of taking these elements forward in a focused manner.  This is  
reflected in the range of important events completed in previous years and/or planned  
between India and Africa in near future. 
3. In order to expand our diplomatic footpr ints and outreach in African continent,  
Government of India has decided in 2018 to open 18 new  Missions in African countries.  
Missions in Republic of Guinea, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Republic of Congo, Togo, Sao  
Tome & Principe, Liberia and Sierra Leone hav e already been opened and  the Missions in  
Somalia, Guinea Bissau, Cape Verde, Chad and Mauritania may be operational by end of  
2021. After opening of the 18 new Missions in Africa, India will have resident Missions in  
47 out of 54 African countries. 
4. The India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) -IV was expected to be held in September  
2020 but was postponed due to the COVID -19 pandemic. In the run up of the Summit,  
1stIndia-Africa Defence Ministers’ Conclave was held in February 2020 in Lucknow. 
However, various other scheduled events since then were postponed due to the ongoing 

19 | P a g e  
COVID-19 pandemic. The Ministry endeavours to hold the IAFS -IV at the earliest suitable  
opportunity. 
5. Since the spread of COVID-19 pandemic world over, India has signed 5 Air Bubble 
Agreements with African countries (Rwanda, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria) to  
ease out travel between India and these countries, and has evacuated stranded Indian 
nationals from various African countries (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Ethiopia, Malawi, 
Eswatini, Zambia, Botswana, etc.) and vice versa. During the COVID-19 pandemic, 
around 150 tonnes of medical aid worth US$ 5.3 million (Rs. 40 crore) has been delivered  
by India to the continent of Africa, in the form of supplies of HCQ t ablets and 16 other  
essential life -saving drugs [worth US $ 0.16 million (Rs. 1.22 crore) each to 32 African  
countries] on grant basis. India has maintained high level contacts at political level also 
with various African countries to express our solidarity with them. 
6. The Ministry, with the budgetary allocation of Rs. 300 crore for the financial year  
2021-22 provisioned under the Head “Aid to African Countries”, would continue to focus 
on catering to the setting-up of Institutes; running various Scholarships/Training 
programmes including under  IAFS-III; ICCR Scholarships; providing Food Aid, Cash  
grants, Medical aid including supplying of equipment; Books; Vehicles; organising 
Events/Seminars/ Studies/Visits, etc. in order to further strengthen ou r friendly relations  
with various African countries. The Ministry would vigorously follow up and review the  
projects announced during IAFS -I, IAFS -II and IAFS -III which are presently at various  
stages of setting up to have these implemented within the shor test possible time. In order to 
augment our development partnership with the friendly African countries, India would  
continue to extend LoCs and Grants to various African countries as per their need basis  
within the parameters prescribed. 
7. India is currently implementing a flagship project in tele-education (e-VidhyaBharti) 
and tele-medicine (e-ArogyaBharti) for Africa called e-VidyaBharati ArogyaBharati 
Network Project (e -VBAB Project). So far, 17 countries have signed the MOU to become  
partner countries. The enrolments for graduate and post-graduate programmes have 
commenced since February 2020. The actual expenditure under the project till date is Rs. 
24.50 crore. Currently, we are implementing Phase II of the project.  An amount of Rs. 20  
crores are due for payment under this project.      Under e-Vidya Bharati, so far 3570 

20 | P a g e  
scholarships have been approved during January 2020, July 2020 and January 2021 
academic session.  Under this project I -Learn Centres in each of the African  country is  
proposed to be set -up. So far 4 I -learn centres  have already been set -up.   Each project 
costs Rs. 1 crore. Twenty more i-learn centres are to be established in the coming months. 
8. The Ministry would like to emphasize that this high priority and importance 
accorded to Africa in our Foreign Policy is sought to be reflected in the development  
cooperation context. The Ministry will ensure effective utilisation of funds for expeditious  
implementation of our diverse ongoing projects in Afr ica and seek enhanced allocation  
under the budgetary Head “Aid to African countries” at Revised Estimates (RE) stage, if  
necessary; and/or on finalisation of the dates of the IAFS -IV. During the fiscal year 2020 - 
21, we were able to spend ……most of the fun ds allocated under the budgetary Head “Aid  
to African Countries” despite the COVID -19 induced lock down. Nevertheless, due to the  
ban on international travel out of India, many of our aid projects in Africa could not make  
optimal progress since our experts were not able to travel, etc.  As and when the COVID-19 
pandemic subsides and the situation becomes normal, we will move ahead on our grant  
projects with renewed focus. 
9. The Ministry has taken a note of all the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee 
and will seek to address them with utmost seriousness. 
34. Expressing their discontent with the fiscal space (as evident from the budgetary 
outlays) accorded to Africa; the Committee had insisted that such a diverse and large region  
require proper engagement and commitment.  In response to the concerns of the Committee,  
in its Action Taken Replies, the Ministry has assured that Africa is receiving high priority in  
our foreign policy. The Committee are pleased to know that on the basis  of 10 gu iding 
principles outlined by the Prime Minister in 2018, has paved way for upscaling our ties with  
the African region. Furthermore, in order to expand our diplomatic footprints and outreach  
in African continent, India has already opened 15 new Missions in Africa and opening of 
three new Missions are in advanced stage. After opening of the 18 new Missions in Africa,  
India will have resident Missions in 47 out of 54 African countries. It is satisfying to note that  
despite Covid related disruptions , the Ministry has been able to utilize greater part of the  
budgetary allocation under the head ‘Aid to African Countries.’ While acknowledging the  
plethora of steps taken by the Ministry to forge better ties with Africa, the Committee are of 

21 | P a g e  
the firm opinion that the funds, efforts and priority is not in alignment with the potential. 
The Committee therefore urge the Ministry should make persistent effort to deepen our  
outreach and engagement with a region that has immense potential. 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 28) 
AUGMENT HUMAN RESOURCES IN MEA 
35. The persistent under staffing of the Ministry of External Affairs have been a source of  
constant concern. During the course of oral evidence before the Committee, the Foreign Secretary  
had also underlined the problem of human resource constraints in the Ministry. Vacancies in the  
Ministry of External Affairs are filled by a combination of direct recruitment through the Civil  
Services Examination conducted by UPSC, examinations conducted by SSC an d promotion from  
feeder cadres as per extant Rules. The Committee had noted that there had been revamping of the  
organizational structure of MEA at the topmost level with an objective to streamline the decision  
making process. The gap between the sanctioned strength and actual strength had created 
anomalies not only in promotion but also in meeting the requirements of the Ministry. The 
Committee had observed that the Ministry has taken a series of affirmative action such as placing  
indent with Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT), Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC) and Staff Selection Commission (SSC); reinforcing technical capacity by taking officers  
with domain expertise on deputation from Line Ministries and Departments of Governments and  
engaging Consultants with expertise in various fields. 
Taking a serious view of this matter, the Committee felt that the justifications and actions  
taken by the Ministry to fill up the vacant posts are inadequate and unproductive. The Committee  
had urged t he Government at the highest levels to consider the human resource requirements of  
MEA favourably and also direct Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and Union Public Service  
Commission (UPSC) to fill up the enhanced number of direct recruitments on priority basis. The 
Committee h a d also recommended that the Ministry should continue to create cadre/induct 
expertise from other Ministries, academia, think tanks and the private sector, as needed to 
supplement its human resource with relevant domain expertise. 
36. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, stated that it takes regular and concerted action to  
ensure adequate human resources in order to meet its functional requirements. Regular indents are  
placed with SSC, UPSC and DoPT to fill vacancies acro ss various Cadres under the control of the  
Ministry. In addition to filling vacancies by a combination of direct recruitment, departmental 

22 | P a g e  
promotion and Limited Departmental Competitive Examinations (LDCE) in line with extant Rules,  
the Ministry also induct officers from various Departments and Ministries of Government of India  
on deputation to perform specialized roles and fulfill specific functional and technical 
requirements. 
24 IFS officers of the batch of 2020 (CSE-2019) have joined the Sushma Swaraj Institute of 
Foreign Service (SSIFS) in January, 2021 and are completing their Phase -I in mid -June 2021 . 
Ministry has placed an indent of 73 for the years 2021 & 2022 with DoPT and UPSC. 
Further, more than 100 ASOs from CGLE 2017 had already joined the Ministry and 89  
ASOs from CGLE 2018 have also started joining the Ministry. Requisite indents for ASOs for 
2019 & 2020 have already been placed with SSC for which the recruitment process is still 
underway and is expected to be completed shortly. Indents for the posts of Stenographers ‘C’ & 
‘D’ grades have also been placed with SSC and action on this front is being followed up regularly.  
SSC is also in the process of completing the recruitment process for more than 150 MTSs for the  
Ministry. 
There are more than 200 LDCE vacancies of SO and PS for the years 2015, 2016, 2017,  
2018 & 2019 which remain unfilled as the result for LDCE 2015 has been declared in April 2021  
and from years 2016 to 2019 have not been held by UPSC due to an ongoing court case. Recently,  
the result of LDCE 2015 has been declared by UPSC in April 2021 and it is hoped that the process  
for conducting LDCE for 2016 onward will soon be initiated by UPSC . Ministry is in consultation 
with DoPT and UPSC to find ways to fill these vacancies at the earliest. 
The process for filling vacant positions in the Legal & Treatise Cadre of the Ministry is also 
underway by the UPSC and is expected to be completed soon. 
The Ministry also engages Consultants, including retired Government officials as well as  
experts hired from the open market via a transparent and competitive recruitment process, with  
expertise in varied fields including project management, international law, consular services, 
arbitration, disarmament etc. 
37. While observing the continuous problem of under -staffing in the Ministry of External  
Affairs the Committee has urged that the Ministry should fill the vacant posts through direct  
recruitment, promotion, deputation and induction of expertise from relevant fields. In its  
Action Taken Replies, the Ministry has informed about a plethora of steps being taken to  
expand its human resources through placing of indents with SSC, UPSC, direct recruit ment, 
departmental promotion, Limited Departmental Competitive Examinations (LDCE), 

23 | P a g e  
deputation and engaging domain experts as Consultants. The Committee feel that adequate  
availability, regular up skilling and training are important for developing human capital and  
therefore, the Ministry should accordingly take measures to enhance it at the organizational  
level. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 29) 
GENDER BALANCED ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE 
38. The Committee were appalled to discern the marginal representation of women within the  
Ministry of External affairs. According to the data furnished by the Ministry, of the 3756 officers  
(Gazetted as well as non-Gazette posts) only 612 (16.29%) are women. Of these, there were only 
22 women officers holding charge of Ambassadors/High Commissioners in various Missions/Posts  
abroad. On being enquired about the reason for such gender imbalance, the Ministry had stated that  
the requirement of officers is done by a competitive exam ination conducted by UPSC and there is  
no gender-based reservation indirect recruitment or in induction and promotion. 
The Committee found that the Ministry’s justification for the gender imbalance within  
the organization attributing it to skewed intake ratio presents a dismal picture of foreign policy  
being regarded largely as masculine domain. Emphasizing the imperative of a gender balance  
within MEA, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should ensure improvement in  
internal practices on occupational equality including careers progression, promotion, training and  
appointments to higher ranks. The Ministry should also undertake a thorough and comparative  
cross-service analysis of the reason behind the skewed gender intake ratio and apprised the 
Committee about the findings of the same. 
39. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry stated that the recruitment of IFS officers is via a 
competitive examination  conducted by  UPSC. There is  no gender based reservation in direct 
recruitment to IFS or i n induction and promotion to IFS from the feeder grade of Grade I of IFS  
Branch B. However, the Service has been open to both men and women in equal measure since its  
inception and have good gender balance with more and more women officers entering the Service 
in recent years. Gender equality is more a common practice than an exception as far as the IFS is  
concerned. At  present, nearly 25% of the Cadre strength of IFS is composed of women 
officers. Similarly, recruitment to General Cadre of IFS 'B', Stenographers' Cadre of IFS'B' and 

24 | P a g e  
other cadres in the Ministry is done  via competitive examination conducted by UPSC/SSC and  
there is again non-gender based reservation in direct recruitment or in promotion. 
40. In order to overcome the existing gender imbalance in the organizational structure  
of the Ministry of External Affairs, the Committee had recommended it to improve internal  
practices on occupational equality . The Ministry in its Action Taken Rep lies has merely  
reiterated its Replies furnished during the examination of DFG stage. The point of the 
Ministry regarding recruitment through competitive examination without any gender based  
reservation is well taken. In the instant recommendation, the Com mittee had advised the  
Ministry to take gender sensitive measures within its organization. Further, the Ministry was  
also asked to undertake a comparative cross-service analysis of the reasons behind the 
skewed gender intake ratio. The Action Taken Replies on this aspect of the Committee’s  
recommendation have not been furnished. The Committee once again recommend that 
specific efforts should be made to reduce the gender gap within the organization in the longer  
run. The Ministry should  also conduct a  cross-Service study of gender intake ratio and  
inform the Committee about the findings of the same at the final action taken stage. 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 31) 
WELFARE OF INDIAN DIASPORA 
41. The Committee were aware that the Indian Diaspora has an impact on Indian foreign policy 
and they play a constructive role in facilitating India’s developmental agenda and soft power  
projection. There are institutionalized mechanisms for regular engagement with the Indian 
Diaspora. Various schemes and programmes  such as Know India Programme (KIP),Scholarship  
Programme for Diaspora Children(SPDC),Celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra, Pravasi Teerth DarshanYojana (PTDY), Global Pravasi Rishta Portal  
(Rishta Portal) etc are being  executed for the welfare of Indian Diaspora. While comparing the  
budgetary allocation to various schemes and programmes that were being implemented for welfare  
of Indian Diaspora by erstwhile MOIA and by MEA now, the Committee had observed a set 
pattern of arbitrary and constant allocation of funds. The Committee were also discerned that India  
Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (IDF -OI), Study India Programme (SIP), Overseas  
Indian Facilitation Centre(OIFC),Tracing the Roots Scheme were cl osed during 2014 to 2018,  
without citing any valid justification. Schemes and programmes are effective only when those 
reach the target audience. The Ministry has submitted that IT is making efforts to spread awareness 

25 | P a g e  
about the various schemes and programmes through its website and Missions, social media 
platforms, State outreach programmes and recently launched Global Pravasi Rishta Portal 
(RISHTA).In the considered view of the Committee, the objectives behind the merger of erst while 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs with MEA gets compromised, if adequate attention and fiscal  
space is not provided to the Diasporic community. The Committee, therefore,  reiterated their  
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should constitute a working group to assess all schemes  
and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians and apprise them about its outcome within six  
months. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry should proactively engage with the State 
Governments to deepen the imp act of information and awareness campaigns related to various  
schemes and programmes for engaging Indian Diaspora. 
42. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, stated that it is highly sensitive to the needs of  
the Indian Diaspora and has been giving adequate attention to them. The policy of the Government  
of India towards Diaspora is of making the engagement deeper, continuous and comprehensive. In  
pursuance of its policy, the Ministry has been consistently evaluating and examining its initiatives  
and programmes for the welfare of the Indian community abroad. Therefore, on merger of MOIA  
with MEA, the Ministry, under the guidance of EAM, had re-examined all the initiatives which had 
been undertaken by erstwhile MOIA and has strengthened the once which have had encouraging  
response from the Diaspora. It has also shelved a few schemes because of either duplication of 
work or for poor response and some new initiatives have been introduced. This has been done to  
bring more efficiency and effectiveness in th e system and for better engagement with the diaspora.  
The changes brought about such as introduction of technology, comprehensive partnership with  
various State Governments, wider outreach, etc are not arbitrary but well thought out initiatives. 
It is reiterated that the endeavour of the Ministry is to improve the existing schemes and to  
roll out new initiatives using modern technological tools which are low cost but highly effective in  
greater engagement with persons dispersed across  the Globe. The increased use of cost effective  
technologies and enhanced outreach and interaction with the diaspora have been found very useful  
during the last over one year of the pandemic when there has been largely virtual interaction. The  
Ministry has been able to rise to the occasion during the pandemic by assisting millions of Indians  
abroad through Vande Bharat Mission and also in extending help to the members of the community 
by providing food, shelter and medicines from ICWF. This is the best exam ple of the Ministry  
being on the right path in making changes to its strategies on evaluating its programmes for the  
welfare of the Indian community on the real time basis and has been able to rise to the occasion at 

26 | P a g e  
the critical time of need. Further, Ministry has been able to engage with various State Governments  
in different schemes for the Diaspora and will work pro-actively to enhance this engagement. 
43. For comprehensive assessment of the various measures/schemes undertaken for the  
welfare of the Indian Diaspora, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should  
constitute a working group and also play a pro -active role in conjunction with various state  
governments for wider dissemination of awareness about the ongoing schemes. The Ministry 
has informed that in consonance with its policy of deeper, continuous and comprehensive  
engagement it has been consistently evaluating and examining initiatives and programmes for 
the welfare of the Indian community abroad. The Committee applaud the effort of the 
Ministry to use cost effective technologies and enhanced outreach and interaction with the  
Diaspora during the ongoing pandemic. In the firm opinion of the Committee, following the  
merger of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Af fairs (MoIA) with MEA, the Ministry  
should have conducted a systematic study of the various schemes and programmes for 
welfare of Indian  Diaspora and  documented the same. In  the absence of such  a detailed  
study, the Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation to constitute a working group to  
make a comparative analysis of the objectives, working and challenges of various 
programmes/initiatives/schemes for welfare of  Indian Diaspora. The Ministry should keep  
the Committee informed about the progress made in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 35 & 36) 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) 
44. As the principal organ for soft and cultural diplomacy of the Government of India, 
ICCR’s activities are spread across the globe ranging from providing scholarships, organizing  
exhibitions, to performing and visuals arts programmes. The Committee had noted  that Rs 300  
crore has been provisioned for ICCR for BE 2021 -22 (as compared to Rs. 290 cr. in BE 2020 -21). 
The Ministry had informed that the  enhanced allocation has been made for scholarship, welfare  
activities, incoming Exhibitions, Distinguished Visitors Programmes, Academic Visitors 
Programmes, festivals abroad and Multimedia & Website. Based on the fact that ICCR activities  
have been affec ted in the wake of global Covid -19 lockdown, the budgetary allocation during RE  
2020-21 was decreased. The Ministry clarified that no substantial efforts had been made by ICCR  
for generating additional resources to run its activities. Despite the limited allocation, the 
Committee found that it was not fully utilized. Keeping in view the broad spectrum of activities 

27 | P a g e  
undertaken by ICCR, the Committee had strongly felt the need for enhanced budgetary 
allocation of ICCR. The Ministry was encouraged to explore the possibility of Partnerships  and 
PPP Models for ICCR where the partners also put in resources for executing projects. ICCR should  
establish a mechanism for ensuring that the pace of expenditure was improved for better requisition 
of budgetary demands in the next fiscal. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the  
Government should further increase the budgetary allocation for ICCR at RE 2021 -22 and BE  
2021-22 stage justifying the increasing significance of soft p ower projection of the country and  
central role of ICCR in it. 
45. In its Action Taken Reply to Recommendation No. 35, the Ministry of External Affairs has  
stated that it has taken note of Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation and assures that to ensure 
pace of e xpenditure and effective utilization of allocation of Grant -in-Aid, ICCR has prepared  
Revised Plan of Action for Financial Year 2021 -22 which is based on proposals/inputs received  
from more than 125 Missions/ Posts, in addition to programmes planned/to be executed at ICCR  
headquarters. ICCR would also be exploring avenues for generating additional fund in future by  
organizing event on PPP model and renting its infrastructural spaces. Ministry would also like to  
add that in line with the increasing significance of soft power projection of the country and ICCR’s  
central role in it, BE 2021-22 has been provisioned higher at Rs 300 crore (as compared to Rs. 255  
cr. in RE 2020-21). 
 
46. ICCR Cultural Centres constitute a key tool of India’s cultural  outreach abroad through  
their wide range of cultural, academic and intellectual activities. The Ministry had informed that 
the Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris were expected to be operational by the end of this  
year. The Ministry had submitted that establis hment of a new cultural centre is dependent on a  
variety of factors which included local formalities for opening of a new Cultural Centre, 
background information of Mission, information about the city where a Cultural Centre is 
proposed, details of Foreign Cultural Centre set up by other major countries, interest of general  
public about India in terms of art, culture, Bollywood, other Art forms and India -centric activities 
proposed for a Cultural Centre, etc. The Committee had recommended that the Mi nistry should  
ensure that the Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are operational by end of 2021 positively.  
The Ministry should also empanel artists from the widest possible variety of Indian languages/  
dialects and cultures so that India’s diversity is richly showcased abroad. 

28 | P a g e  
47. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that the renovation work  
of Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are underway. The Ministry acknowledges 
recommendation of Hon’ble Committee f or empanelment of artists in widest possible way and is  
committed to represent India’s rich diversity through its programmes/schemes. 
48. Availability of sufficient funds is imperative for carrying out the varied and wide - 
ranging activities of ICCR. The Committee had, therefore, asked ICCR to seek additional  
funds and effectively utilize the amount allocated to it. In its Action Taken Replies, the  
Ministry has stated that based on proposals/inputs received from more than 125 Missions/  
Posts as well as programme/activities planned at ICCR headquarters and regional offices,  
ICCR has prepared Revised Plan of Action for Financial Year 2021 -22. The Committee are  
satisfied to note that in pursuance of their recommendation, ICCR would be exploring 
avenues for generating additional fund in future by organizing event on PPP model and  
renting its infrastructural spaces. Regarding the status of Cultural Centres in Washington  
and Paris, the Ministry has informed that renovation work of Cultural Centres in 
Washington and Paris are underway. The Committee are dismayed to observe the tardy  
progress of the Indian Cultural Centres at Washington and Paris. The Committee 
recommend that the renovation work must be expedited and the Centres at Washington and  
Paris may be made operational by the end of the year. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 39) 
GREATER EXCHANGE WITH ACADEMIA & THINK TANKS 
49. The Policy Planning & Research Division of the Ministry of External Affairs is entrusted  
with four primary functions − organization of colla borative conferences and seminars with various  
think tanks; conduct of bilateral and multilateral policy planning dialogues with other Foreign  
Offices; preparation of research papers, policy briefs and situation reports pertaining to global  
developments an d international affairs in general and India’s foreign policy in particular; and  
preparation of the Annual Report of the Ministry. The Committee had observed that there are  
multiple mechanisms for engagement with academics, which inter alia includes funding of 
national/international seminars and thematic conferences through its autonomous bodies – ICWA 
and RIS, commissioning of research projects through think tanks, etc. The Ministry had also  
submitted that the research output of the academic activities is compiled into reports and 

29 | P a g e  
compendia. The Ministry was also utilizing external expertise in  the form of subject specialist  
consultants for the purpose of research and policy planning. The Committee were surprised to note  
that there are n o established research collaborations with other countries on issues pertaining to  
foreign policy. 
The Committee were pleased to learn that the Policy Planning & Research Division along  
with its network of autonomous bodies (Indian Council of World Affairs and Research and 
Information Systems), think tanks and collaborations with academia had undertook a continuous  
analysis of our principal foreign policy objectives as well as  provides research-based perspectives 
to the Ministry on  various regional and global developments. The Committee had, however, felt  
that the interface between policy and academia required greater synergy. The Committee had,  
therefore, recommended that the Policy Planning and Research Division should make persistent  
efforts to incorporate academic and policy analysis into the process of foreign policy formulation.  
There was also a need for wider dissemination of the publications of Reports, Briefs and 
compendia of the Ministry and its network of think tanks and autonomous bodies. The Comm ittee 
had also desired that the Ministry should reach out to established think tanks in partner countries 
for a deeperexchange of ideas and policies. 
50. The Ministry of External Affairs in its Action Taken Reply stated that Policy dialogues are  
an established diplomatic mechanism that facilitates exchange of perceptions and ideas. The 
purpose of these dialogues, within the broader bilateral relationship, is to focus on long -term trends 
and develop a deeper and more wide -based understanding on import ant bilateral, regional, and  
global issues. They usually complement and supplement other dialogue mechanisms such as 
Foreign Office Consultations and subject-specific dialogue mechanisms that have a more 
immediate and tactical focus. 
Policy Planning Division has initiated and conducted Policy dialogues with several partners with  
robust policy units. They have been instituted with the assistance of Missions abroad which 
maintain contact with policy units in their countries of accreditation. Ag endas for dialogues are  
decided based on consultations through diplomatic channels. 
The themes usually include broad surveys of the international scene with an analysis of  
geo-political, geo-economic, and increasingly, geo-technical trends. Multilateral issues, particularly 
the evolution and impact of long-term trends, are invariably discussed. Bilateral and regional issues 
of interest to either partner, particularly those with strategic implications over a longer timeframe,  
are included on the agenda on the basis of mutual discussions. 

30 | P a g e  
The output of the talks is circulated with the relevant diplomatic stakeholders and informs  
the policy formulation process within the Ministry by bringing in longer -term, historical, and  
strategic perspectives. 
Many of the dialogues have moved to virtual platforms following the pandemic. This has  
also facilitated more sustained and regular interaction between Policy units. 
Policy dialogues conducted in 2018 
The following table lists the PPDs held in the year 2018. 
 
S.No Policy Planning Dialogue Date and Year 
1. India-Indonesia Policy-Planning Dialogue 15.01.2018 
2. India-Japan Policy Planning Dialogue 18.07.2018 
3. India-Iran Policy Planning Dialogue 04.09.2018 
 
These dialogues involved a productive exchange of views on themes such as foreign policy 
priorities of the respective countries, relations with the major powers of the world, issues of global  
governance, terrorism, connectivity in Asia, etc. 
Policy dialogues conducted in 2019 
The following table lists the PPDs held in the year 2019. 
 
S.No Policy Planning Dialogue Date and Year 
1. India-Russia Policy-Planning Dialogue 07.06.2019 
2. India-Indonesia Policy-Planning Dialogue 11.07.2019 
3. India-Germany Policy-Planning Dialogue 10.09.2019 
 
Themes discussed included regional issues such as developments in the EU, India and its  
evolving neighbourhood, Multilateralism in times of Great Power Competition, Indo-Pacific, 
Transatlantic relations, US -China, China-Russia, crisis hotspots, ASEAN Outlook on the Indo - 
Pacific, BRI and indebtedness of recipient nations, to name a few. 
 
 
Policy dialogues conducted in 2020-21 
The following table lists the PPDs held in 2020-21: 

31 | P a g e  
S.No Policy Planning Dialogue Session I Session II 
1. India-Vietnam 15/09/20 -- 
2. India-Germany 29/09/20 -- 
3. India-EU 19/10/20 28/01/21 
4. India-Israel 21/10/20 22/12/20 
5. India-Turkey 22/10/20 -- 
6. India-Australia 23/10/20 04/02/21 
7. India-Denmark 10/11/20 -- 
8. India-BRICS 10/12/20 -- 
9. India-UK 17/12/20 -- 
10. India-Poland 28/01/21 24/03/21 
11. India-Russia 16/02/21 -- 
 
Relations with US, China, Europe, Middle East and Indo -Pacific, geo -technological and  
geo-energy trends, multilateral cooperation and international architecture, global multilateral trends 
- counter-terrorism, climate change, health, migration and demographics, UNSC- India’s 
Priorities, perspectives on the post COVID -19 world order, Conflicts - emerging trends and fault  
lines, future of globalization, emerging economic and trade issues including supply chain 
resilience, big tech, great powers and their relations, etc., were discussed during these dialogues. 
Policy Planning Division has been funding various research projects, with a view to fulfil 
its mandate of encouraging research in the foreign policy domain. Research projects are regularly  
commissioned in Think Tanks and academic institutions. Officers in the Division maintain regular  
contact with academics and researchers working on areas of interest to the Ministry. 
The Ministry supports Track 1.5 Dialogues with the participation of prominent think -tanks. 
Regular interactions of academics with senior officials are facilitated by this Division. The four  
flagship annual conferences - Raisina Dialogue, Global Technology Summit, Asian Economic  
Dialogue, and Indian Ocean Conference - are supported by the Ministry in collaboration with  
prominent think-tanks to facilitate greater interaction of academia with the policy-making 
community. 

32 | P a g e  
The following is the list of Conferences/Track 1.5 Dialogues and Other Conferences 
supported by this Division in FY 2019-20 and FY 2020-21: 
S.No. Conference/Track 1.5 Dialogue Partner Institute 
Flagship Conferences 
1. Raisina Dialogue Observer Research Foundation 
2. Global Technology Summit Carnegie India 
3. Asia Economic Dialogue Pune International Centre 
4. Indian Ocean Conference India Foundation 
Track 1.5 Dialogues 
5. India-Republic of Korea  
 
Ananta Aspen Centre 6. India-Japan Forum 
7. Indo-US Forum 
8. India-Japan Delhi Policy Group 
9. India-Canada Gateway House 
Track 2 Dialogues 
10. India-Myanmar Conference India Foundation 
11. India-Bangladesh Conference Jadavpur Association of International 
Relations (JAIR) 
12. West Asia Conference ManoharParrikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MP-IDSA) 
13. Kolkata-Dhaka Dialogue HP Ghosh Research Centre, Jadavpur 
University 
Other Conferences 
14. Dialogue on Strategic Security Threats National Institute of Advanced Studies 
NIAS-CISAC 

33 | P a g e  
15. Conference on India’s Neighbourhood 
Policy 
VidyaPrasarakMandal 
16. Conference on Indo-Pacific Madurai Kamaraj University 
17. IAAPS Conference Indian Association for Asian and 
Pacific Studies 
 
The following table lists thematic research projects supported by the Division in FY 2019- 
20 and FY 2020-21 
S. No. Financial Year Institute Project 
1. 2019-20 Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on Pakistan 
Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on 
Bangladesh 
Association of Indian 
Diplomats 
A quarterly journal of Foreign Policy 
Chennai Centre for 
China Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 
Centre for China 
Analysis and Strategy 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 
2. 2020-21 Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on Pakistan 
Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on 
Bangladesh 
Association of Indian 
Diplomats 
A quarterly journal of Foreign Policy 
Chennai Centre for 
China Studies (CCCS) 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 

34 | P a g e  
  Centre for China 
Analysis and Strategy 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 
 
The Ministry has a system of circulating policy papers within the larger policy community  
both within the government and outside. Policy Planning Division has circulated papers on the  
following topics in the last 12 months: 
1. COVID series non-papers 
2. Think-Tank Survey in India 
3. The Legal Implications of Brexit for India 
4. Geo-political and Geo-economic Impact of Coronavirus and the Implications for 
India 
5. Coronavirus Pandemic, Global Supply Chain input on India 
6. Radical Islamic Terrorism in Africa 
7. Mapping of Think Tank and Track 1.5 Linkages 
8. Paper on “Emerging Contours of Health Diplomacy 
9. Disruptive Trends in Economic Diplomacy 
 
The Division regularly produces a Think-Tank compendium which is shared extensively with 
various stakeholders. The Compendium comprises the output of select Indian think -tanks dealing 
with diplomacy, international trade, and national security. Several relevant webinars/seminars and  
conferences organized by think-tanks are monitored by Policy Planning and Research Division and  
an attempt is made to identify broad trends in foreign policy thinking and analysis. 
The Ministry ensures that the deliberations of conferences and Track 1.5 dialogues supported  
by it are widely disseminated to the academic community and public. It has also intensified its  
presence in social media and other channels to better communicate with stakeholders of foreign  
policy. 
Ministry of External Affairs and its network of Missions and Posts abroad interacts 
extensively with the foreign policy research community at headquarters and abroad. Several formal  
and informal connections have developed th at promote collaboration amongst think -tanks and  
research/ academic institutions. These have been mapped by the Policy Planning Division 
(Annexure III Paper on Think Tank Mapping). 

35 | P a g e  
The Policy Planning Division supports research collaborations/academic conferences 
organised by various universities and think-tanks on a case-to-case basis. Some of these 
collaborations through think -tanks and universities involve foreign partners as well. The annually  
organised India-South Korea and India-Japan Track 1.5 Dialogues are supported by the Ministry  
which has collaboration between Indian think-tanks and think-tanks from South Korea and Japan to 
cite a few examples. 
RIS and ICWA have established research collaborations with think tanks, research 
institutes, and academic institutes of foreign countries, on issues pertaining to foreign policy. The  
details are available at Annexure I and II, respectively. 
The Think Tank space in India is expanding rapidly. Think tanks are connectivity rich and 
the Indian think-tank space is organically linked and growing with a larger global public diplomacy 
space. The Policy Planning Division is in regular contact with many research organisations and  
Think Tanks based in New Delhi and all over India. These organisations have robust collaboration  
mechanisms with important opinion makers and stakeholders all over the world. To know more  
about these collaborations, the Division undertook an exercise to map Think Tanks and 1.5 
linkages between India and 20 select countries. 19 India -based Think Tanks active in this space  
were identified. This exercise helped Ministry gain domain awareness and a database about this  
vital public diplomacy sphere. It also helped formulate a working database of the think-tank space 
in India and their linkages abroad while giving Ministry a sense of their evolution over time. 
One of the mandates of Indian Missions and Posts across the world is to establish and  
maintain exchanges with Think Tanks and research institutions in the host countries. Indian 
Missions and Posts across the world regularly and systematically maintain contact with Think  
Tanks and academic/ research institutions in their countries of accreditation. They regularly meet  
with such Think Tanks, participate in events, and interact with Think Tank and academic personnel  
and researchers. The results of these interactions are reported to Ministry through its system of  
diplomatic reporting. Ministry, through its Missions and Posts, is therefore in r egular contact with 
established Think Tanks in countries in the world. Further, a large number of these Think Tanks 
and institutions conduct visits to India. Meetings with Ministry officials are a regular feature of 
their programs. Ministry through participation of growing number Track 1.5 dialogues interacts  
frequently with a growing number of international Think Tanks. 
The two organisations supported by the Ministry, ICWA and RIS have regular programs 
of interactions, academic and research collaborations with partner institutions in several countries and 

36 | P a g e  
academic bodies in other countries. The research resulting from such collaborations is published in  
various academic journals. As far as establishing research collaboration with national and international 
MoU partners is concerned, ICWA has 53 international and 18 National MoU partners. Efforts are  
underway to establish more research collaboration with national and international MoU partners. 
51. With the objective of enhancing the research base and inclusion of varied perspectives  
into our foreign policy, the Policy Planning and Research Division was urged to deepen  
engagements with academia and think tanks both within and outside India. In its Action Taken 
Replies, the Ministry has enlisted a plethora of measures taken by the Policy Planning &  
Research Division along, Autonomous bodies like Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) ,  
Research & Information System (RIS) and Missions/Posts abroad. Some of the notable efforts 
include conducting of Policy Dialogues, funding research, extensive interactions with think  
tanks, research organizations and academic Institutes; and supporting research 
collaborations/academic conferences organised by universities and  think-tanks. As regards,  
the Committee’s recommendation about wider dissemination of publications by the Ministry  
as well as its autonomous bodies (ICWA and RIS), the Ministry has submitted that the results 
emanating from interaction of its autonomies bodies like RIS and ICWA with partner 
institutions and academic bodies in other countries are published in various journals. 
Recognizing the significance of public diplomacy, the Committee are of the opinion that there  
is immense scope for engagement with academic institutions, think tanks and research 
organizations and the Ministry should widen and deepen such exchanges. The outcomes of  
such exchanges should be widely publicized for public information and incorporated in our  
foreign policy agenda. 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 41) 
FOREIGN POLICY DOCUMENT 
52. According to the Ministry, the key principles shaping and guiding Indian foreign policy  
were to pursue pragmatic and outcome oriented engagements, build influence in key global forums, 
creation of mutually beneficial, people oriented regional frameworks for stability and prosperity,  
working out reformed multilateralism and globalization and strengthening bonds of Indian 
Diaspora with their homeland. The Ministry had also informed that there was no single overarching 
and formalized strategic document that could delineate a roadmap for India’s foreign policy 
apparatus and that the underlying principles of our diplomatic strategy were long established and 

37 | P a g e  
enduring. The Ministry continually assessed and refine its diplomatic stance and policies in 
response to evolving global challenges. India’s positions on relevant issues and its interests, in the  
context of these principles, have been articulated through various platfor ms. The Committee had 
observed that frequent consultations were held with concerned Ministries/Departments and other  
organizations of the Government while formulating specific foreign policy goals. The Committee  
had also noted that mechanism of Foreign Office consultations exists with all countries for 
consultations on foreign policy. The Committee had  also noted that the Ministry is  utilizing 
subject specialist consultants. 
Over the years, the Committee had been encouraging the Ministry to articulate India’s 
grand strategy encompassing short term, medium term and long term objectives of our foreign  
policy The Committee were unimpressed by the Ministry’s justification for not having a grand  
strategy. The Committee had, therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should take all necessary steps to spell out a coherent and balanced Grand Foreign  
Policy strategy for India on priority basis. 
53. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry stated that India’s fo reign policy is articulated, in  
accordance with precedent, law and parliamentary rules in documents that are available in the  
public domain. Continuity and change have been one of the defining characteristics of India’s  
foreign policy. The ends of our fore ign policy are deeply intertwined with national developmental  
priorities. Correspondingly, the means and strategies devised to achieve those ends have been  
attuned such that there is maximum convergence between India’s global diplomatic engagement  
and dome stic development. In effect, India’s foreign policy strategy is aimed to diversify and  
expand the country's political, economic, and geo -strategic options to ensure that India continues  
moving on an upward trajectory as a fast-growing inclusive economy, with a rising profile in 
global affairs. 
A changing world requires a dynamic foreign policy. Over the decades, India has rapidly grown in  
economic, political, and military strength. Consequently, India’s global footprint has expanded  
remarkably. There is greater integration of Indian economy with regional and global economies.  
Our commerce, trade and energy linkages have grown substantially. Connectivity  – physical, 
digital, and financial – with our neighbouring partners and beyond is a fast -emerging reality. Our  
diaspora has grown in stature and profile and has expanded vertically and horizontally across the  
world. We have much stake in global governance regimes that shape our climate, technology,  
health, and other socio-economic policies. 

38 | P a g e  
While no single overarching policy document can capture all aspects of India’s foreign  
policy, the principles of India’s diplomatic strategy are long-established and enduring. The 
underlying principles and priorities have been disseminated by the Ministry through various 
channels of public communication. 
The Annual Report of the Ministry contains a comprehensive statement of policies followed in the  
diplomatic sphere and their implementation. Replies to Parliamentary Questions, submissions to  
Parliamentary Committees and Ministerial statements also articulate foreign policy strategy in  
accordance with the rules of parliamentary democracy. 
Public statements by the President, Vice President, Prime Minister, Minister of External  
Affairs, the Minister  of State in  the Ministry, and senior  officials of the Ministry of  External 
Affairs which are collated on the website of the Ministry are also utilized to articulate Indian  
diplomatic and foreign policy objectives. This is supplemented by other diplomatic documents  
which contain the public expression of foreign policy priorities. This is in accordance with 
international practice as followed by the foreign offices of major powers. 
The Ministry would also like to draw attention of the Committee to its Recommendation no. 
40 of the Seventh Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Demands for  
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2020-21 whereby the committee 
recommended that the Ministry conduct a comparative study of countries’ grand strategy. In 
accordance with the recommendations of the Standing Committee,Indian Missions across the world 
were asked to provide information a bout the existence of grand foreign policy documents/strategy  
in their countries of accreditation and whether such documents, if they exist, are brought out by  
Foreign Offices. 
The responses received are tabulated as Annexure IV. 
The main findings of the survey are as follows : 
a. Out of the 171 countries surveyed, 86%, i.e.,148 countries, do not have any single 
comprehensive strategy document. (Table A) 
b. countries and the EU publish comprehensive strategy documents about strategic and foreign 
policy objectives. 17 of these documents are published by Foreign Offices. 6 of them are published  
by offices of Heads of Government (PMO equivalent). 
c. The 17 countries where the Foreign Office publishes strategy documents about strategic and 
foreign policy objectives are: 

39 | P a g e  
1. Australia 
2. Costa Rica 
3. Czech Republic 
4. Ecuador 
5. Ireland 
6. New Zealand 
7. Poland 
8. Peru 
9. Russia 
10. Spain 
11. Switzerland 
12. South Africa 
13. Thailand 
14. Turkey 
15. Finland 
16. Estonia 
17. Slovenia 
 
d. The EU document is published by European External Action Service. 
 
e. The 6 countries where strategy documents about strategic and foreign policy objectives are 
published by offices of Heads of Government are: 
Azerbaijan: (Azerbaijan in the International Arena/Office of the President) 
Belgium: (Comprehensive Approach-Strategy Note/Council of Ministers) 
Bosnia and Herzegovina: (The Foreign Policy Strategy of Bosnia and Herzegovina 2018- 
2023/Office of the President) 
Nigeria: (National Security Strategy/Office of the President) 
USA (National Security Strategic Guidance/ White House) 
UK (Global Britain in a Competitive Age: the Integrated Review of Security, Defence, 
Development and Foreign Policy/ UK PMO) 
Ministry’s practise of articulation of foreign policy through Annual Reports, Parliament 
discussions, statements of high functionaries etc is therefore in line with international practice of 
the vast majority of foreign offices. 

40 | P a g e  
54. Over the years in their DFG Reports, the Committee have been making the 
recommendation that the Ministry should articulate a cogent grand foreign policy strategy as  
a guiding framework for our bilateral, regional and multilateral engagements. The 
Committee are relieved to note that in pursuance of its recommendation, the Ministry has  
conducted a comparative study of countries’ grand strategy. Based on the data furnished by  
the Ministry 148 of the 171 countries surveyed do not have any single comprehensive strategy  
document. The Ministry has therefore as serted that its practise of articulation of foreign  
policy through Annual Reports, Parliament discussions, statements of high functionaries etc 
is therefore in line with international practice of the vast majority of foreign offices. The  
Committee are satisfied to note that unlike previous years, the Ministry had offered a 
substantiated justification not having a grand strategy. The Committee, however, are of the  
opinion that the current practice of articulation of India’s foreign policy is fragmented and 
not well documented. The Ministry may accordingly come up with a Foreign Policy 
Document, if not a grand strategy, that clearly delineates the guiding framework for our  
foreign policy engagements. 

41 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Against a budgetary demand of Rs. 22,888.73 crore, the  Ministry of External Affairs 
has been allocated Rs. 18,154.73 crore for BE 2021 -22. The Committee observe that BE 2021-22 
allocation is the highest ever allocation to the Ministry and is 4.66% more than BE 2020-21 
and 21 %  more than  RE 2020-21 allocation. Notwithstanding these figures, the percentage of  
MEA’s budget during 2021 -22 as a percentage of GOI’s budget is me rely 0.52%. While the  
increased allocation to MEA in absolute term is a fine development, however it is continuously  
slipping down as a percentage of the GOI’s total expenditure. The Ministry’s affirmative response  
to the Committee’s query on adequacy of a llocated budget indicates that the former has accepted  
budgetary constraint as  a given reality. Keeping in view the extent and magnitude of India’s  
diplomatic outreach and foreign policy objectives, the Committee strongly feel  that the allocation 
is incomm ensurate and inadequate. Budgetary resources will play a determining role in India’s  
pursuit of permanent seat at United Nations Security Council (UNSC) that require adequate global  
presence and expansion of diplomatic outreach. Provisioning of adequate finances is critical to  
ensure that India’s global footprint and diplomatic outreach is not circumscribed. The Committee,  
therefore, strongly recommend that the allocation to the Ministry of  External Affairs, mandated  
with managing India’s externa l relations, should further be suitably and appropriately enhanced  
from what is being provisioned now. The Ministry of External Affairs should make a strong case  
for the same. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will continue to engage with the 
Ministry of Finance at all levels to emphasize the importance of providing adequate budgetary  
allocations to the Ministry and to ensure that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in the  
pursuit of its international commitments. 

42 | P a g e  
As submitted earlier and noted by the Committee, sustained engagement with the Ministry  
of Finance has resulted in increased allocation of Rs. 18,154.73 crore for BE 2021 -22, the highest 
ever allocation to th e Ministry, with an increase of 4.66% over BE 2020 -21 and 21 % over RE  
2020-21. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
The gap between budgetary demand and actual allocation to the Ministry of External 
Affairs at both the BE as well as the RE level have been a recurrent feature of MEA’s Demands for 
Grants. The Ministry has informed that the two pronged approach of making realistic and need  
based assessment coupled with closer consultative process with the Ministry of Finance has yielded 
the most favourable BE allocation ratio with RE 2020 -21 (82% of demand) and BE 2021 -22 
(79.32% of demand) to the Ministry. Owing to the reduction in budgetary allocation during RE  
2020-21, the Ministry had to undertake re-assessment of fund requirements for budget heads. 
The Committee are happy to learn that the Ministry’s RE and BE demand- allocation 
differential has improved, demonstrating realistic projections and constructive appreciation of 
Ministry’s requirements by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee urge that the Ministry should  
continue to make unrelenting efforts in narrowing down the RE and BE demand-allocation 
differential through credible budgetary demands justified by efficient utilization of funds  and 
objective assessment of anticipated expenditures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry highly values the observations & recommendations of the Committee and would like to  
assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will continue to make efforts to narrow the gap between  
demand and allocation at RE and BE stages. To this end, Ministry will further sharpen the existing  
and successful strategy of making realistic and need based assessment of budgetary requirement  
coupled with closer consultative process with the Ministry of Finance, wh ile also ensuring robust  
utilization of funds in an efficient and timely manner. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 

43 | P a g e  
(Recommendation No 3) 
 
Recognizing the significance of a focused budgetary planning process, the Committee  
have emphatically stressed upon the need to develop a well-defined and focused budgetary planning 
(including Zero-Based Budgeting). In its replies, the Ministry has informed that a rigorous 
mechanism of Quarterly Budget Management Meeting has been developed whereby detailed 
exercise for head-wise evaluation of projects under various Heads are carried out. Furthermore, the  
overarching principle of Zero-Based Budgeting guides the continuous evaluation and assessment of 
budgetary allocation as against fund utilization i n Ministry’s budget management. Appreciating the 
Ministry’s efforts to incorporate the idea of Zero -Based Budgeting in the budgetary planning  
process, the Committee suggest that sustained endeavour should be made to make precise, 
objective and  realistic de mands by all Divisions/Spending Units to diminish the  gap between 
budgetary demand and allocation. 
The Committee note the lack of gender budgeting dimension in MEA’s scheme of  
things. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to constitute a Gender Budget Cell in line 
with the 2007 Guidelines of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. In Committee’s  
view as a powerful instrument for achieving gender mainstreaming, the concept of Gender 
budgeting, must be integrated in the Ministry’s policy formulation, implementation and review. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry appreciates the Hon’ble Committee’s recognition of its efforts in incorporating the  
principle of zero-based budgeting in the budgetary planning process. Ministry would like to 
reaffirm its focused efforts to make precise, objective and realistic demands by all 
Divisions/Spending Units to diminish the gap between budgetary demand and allocation. 
As far as the aspect of Gender Budgeting is concerned, Ministry would like to apprise the  
Hon’ble Committee that as per the 2007 Guidelines of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry has 
constituted a Gender Budget Cell (with the latest Cell being reconstituted in September 2020),  
headed by an officer of the rank of Jo int Secretary. In addition, Ministry administers a number of  
fully women-centric schemes (100 % provision towards women) and pro -women schemes (at least 
30% provision towards women) under its different Aid Heads. Some instances of such schemes in  
the Current Financial Year are - construction of Girls Hostel Building for Nepal APF School in  
Kathmandu, Special Programme for Women Correspondents, India Palestine Centre for 

44 | P a g e  
Empowering Women in Palestine, Assistance for Livelihood Improvement, Women Empowerment 
and Awareness Programme, etc. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 5) 
 
After the discontinuation of the Plan and Non -Plan classification since Financial Year  
2017-18, budget classifications are being done along  two verticals – Revenue and Capital heads 
and Scheme and Non -scheme Sections. The Committee observe that there has been an increase in  
allocations under both the Revenue and Capital sections during BE 2021-22 and decreased 
allocations during RE 2020 -21. A ccording to the Ministry, there are varied reasons for reduced  
allocations which inter-alia includes disruptions in supply chains, manpower and material 
availability due to COVID-19 lockdown, extant Cash Management Guidelines, etc. The Committee 
observe that adjustments have been made in allocation under various budget heads of MEA to  
comply with the overall RE and BE ceilings given by the Ministry of Finance. While 
acknowledging the grounds for reduced allocations during RE 2020 -21, the Committee  are of the  
firm opinion that the current allocations under both Capital and Revenue sections would be 
inadequate. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge that the Ministry should undertake a detailed  
and careful assessment of funds requirements for variou s heads in MEA budget and make a  case 
for enhanced allocation at the RE stage to cover up for the slow pace of progress last year due to  
Covid-19 pandemic. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has noted the concerns of  the Hon’ble Committee and would like to submit that 
our existing mechanism of holding Quarterly Budget Management Meetings with major Divisions  
and Spending Units, chaired by Foreign Secretary or Financial Advisor, where spending as well as  
demands are assessed in detail based on project -wise status of implementation, has assisted in the  
Ministry projecting realistic demands for a given financial year for the Revised Estimates and for  
the subsequent financial year for the Budget Estimates. Further, Ministry will focus on  achieving 
anticipated implementation progress in all key result areas and ensuring robust expenditure in the  
first half of the financial year, which would assist in making a positive case with Ministry of  
Finance at the RE stage. 

45 | P a g e  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
(Recommendation No 6) 
 
The Committee note that an allocation of  Rs. 7635.15 crore and Rs. 10,519.58 crore has  
been made at BE 2021-22 for Scheme and Non-Scheme Sections, respectively. In terms of 
distribution about 42% of MEA’s budget is on Scheme side, which primarily constitutes Technical  
and Economic Cooperation with other countries. The Non-Scheme Section  includes Passport 
Sewa Project, Missions/Post abroad, obligatory as well as voluntary contributions to UN and other  
International Organizations. 
The Committee are aware that both  the Scheme and  Non-Scheme sections are vital in  
their own right. However, by virtue of catering to international aid and assistance programmes that  
directly impinge upon our international credentials; the Committee are of the considered view that  
the Scheme section should be given requisite priority in budgetary allocations. The Committee are  
pleased to learn that there has been intensive monitoring and review of technical aid and assistance  
programmes in the past year, including at the  level of External Affairs Minister and Foreign  
Secretary. These institutionalized reviews have led to identification of several new initiatives and  
projects. While maintaining a fine balance between our aid and  non-aid outlays, the Committee are 
hopeful that the Scheme section will be kept unaffected from budgetary cuts.  The Committee  
would recommend that the Ministry should ensure that funds are available for  smooth and 
efficient implementation of our international projects without any cost and time over -runs. The  
Committee also desire that the Ministry should prepare a detailed  timeline for initiation and 
completion of the newly identified projects and initiatives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to reaffirm its focused efforts to ensure adequacy of funds for its  
international projects and robust utilization of allocated funds in an efficient and timely manner.  
Ministry would like to also reassure Hon’ble Committee that it will  continue to engage with  
Ministry of Finance to keep them informed of funds required to meet our international 
commitments and to emphasize the importance of providing adequate budgetary allocations to the  
Ministry. Further, Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will con tinue its  
endeavour to complete projects within the timelines envisaged while also addressing the inherent 

46 | P a g e  
political, security, geological and other challenges faced by the Ministry in implementing projects 
abroad. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
Upon careful scrutiny of the budget documents and replies furnished by  the Ministry, 
the Committee observe a smooth and balanced pace of expenditure during each quarter of the  
Financial Year 2020-21. The cumulative expenditure in the first three quarters have been 21%, 
39% and 62% which is in consonance with the Cash Management Guidelines of Ministry of  
Finance. The Committee note that in order to ensure optimum utilization of budgetary resources, 
expenditure is closely and regularly monitored through quarterly review meetings. It is satisfying to 
note that the mechanism has resulted in effective budgetary utilization to the tune of 98% over past  
five years. 
While acknowledging the pruden t and optimum utilization pattern of MEA  for BE  
2020-21, the Committee would urge that the Ministry should continue its focused approach 
towards sharper monitoring and expenditure management through its review meetings. Such 
perfect budgetary utilization would certainly make a compelling case for enhanced budgetary  
allocation to MEA during RE 2021-22 as well as BE 2022-23. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry acknowledges recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee on optimization of 
budgetary utilisation, and Ministry would endeavour to reinforce its sustained and focused 
approach towards sharper monitoring and expenditure management through its review meetings at  
the highest levels. Ministry will continue to engage with the Ministry of Finance for adequate  
budgetary allocation at the RE 2021 -22 as well as BE 2022 -23, justified by efficient utilization of  
funds and objective assessment of anticipated expenditures, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s  
recommendation. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 

47 | P a g e  
(Recommendation No 8) 
 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under the head ‘Embassies and 
Missions’ has been enhanced from Rs. 2994.06 crore (BE 2020-21) to Rs. 3240.07 crore (BE 2021- 
22). As per the Ministry, the inc reased allocation is for opening of new Missions/Posts to expand  
our diplomatic outreach. In Committee’s view Missions and Posts constitute the vital interface not  
only between India and the respective country in which they are located but also serves as i ts 
connect with Indian diaspora.  The Committee also understand that resident Indian Missions are  
opened on the basis of potential for deepening strategic cooperation, strong potential for bilateral  
trade and investment, strong Diaspora presence, bolster political outreach and for signaling India’s  
commitment to stepping up of diplomatic engagement with important countries/regions. The 
upward budgetary allocation under the head ‘Embassies and Missions’ is a satisfying development.  
However, the Comm ittee find that like the overall trend in  MEA’s Demands for Grants, there has  
been a mismatch between the budgetary projection and actual allocation under this head. The  
Committee also note the good pace of expenditure and budgetary utilization under this sub head 
during the past three years. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should actively seek  
to redress the sub - optimal allocation under this head with the Ministry of  Finance at all levels. 
The prudent expenditure pattern displayed by th e Ministry should be cited as a valid ground for  
suitable improvement in allocation at the RE stage. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will continue to engage with 
the Ministry of Finance to redress the optimal allocation under the budgetary allocation under the  
head “Embassies and Missions”. As pointed out, our increasing diplomatic footprint coupled with  
robust utilization of budgetary allocation under this head has been cited and will conti nue to be  
cited as grounds for more budgetary allocation under this Head. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 12) 
 
The issuance of passports in a timely, seamless and hassle free manner is the most  
citizen-centric service provided by the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee are also aware 

48 | P a g e  
that there are 93 Passport Seva Kendras (PSK) and 426 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras 
(POPsK) functioning under the supervision of the 36 Passport Offices in the  country to handle 
this important work. The Passport Seva Programme (PSP) has been extended to the 
Missions/Posts abroad in order to provide better and smoother service to Indian diaspora living  
abroad. So far, 153 Missions/Posts have been integrated into Passport Sev a Project and integration 
of 26 other Missions/Posts is underway. It is seen that MEA maintains a centralized database of  
passports – Passport Related Information Data Exchange (PRIDE). It has established a robust  
grievance redressal mechanism with a multi-lingual call centre operating in 17 languages on a 24x7 
basis. Additionally, a Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism has also been set up in all Passport  
Offices to attend and redress any complaint within a time-frame. The Ministry has further informed 
that in the States/UTs where mPassport Police app has been launched, the time of average Police  
Verification Report (PVR) has been reduced to 18 days. 
The Committee are pleased to learn about a plethora of measures taken by the Ministry  
to make qualitative an d quantitative improvements in passport services in recent times. The vast  
expanse of our passport office network is laudable.  The Committee, however, urge the Ministry to  
ensure that there is a PSK/POPKs in every parliamentary constituency. While apprecia ting the  
progress made in integration of Passport Seva Projects (PSP) with Missions/Posts abroad, the  
Committee desire that the remaining Missions/Posts are integrated at the earliest. The Ministry  
should also make consistent efforts to  encourage States/UTs to launch the ‘mPolice App’ so that  
the time taken for submission of Police Verification Report is reduced to the minimum. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 17 May 2021, 519 Passport Kendras, including 93 Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) 
and 426 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras (POPSKs), are functioning in the country as an 
extended arm of 36 Passport Offices (POs). By opening of 93 PSK and 426 POPSKs, the Ministry  
has covered 489 Lok Sabha Constituencies where there is at least one Passport Kend ra. The  
Ministry of External Affairs and the Department of Posts are working together to ensure 
operationalization of a POPSK in the remaining 54 Lok Sabha Constituencies. 
Ministry had advised 189 Missions/Posts to acquire the necessary IT equipment for  
integration into the PSP system. Out of these 189 Missions/Posts, 4 Missions/Posts are temporarily  
closed and 5 Missions/Posts do not issue passports. As on current date, 166 Missions/Posts have been 
successfully integrated into the Passport Seva Project. 7 Missions/Posts have procured the requisite IT 

49 | P a g e  
equipment and the integration process is currently in progress. Remaining 7 Missions/Posts are in  
process of acquiring the necessary IT equipment and Ministry is coordinating with them to expedite 
the process. Once the availability of the IT equipment is confirmed by the remaining 7 Missions/Posts 
to the Ministry, the integration process would be started remotely. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 13) 
 
The Committee observe  that the  shortage of personnel is one  of the key challenges  
faced by the Ministry in expansion of Passport Seva Project (PSP). Against the sanctioned strength  
of 2,741, the actual working strength of Central Pa ssport Organization (CPO) is 1,789 (as on  
01.02.2021). The difficulty in filling the vacant posts in CPO cadre is attributable to the extant  
Recruitment Rules, which allows direct recruitment only in the grades of Office Assistant, Junior  
Passport Assistant (JPA), Stenographer, Junior Translator and Assistant Superintendent. MEA has  
been indenting Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for recruitment in these grades as per available  
vacancies. Against an indent of 310 posts that was made in 2017, SSC has recomme nded only 118 
persons till date. As an interim measure the Ministry has engaged 347 Data Entry Operators to ease  
the pressure created due to shortage of staff.  During examination of Demands for Grants for the  
past few years, the Ministry had informed that a proposal for physical inspection and staffing study  
of CPO by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure has been sent to  
Ministry of Finance in November 2019.  The Committee would desire to be apprised about the  
progress made in that regard. The Committee also recommend that the issue of human resource  
shortage must be taken up with Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) at the highest level  
and a lasting solution be worked out. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The sanctioned strength of Central Passport Organisation is 2741 and the actual working  
strength of the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) Cadre is 1783, as on 1 May, 2021. In addition,  
21 posts (including 15 Technical  and 6 supporting staff) were created  by the Union  Cabinet 
decision in 2007 to man the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Passport  Seva Project. 
Recently, dossiers for 31 Junior Translators from Staff Selection Commission have been received  
and appointment letters issued to the candidates, out of which 5 have joined. Dossiers for 6 

50 | P a g e  
Stenographers (Grade “D”) and 24 Office Assistant (MTS) grade are awaited from the Staff 
Selection Commission (SSC).  The break-up of the vacancies is as under: 
 
 
Sl. No. Group 'A' Group 'B' Gazetted Group 'B' and Group 'C' 
non Gazetted 
1 Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working 
strength 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working 
strength 
Total 226 192 565 362 1950 1229 
Vacancy 34 203 721 
 
Group 'A' posts : Eligible Officers from feeder post are not available, hence needed to fill up  
vacancies on deputation, in consultation with the UPSC. 
 
Group 'B' (Gazetted) posts: No one is eligible from feeder grade, hence vacant. 
 
Group 'B' (non -gazetted) and Group 'C' Posts : 199 vacancies have been indented for direct  
recruitment to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for the vacancy years 2018, 2019 & 2020.  SSC 
has also been requested to either conduct the Limited Departmental Competitive Examination  
(LDCE) or allow M inistry to conduct the LDCE for 151 vacancies.  The rest of the vacancies are  
due to following reasons: 
(i) Direct recruit vacancies for the year 2021 are yet to be indented to SSC when called for. 
(ii) The employees with requisite qualifying service in the feeder grade are not available to fill 
the promotion vacancies. 
(iii) Recently, 17 appointment letters were issued to the candidates against which they are yet to 
join 
 
2.         A proposal for the physical inspection and staffing study of CPO by the Staff Inspection 
Unit (SIU) of the Department of Expenditure has been sent to the Ministry of Finance in November 
2019. In March 2021, Ministry of Finance has been requested to accord priority to this matter and  
consider undertaking Physical Inspection & Staffin g Study of Central Passport Organisation on an  
urgent basis. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 

51 | P a g e  
(Recommendation No 14) 
 
The budgetary allocation under the sub -head ‘South Asian University’ has witnessed a  
downward trend from Rs. 325 crore in BE 2020-21 to Rs. 150 crore at RE 2020 -21 and to Rs. 314  
crore in BE 2021 -22. The construction work of SAU is divided into 4 packages –Package-I was 
completed in January 2016; Package-II was completed in December, 2020, Package-III is scheduled 
to be complete d by September, 2021 and package IV have not been initiated yet due to ongoing  
litigation on some land pockets. The Ministry has submitted that various encumbrances on allotted  
land and delay in grant of statutory approvals/permission by various local Gove rnment authorities 
has resulted in time over run in the South Asian University construction project.  The Ministry has 
informed that due to frequent NGT ban on construction activities in NCR and labour migration due  
to COVID-19 pandemic, construction work was severely affected during the past one year. Regular 
Progress Review Committee (RRC) meetings are conducted with the agency at site to expedite the  
work. The Committee observe that the total contribution of India to SAU including its operational  
cost is about US$ 225 million. 
The Committee express deep concern over the persistent delay in completion of 
construction work of the permanent campus of South Asian university in the name of litigation in a  
small portion of land.  In the considered opinion of the Committee, the tardy progress has visibly  
tarnished our capacity of leading regional initiatives. Highlighting the significance of timely 
implementation of projects, the Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the construction  
work of SAU should be completed as per schedule and no further time and cost overruns should 
be incurred. The Committee also desire that the academic credential of SAU should be maintained  
in terms of course curriculum, selection of students and faculty recruitment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry would like to update the Hon’ble Committee on the further progress of work in SAU  
construction project. Packages I & II of the construction of the South Asian University have been  
completed. The University is in the process of obtaining Occupancy Certificate for the completed  
buildings for shifting to the new campus. Package III is expected to be completed by December  
2021. The work progress has slowed down due to COVID 19-related restrictions/ lockdown. 
Package IV construction has not been initiated yet due to various encumbrances on allotted  
land/ongoing litigations on some land pockets. 

52 | P a g e  
DDA physically handed over only 93.68 acres of land to MEA in two instalments in 2010  
and 2011 out of the proposed al location of 100 acres for construction of the University at Maidan  
Garhi and the remaining 6.32 acres land, which was under litigation at the time, is yet to be  
allocated. 
Nearly 50% of the allocated 93.68 acres of land was found to be under various kinds of 
encumbrances or subsequently came under litigation.  The Ministry has brought down the land  
under litigation/other encumbrances through vigorous pursuit of court cases and liaison with the  
concerned agencies.  However, 14.96 acres of land is still under l itigation, which is not a single  
patch of land but in the form of scattered pockets (4.64, 3.63, 2.31, 2.30 and 2.08 acres) that  
prevents construction of the buildings that have footprint on any of these pockets in accordance  
with approved design. 
In addition, Forest Department in January 2015 informed that there had been an ingress into  
forest land and geo -morphological ridge area and hence no construction could be done on the  
encumbered land.  Supreme Court though granted permission for non-forest use of forest land  
subject to clearance being obtained under Forest Conservation Act, 1980 (FCA) and compliance  
with conditions that are imposed for such diversion of land use.  Delhi Government conveyed in  
March, 2019 that in order to obtain nec essary clearance, it is mandatory for the user agency to  
arrange for handing over and mutation of 1.0789 hectares (2.67 acres) of non -forest land in favour  
of Department of Forests and Wildlife. 
Out of the allocated land, DDA took back 4.29 acres of land f or peripheral road -widening 
and only partially compensated by allocating 2.47 acres of Gram Sabha land to MEA.  The 
University has recently informed us  that the Department of Forest has started constructing a 
boundary wall on the said Gram Sabha land as the  same has been declared ridge/forest land by the  
Special Task Force order 2012. 
Thus, the inordinate delay in commencing Package IV of the SAU construction project is  
due to shortfall of 28.24 acres of land scattered in several pockets that has been either  not yet  
allotted by DDA or is under litigation or encumbrance due to environmental issues. 
All such building that have footprint on the encumbered land were clubbed in Package IV.  
Ministry has been pursuing the court cases to release the remaining land totalling 14.96 acres under 
litigation and following up with DDA to allot 1.0789 hectares (2.67 acres) of an alternative land to  
Forest Department, GNCTD to obtain final clearance from the Forest Department for use of the  
ridge land and also to provide the remaining 6.32 acres of land as committed initially. Ministry is 

53 | P a g e  
also actively pursuing with Forest Settlement Office to denotify the Gram Sabha land (2.47 acres)  
which has been declared as ridge/forest land to enable the Ministry to take possession of the said  
land. 
As regards the academic credential of SAU in terms of course curriculum, it is submitted 
that selection of students is made through an entrance test followed by an interview (in case of Ph.D 
students). There is a periodic review of the curriculum.  Faculty members are appointed by the  
Selection Committee and the President thereafter recommends the selected applicants to the Executive 
Council. All teachers are selected on the basis of merit, in accordance with the procedure laid down 
in the Regulations.  The promotion of faculty members is linked to various academic parameters,  
which are comparable with those of other academic institutions. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 15) 
 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 250 crore has been provisioned for 
Nalanda University for BE 2020-21 as well as BE 2021 -22. Regarding the progress in construction 
work of Nalanda University, the Ministry has submitted t hat despite a time overrun at the initial  
stage, the pace of progress has accelerated from 0.3% in May 2017 to over 80% in January 2021.  
COVID-19 pandemic and the attendant restrictions had also adversely impacted the Nalanda 
University construction project. The pace of construction, however, has picked up and the 
remaining works are expected to be completed in 2021 -22. The University has also established a  
dedicated monitoring mechanism for timely completion of the works. The Committee are of the  
firm view that the construction work of Nalanda University campus should be completed in 2021 - 
22 without any delay. The Ministry should also ensure that the academic standards and curriculum  
are in keeping with the international image of the University. 
 
 
Reply of the Goverment 
 
Ministry has taken note of Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations and would like to 
submit that concerted efforts are being taken to accelerate the progress of construction for timely  
completion. By May 2021, a physical progress of approximately 83.5% of construction works has  
been achieved. 

54 | P a g e  
As per Section 8 (1) of the Nalanda University Act 2010, “ the Governing Board shall be  
responsible for all the policies and directions of the University and management of its affairs”. The 
Ministry through its participation in the Governing Board works to ensure that academic standards  
and curriculum are in keeping with the international image of the University. 
The Ministry is also coordinating with the Nalanda University for early completion of  
subordinate legislation (Statutes/Ordinances/Regulations) which will empower the University to fill 
functional gaps and strengthen its governance structures, including Statutes related to the 
establishment of new schools of study, composition, and powers of Academic Council etc. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 16) 
 
The Committee are aware that development partnership constitute a central plank of our  
foreign policy, and has continuously expanded in scope and outr each. The budget head ‘ Technical  
and Economic Cooperation’ covers expenditure related  to India's aid and assistance programmes.  
Following the overall budget trend of MEA, allocation under this head has grown from Rs. 6617.17 
(BE2020-21) to Rs.6754.40 (BE2 021-22). The Committee note that budgetary demands under this  
head are prepared after undertaking a realistic assessment of needs and spending patterns, based on  
project implementation cycles, local conditions and physical progress to effectively implement  the 
ongoing projects commitments as well as new off takes. The Committee observe that the Covid -19 
pandemic and resultant restrictions have adversely affected the implementation of ongoing projects  
in different partner countries. 
Over the years, the Committee have underscored the imperative of making the 
budgetary allocation under this head more predictable and consistent.  The Committee are happy to  
learn that in pursuance of its recommendation, the budget head ‘Technical and Economic 
Cooperation’ has been suitably allocated. The Committee  hope that with the gradual easing down  
of Covid restrictions, the various ongoing projects will gain momentum and more allocation might  
be required for swift implementation of ongoing projects in Financial Year 2021-22. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should seek additional finances, if required, from the  
Ministry of Finance, including supplementary grants or increased RE 2021 -22 allocation so that  
lack of funds do not hinder developmental assistance. 

55 | P a g e  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted with a view to  
incorporate them during implementation of the ongoing development projects in partner countries.  
As rightly pointed by the Hon’ble Committee, Budgetary Outlay under the Head ‘Technical and  
Economic Cooperation’ has been enhanced from Rs. 6617.17 (BE2020 -21) to Rs.6754.40 (BE  
2021-22). Ministry will ensure that as and when Covid-related restrictions are eased, the 
earmarked budget would be utilized towards implementation of the ongoing projects, based on  
realistic assessment of their physical and financial progress. In case additional funds are required,  
the same shall be requisitioned at the RE stage. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No 18) 
 
Given the considerable importance of India’s aid and assistance in South Asia and our  
pronounced policy of ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’, the Committee welcome  the increase 
in allocation for Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal and Myanmar which covers a wide spectrum of sectors 
such as projects on greater connectivity, improved infrastructure, strong cooperation in sectoral  
areas and broader people to  people contacts. However, the response of the Minist ry regarding the  
burgeoning Chinese presence in the neighbourhood, is generic and irrelevant. The Committee feel  
that the Ministry’s oblivious attitude to the growing Chinese presence in our neighbourhood is  
short-sighted and unrealistic. The Committee, th erefore, suggest that the Ministry should  take a 
well informed position in this regard and ensure that our aid projects in our neighbourhood are  
given utmost  priority with adequate fund allocation and expeditious  implementation aimed at  
strengthening our presence and influence in the neighbourhood. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it keeps a constant watch on all  
the developments having a bearing on India’s security and takes all necessary measures to 
safeguard it. The Government of India attaches high priority to our relationship with our 
neighbouring countries and considers its relations  with its neighbours are independent of the 
relations of those countries with third countries. The Government of India has a well articulated  
policy of ‘Neighbourhood First’ with a focus on creating mutually beneficial, people-oriented, 

56 | P a g e  
regional frameworks for stability and prosperity. These engagements cover a wide canvas of 
subjects like  projects on greater connectivity, improved infrastructure,  stronger cooperation in  
sectoral areas (like education, culture, trade & investments, defence and security) and broader  
people-to-people contacts. Our close, civilizational ties with Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh and 
Myanmar stand firmly on their own. Our development cooperation is tailored as per the priorities 
of our development partners and our focus is enhancing connectivity and deepening the economic  
linkages with our neighbours. 
Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee of ensuring that our aid projects  
in the neighbourhood are given utmost priority with adequate fund allocation and expeditious  
implementation aimed at strengthening our presence and influence in the neighbourhood. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 19) 
 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation under the minor head ‘Aid to  
Bangladesh’ for the year BE 2021 -22 has been kept at Rs. 200 crore which was the same in BE  
2020-21. However, at the RE 2020 -21 stage, the allocation  was reduced to Rs. 125 crore, based 
on actual pace of project implementation. The slow pace of implementation of projects under  
this head during the past three years is disconcerting. There are seve ral key ongoing projects in  
Bangladesh such as Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link, dredging of Kushiara and Gomti Rivers, 
construction of India Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline, Humanitarian assistance and several High  
Impact Community Development Projects (HICDPs) in the area of education, health, water, 
culture, urban development  disaster management and community welfare. Regarding the status  
of Akhaura Agartala Rail Link, the Ministry has submitted that the project has been delayed by  
multiple factors inc luding short working period, COVID pandemic and weak financial position of  
the contractor appointed by the Government of Bangladesh.  Till date, physical progress of 42.50%  
and financial progress of 38.70% has been achieved. The project is likely to be comp leted by the  
end of 2021. The Ministry has also informed that the India Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline is likely  
to be completed by September, 2021. 
The Committee express their strong disapproval of the utilization by the Ministry under  
this sub-head. In v iew of the tardy implementation of the various projects, the Committee would  
strongly recommend that the Ministry should take adequate measures to ensure full utilization of 

57 | P a g e  
budgetary allocation and timely completion of all ongoing projects in Bangladesh, particularly the 
Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link Project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to engage with Government of Bangladesh  
has been taken on board. It may be pointed out that based on the progress of various proposals, the 
budget allocation under the “Aid to Bangladesh” head was enhanced from Rs 125 crores at RE  
2020-21 to Rs 175 crores at the FE 2020-21 stage and was fully utilized. 
As far as the implementation of projects in Bangladesh is  concerned, Ministry would  
like to inform the Committee that despite the Covid constraints, progress on 5 HICDPs worth Rs 14 
crores during FY 2020 -21 has been achieved and project implementation has commenced. The  
Akhaura-Agartala rail link project on the Bangladeshi side is being executed by Bangladesh 
Railways with the financial assistance of the Government of India. Progress of the project has been  
delayed due to lockdown in Bangladesh in light of Covid-19 situation. Revised timeline for 
completion is December 2021 with present progress of work at 47.65%. Close supervision and  
periodic reviews are being undertaken to achieve full utilization of allocated funds for the Akhaura- 
Agartala Rail Link Project and for its early completion. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
(Recommendation No.20) 
 
India has extensive development partnership with Bhutan and budgetary allocations are  
provisioned under both Revenue and Capital Heads. An allocation of Rs. 2124.20 crore has been  
provided under the head ‘A id to Bhutan’ for BE 2021 -22. Apart from the Hydroelectric projects,  
Government of India is implementing Project Tied Assistance and Small Development Projects in  
Bhutan and this allocation has been kept aligned with project implementation progress. The 
Committee are happy to learn that India and Bhutan are collaborating on joint development of a  
small satellite for Bhutan. The Committee also observe that in line with our special relations with  
Bhutan, India has ensured continuous supply of trade and essential items to Bhutan, despite 
COVID-19 related lockdowns. India’s developmental partnership with Bhutan has been 
multifaceted and unique. The Committee are hopeful that the deepening engagement in traditional  
as well as non-traditional areas will grow with the inclusion of satellite development. The 
 Committee desire that the Ministry should continue to prioritize our special relationship with 

58 | P a g e  
Bhutan by completion of all the ongoing projects in a time bound manner without any parking of 
funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The fund requirement for projects under 'Aid -to-Bhutan' budget head are projected after  
comprehensive discussion with Indian Mission in Thimphu and keeping in view our long-term 
commitments with Bhutan and as discussed in the annual plan talks. All GoI assisted Hydro - 
Electric Projects (HEPs) in Bhutan are being continuously reviewed and monitored by the 
respective Project Authorities comprising senior officials of GoI a nd the Royal Government of  
Bhutan. Every effort is made to release funds as and when requested by respective Project 
Authorities, considering the availability of balance funds with the Project so that parking of funds  
could be avoided. 
 
Updated status of HEPs: 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Project/ Scheme Approved Value Scheduled date of 
completion 
Current Status 
1. Mangdechhu (720 MW 
HEP) 
INR   5012.63    Cr    (as 
approved in 3rd RCE in 
March 2019). 
 
Final Completion cost (at  
August 2019 PL) is under  
examination by the 
concerned Govt. 
Authorities. 
Project has been 
commissioned. It was  
inaugurated in Aug 
2019 by PMs of India  
and Bhutan. 
Physical progress- 
100%; 
Fund released so far: 
INR 5012.63 Cr 
2. Punatsangchhu-I (1200 
MW HEP) 
RCE of INR 9375.58 Cr 
(Approved in July 2015) 
June 2019 Physical progress- 
87.22% (as of Apr 
2021); 
Fund released so far:  
INR 8045.38 Cr 
 
*The project has been  
delayed due to 
geological surprises. 
3 Punatsangchhu-II (1020 RCE of INR 7290.62 Cr 2018-19 Physical progress- 

59 | P a g e  
 MW HEP) (Approved in July 2016) 
 
2nd RCE (at Jan 2020 
PL) is under examination  
by the Ministry. 
 90.02% (as of Apr 
2021); 
Fund released so far: 
INR 7235.463 Cr 
 
*The project has been 
delayed due to 
geological surprises. 
4 Kholongchhu (600 MW 
HEP) 
INR 3868.870 Cr (DPR 
completion cost) 
Pre-construction 
activities in progress. 
INR 190.1817 Cr has 
been released by 
MEA towards 
DGPC’s equity till 
date. 
 
Further, in line with India-Bhutan unique and special relations, Government of India has ensured  
continuous supply of trade and essential items to Bhutan, despite COVID -19 related lock -downs. 
Government of India also provided essential medicines and medical supplies- including 
Paracetamol, Hydroxychloroquine, PPEs, N95 masks, test kits and vaccines to the Royal 
Government of Bhutan. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 21) 
 
The Committee observe that there has been an improvement in budgetary allocation  
under the head ‘Aid to Nepal’ from Rs. 800 crore (BE 2020 -21) to Rs. 992.00 crore (BE 2021 -22). 
The main reason for enhanced allocation as furnished by  the Ministry is that some of the major  
ongoing development and infrastructure projects in Nepal are in final stage s of completion. The  
Committee are pleased to note that India has gifted one million dose of ‘Made in India’ COVID -19 
vaccines to Nepal on 21 January, 2021 for the immediate requirement of Nepal’s healthcare and  
frontline workers. The Committee are optimistic that the Ministry will utilize the enhanced 
budgetary allocation for Nepal to complete the projects in their final stages of completion, 
without any timeand cost overruns. 

60 | P a g e  
Reply of the Government 
As recommended by the Hon’ble Commi ttee, Ministry will make concerted efforts to fully utilize  
the budgetary allocation of Rs. 992 crores under this head. The existence of robust oversight  
mechanism at various levels which monitor and review the progress of the GOI assisted and funded 
projects Nepal, including high-level mechanism at Ministerial level as well as working level 
mechanism at senior officials’ level and  also Joint Project Monitoring Committees held with  
Government of Nepal will ensure smooth and expeditious implementation of projects and 
achievement of targets within specified timelines. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 22) 
 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to Afghanistan’ has been  
reduced from Rs. 400 crore in BE 2020-21 to Rs. 350 crore during both RE 2020-21 and BE 2021- 
22. As per the Ministry, the reduction in BE and RE stage was due to unforeseen circumstances  
created by the COVID -19 pandemic restrictions and resultant problems. The Foreign Secretary  
informed that about one thousand scholarships, training and fellowships were extended to Afghan  
students in the past year. India also extended grant assistance of 500,000 doses of COVID vaccine  
to Afghanistan. The Committee note that MoU for construction of the Lalander (Shahtoot) Dam has 
been signed between India and Afghanistan on 9 February, 2021.  The Committee are pleased to  
note that despite the ongoing pandemic, 76% of BE (2020 -21) for Afghanistan has been utilized so  
far. The Committee know that India has successfully c ompleted various large and small projects in  
Afghanistan despite daunting logistical and security challenges. In view of our exemplary past  
record in developmental aid and assistance to Afghanistan, the Committee desire that the Ministry  
should continue making concerted efforts to fulfill all our commitments to Afghanistan, particularly 
in the evolving political situation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry appreciates Hon’ble Committee’s acknowledgement of its work in the field of  
developmental aid and assistance in Afghanistan. The Ministry would like to assure that it will  
continue making concerted efforts to fulfil all our commitments to Afghanistan, particularly in the  
evolving political situation. 

61 | P a g e  
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 23) 
 
The Committee observe that there has been a substantial reduction in budgetary 
allocation for Sri Lanka during RE 2020 -21 due to the COVID -19 pandemic. The Ministry has  
submitted that the restrictions imposed due to COVID-19 led to a complete halt in progress of High 
Impact Community Development Projects (HICDP) as well as cancellation of training 
programmes/courses. The Committee are of the firm view that the reduced allocations for Sri  
Lanka should not affect our developmental projects in Sri Lanka. With the relaxation in Covid -19 
pandemic and related restrictions arising out of it, the Committee expect that the pace of 
implementation of projects,  particularly HICDPs and housing, will be restored. The Ministry  
should re-assess its budgetary requirements on the basis of progress made in the ongoing projects  
and seek additional finances, if required, at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee with regard to 'Aid to Sri Lanka' is duly  
noted. While the Covid -19 pandemic has had an impact on the pace of implementation of our  
developmental projects in Sri Lanka, this Ministry would make utmost efforts to ensure that as the  
restrictions related to Covid-19 are lifted, the pace of implementation of these projects is 
accelerated. 
As recommended, the Ministry would re -assess its budgetary requirements on the basis of the  
progress made in the ongoing projects and seek additional finances, if required, at the RE stage. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 24) 
 
Like in other countries, the Committee notice that there has been a slowdown in project  
implementation in Maldives during the last financial year.  An allocation of Rs. 200 crore has been  
provisioned for BE 2021-22. This allocated amount is expected to be utilized for ongoing and  
proposed projects such as High Impact  Community Development  Projects (HICDP), DPR for 
Gan Airport Project, Conservation of Friday Mosque, Police Academy in Addu, Construction of  
the Ministry of Defence Building, etc. The National College for Policing and Law Enforcement 

62 | P a g e  
(formerly known as  National Police Academy), which was slated to be completed by May 2019,  
has been delayed due to multiple factors. The Committee note that 88% of the construction of  
National College for Policing and Law Enforcement has been completed. The Committee strongly  
recommend that the expected deadline of 2021 for completion of the Police Academy is strictly  
adhered to. The Minist ry should also adhere to the blueprint of all ongoing and  proposed projects 
so as to ensure that the allocated amount is utilized fully. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been well noted. There is a factual  
error in para 3.59 of the recommendation wherein the BE 2021-22 under the head “Aid to 
Maldives” has been mentioned as Rs 200 crore whereas it should be Rs 250 cr. The status update of 
ongoing projects is as below: 
12 projects included under the HICDP scheme are at various stages of implementation. All  
of these projects are expected to be completed by the end of CFY 21-22. 
Of the 18 cash-grant assistance projects, 14 projects have been completed. 11 of these have  
been inaugurated; Another 3 are planned to be inaugurated once lock down restrictions in Maldives 
are eased. The remaining 4 projects are likely to be completed by August-September 2021. 
8 large infrastructure projects have been taken up for implementation under the USD 800  
Line of Credit extended to the Maldives. 
Contracts for 2 of these projects i.e. 34 Islands Water Supply and Sewerage Network and  
Addu Roads projects were awarded in February and March, 2021 respectively. 
Tender documents are being finalized i.r.o. the Cricket Stadium, Gulhifalhu port and 
Hanimaadhoo Expansion projects. 
Projects related to Gan International Airport Redevelopment, MIFCO Expansion and 
Cancer Hospital are at the DPR preparation/ approval stages. A team from AAI visited Maldives in  
April 2021 to conduct prel iminary investigations to commence work on the Gan International  
Airport Redevelopment project. 
ASI deputed a 6 -member team to Maldives in March 2021 to continue work on the  
restoration of the Friday mosque in Male’. Tendering process for supply of men and  material 
required for the project is being carried out. 
National College for Police and Law Enforcement Studies  – Work on  the project has  
continued despite the lethal Covid 19 wave that hit Maldives at the end of April 2021. The current 

63 | P a g e  
physical progress is 93.5% and the entire project including finishing work is expected to be 
completed by July 2021. 
 
Pace of project-implementation was negatively impacted during the months of April-May 
2021, due to the sharp rise in Covid 19 cases in the Maldives which resulted in a lockdown being  
imposed by Govt of Maldives since the beginning of May. Another crippling factor has been the ban 
put in place by Maldives on entry of all categories of visa-holders, including work-visa holders, from 
South Asian countries beginning May 13, 2021. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 25) 
 
The budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to Myanmar’ was Rs. 300 crore during Be 2020-21, 
which was increased to Rs. 350 crore (RE 2020-21) and Rs. 400 crore (BE 2021-22). The 
Committee have noted the  Ministry’s assertion that an enhanced BE  2021-22 allocation would  
cater to ongoing projects including Kaladan Multimodal transit Transport project (KMTTP), supply 
and installation of Coastal Surveillance Rad ars, trilateral highways and so on. The Committee are  
aware that Myanmar is a vital component of our ‘Neighbourhood First’ and ‘Act East’ policies.  
Even with the political turmoil in Myanmar, the enhanced allocation is going to serve India’s  
interests. 
The Committee are optimistic that the Ministry would be able to utilize the allocated  
amount for expeditious and timely implementation of ongoing bilateral connectivity and social  
infrastructure development projects, particularly the Kaladan Multimodal Transi t Transport project 
during the financial year 2021-22. 
 
Reply of the Goverment 
The enhanced allocation of Rs 400.0 cr in BE 2021 -22 under ‘Aid to Myanmar’ would  
facilitate in completing the activities scheduled to be completed under various ongoing projects. 
The budget allocation at FE 2020-21 stage was enhanced to Rs 350.0 cr vis-à-vis BE 2020-21 of Rs 
300.0 cr, and was fully utilized. 
 
Kaladan is a strategic project linking the mainland with our North East states through  
Mizoram. A high level committee has been constituted by Ministry of Shipping for 

64 | P a g e  
operationalization of Sittwe port by 2022. The Ministry is in constant engagement with the 
concerned authorities in the Government of Myanmar through our Mission in Yangon to secure their 
support for smooth and expedited progress, of the stalled road construction due to the political turmoil, 
security concerns and Covid restrictions. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 26) 
 
The budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to African countries’ caters to setting up of 
institutes, various scholarships/training programmes; ICCR scholarships; food aid, books, medical  
aid, cash grants etc. An allocation of Rs. 300 crore has been provisioned for BE 2021 -22. India’s 
partnership with Africa is based on a consultative model of cooperation and sharing of 
development experiences and is focused on addressing the priorities and needs of African 
countries. The three India Africa Forum Summits (IAFS- I, II and III) in 2008, 2011 and 2015 have 
further reinforced development partnership with the country. The Committee note that the progress  
in various projects under India Africa Summits is reviewed regularly in consultation with 
concerned Ministries and relevant  stakeholders. The Committee notice that so far 17 African 
countries have joined  the e-Vidya Bharti and e -arogya Bharti Network project (e -VBAB) which 
was approved in 2015 to provide quality education to African students. The declining trend of  
allocation to African countries has been a source of great discontentment to the Committee. The  
Foreign Secretary asserted that Africa is a key foreign  policy priority and our engagement has 
been intensifying, albeit the budgetary allocations speak otherwise. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the budgetary allocation for African countries should be in alignment with the  
importance, size and extent of the region. There is an urgent need to intensify our diplomatic  
presence in the region. The Ministry should also take all requisite steps, including seeking 
enhanced allocation and effective utilization of funds, for expeditious implementation of our 
diverseongoing projects in Africa. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has sincerely noted the concerns and recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee. 
The Ministry would like to reassure the Hon’ble Committee that Africa is receiving very high  
priority by the Government. 

65 | P a g e  
 
2. India has maintained a vibrant relationship with African countries, which is evident with 34  
outgoing visits since 2014 [President (13), Vice President (12) and Prime Minister (9)] and more  
than 100 incoming visits at ministerial level from African nations. The 10 guiding principles  
enunciated by honourable Prime Minister in Uganda in 2018, will continue to guide  India-Africa 
relations and take our engagement to the next higher level.  These guiding principles have been  
given ‘top priority’ in identifying key areas of cooperation with Africa including digital & IT,  
agriculture, trade & investment, development partnership especially designing people-centric 
projects, building local capacity and assisting African youth through training programmes, 
cooperation in security, terrorism & maritime issues, international cooperation in climate change,  
etc. The Ministry is in the process of taking these elements forward in a focused manner.  This is 
reflected in the range of important events  completed in previous years  and/or planned between  
India and Africa in near future. 
 
3. In order to expand our diplomatic footprints and outreach in African continent, 
Government of India has decided in 2018 to open 18 new  Missions in African countries.  Missions 
in Republic of Guinea, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Republic of Congo, Togo, Sao Tome & Principe,  
Liberia and Sierra Leone have already been opened and  the Missions in Somalia, Guinea Bissau,  
Cape Verde, Chad and Mauritania may be operational by end of 2021.  After opening of the 18  
new Missions in Africa, India will have resident Missions in 47 out of 54 African countries. 
 
4. The India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS)-IV was expected to be held in September 2020 but  
was postponed due to the COVID -19 pandemic. In the run up of the Summit, 1 st India-Africa 
Defence Ministers’ Conclave was held in February 2020 in Lucknow.  However, v arious other  
scheduled events since then were postponed due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The 
Ministry endeavours to hold the IAFS-IV at the earliest suitable opportunity. 
 
5. Since the spread  of COVID -19 pandemic world  over, India has  signed 5 Air Bubble 
Agreements with African countries (Rwanda, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria) to ease out  
travel between India and these countries, and has evacuated stranded Indian nationals from various  
African countries (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Ethiopia, Mal awi, Eswatini, Zambia, Botswana, etc.)  
and vice versa. During the COVID-19 pandemic, around 150 tonnes of medical aid worth US$ 5.3 

66 | P a g e  
million (Rs. 40 crore) has been delivered by India to the continent of Africa, in the form of supplies 
of HCQ tablets and 16 other essential life -saving drugs [worth US $ 0.16 million (Rs. 1.22 crore)  
each to 32 African countries] on grant basis. India has maintained high level contacts at political  
level also with various African countries to express our solidarity with them. 
 
6. The Ministry, with the budgetary allocation of Rs. 300 crore for the financial year 2021 -22 
provisioned under the Head “Aid to African Countries”, would continue to focus on catering to the  
setting-up of Institutes; running various Schol arships/Training programmes including under  IAFS- 
III; ICCR Scholarships; providing Food Aid, Cash grants, Medical aid including supplying of  
equipment; Books; Vehicles; organising Events/Seminars/ Studies/Visits, etc. in order to further  
strengthen our fr iendly relations with various African countries. The Ministry would vigorously  
follow up and review the projects announced during IAFS -I, IAFS -II and IAFS -III which are  
presently at various stages  of setting  up to  have these implemented within  the shortest  possible 
time. In order to augment our development partnership with the friendly African countries, India  
would continue to extend LoCs and Grants to various African countries as per their need basis  
within the parameters prescribed. 
7. India is currently im plementing a flagship project in tele -education (e -VidhyaBharti) and  
tele-medicine (e -ArogyaBharti) for Africa called e -VidyaBharati ArogyaBharati Network Project  
(e-VBAB Project). So far, 17 countries have signed the MOU to become partner countries. The  
enrolments for graduate  and post -graduate programmes have  commenced since February 2020.  
The actual expenditure under the project till date is Rs. 24.50 crore. Currently, we are 
implementing Phase II of the project.  An amount of Rs. 20 crores are due for payment under this  
project.    Under e -Vidya Bharati, so far 3570 scholarships have been approved during January  
2020, July 2020 and January 2021 academic session.  Under this project I-Learn Centres in each of  
the African country is proposed to be set -up. So far 4 I -learn centres have already been set -up. 
Each project costs Rs. 1 crore.  Twenty more i -learn centres are to be established in the coming  
months. 
 
8. The Ministry would like to emphasize that this high priority and importance accorded to  
Africa in our Foreign Policy is sought to be reflected in the development cooperation context. The  
Ministry will ensure effective utilisation of funds for expeditious implementation of our diverse  
ongoing projects in Africa and seek enhanced allocation under the budgetary Head “Aid to African 

67 | P a g e  
countries” at Revised Estimates (RE) stage, if necessary; and/or on finalisation of the dates of the  
IAFS-IV. During the fiscal year 2020 -21, we were able to spend ……most of the funds allocated  
under the budgeta ry Head “Aid to African Countries” despite the COVID -19 induced lock down.  
Nevertheless, due to the ban on international travel out of India, many of our aid projects in Africa  
could not make optimal progress since our experts were not able to travel, etc.  As and when the  
COVID-19 pandemic subsides and the situation becomes normal, we will move ahead on our grant  
projects with renewed focus. 
 
9. The Ministry has taken a note of all the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee and 
will seek to address them with utmost seriousness. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 27) 
The Committee note that under the sub -head ‘Chabahar Port’, an allocation of Rs 100  
crore has been provided during BE 2021 -22 which is same as BE 2020 -21. However, nil allocation 
was provisioned during RE 2020 -21. The justification offered by the Ministry for nil allocation at  
the RE stage was under utilization of  allocated amount duet o delay in equipment delivery because  
of COVID pandemic induced restrictions and the s kepticism regarding US sanctions on the port  
equipment suppliers. The Committee are glad to note that India has proposed to include Chabahar 
in INSTC project, the first ever transport corridor project envisaged by India. 
 
Keeping in view the strategic importance of Chabahar port as an alternative route to  
Afghanistan and Central Asia, the Committee strongly feel that the allocation under this head  
should be steady and predictable. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should base  
our foreign policy on realistic terms. In the interest of our international credibility on delivering  
connectivity projects, the Ministry should allocate ample finances and also pursue a pro -active 
policy to constructively engage the  Iranian side to accele rate the construction project  on the basis 
of agreed timelines. 

68 | P a g e  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee for 
compliance. An amount of Rs 40.0 crores has been released in May 2021 towards payment 
obligations of crane & material procurement for Chabahar port. Ministry is optimistic of full  
utilization of allocated budget for Chabahar port, based on robust Q1 expenditure in CFY and  
expectation of healthy progress in project. Any addit ional fund requirement under the head will be  
duly catered to at RE 2021-22 stage. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 28) 
 
The persistent under staffing of the Ministry of External Affairs have been a source of  
constant concern. During the course of oral evidence before the Committee, the Foreign Secretary  
had also underlined the problem of human resource constraints in the Ministry. Vacancies in the  
Ministry of External Affairs are filled by a combination of direct recruitment th rough the Civil  
Services Examination conducted by UPSC, examinations conducted by SSC and promotion from  
feeder cadres as per extant Rules. The Committee note that there has been revamping of the  
organizational structure of MEA at the topmost level with an  objective to streamline the decision  
making process. The gap between the sanctioned strength and actual strength has created anomalies 
not only in promotion but  also in meeting the requirements  of the Ministry.  The Committee  
observe that the Ministry has taken a series of affirmative action such as placing indent  with 
Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT), Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff  
Selection Commission (SSC); reinforcing technical capacity by taking officers with domain 
expertise on deputation from Line Ministries  and Departments of Governments and engaging 
Consultants with expertise in various fields. 
 
 
Taking a serious view of this matter, the Committee feel that the justifications and  
actions taken by the Ministry to fill up the vacant posts are inadequate and unproductive. The  
Committee urge the Government at the highest levels to consider the human resource requirements  
of MEA favourably and also direct Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and Union Public Service 

69 | P a g e  
Commission (UPSC) to fill up the enhanced number of direct recruitments on priority basis. The  
Committee would also recommend that the Ministry should continue to  create cadre/ induct 
expertise from other Ministries, academia, think tanks and the private sector, as needed to 
supplementits human resourcewith relevant domain expertise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry takes regular and concerted action to ensure adequate human resources in order to  
meet its functional requirements. Regular indents are placed with SSC, UPSC and DoPT to fill  
vacancies across various Cadres under the control of the Ministry. In addition to filling vacancies 
by a combination of direct recruitment, departmental promotion and Limited Departmental 
Competitive Examinations (LDCE) in line with extant Rules, the Ministry also induct officers from  
various Departments and Ministries of Government of India on deputation to perform specialized  
roles and fulfill specific functional and technical requirements. 
 
24 IFS officers of the batch of 2020 (CSE -2019) have joined the Sushma Swaraj  Institute of  
Foreign Service (SSIFS) in January, 2021 and are completing their Phase -I in mid -June 2021 . 
Ministry has placed an indent of 73 for the years 2021 & 2022 with DoPT and UPSC. 
 
Further, more than 100 ASOs from CGLE 2017 had already joined the Ministry and 89 ASOs from  
CGLE 2018 have also started joining the Ministry. Requisite indents for ASOs for 2019 & 2020  
have already been placed with SSC for which the recruit ment process is still underway and is  
expected to be completed shortly. Indents for the posts of Stenographers ‘C’ & ‘D’ grades have 
also been placed with SSC and action on this front is being followed up regularly. SSC is also in 
the process of completing the recruitment process for more than 150 MTSs for the Ministry. 
 
There are more than 200 LDCE vacancies of SO and PS for the years 2015, 2016, 2017,  
2018 & 2019 which remain unfilled as the result for LDCE 2015 has been declared in April 2021 
and from years 2016 to 2019 have not been held by UPSC due to an ongoing court case. Recently,  
the result of LDCE 2015 has been declared by UPSC in April 2021 and it is hoped that the process  
for conducting LDCE for 2016 onward will soon be initiated by UPSC. Ministry is in consultation 
with DoPT and UPSC to find ways to fill these vacancies at the earliest. 

70 | P a g e  
The process for filling vacant positions in the Legal & Treatise Cadre of the Ministry is also  
underway by the UPSC and is expected to be completed soon. The Ministry also engages 
Consultants, including retired Government officials as well as experts hired from the open market  
via a transparent and competitive recruitment process, with expertise in varied fields including  
project management, international law, consular services, arbitration, disarmament etc. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
(Recommendation No 29) 
 
The Committee are appalled to discern the marginal representation of women within the  
Ministry of External affairs. According to the data furnished by the Ministry, of the 3756 officers  
(Gazetted as well as non-Gazetted posts) only 612 (16.29%) are women. Of these, there are only 22 
women officers holding charge of Ambassadors/High Commissioners in various Missions/Post s 
abroad. On being enquired about the reason for such gender imbalance, the Ministry stated that the  
requirement of officers is done by a competitive examination conducted by UPSC and there is no  
gender-based reservation in direct recruitment or in induction and promotion. 
The Committee find that the Ministry’s justification for the gender imbalance within the  
organization attributing it to skewed intake ratio presents a dismal picture of foreign policy being  
regarded largely as masculine domain. Emphasizing the imperative of a gender balance within  
MEA, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should ensure improvement in internal 
practices on occupational equality including careers progression, promotion, training and 
appointments to higher ranks. The Ministry should also undertake a thorough and comparative  
cross-service analysis of the reason behind the skewed gender intake ratio and apprise the 
Committee about the findings of the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The recruitment of IFS officers is via a competitive examination conducted by UPSC. 
There is no gender based reservation in direct recruitment to IFS or in induction and promotion to  
IFS from the feeder grade of Grade I of IFS Branch B. However, the Service has been open to both 
men and women in equal measure since its inception and have good gender balance with more and  
more women officers entering the Service in recent years. Gender equality is more a common  
practice than an exception as far as the IFS is concerned. At present, nearly 25% of the Cadre 

71 | P a g e  
strength of IFS is composed of women officers. Similarly, recruitment to General Cadre of IFS 'B',  
Stenographers' Cadre of IFS'B' and other cadres in the Ministry is done via competitive 
examination conducted by UPSC/SSC and there is again non -gender based reservation in direct  
recruitment or in promotion. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 30) 
 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation under the sub-head ‘Training’  
was Rs. 25.95 crore during BE 2020-21, which was reduced to Rs. 16.77 crore during RE 2020 -21. 
An outlay of Rs. 25.76 crore has been provisioned during BE 2021 - 22. Sushma Swaraj Institute of 
Foreign Service (SSIFS) is tasked with train ing of IFS  Officers, Foreign Diplomats and members  
of Indian Civil Services in foreign policy and diplomatic skills through various training 
programmes and modules. There has been an increasing demand for training programmes, both for  
Indian civil servants  and foreign diplomats. Like other heads, the utilization of budget under this  
sub head has manifested a declining trend due to COVID -19 lockdown during the current financial  
year 2020-21. The Ministry has informed that there are some proposals to introduce new training  
programmes during 2021 -22 after the COVID -19 subsides. The Committee also observe that a  
feedback mechanism regarding training module has been established. Recognizing the need for  
enriching human capital, the Committee feel that tra ining should be given adequate fiscal space.  
The Committee desire that a continuous system of evaluation be established so that the inputs and  
feedback received from the trainees are suitably incorporated at regular intervals for value addition  
of the trai ning programmes and accordingly the number of training programmes should also be  
enhanced with adequate budget allocation. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
During current FY 2020-21, SSIFS has been alloted budget (B.E.) of Rs.25.95 crores. 
On the specific point  raised by the Standing Committee on External Affairs, SSIFS inputs are as  
follows: 

72 | P a g e  
(a) New training programmes during 2021-22 in the post Covid-19 period include the Fellowship 
Programme on Environment and Climate Change for foreign diplomats, and continuation of new  
training programmes like Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats and Special  
Training Programmes for Officers of States & Union Territories on Economic & Commercial  
Diplomacy. 
 
(b) SSIFS is implementing a very elaborate feedback mechanism at two levels: (i) Every  
participant formally provides written feedback/evaluation of every session; and (ii) At the end of  
each course, feedback session is conducted by Dean with participation of J oint Secretary and  
Course Coordinators. The feedback received is considered carefully and factored -in to the extent  
possible for improving and upgrading the programmes in future. 
 
(c) SSIFS has been provided with adequate ‘fiscal space’, i.e. sufficient funds,  for conducting of 
all training programmes envisaged during 2021-22; and 
 
(d) The training programmes have been consistently increasing both in scope of coverage and in  
numbers for both Indian officers and foreign diplomats. For example, during 2019 and 2020, a new 
Fellowship Programme on Disarmament and Security Affairs has been introduced in this important  
area. Similarly, the number of foreign training programmes have gone up from 9 in 2017-18 to 16 
in 2018 -19 and to 36 in 2019 -20. In 2020 -21, new cour ses were organised for resident foreign  
diplomats based in New Delhi. Similarly, in 2020 -21, new courses were introduced for Indian  
officers from States and Union Territories on economic and commercial matters. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No 31) 
 
The Committee are aware that the Indian Diaspora has an impact on Indian foreign  
policy and they play a constructive role in facilitating India’s developmental agenda and soft power 
projection. There are institutionalized mechanisms for regular engagement with the Indian 
Diaspora. Various schemes and programmes such as Know Inda Programme (KIP), Scholarship  
Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC),Celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra, Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY), Global Pravasi Rishta Portal 

73 | P a g e  
(Rishta Portal) etc are being executed for the welfare of Indian Diaspora. While comparing the  
budgetary allocation to various schemes and programmes that are being implemented for welfare of 
Indian Diaspora by erstwhile MOIA and by MEA now, the Committee observe a set pattern of  
arbitrary and constant allocation of funds. The Committee are also discerned that India 
Development Foundation of Overseas Indians (ID F-OI), Study India Programme (SIP), Overseas  
Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), Tracing the  Roots Scheme were closed during 2014 to 2018,  
without citing any valid justification. Schemes  and programmes are effective only when those  
reach the target audience. The Ministry has submitted that IT is making efforts to spread awareness  
about the various schemes and programmes through its website and Missions, social media 
platforms, State outreach programmes and recently launched Global Pravasi Rishta Portal 
(RISHTA). 
In the considered view of the Committee, the objectives behind the merger of erstwhile  
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs with MEA gets compromised, if adequate attention and fiscal  
space is not provided to the Diasporic community. The Committee  would, therefore, reiterate their  
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should constitute a working group to assess all schemes  
and programmes for welfare of overseas Indians and apprise them about its outcome within six  
months. The Committee also desire that the Ministry proactively engage with the State 
Governments to deepen the impact of information and awareness campaigns related to various  
schemes and programmes for engaging Indian Diaspora. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry is highly sensitive to the needs of the Indian Diaspora  and has been giving  
adequate attention to them. The policy of the Government of India towards Diaspora is of making  
the engagement deeper, continuous and comprehensive. In pursuance of its policy, the Ministry has 
been consistently evaluating and examining its initiatives and programmes for the welfare of the  
Indian community abroad. Therefore, on merger of MOIA with MEA, the Ministry, under the  
guidance of EAM, had re -examined all the initiatives which had been  undertaken by erstwhile  
MOIA and has strengthened the once which have had encouraging response from the Diaspora. It  
has also shelved a few schemes because of  either duplication of  work or for  poor response and 
some new initiatives have been introduced. T his has been done to bring more efficiency and  
effectiveness in the system and for better engagement with the diaspora. The changes brought 

74 | P a g e  
about such as introduction of technology, comprehensive partnership with various State 
Governments, wider outreach, etc are not arbitrary but well thought out initiatives. 
It is reiterated that the endeavour of the Ministry is to improve the existing schemes and  
to roll out new initiatives using modern technological tools which are low cost but highly effective 
in greater engagement with persons dispersed across the Globe. The increased use of cost effective  
technologies and enhanced outreach and interaction with the diaspora have been found very useful  
during the last over one year of the pa ndemic when there has been largely virtual interaction. The  
Ministry has been able to rise to the occasion during the pandemic by assisting millions of Indians  
abroad through Vande Bharat Mission and also in extending help to the members of the community 
by providing food, shelter and medicines from ICWF. This is the best example of the Ministry  
being on the right path in making changes to its strategies on evaluating its programmes for the  
welfare of the Indian community on the real time basis and has been  able to rise to the occasion at  
the critical time of need. Further, Ministry has been able to engage with various State Governments  
in different schemes for the Diaspora and will work pro-actively to enhance this engagement. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
(Recommendation No 32) 
The Committee have noted that several Indian nationals were stranded due to Covid -19 
pandemic related global lockdowns and cancellation of International flights and are  glad to 
recognize the fact that over 3.2 million Indians have been evacuated to return to India under the  
Vande Bharat Mission. An online platform (REPAT portal) has also been developed by the 
Ministry to monitor the developments. MEA has worked closely with the Ministry of Skill 
Development to m ap the skills of the returnees.  Indian Missions/Posts abroad proactively helped  
the distressed/stranded Indian nationals through  the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF). 
The Committee note that ICWF is a self sustaining fund outside Consolidated Fund of India with 
no budgetary support. The Foreign Secretary drew attention of the Committee towards the 
possibility of using the money earned through e visas under ICWF. Currently, the payment of  
electronic visa goes to the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
The Committee want to put it on record that the Ministry of External Affairs has played  
a commendable role in bringing back the Indian nationals during the Covid -19 pandemic. Through 
the Vande Bharat Mission, REPAT portal,  usage of ICWF Funds and  active involvement of Indian 
Missions/Posts, the Ministry has manifested exemplary sense of responsibility towards our 
Diaspora during such tough time. The Committee strongly endorse the Ministry’s suggestion of 

75 | P a g e  
channelizing the money earned through electronic visa into the ICWF so that more finances are at  
the disposal of the Ministry to extend support to Indian Diaspora and desire that steps should be  
taken to achieve the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry appreciates the Hon’ble Committee’s recognition of its efforts in bringing back the 
Indian nationals during the Covid-19 pandemic. 
With regard to the channelizing of money earned through electronic visa into the ICWF,  
Ministry would like to apprise the Hon’ble Committee t hat the matter has already been taken up  
with MHA for collection of ICWF Service Charge from eVISA applicants and its transfer to the  
respective Missions/Posts ICWF accounts. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
(Recommendation No 33) 
 
The Committee are aware that the Know India Programme (KIP) is a flagship initiative  
of MEA to help familiarize Indian Diaspora youth, in the age group of 18-26 years, with 
developments and achievements made by the country and bringing them closer to the land of their  
ancestors. An allocation of Rs. 6 crore was made under this programme during BE 2020 -21 which 
has been increased to Rs. 7 crore for BE 2021 -22. The Ministry has informed that the enhanced  
allocation has been made due to addition of Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana  (PTDY). This Yojana  
was started by the Ministry in 2018 -19 as a special edition for elderly diaspora from the seven  
Girmitiya countries (Fiji, Guyana, Mauritius, South Africa, Suriname, Trinidad & Tobago and  
Reunion Islands) in the age group of 45 -65 years under the Know India Programme series to  
connect them to the spiritual and religious heritage of India. The Committee are happy to learn that  
based on inputs from relevant stakeholders, new elements such as Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana  
(PTDY) has be en added to KIP. Given the limited budgetary allocation, the Committee fail to  
understand the manner in which the expansion will be incorporated. The Committee, therefore,  
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should seek more funds for Know India 
Programmes that have been received warmly by the Indian Diaspora at RE stage. 

76 | P a g e  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Standing Committee has duly  appreciated the incorporation of PTDY in KIP and  in 
fact recommends additional allocation of fund in Budget. Due to the ongoing Covid pandemic  
situation, particularly the second wave in India, the programmes under KIP could  not be initiated 
so far in the Current Financial Year. These programmes can only be undertaken once the 
conditions in the country bec ome safe for travel. In case the situation turns around soon and  
additional funds are required after the utilization of the allocated amount in the Budget, the 
Ministry will seek additional allocations aligned with KIP objectives and recommendations of the  
Committee. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 34) 
 
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is a joint collaborative partnership between MEA  
and Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) with the objective of enhancing  
the skills set of potential emigrant workers in select sectors and job roles, in line with international  
standards, to facilitate their overseas employment.The Committee observe that this Yojana has two  
components- technical top- up training, to be provided by MSDE and Pre-Departure Orientation 
and Training (PDOT) imparted by MEA. The Committee are astonished to note an MoU was 
signed between MEA and MSDE in 2016 to provide institutionalized training and PDOT to 
migrant workers under this scheme and Rs. 10 Cr. Was released to MSDE in March 2017 but the  
said fund is yet to be utilized and since then, the budgetary allocation for PKVY has been made till  
date. The performance review Report of PKVY is also awaited.The Ministry has informed that a  
new scheme is b eing considered by MSDE with new provisions of skill training under different  
value chain in due alignment with need for skilled manpower in different countries. This all shows  
that the Government is not genuinely serious towards the requirement of enhanci ng the skills set of 
potential emigrant workers. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA should make sincere 
efforts in collaboration with MSDE and prepare a time -bound programme with set objectives to  
provide training to potential emigrant workers in specific sectors and job rules in line with 
international standards. The Committee also desire that sufficient fund should also be allocated for  
Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana at RE stage so that targets fixed in this regard are achieved and the 

77 | P a g e  
scheme does not suffer more. The Committee also desire that as on January 2021, PDOT is  
operational in 27 cities of 12 States (Delhi, UP, Rajasthan, Punjab, Maharashtra, West Bengal,  
Andhra Pradesh, Telengana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Bihar and Karnataka) The Ministry has informed 
that there are plans to open many more PDOT centres at major overseas  Migration specific places 
in the country.The Committee desire that MEA should take all initiatives to meet the target of  
imparting training to 5 Lakh workers by 202 2 through online or offline classroom training models  
for Pre-departure Orientation Training Programme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
1. Utilisation of funds under Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana: This Ministry has been 
informed by NSDC, the implementing partner of MSDE for PKVY, that between FY 2017 -18 and 
FY 2020-21, under the Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) program, NSDC has received a  
total of Rs. 7.50 Crores from MSDE through NSDF, out of which Rs. 5.57 Crores have been  
utilised. Following is the FY – wise break-up of the funds received vs. utilised: 
 
Particulars Funds received from MSDE 
(In Rs Cr.) 
Funds utilised by NSDC 
(In Rs Cr.) 
FY 2017-18 3.00 0.89 
FY 2018-19 - 2.00 
FY 2019-20 0.50 0.52 
FY 2020-21* 4.00 2.16 
Total 7.50 5.57 
*Provisional since balance sheet of NSDC for FY 2020-21 is still under process 
 
As of May  2021, PDOT has been imparted to 91,152 emigrants. PDOT centres were closed  
between 17th March - 15th November 2020 in view of the GoI Advisory to prevent the spread of  
COVID-19 pandemic. PDOT was re-initiated from 16th November 2020. Since then, slow return 
of potential emigrants for PDOT has been observed which has resulted in training being imparted 
to 1,957 candidates between November 2020 and 31st March 2021. 
 
2. Update on PDOT centres 

78 | P a g e  
Based on MEA's recommendations for locations, there are 14 NSDC affiliated Training 
Partners that have been empanelled as PDOT centres at 12 locations, as of May 2021: 
 
S.No PDOT Centre Name Location 
1 Asmacs Skill Development Pvt. Ltd., Videsh 
Bhawan 
Mumbai 
2 Asmacs Skill Development Pvt. Ltd., Sakinaka Mumbai 
3 Don Bosco Technical Institute, Okhla Delhi 
4 Orion Edutech Pvt. Ltd, Mandir Marg Delhi 
5 Espoir Academy, Eram Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Cochin 
6 Mahendra Skills Training & Development Pvt. Ltd. Lucknow 
7 Confederation of   Indian   Industry   (CII),   Model 
Career Centre (MCC) 
Chennai 
8 PMKK Gorakhpur (Learnet Institute of Skills) Gorakhpur 
9 Regional Centre for Entrepreneurship Development, 
Mohali 
Chandigarh 
10 Quivan Skill Empowerment Private Limited Kolkata 
11 ASMACS Skill Development Limited – BRMIT Bhubaneswar 
12 Learnet institute of Skills Jalandhar 
13 Datapro Amritsar 
14 Learnet Institute of Skills, Kowdiar Thiruvananthapuram 
 
Aim of PDOT  is to enhance emigrant workers’ soft  skills vis-à-vis culture, language, 
tradition and local rules & regulations of the countries of destination as well as to sensitize them  
about benefits of safe and legal migration and various GOI programmes and schemes for their  
welfare and protection. Since January 2018, one -day PDOT program has been rolled out by the  
Ministry in a structured manner, starting with two centers each at Mumbai and New Delhi. 
Gradually, it has been expanded to 30 centers in 27 cities across the country. 
Secretary (CPV & OIA) launched first ever online PDOT Programme on 7 April 2021, as an  
additional mechanism for the prospective overseas emigrants, who cannot attend the training 
programme in person. Emigrants have now both offline and online options for obtaining the Pre - 
Departure Orientation Training. We have noticed that since  launching online PDOT, more women  
immigrants have participated for obtaining PDO Training. 
Ministry is also in the process to open around 100 PDOT centres across the country so that  
maximum prospective overseas emigrant workers could get Pre-Departure Orientation Training. In 

79 | P a g e  
this regard, letters to all State Governments have been issued to identify the additional places 
where new PDOT centres could be established.  As on 25 May 2021,  98324 emigrant workers 
have been imparted PDO training through 30 PDOT Centers  (14 centres managed by NSDC  and 
16 centres by State Governments) details of centre-wise training imparted are as follows:- 
 
S.No Name of the PDOT Centre Date of Opening Centers Total 
1 Videsh Bhawan 10.01.2018 NSDC 26629 
2 ASMACS, Mumbai 10.01.2018 NSDC 27204 
3 Orion 10.01.2018 NSDC 11009 
4 Don Bosco 10.01.2018 NSDC 14544 
5 Espoir 22.11.2018 NSDC 4713 
6 Mahendra 26.12.2018 NSDC 3097 
7 Gorakhpur 23.09.2019 NSDC 1311 
8 Mohali 23.09.2019 NSDC 528 
9 Chennai 23.09.2019 NSDC 1165 
10 Bhubneshwar 16.03.2021 NSDC 3 
11 Kolkata 22.03.2021 NSDC 93 
12 Amritsar 02.04.2021 NSDC 0 
13 Jalandhar 25.03.2021 NSDC 0 
14 Trivandrum 25.03.2021 NSDC 20 
   Total 90316 
1 Jaipur 25.05.2019 State Govt 1759 
2 TomCom, Hyderabad 08.08.2019 State Govt 1063 
3 Karimnagar 08.08.2019 State Govt 138 
4 Nazamabad 08.08.2019 State Govt 380 
5 Patna 29.07.2019 State Govt 563 
6 Gaya 29.07.2019 State Govt 434 
7 Muzaffarpur 29.07.2019 State Govt 466 
8 Darbhanga 29.07.2019 State Govt 165 
9 Sikar 08.08.2019 State Govt 1113 
10 Vizag 07.01.2021 State Govt 1 
11 Tamil Nadu 03.01.2020 State Govt 465 
12 Vijaywada 24.09.2019 State Govt 897 
13 Kadapa 24.09.2019 State Govt 391 
14 Nagaur 27.11.2019 State Govt 127 
15 Bengaluru 24.02.2020 State Govt 32 
16 Kakinada 11.01.2021 State Govt 14 
   Total 8008 

80 | P a g e  
 Total no. of Emigrants 
imparted PDOT as on date 
26.05.2021 
 
 
98324 
  
 
India International Skill Centre (IISC) Pilot 
In order to provide skills training in accordance with international standards to Indians  
aspiring to work overseas, the India International Skill Centre (IISC) program was conceptualized  
by MSDE and NSDC. An IISC pilot was launched across 14 training centres empanelled for the  
same, where 583 candidates were trained and 63 placed overseas. For the pilot, the c andidates were 
provided skills training under MSDE’s Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) and pre - 
departure orientation training under MEA’s Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and was 
successfully completed in 2018. 
Going forward, based on the learnings from the pilot, MSDE is working on a new scheme for skills 
training for overseas placement. The PDOT scheme continues in coordination with MEA. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
(Recommendation No 35) 
 
As the principal organ for soft and cultural diplomacy of the Government of India,  
ICCR’s activities are spread across the globe ranging from  providing scholarships, organizing  
exhibitions, to performing and visuals arts programmes. The Committee note that Rs 300 crore has  
been provisioned f or ICCR for BE 2021 -22 (as compared to Rs. 290 cr. in BE 2020 -21). The  
Ministry has informed that the enhanced allocation has been made for scholarship, welfare 
activities, incoming Exhibitions, Distinguished Visitors Programmes, Academic Visitors 
Programmes, festivals abroad and Multimedia & Website. Based on the fact that ICCR activities  
have been affected in the wake of global Covid -19 lockdown, the budgetary allocation during RE  
2020-21 was decreased. The Ministry clarified that no substantial e fforts have been made by ICCR  
for generating additional resources to run its activities. Despite the limited allocation, the 
Committee found that it was not fully utilized. Keeping in view the broad spectrum of activities  
undertaken by ICCR, the Committee strongly feel the need for enhanced budgetary 
allocation of ICCR. The Ministry is encouraged to explore the possibility of Partnerships and PPP  
Models for ICCR where the partners also put in resources for executing projects. ICCR should  
establish a mechanism for ensuring that the paceof expenditure is improved for better requisition of  
budgetary demands in the next fiscal. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 

81 | P a g e  
should further increase the budgetary allocation for ICCR at RE 2021-22 and BE 2021 -22 stage 
justifying the increasing significance of soft power projection of the country and central role of  
ICCR in it. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken note of Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation and assures that to ensure 
pace of expenditure and effective utilization of allocation of Grant -in-Aid, ICCR has prepared  
Revised Plan of Action for Financial Year 2021 -22 which is based on proposals/inputs received  
from more than 125 Missions/ Posts, in addition to programmes planned/ to be executed at ICCR  
headquarters. ICCR would also be exploring avenues for generating additional fund in future by  
organizing event on PPP model and renting its infrastructural spaces. 
Ministry would also like to add that in line with the increasing significance of soft power  
projection of the country and ICCR’s central role in it, BE 2021 -22 has been provisioned higher at  
Rs 300 crore (as compared to Rs. 255 cr. in RE 2020-21). 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 37) 
 
ICWA performs three principal functions – carry out Research with a Foreign Policy  
focus; act as a platform for discourse on foreign policy and international affairs and maintains a  
robust publication programme. It also conducts outreach activities with li ke-minded institutions  
nationally and internationally. An outlay of Rs. 16  crore has been provided for ICWA during BE  
2021-22 that is slightly lower than the budgetary  allocation during BE 2020 -21. The reasons  
attributed by the Ministry for reduction during BE 2021-22 and RE 2020-21 was fewer 
requirements of funds to  CPWD for renovation  work of Library, which is in alignment with  
assessed pace of work. The Committee note that during the period April 2020 - Feb 2021, the  
Council has organized a total of 100 Seminars/ Conferences/ Panel discussions and Book 
discussions. The Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure that adequate funds are 
provisioned for ICWA to  carry out the functions  entrusted to it. The Committee also suggest that  
the extensive research carried out by ICWA need to be well publicized and more research 
collaboration be established with national and foreign think tanks/research organizations. 
Reply of the Government 
We have taken note of the Committee's observation that the Ministry should ensure 
adequate funds to be provisioned for ICWA to carry out its functions, and welcome the 

82 | P a g e  
Committee’s suggestions to increase publicity of its extensive research  and establish more research 
collaborations with national and foreign think tanks / research organizations. 
ICWA has been making efforts to publicize its research publications which include books,  
Sapru House research papers, articles in its journal India Quarterly, Issue Briefs, Policy Briefs,  
Viewpoints, Special Reports, and Commissioned Special studies papers by experts. Its publications  
are made publicly available at the ICWA website and are being sent electronically to think tanks,  
MoU partners (national and international), Members of the Governing Body & Council, 
Consultative Committee on External Affairs and Officers of MEA and other concerned GoI 
departments. These are also being regularly uploaded on social media platforms like Twitter and  
Facebook for wider dissemination. MEA is regularly receiving ICWA research publications. 
Last year, ICWA has come out with 5 book publications which have been distributed to  
libraries, universities, think tanks, research organizations, national MoU partners, and experts in the 
subject area. The p rocess of distribution of ICWA’s research publications, particularly books, and  
journal articles, to its international MoU partners is also being worked out. Besides ICWA has been 
making a conscious attempt to reach out to the public through translation of its academic 
publications in Hindi and other regional languages. 
As far as establishing research collaboration with national and international MoU partners 
is concerned, ICWA has 53 international and 18 National MoU partners. Recently, it has undertaken 
joint research projects with two of the national MoU partners. Efforts are underway to establish more 
research collaboration with national and international MoU partners. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 38) 
 
Research and Information System (RIS) is a think tank specializing in international 
economic relations and development cooperation, serving as a forum for fostering effective policy  
dialogue among  think tanks of developing  countries. An outlay  of Rs.  12.62 crore has been 
earmarked for RIS for BE 2021-22 while an allocation of Rs. 12.46 crore was made at RE 2020- 
21. The Ministry submitted that the reduced grant by the MEA was due to the anticipated under - 
utilization of funds by RIS largely on  account of the unforeseen impact of  COVID 19 on its 
planned activities. The Committee note that there are four thrust areas of RIS Work Programme - 
Global Economic Issues and South-South Cooperation; Trade, Investment and Economic 
Cooperation; Connectivity and Regional Cooperation; and New Technologies and Development 

83 | P a g e  
Issues. The expertise of RIS on issues pertaining to Global South, including the evolving 
architecture on international trade, investment, finance, development, IPR and STI as well as  on 
WTO issues provides vital and policy relevant inputs to MEA and other departments of the 
Government. In view of the far reaching implications of the RIS initiatives,  the Committee would  
recommend that suitable enhancement of the budgetary allocations as per their requirements at the  
RE stage. They also recommend proper channelizing of research inputs of RIS into foreign policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry concurs with the observation of the Committee that the “expertise of RIS on  
issues pertaining to Global South, including the evolving architecture on international trade, 
investment, finance, development, Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and Science, Technology and  
Innovation (STI) as well as on WTO issues provides vital and policy relevant inputs to MEA and  
other departments of the Government.” 
During the past couple of years, the Ministry has ensured higher financial allocations to  
meet the financial requirements of RIS. MEA is also putting in place a robust mechanism for  
properly channelizing the research inputs of RIS into foreign policy on a constant basis by way of  
enhanced dialogue and engagement at the level of Heads of Division and by regularly inviting RIS  
at the meetings of Heads of Missions for disseminating their r esearch outcomes on contemporary  
issues. MEA  also supports and integrates  RIS’s policy research inputs  on emerging issues  of 
critical importance to India and the developing world. MEA and RIS are working on appropriate  
changes in RIS Byelaws to give added dynamism and synergy to the working of RIS. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 
The Policy Planning & Research Division of the Ministry of External Affairs is entrusted  
with four primary functions − organization of collaborative conferences and seminars with various  
think tanks; conduct of bilateral and multilateral policy planning dialogues with other Foreign  
Offices; preparation of research papers, policy briefs and situation reports pertaining to global  
developments and international affairs in general and India’s foreign policy in particular; and  
preparation of the Annual Report of the Ministry. The Committee observe that there are multiple  
mechanisms for engagement with academics,which inter alia includes funding of 

84 | P a g e  
national/international seminars and thematic conferences through its autonomous bodies – ICWA 
and RIS, commissioning of research projects through think  tanks, etc. The Ministry has  also 
submitted thatthe research output of the academic activities is compiled into reports and compendia. 
The Ministry is also utilizing external expertise in  the form of subject specialist consultants for the  
purpose of research and policy planning. The Committee were surprised to note that there are  no 
established research collaborations with other countries on issues pertaining to foreign policy. 
 
The Committee are pleased to learn that the Policy Planning & Research Division along  
with its network of autonomous bodies (Indian Council of World Affairs and Research and 
Information Systems), think tanks and collaborations with academia undertakes a continuous 
analysis of our principal foreign policy objectives as well as  provides research-based perspectives 
to the Ministry on various regional and global developments. The Committee, however, feel that the 
interface between policy and academia require greater synergy. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Policy Planning  and Research Division should make persistent  efforts to 
incorporate academic and policy analysis into the process of foreign policy formulation. There is  
also a need for wider dissemination of the publications of Reports, Briefs and compendia of the  
Ministry and its network of think tanks and autonomous bodies. The Committee al so desire that the 
Ministry should reach out to established think tanks in partner countries for a deeper exchange of  
ideas and policies. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Policy dialogues is an established diplomatic mechanism that facilitates exchange of 
perceptions and ideas. The purpose of these dialogues, within the broader bilateral relationship, is 
to focus on long-term trends and develop a deeper and more wide-based understanding on 
important bilateral, regional, and global issues. They usually complement and supplement other  
dialogue mechanisms such as Foreign Office Consultations and subject-specific dialogue 
mechanisms that have a more immediate and tactical focus. 
Policy Planning Division has initiated and conducted Policy dialogues with several partners 
with robust policy units. They have been instituted with the assistance of Missions abroad which 

85 | P a g e  
maintain contact with policy units in their countries of accreditation. Agendas for dialogues are  
decided based on consultations through diplomatic channels. 
The themes usually include broad surveys of the international scene with an analysis of  
geo-political, geo-economic, and increasingly, geo-technical trends. Multilateral issues, particularly 
the evolution and impact of long-term trends, are invariably discussed. Bilateral and regional issues 
of interest to either partner, particularly those with strategic implications over a longer timeframe,  
are included on the agenda on the basis of mutual discussions. 
The output of the talks is circulated with the relevant diplomatic stakeholders and inform 
the policy formulation process within the Ministry by bringing in longer -term, historical, and  
strategic perspectives. 
Many of the dialogues have moved to virtual platforms following the pandemic. This has  
also facilitated more sustained and regular interaction between Policy units. 
Policy dialogues conducted in 2018 
 
The following table lists the PPDs held in the year 2018. 
 
S.No Policy Planning Dialogue Date and Year 
1. India-Indonesia Policy-Planning Dialogue 15.01.2018 
2. India-Japan Policy Planning Dialogue 18.07.2018 
3. India-Iran Policy Planning Dialogue 04.09.2018 
 
These dialogues involved a productive exchange of views on themes such as foreign policy 
priorities of the respective countries, relations with the major powers of the world, issues of global  
governance, terrorism, connectivity in Asia, etc. 
Policy dialogues conducted in 2019 
 
The following table lists the PPDs held in the year 2019. 
 
S.No Policy Planning Dialogue Date and Year 

86 | P a g e  
1. India-Russia Policy-Planning Dialogue 07.06.2019 
2. India-Indonesia Policy-Planning Dialogue 11.07.2019 
3. India-Germany Policy-Planning Dialogue 10.09.2019 
 
 
Themes discussed included regional issues such as developments in the EU, India and its evolving  
neighbourhood, Multilateralism in times of Great Power Competition, Indo -Pacific, Transatlantic 
relations, US-China, China-Russia, crisis hotspots, ASEAN Outlook on t he Indo-Pacific, BRI and  
indebtedness of recipient nations, to name a few. 
Policy dialogues conducted in 2020-21 
 
The following table lists the PPDs held in 2020-21: 
 
S.No Policy Planning Dialogue Session I Session II 
1. India-Vietnam 15/09/20 -- 
2. India-Germany 29/09/20 -- 
3. India-EU 19/10/20 28/01/21 
4. India-Israel 21/10/20 22/12/20 
5. India-Turkey 22/10/20 -- 
6. India-Australia 23/10/20 04/02/21 
7. India-Denmark 10/11/20 -- 
8. India-BRICS 10/12/20 -- 
9. India-UK 17/12/20 -- 
10. India-Poland 28/01/21 24/03/21 

87 | P a g e  
11. India-Russia 16/02/21 -- 
 
 
Relations with US, China, Europe, Middle East and Indo -Pacific, geo -technological and  
geo-energy trends, multilateral cooperation and international architecture, global multilateral trends 
- counter-terrorism, climate change, health, migration and demographics, UNSC- India’s 
Priorities, perspectives on the post COVID -19 world order, Conflicts - emerging trends and fault  
lines, future of globalization, emerging economic and trade issues including supply chain 
resilience, big tech, great powers and their relations, etc., were discussed during these dialogues. 
Policy Planning Division has been funding various research projects, with a view to fulfil 
its mandate of encouraging r esearch in the foreign policy domain. Research projects are regularly  
commissioned in Think Tanks and academic institutions. Officers in the Division maintain regular  
contact with academics and researchers working on areas of interest to the Ministry. 
The Ministry supports Track 1.5 Dialogues with the participation of prominent think -tanks. 
Regular interactions of academics with senior officials are facilitated by this Division. The four  
flagship annual conferences - Raisina Dialogue, Global Technology Summit, Asian Economic  
Dialogue, and Indian Ocean Conference - are supported by the Ministry in collaboration with  
prominent think-tanks to facilitate greater interaction of academia with the policy-making 
community. 
The following is the list of Conferences/Track 1.5 Dialogues and Other Conferences 
supported by this Division in FY 2019-20 and FY 2020-21: 
 
S.No. Conference/Track 1.5 Dialogue Partner Institute 
Flagship Conferences 
1. Raisina Dialogue Observer Research Foundation 
2. Global Technology Summit Carnegie India 
3. Asia Economic Dialogue Pune International Centre 
4. Indian Ocean Conference India Foundation 

88 | P a g e  
Track 1.5 Dialogues 
5. India-Republic of Korea  
 
Ananta Aspen Centre 6. India-Japan Forum 
7. Indo-US Forum 
8. India-Japan Delhi Policy Group 
9. India-Canada Gateway House 
Track 2 Dialogues 
10. India-Myanmar Conference India Foundation 
11. India-Bangladesh Conference Jadavpur Association of International 
Relations (JAIR) 
12. West Asia Conference Manohar Parrikar Institute for 
Defence Studies and Analyses (MP- 
IDSA) 
13. Kolkata-Dhaka Dialogue HP Ghosh Research Centre, Jadavpur 
University 
Other Conferences 
14. Dialogue on Strategic Security Threats National Institute of Advanced Studies 
NIAS-CISAC 
15. Conference on India’s Neighbourhood 
Policy 
Vidya Prasarak Mandal 
16. Conference on Indo-Pacific Madurai Kamaraj University 
17. IAAPS Conference Indian Association for Asian and 
Pacific Studies 
 
 
The following table lists thematic research projects supported by the Division in FY 2019- 
20 and FY 2020-21 
 
S. No. Financial Year Institute Project 

89 | P a g e  
1. 2019-20 Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on Pakistan 
Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on 
Bangladesh 
Association of Indian 
Diplomats 
A quarterly journal of Foreign Policy 
Chennai Centre for 
China Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 
Centre for China 
Analysis and Strategy 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 
2. 2020-21 Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on Pakistan 
Manohar Parrikar 
Institute of Defence 
Studies 
Analytical and Research Studies on 
Bangladesh 
Association of Indian 
Diplomats 
A quarterly journal of Foreign Policy 
Chennai Centre for 
China Studies (CCCS) 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 
Centre for China 
Analysis and Strategy 
Analytical and Research Studies on China 

90 | P a g e  
The Ministry has a system of circulating policy papers within the larger policy community both  
within the government and outside. Policy Planning Division has circulated papers on the 
following topics in the last 12 months: 
COVID series non-papers 
Think-Tank Survey in India 
The Legal Implications of Brexit for India 
Geo-political and Geo-economic Impact of Coronavirus and the Implications for India 
Coronavirus Pandemic, Global Supply Chain input on India 
Radical Islamic Terrorism in Africa 
Mapping of Think Tank and Track 1.5 Linkages 
Paper on “Emerging Contours of Health Diplomacy 
Disruptive Trends in Economic Diplomacy 
 
The Division regularly produces a Think-Tank compendium which is shared extensively 
with various stakeholders. The Compendium comprises the output of select Indian think -tanks 
dealing with diplomacy, international trade, and national security. Several relevant 
webinars/seminars and conferences organized by think-tanks are monitored by Policy Planning and 
Research Division and an attempt is made to identify broad trends in foreign policy thinking and  
analysis 
The Ministry ensures that the deliberations of conferences and Track 1.5 dialogues 
supported by it are widely disseminated to the academic community and public. It has also 
intensified its presence in social media and other channels to better communicate with stakeholders  
of foreign policy. 
Ministry of External Affairs and its network of Missions and Posts abroad interacts 
extensively with the foreign policy research community at headquarters and abroad. Several formal  
and informal connections have developed that  promote collaboration amongst think -tanks and  
research/ academic institutions. These have been mapped by the Policy Planning Division. 
The Policy Planning Division supports research collaborations/academic conferences 
organised by various universities and think-tanks on a case-to-case basis. Some of these 
collaborations through think-tanks and universities involve foreign partners as well. The annually 

91 | P a g e  
organised India-South Korea and India -Japan Track 1.5 Dialogues are supported by the Ministry  
which has collaboration between Indian think-tanks and think-tanks from South Korea and Japan to 
cite a few examples. 
RIS and ICWA have established research collaborations with think tanks, research institutes,  
and academic institutes of foreign countries, on issues pertaining to foreign policy. The details are  
available at Annexure I and II, respectively. 
The Think Tank space in India is expanding rapidly. Think tanks are connectivity rich and  
the Indian think-tank space is organically linked and growing with a larger global public diplomacy 
space. The Policy Planning Division  is in regular contact with many research organisations and  
Think Tanks based in New Delhi and all over India. These organisations have robust collaboration  
mechanisms with important opinion makers and stakeholders all over the world. To know more  
about these collaborations, the Division undertook an exercise to map Think Tanks and 1.5 
linkages between India and 20 select countries. 19 India -based Think Tanks active in this space  
were identified. This exercise helped Ministry gain domain awareness and a database about this  
vital public diplomacy sphere. It also helped formulate a working database of the think -tank space 
in India and their linkages abroad while giving Ministry a sense of their evolution over time. 
One of the mandates of Indian Missions and  Posts across the world is to establish and  
maintain exchanges with Think Tanks and research institutions in the host countries. Indian 
Missions and Posts across the world regularly and systematically maintain contact with Think  
Tanks and academic/ researc h institutions in their countries of accreditation. They regularly meet  
with such Think Tanks, participate in events, and interact with Think Tank and academic personnel  
and researchers. The results of these interactions are reported to Ministry through it s system of  
diplomatic reporting. Ministry, through its Missions and Posts, is therefore in regular contact with  
established Think Tanks in countries in the world. Further, a large number of these Think Tanks 
and institutions conduct visits to India. Meetings with Ministry officials are a  regular feature of  
their programs. Ministry through participation of growing number Track 1.5 dialogues interacts  
frequently with a growing number of international Think Tanks. 
The two organisations supported by the Ministry, ICWA and RIS have regular programs 
of interactions, academic and research collaborations with partner institutions in several countries and 
academic bodies in other countries. The research resulting from such collaborations is published in 

92 | P a g e  
various academic journals. As far as establishing research collaboration with national and international 
MoU partners is concerned, ICWA has 53 international and 18 National MoU partners. Efforts are  
underway to establish more research collaboration with national and international MoU partners. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 
 
(Recommendation No. 41) 
 
Covid-19 pandemic has disrupted all aspects of world politics. The Committee are pleased  
to note that during the COVID pandemic, India generated a lot of goodwill for ensuring supply of  
essential medicines, even while meeting its own domestic requirements and has thereby cemented  
India’s reputation as the “Pharmacy of the World” and as a responsible stakeholder in gl obal health 
supply chains. India has also provided medical assistance in the form of essential drugs, test kits,  
protection gear, etc., to over 150 countries. In wake of this pandemic, the Government of India  
launched the Vande Bharat Mission that brought back4.2 million Indians under 9 VBM Phases  
with 8240 Air India flights and 9115 chartered and ‘Air Bubble’ flights. It was the largest and most  
complex exercise ever undertaken by the Government in close coordination with MEA and 
Ministries of Civil Aviati on, Home Affairs, Health & Family Welfare as well as the  concerned 
State governments. Multilateral, plurilateral and bilateral meetings have taken place at all levels  
using virtual platforms and voice communications. 
The Committee are extremely impressed by the resilience shown by the Ministry of  
External Affairs in responding to the uncertainties that accompanied the Covid 19 pandemicand  
related restrictions. India acted as a responsible international actor during the crisis by providing  
Covid-related medical supplies to more than 150 countries, standing for its Diasporic Community  
and increasing use of innovative tools for conducting diplomacy and  interaction with  foreign 
governments. The Committee applaud the Ministry’s efforts in responding va liantly during such  
uncertain times and are hopeful that India would continue to advocate reformed multilateralism and 
globalization based on principles of fairness, equality and humanity in the post-Covid world. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. 
 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/20/2021] 

93 | P a g e  
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT”S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

94 | P a g e  
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No 17) 
 
 
The Committee note that development partnership projects are rooted firmly in the 
underlying principle of South-South Cooperation, viz. mutual benefit, solidarity, free of 
conditionality, voluntary and demand driven cooperation. The assistance is implemented with the  
long-term goal of generating goodwill and generating a positive leverage to driveforeign policy  
objectives. The Committee, however, feel that the fluctuating budgetary demands and allocations  
convey a different picture.  The Committee are happy to note that international projects are being  
reviewed and monitored through institutional mechanisms such as Joint Project Monitoring 
Committees (JPMCs) and Project steering Committees as well as to effectively handle India’s  
developmental aid project Development Partnership Administration (DPA) has been created. The  
Committee also note that  various challenges often impede the execution of international projects,  
including delays in land acquisitions and approval of local permits; procurement challenges;  
occasional reluctance and apathy of host governments; political uncertainties security threats; 
natural calamity, etc. Keeping these extraneous challenges in mind, the Committee desire that the  
Ministry should undertake an assessment and accordingly re-orient our approach for project 
formulation, appraisal, implementation monitoring and evaluation, to overcome such challenges. In 
the firm opinion of the Committee, the Ministry should frame a developmental aid policy 
alongwith a separate aid disbursal body/subsidiary organ within DPA with a specialized and 
focused mandate of streamlining and evaluating the various projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India’s development partnership cooperation is integral part of India’s foreign policy. The  
inalienable component of our development cooperation is “partnership”. India’s economic 
cooperation through development partnership is demand driven. For example, India’s Grants -in-aid 
projects and capacity building programs are demand driven and are based on local demand/priority 

95 | P a g e  
of the partner countries.  Through development cooperation, Government aims to give fillip to  
South-South Cooperation. 
Development assistance is offered on the request of the host government, which is 
scrutinized by the Ministry in consultation with concerned Territorial Division from  foreign policy 
perspective and also the line ministries.  Feasibility study / DPR is undertaken by the project  
implementation agency, which is vetted by the line ministries.  Physical and financial progress is  
monitored at various levels, including our Missions abroad as well as Project Monitoring 
Committees (PMC) constituted for this specific purpose.  Additionally, expert advice of consultants 
and technical advisors on deputation from other specialized organizations outside the Ministry is  
also taken regarding implementation of these projects. Moreover, period reviews of the 
development assistance programs, viz., comprehensive review of ITEC, CEITs, etc are undertaken  
to attune these programs from impact and outcome perspective.  Budgetary outlays are pre -fixed 
and payments are released on milestone basis. 
Delay in the implementation schedule in some of the development assistance projects is  
apparently due to extraneous factors, viz., lack of appropriate interest / alacrity demonstrated by the 
host government in implementation of the project, once MoU is signed, non-identification and non- 
availability of project site for a considerable period of time, civil wars / internal strife prevalent in  
some of the African countries,  local epidemics, inability  to identify and nominate local project  
implementation agency for the project by the host government, etc.  These factors lead to delay in  
the implementation schedule of the project and non -utilization of budget allocated for the relevant  
FY. However, effor ts are made to periodically update and revise our budget projections and  
requirement for development assistance to other countries taking into account the overall 
perspectives of a dynamic and fluid nature.  All efforts are being made to limit delays to only 
extraneous factors and due diligence is done at every stage of the process. 
As regards Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation of instituting an autonomous aid  
disbursal body similar to USAID for development assistance partnership, the Ministry is fully  
seized of the matter and is periodically reviewing all aspects of development cooperation and aid  
delivery. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2020] 

96 | P a g e  
(Recommendation No 40) 
According to the Ministry, the key principles shaping and guiding Indian foreign p olicy are 
to pursue pragmatic and outcome oriented engagements, build influence in key global forums,  
creation of mutually beneficial, people oriented regional frameworks for stability and prosperity,  
working out reformed multilateralism and globalization and strengthening bonds of Indian 
Diaspora with their homeland. The Ministry has also informed that there is no single overarching  
and formalized strategic document that can delineate a roadmap for India’s foreign policy 
apparatus and that th e underlying principles of our diplomatic strategy are long established and  
enduring. The Ministry continually assesses and refines its diplomatic stance and policies in 
response to evolving global challenges. India’s positions on relevant issues and its i nterests, in the 
context of these principles, have been articulated through various platforms. The Committee 
observe that  frequent consultations are held  with concerned Ministries/Departments and other 
organizations of the Government while formulating specific foreign policy goals. The Committee  
also note that mechanism of Foreign Office consultations exists with all countries for 
consultations on foreign policy. The Committee also note that the Ministry is utilizing subject  
specialist consultants. 
Over the years, the Committee have been encouraging the Ministry to articulate India’s  
grand strategy encompassing short term, medium term and long term objectives of our foreign  
policy The Committee are unimpressed by the Ministry’s justification for not having a grand  
strategy. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of  
External Affairs should take all necessary steps to spell out a coherent and balanced Grand Foreign  
Policy strategy for India on priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
India’s foreign policy is articulated, in accordance with precedent, law and parliamentary  
rules in documents that are available in the public domain.Continuity and change have been one of  
the defining characteristics of India’s foreign policy. The ends of our foreign policy are deeply  
intertwined with national developmental priorities. Correspondingly, the means and strategies 
devised to achieve those ends have been attuned such that there is maximum co nvergence between 
India’s global diplomatic engagement and domestic development. In effect, India’s foreign policy  
strategy is aimed to diversify and expand the country's political, economic, and geo-strategic 

97 | P a g e  
options to ensure that India continues moving on an upward trajectory as a fast-growing inclusive 
economy, with a rising profile in global affairs. 
 
A changing world requires a dynamic foreign policy. Over the decades, India has rapidly  
grown in economic, political, and military  strength. Consequently, India’s global footprint has  
expanded remarkably. There is greater integration of Indian economy with regional and global  
economies. Our commerce, trade and energy linkages have grown substantially. Connectivity – 
physical, digital , and financial – with our neighbouring partners and beyond is a fast -emerging 
reality. Our diaspora has grown in stature and profile and has expanded vertically and horizontally  
across the world.  We have much stake in global governance regimes that shape our climate,  
technology, health, and other socio-economic policies. 
 
While no single overarching policy document can capture all aspects of India’s foreign  
policy, the principles of India’s diplomatic strategy are long-established and enduring. The 
underlying principles and priorities have been disseminated by the Ministry through various 
channels of public communication. 
 
The Annual Report of the Ministry contains a comprehensive statement of policies followed 
in the diplomatic sphere and their implementation. Replies to Parliamentary Questions, 
submissions to Parliamentary Committees and Ministerial statements also articulate foreign policy  
strategy in accordance with the rules of parliamentary democracy. 
 
Public statements by the President, Vice Pr esident, Prime Minister, Minister of External  
Affairs, the Minister  of State in  the Ministry, and senior  officials of the Ministry of  External 
Affairs which are collated on the website of the Ministry are also utilized to articulate Indian  
diplomatic and foreign policy objectives. This is supplemented by other diplomatic documents  
which contain the public expression of foreign policy priorities. This is in accordance with 
international practice as followed by the foreign offices of major powers. 
 
The Ministry would also like to draw attention of the Committee to its Recommendation no. 
40 of the Seventh Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Demands for  
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2020-21 whereby the committee 
recommended that the Ministry conduct a comparative study of countries’ grand strategy.  In 

98 | P a g e  
accordance with the recommendations of the Standing Committee, Indian Missions across the  
world were asked to provide information about the existence of grand foreign policy 
documents/strategy in their countries of accreditation and whether such  documents, if they exist,  
are brought out by Foreign Offices. 
 
The responses received are tabulated as Annexure III. 
 
The main findings of the survey are as follows : 
 
a. Out of the 171 countries surveyed, 86%, i.e.,148 countries, do not have any single 
comprehensive strategy document. (Table A) 
b. countries and the EU publish comprehensive strategy documents about strategic and foreign 
policy objectives. 17 of these documents are published by Foreign Offices. 6 of them are published  
by offices of Heads of Government (PMO equivalent). 
c. The 17 countries where the Foreign Office publishes strategy documents about strategic and 
foreign policy objectives are: 
1. Australia 
2. Costa Rica 
3. Czech Republic 
4. Ecuador 
5. Ireland 
6. New Zealand 
7. Poland 
8. Peru 
9. Russia 
10. Spain 
11. Switzerland 
12. South Africa 
13. Thailand 
14. Turkey 
15. Finland 
16. Estonia 

99 | P a g e  
17. Slovenia 
d. The EU document is published by European External Action Service. 
 
e. The 6 countries where strategy documents about strategic and foreign policy objectives are 
published by offices of Heads of Government are: 
Azerbaijan: (Azerbaijan in the International Arena/Office of the President) 
Belgium: (Comprehensive Approach-Strategy Note/Council of Ministers) 
Bosnia and Herzegovina: (The Foreign Policy Strategy of Bosnia and Herzegovina 2018-
2023/Office of  the President) 
Nigeria: (National Security Strategy/Office of the President) 
USA (National Security Strategic Guidance/ White House) 
UK (Global Britain in a Competitive Age: the Integrated Review of Security, Defence, 
Development and Foreign Policy/ UK PMO) 
Ministry’s practise of articulat ion of foreign policy through Annual Reports, Parliament  
discussions, statements of high functionaries etc is therefore in line with international practice of 
the vast majority of foreign offices 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2021] 

100 | P a g e  
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation No 4) 
While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for  the 
past four years, the Committee have been recommending that the Ministry should conduct a cross - 
country comparative study of budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments entrusted with the  
task of managing foreign affairs. In their initial replies, the Ministry submitted that the preliminary  
report of a study conducted by Research and Information System for economic development (RIS)  
is under examination. On further probing, the Ministry informed that a comprehensive assessment  
of the preliminary report has been completed and more comparative s tudy variables are being  
included in the report. 
The Committee do not approve such casual approach of the Ministry in furnishing  
replies to the Committee on such serious matters. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  
that the findings of the preliminary Report should be furnished to the Committee instantly and final  
report should be compiled within three months. The Ministry should also ensure that the 
comparative data and figures are used to bolster its case for enhanced budgetary allocation in the  
next financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. Ministry would like 
to assure the Committee that the Report of the study conducted by the Research and Information  
System for economic development (RIS) is under active consideration. As submitted earlier, a  
comprehensive assessment of the preliminary report has been completed. Further, Ministry has  
convened a few rounds of meetings with representatives of RIS to exchange views o n the areas  
which need further work and the addition of more parameters to make the Study more relevant and  
contemporary. The Ministry will endeavour to complete the final draft of the Study in the current  
calendar year. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2021] 

101 | P a g e  
 
(Recommendation No 9) 
Highlighting the significance of Missions and Posts, the Committee opine that opening  
of Indian Missions help in expanding India’s diplomatic footprint, deepen political relations, 
enable growth of bilateral trade, investments and economic engagements, facilitate stronger people-
to-people contacts, bolster political outreach in multilateral fora and help garner support for  India’s 
foreign policy objectives. The Union Cabinet had accorded approval for opening up of 18  new 
Indian Missions in Africa in a phased manner between 2018 -2021. Of these 15 Missions - Conakry 
(Guinea), Djibouti (Djibouti), Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), Brazzaville (Republic of  Congo), 
Malabo (Equatorial Guinea)  and Kigali (Rwanda), Yaounde (Cameroon), Asmara (Eritrea)  and 
Mbabane (Eswatini), Monrovia (Liberia), Freetown (Sierra Leone), Sao Tome (Sao Tome and  
Principe), Nouakchott (Mauritania), Lomé (Togo) and N’djamena (Chad) are in various stages of  
functioning. Efforts are ongoing to operationalize the last three remaining Missions viz., 
Mogadishu (Somalia), Bissau (Guinea Bissau) and Praia (Cape Verde). Ministry has also informed  
that there are 48 countries where India does not have resident Indian Missions. F urthermore, the 
Committee also note that in December 2020, the Cabinet has approved opening of three new Indian  
Missions in Estonia, Paraguay andDominican Republic. 
 
Standing by the Ministry’s own admission about the imperative of  having presence in  
all UN countries for attaining our goal of UNSC permanent seat, the Committee strongly feel that  
India should have a resident Mission in all UN Member countries. The Committee appreciate  
that opening of a resident Indian Mission or Post is a time -taking exercise which entails internal  
planning and approvals as well as coordination and liaising with the host Government. While  
lauding the timely completion of the 15 Missions in African countries, the Committee strongly  
recommend that the Ministry should complete the remaining three Missions in Africa and the 
newly approved 3 Missions in Latin America in 2021. The Ministry should also seek additional  
finances to that end, if required, at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Among the 18 Missions approve d by Cabinet in March, 2018, 15 Missions are in various  
stages of functioning and all efforts are being made to operationalize the last 3 Missions viz:  
Mogadishu, Bissau and Praia. Appropriate budgetary provisions are projected as per the expected 

102 | P a g e  
timeline of operationalization of the Missions, in consultation with the Internal Finance Division of  
the Ministry. 
Cabinet approval has been received in December, 2020 to open 3 new Indian Missions in  
Estonia, Paraguay and Dominican Republic and administrative processes for implementation of  
these decisions are underway. Recently on 25 May, 2021, Cabinet has approved opening of 
Consulate in Addu, Maldives. Opening of  a resident Indian Mission or Post is a time -taking 
exercise requiring internal planning for logistics, deployment, infrastructure and approvals as well  
as coordination and liaisoning with the host Government and Ministry would follow it up closely  
with the relevant authorities. As recommended by Hon’ble Committee, Ministry would seek 
additional budgetary allocations under head Embassies & Missions, if necessary, for early 
operationalization of newly approved Missions/Posts. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2021] 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No 10) 
 
The Committee observe that the Dire ctorate General of Inspections (DGI) was set up in  
2014 in the system of regular inspection of Indian Missions/Posts abroad and in 2016 also  
introduced a web portal named Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) for 
selection of Missions/Posts for on -site inspections. But the Committee are astonished to note that  
after all these efforts, only eight Missions/Posts were inspected in 2018 and two in 2019 and during  
2020 not a single on -site or off -site inspection took place. The Comm ittee are not at all satisfied  
with such tardy progress in such an important process of performance evaluation and monitoring. 
Emphasizing the imperative of periodic inspection and monitoring in increasing the efficacy 
of Indian Missions/Posts abroad, the Committee recommend that  the Ministry should launch the  
revamped PEMS portal at the earliest since it has already missed several timelines. The Ministry  
should also compile an annual data on country - specific challenges faced by the Missions/Posts  
abroad so that the evaluation exercise could result in positive outcomes and suggestions. 

103 | P a g e  
Reply of the Government 
 
Due to various reasons, only eight Missions/Posts could be inspected in 2018 and two  
Missions/Posts were inspected in 2019. Due to COVID-19 pandemic and revamping process of  
PEMS portal, inspection could not be conducted during 2020. 
The Ministry has launched the revamped portal of Performance Evaluation and 
Monitoring System (PEMS -2.0) on 07.06.2021. The evaluation exercise will be d one in a time - 
bound manner followed up by off -site and on -site inspection, where required, for improving the  
functioning of our Missions/Posts. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 11) 
 
The Committee observe that the budget head ‘Passport and Emigration’ caters to 
expenditure on Passport offices, printing of travel documents, lease/purchase of passport printers,  
payments to State and Union territories  Governments for verification, expenses of pre -departure 
orientation and skill up -gradation of emigrant workers. The budgetary allocation under this sub - 
head has witnessed a decline from Rs. 1348.59 crore (BE 2020- 21) to Rs. 1328.63 crore (BE 2021- 
22). As per the Ministry the reduction in projections and allocation is primarily on a ccount of slow 
progress due to COVID -19 pandemic under printing and procurement of travel documents, Postal  
and Freight charges, Office Expenses and Information Technology head. 
The Committee observe that the budget sub-head ‘ Passport and Emigration’ cate rs 
to two diverse but crucial set of items and directly affect on public services delivery and welfare of  
Overseas Indians. Keeping this in mind, the Committee feel that provision of adequate funds is  
essential. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the  Ministry should ensure timely delivery 
of public services  in terms of passport  and emigration support and if required, seek additional  
funds at the RE stage.  The Committee also desire that Videsh Bhawans should be established as a  
one stop service center in every state capital. The Ministry should work out a detailed proposal in  
this regard and apprisethe Committee at the soonest. 

104 | P a g e  
Reply of the Government 
 
. The observation of the Committee have been noted and based on need assessment of funds 
and efficient utilization pattern, Ministry shall seek additional funds at the RE stage for passport  
and emigration services. 
Ministry initiated process  for establishment  of Videsh Bhawans (VB) in Indian States  
capitals in June, 2016. T he proposal was to bring all subordinate offices of MEA such as Branch  
Secretariat, Passport office, ICCR Centre and POE under one roof to enhance the efficiency of  
service to be provided to the public of the respective state/ union territory (UT) and also  for better 
coordination among the State/ UT administration and the Ministry. Initially, efforts were made to  
identify the places where space is available in the existing RPO that can be used for VB after  
making required modifications and rest of the state  governments were requested to allot suitable  
land (free of cost)  for construction of VB. Presently, all proposals for Videsh Bhawan have been  
put on hold where no construction has commenced so far. The construction on only those projects  
which commenced as RPO (Bhopal, Kolkata, Ranchi) and were later modified as Videsh Bhawan  
are being continued. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2021] 
 
 
(Recommendation No 36) 
 
ICCR Cultural Centres constitute a key tool of India’s cultural outreach abroad  through 
their wide range of cultural, academic and intellectual activities. The Ministry has informed that the 
Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are expected to be operational by the end of this year.The 
Ministry has submitted that establishment of a new cultural cent res is dependent on a variety of  
factors which includes local formalities for opening of a new Cultural Centre, background 
information of Mission, information about the city where a Cultural Centre is proposed, details of  
Foreign Cultural Centres set up by  other major countries, interest of general public about India in  
terms of art, culture, Bollywood, other Art forms and India-centric activities proposed for a 
Cultural Centre, etc. The Committee would recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the  
Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are operational by end of 2021 positively. The Ministry  
should also  empanel artists from the widest  possible variety of  Indian languages/dialects and 
cultures so that India’s diversity is richly showcased abroad. 

105 | P a g e  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The renovation work of  Cultural Centres in Washington and Paris are underway. The  
Ministry acknowledges recommendation of Hon’ble Committee for empanelment of artists in 
widest possible way and is committed to represent India’s rich diversity through its 
programmes/schemes. 
[O.M. No. AA/Parl/125/17/2021] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI P.P. CHAUDHARY, 
  August, 2021  Chairperson, 
Sravana, 1943 (Saka) Committee on External Affairs 

106 | P a g e  
MINUTES   OF   THE   TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 11 AUGUST, 2021 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 11 August, 2021 from 1013 hrs. to 1027 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
 
3. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
 
4. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
 
5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
 
6. Shri P. C. Mohan 
 
7. Dr. K. C. Patel 
 
8. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri K. J. Alphons 
 
10. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 
11. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
12. Shri Brijlal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul - Additional Secretary 
 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Director 
 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following two draft Reports:- 

107 | P a g e  
(i) xx xx xx 
 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Eighth Report on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External  
Affairs for the year 2021-22’. 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Reports. The Members suggested some minor modifications. After 
deliberations the Committee adopted the draft Reports. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

108 | P a g e  
APPENDIX- I 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39 and 41. 
Total- 34 
Percentage: 82.92% 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL 
Total- Nil 
Percentage: 0 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos. 17 and 40 
Total- 2 
Percentage: 4.87 % 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos. 4, 9, 10, 11 and 36 
Total- 5 
Percentage: 12.19 % 

109 | P a g e  
Annexure -I 
 
 
LIST OF RIS INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES 
(LAST THREE YEARS) 
 
 
 
A. MoU with Foreign Institutes 
1 Ethiopian Development Research Institute (EDRI) 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 
2 International Cooperation Deptt., Development Research Centre (DRC) of the State 
Council of China, Beijing, China 
3 Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), Jakarta, Indonesia 
4 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) with NeST 
5 Institute of Developing Economies,Japan External Trade Organization, (JETO) 
Japan 
6 Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) 
Ebene, Mauriius 
7 Policy Analysis and Department Agency of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Republic of Indonesia 
8 Institute for Strategic and Socio-Economic Research 
Nepal 
9 The Centre for Foreign Relations (CFR) of the United Republic of Tanzania 
10 Department for International Relations (DFID) now FCDO, The Government ofUnited 
Kingdom 
11 South Africa Institute of International Affairs (SAIIA) 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
12 The National Institute of Strategic Studies Kyrgyz Republic (NISS KR), Bishkek 
13 Presidential Agency of International Cooperatin of Colombia (APC- Colombia) 
14 Michigan State University (MSU), East Lansing, Michigan, USA 
15 Chile Pacific Foundation (FCHP) 
16 The Institute of Foreign Affairs and National Security (IFANS) of The Korea 
National Diplomatic Academy, Republic of Korea; 
The Korea Institute for International Economic Policy (KIPP), Republic of Korea 
17 Biruni Institute, Kabul, Afghanistan 
 
B. TRADITIONAL PARTNERS 
 
1 Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD), Dhaka, Bangladesh 

110 | P a g e  
2 Royal Institute for Governance and Strategic Studies (RIGSS) 
Bhutan 
3 Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (IPEA), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
4 China Agricultural University (CAU), Beijing, China 
5 Chinese Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation (CAITEC), 
Beijing, China 
6 Deutsche Gesellschaft fur internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Emberging Market 
Sustainability Dialogues, EMSD, Berlin, Germany 
7 German Development Institute(DIE), Bonn, Germany 
8 Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA), Jakarta, Indonesia 
9. Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), Jakarta, Indonesia 
10 UNU Institute for the Advanced Study of Sustainability, Tokyo, Japan 
11 Myanmar Institute of Strategic and International Studies (MISIS), Yangon, Myanmar 
12 South Asia Watch on Trade, Economics and Environment (SAWTEE), Kathmandu, 
Nepal 
13 Institute for Strategic and Socio-Economic Research (ISSR), Kathmandu, Nepal 
14 Neeti Anusandhan Pratishthan, Nepal 
15 Institute for Integrated Development Studies (IIDS), Kathmandu, Nepal 
16 Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS), Lahore, Pakistan 
17 Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI), Islamabad, Pakistan 
18 Marga Institute, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
19 National University of Singapore, Singapore 
20 Institute for Global Dialogue, Pretoria, South Africa 
21 Department of  International Relations and Cooperation (DIRCO), Pretoria, South 
Africa 
22 Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute of International Relations and Strategic Studies, Sri 
Lanka 
23 Thailand International Cooperation Agency (TICA), Bangkok, Thailand 
24 Institute of Development Studies (IDS), Sussex, Brighton, UK 
25 Asia-Pacific Association of Agricultural Research Institutions, Bangkok, Thailand 
26 Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand 
27 Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS), Singapore 
28 Institute of Policy Studies (IPS), Sri Lanka 
29 Korea Institute for International Economic Policy (KIEP), Seoul, Korea 
 
Multilateral and Regional Institutions 
 
1 Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), Beijing, China 
2 New Development Bank (NDB), Shanghai, China 
3 OECD, Paris, France 

111 | P a g e  
4 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Paris, 
France 
5 World Food Programme (WFP), Rome, Italy 
6 Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), Rome, Italy 
7 Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), Ebene, Republic of Mauritius 
8 South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), Nepal 
9 Asian Development Bank (ADB), Manila, Philippines 
10 Islamic Development Bank, Saudi Arabia 
11 African Development Bank, South Africa 
12 International Labour Orgnaization (ILO), Switzerland 
13 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Geneva, 
Switzerland 
14 World Trade Organization (WTO), Geneva, Switzerland 
15 UN ESCAP, Bangkok, Thailand 
16 United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC), USA 
17 The World Bank, Washington D. C., USA 
18 International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC, USA 
19 Commonwealth Secretariat, London, UK 
20 Center for the Implementation of Public Policies Promoting Equity and Growth 
(CIPPEC), Argentina 
21 Argentine Council for International Relations (CARI) 
22 Latin American Social Sciences Institute (FLACSO), Argentina 
23 Chile Pacific Foundation 
24 Wangari Maathai Institute for Peace and Environmental Studies, University of Nairobi. 
25 Nigerian Institute for international Affairs (NIIA) 
26 Dublin City University, Ireland 
27 Paris Peace Forum (PPF) 
28 New York University, 
29 Yale University, New Haven, United States 
30 Brookings India 
31 BRICS Policy Centre, Brazil 
32 African Centre for Technology Studies (ACTS), Kenya 
33 The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN-DESA), New 
York 
34 Institute Mora, MEXICO 
35 UN Foundation 
36 Bangladesh Institute of International and Strategic Studies 
37 Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), China 
38 The Institute of World Economics and Politics (IWEP), CASS, China 
39 The Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI), Japan 

112 | P a g e  
40 Cabinet Office, Government of Japan 
41 The National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies (GRIPS), Japan 
42 The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
43 Russian International Affairs Council (RIAC), Moscow 
44 The National Committee for BRICS Research (BRICS NKI) , Russia 

113 | P a g e  
Annexure-II 
 
LIST OF ICWA INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS IN VARIOUS 
COUNTRIES 
 
Please find below the list of research collaborations that ICWA established with  
think tanks, research and academic institutes of foreign countries, on issues 
pertaining to foreign policy, during the last three years. (2018-2021) 
 
II. List of Foreign Think Tan ks/Research and Academic Institution on  
Foreign Policy with which MoUs have been signed between 2018 - 
2021 
 
1. Center for International Relations (CIRS),Uzbekistan, 
September 14, 2018 
2. Institute for Strategic and Regional Studies under the 
President of the Republic of Uzbekistan (ISRS),Tashkent, 
Uzbekistan, September 28, 2018 
3. Russia International Affairs Council,(RIAC), Moscow, 
Russia ,14-15 November, 2018 
4. Asia New Zealand Foundation (ANZF), Wellington 
10 April 2019 
5. The SCO Centre for Public Diplomacy in Uzbekistan 
February 13, 2020 
6. The Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of the Kyrgyz Republic named after Kazy 
Dikambaev, February 26, 2020 
7. Korea National Diplomatic Academy (KNDA), Seouland 
Korea Institute for International Economic Policy 
(KIEP), Seoul, October 22, 2020 
8. Institute of International Politics and Economics, 
(IIPE) Belgrade, December 10, 2020 
 
III. ICWA research  collaboration during (2018-2021) with Foreign 
Think Tanks/Research and Academic Institution on Foreign Policy  
which are not MoU partners. 
 
1. Royal Institute for Governance and Strategic Studies 
(RIGSS), Bhutan, 4 December 2018. 
2. The German Institute for Global and Area Studies 
(GIGA) and German Institute for International and 

114  
 Security Affairs (SWP), 1 November 2019 
3. Vietnam Institute for Indian and Southwest Asian 
Studies, Vietnam, 7 October 2020 
4. The Wilson Centre, Washington D.C, 19 November 
2020 

115  
Annexure-III 
 
SURVEY OF GRAND FOREIGN POLICY DOCUMENTS/ STRATEGY IN 
COUNTRIES 
Table A - Survey of Countries Publishing Grand Strategy Documents 
 
 
 
S.N 
o 
 
 
Country 
Grand 
Strategy 
Y/N 
 
 
Remarks 
1 Afghanistan N Nil 
2 Albania N Nil 
3 Algeria N Nil 
4 Angola N Nil 
 
5 
Antigua and 
Barbuda 
 
N 
 
Nil 
6 Argentina N Nil 
7 Armenia N Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
Australian Government released the Foreign Policy White Paper in 2017. The  
White Paper "sets out a comprehensive framework to advance Australia’s 
security and prosperity in a contested and competitive world. 
However, the White Paper does not mention “Grand Strategy” anywhere in 
the document. It presents an overview of the challenges and priorities of 
Australia’s foreign policy, encompassing a wide array of subjects such as 
defence, trade, investments, internal security etc. 
The document primarily has inter-ministerial task-cutting. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Austria 
 
 
Y 
Austria’sDepartment of Security Policy Affairs has published “Austrian 
Security Strategy” - a document primarily consisting of internal and external  
security matters. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
Azerbaijan 
 
 
 
Y 
The Administrative Department of the President has prepared a document 
“Azerbaijan in the International Arena” - primarily   enlisting goals and means  
of Azerbaijan’s foreign policy and its relations with international actors. 
However, the document does not mention the word “Grand Strategy”. 
11 Bahamas N Nil 
12 Bahrain N Nil 
13 Bangladesh N Nil 

116  
14 Belarus N Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
Belgium 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
The Council of Ministers of Belgium has prepared a document titled 
"Comprehensive Approach - Strategy Note". It enlists the guiding principles of  
Belgium foreign policy, the challenges it faces and the means to resolve them. 
 
 
The document does not mention the word “Grand Strategy”. 
16 Belize N Nil 
17 Benin N  
 
18 
Bosnia & 
Herzegovina 
 
Y 
It has a Foreign policy strategy document (2018-23). This has been released by 
the Head of the State. 
19 Botswana N Nil 
20 Bhutan N Nil 
21 Bolivia N Nil 
22 Brazil N Nil 
 
23 
Brunei 
Darussalam 
 
N 
 
Nil 
24 Bulgaria N Nil 
25 Burundi N Nil 
26 Burkina Faso N Nil 
27 Cabo Verde N Nil 
28 Cambodia N Nil 
29 Cameroon N Nil 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
Canada 
 
 
 
 
N 
The Canadian government does, from time to time, produce white papers on its  
foreign policy goals and objectives as well as general directions.  In January  
2020, the then Foreign Minister of Canada had made a public announcement 
that the government would soon be producing a white paper on “Canada’s  
Feminist Foreign Policy”, however, this document has so far not been made  
public. 
 
 
31 
Central African 
Republic 
(CAR) 
 
 
N 
 
 
Nil 
32 Chad N  
33 Chile N Nil 
 
34 
 
China 
 
N 
China does not have a publicly articulated cogent and comprehensive grand 
strategy. 

117  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Colombia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has published “ Principles and guidelines of 
Colombian foreign policy - Responsible, innovative and constructive foreign 
policy 2018-2022”. 
 
 
It outlines the goals and principles of colombian foreign policy and is not an 
elaborative document. 
 
 
The document does not mention “Grand Strategy”. 
Mission has shared three links: https://www.cancilleria.gov.co/principios-y- 
lineamientos-la-politica-exterior-colombiana 
https://www.cancilleria.gov.co/en/principles-and-outlines-colombian-foreign- 
policy. 
36 Comoros N Nil 
 
37 
Commonwealt 
h of Dominica 
 
N 
 
Nil 
38 Cote d’ Ivoire N Nil 
 
 
39 
 
 
Costa Rica 
 
Y 
The Ministry of External Relations has published “Institutional Strategic Plan 
2021-2025” - a guiding document for the government on foreign policy matters. 
The document does not mention “grand strategy”. 
40 Croatia N Nil 
41 Cuba N Mission has shared a document containing the vision of the Ministry 
 
42 
 
Cyprus 
 
N 
Mission has shared a document containing the Mission statement of the 
Ministry 
 
 
43 
 
Czech 
Republic 
 
 
Y 
The Czech Republic has Foreign Policy document. The details of this document 
is available 
at: https://www.mzv.cz/file/1574645/Concept_of_the_Czech_Republic_s_Forei 
gn_Policy.pdf. 
44 Denmark N The mission mentioned that the country is in the process of formulating one. 
45 Djibouti N Nil 
 
46 
Dominican 
Republic 
 
N 
 
Nil 
 
47 
 
DPRK 
 
N 
The Mission has shared a link in this regard, 
https://www.mfa.gov.kp/en/overview/. 
 
48 
 
Estonia 
 
Y 
The Foreign Policy Strategy of Estonia has been drawn up for the first time and 
it covers the state’s foreign policy activities up to 2030. It was released in May 
2020. 

118  
   https://vm.ee/sites/default/files/Estonia_for_UN/Rasmus/estonian_foreign_polic 
y_strategy_2030_final.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
Finland 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
On 29 October 2020 , the Finnish Government adopted the Government Report  
on Finnish Foreign and Security Policy and submitted it to Parliament. The  
report, being drawn up once during each government term, assesses Finland's  
foreign and security policy operating environment and defines the goals and  
priorities for Finland's actions within the next few years. The Report is available 
at https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/handle/10024/162515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ireland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has prepared a short document 
called “ Statement of Strategy”. 
It outlines the broad objectives, underlying principles and targets of the 
Ministry. 
However, it does not mention the word “Grand Strategy” 
The mission has shared following links in this regard: 
The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade - Statement of Strategy - 
2017-2020 may be seen at the following link: 
https://www.dfa.ie/media/dfa/alldfawebsitemedia/aboutus/DFAT-Statement-of- 
Strategy-2017-2020.pdf 
 
The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs Roles and Policies (including 
strategies) may be seen at: https://www.dfa.ie/our-role-policies/ 
51 DR Congo N Nil 
 
52 
 
Ecuador 
 
Y 
Mission has shared a link: https://www.cancilleria.gob.ec/wp- 
content/uploads/2018/01/agenda_politica_2017baja.pdf 
53 Egypt N Nil 
54 El Salvador N  
 
55 
Equatorial 
Guinea 
 
N 
 
Nil 
 
 
56 
 
The European 
Union 
 
 
Y 
Mission remarked that European Union Global Strategy (EUGS) adopted on 28 
June 2016, replaced European Security Strategy. Mission furnished a document 
titled "Shared Vision, Common Action: A Stronger Europe". 
57 Fiji N Nil 
58 France N Nil 
59 Gabon N Nil 
60 Guyana N Nil 

119  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germany 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
The website of the German Foreign Office contains a webpage titled 
'Germany’s foreign and European policy principles' (https://www.auswaertiges- 
amt.de/en/aussenpolitik/themen/policy-principles/229790), which contains 
information regarding the guiding principles of Germany's foreign policy on 
various issues such as relations with Europe, transatlantic partnership, 
commitment to multilateral international order, democracy, rule of law and 
human rights, etc. The individual sections have summarised information on the 
subject and contain links which direct to more detailed information. 
 
This is the only official resource available on Germany's overall foreign policy 
strategy as per our information. No document or policy paper on Germany's 
grand foreign policy strategy could be found. 
 
62 
 
Ghana 
 
N 
Mission said that Ghana’s foreign policy guidelines are enshrined in their 
Constitution 
 
 
63 
 
 
Greece 
 
 
N 
The Mission communicated that The Greek Foreign Ministry was requested to  
confirm whether they have Foreign Policy Strategy/document. Their response is 
that they are not in a position to give any definite answer on this. 
64 Grenada N Nil 
65 Guatemala N Nil 
66 Guinea Bissau N Nil 
67 Haiti N Nil 
68 Honduras N Nil 
69 Hungary N Nil 
70 Iceland N Nil 
71 Israel N Nil 
72 Indonesia N Nil 
73 Iran N Nil 
74 Iraq N Nil 
75 Italy N Nil 
76 Jamaica N Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
Japan does not have any grand Foreign Policy document/strategy. Instead, Japan 
has annual Foreign Policy Report; "Diplomatic Bluebook '' 
(https://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/other/bluebook/index.html) that details its 
Foreign Policy priorities and engagement with respective countries/regions. 
There is no other such official document on Foreign Policy, including the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Our interlocutors from MOFA, Japan, 
have also shared that there is so-called National Security Strategy. Please see 
links below for details. 

120  
   https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/siryou/131217anzenhoshou/nss-e.pdf 
 
https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/siryou/131217anzenhoshou/pamphlet_en.pdf 
 
 
78 
 
 
Jordan 
 
 
N 
Jordan has been a strong US ally in the region and believes in tactical 
understandings with major powers/countries instead of an independent and 
strong foreign policy strategy. 
79 Kazakhstan N Nil 
80 Kenya N Nil 
 
81 
Kyrgyz 
Republic 
 
N 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kuwait 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
Kuwait does not have a single document articulating grand strategy or foreign 
policy strategy; however New Kuwait Vision 2035 is a strategic vision focused 
on developmental plan with elements of regional and global foreign policy and 
strategy incorporated in it. An official Summary of the New Kuwait Vision 
2035 is given at: https://www.mofa.gov.kw/en/kuwait-state/kuwait-vision- 
2035/. 
The plan may be accessed at: https://issuu.com/pbc_kuwait/docs/nk2035. 
83 Lao PDR N Nil 
84 Latvia N Nil 
85 Lebanon N Nil 
 
86 
 
Lesotho 
 
N 
The strategy document has been shared on the facebook page of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. 
87 Liberia N Nil 
 
 
 
 
88 
 
 
 
 
Luxembourg 
 
 
 
 
N 
The MFEA, Luxembourg does not have any standing note/approach/policy 
document guiding or shaping its foreign policy. Each year, the Minister for  
Foreign and European Affairs delivers the foreign policy statement to the 
Chamber of Deputies (Luxembourgish Parliament). This speech enables the  
head of Luxembourg's diplomatic se rvice to present the broad outline of the  
country's foreign and European policy. 
89 Madagascar N Nil 
90 Malaysia N Nil 
 
91 
 
Malawi 
 
Y 
Mission has forwarded a document on the Foreign & Diaspora Policy received 
by local Foreign Office. 
92 Maldives N Nil 
 
 
93 
 
 
Malta 
 
 
N 
Malta does not have any Grand Foreign Policy Document/Strategy. A link to 
the Strategic Objectives as mentioned on the website of the Ministry for Foreign 
and European Affairs of Malta is as 
follows: https://foreignandeu.gov.mt/en/Pages/Strategic-Objectives.aspx 

121  
    
94 Mauritius N Nil 
 
95 
 
Mexico 
 
N 
Nil 
96 Moldova N Nil 
97 Mongolia N Nil 
98 Montenegro N Nil 
99 Morocco N Nil 
 
100 
 
Mozambique 
 
N 
Mozambique does not have any Grand Foreign Policy Document/Strategy 
101 Myanmar N Nil 
102 Namibia N Nil 
 
 
 
103 
 
 
 
Nepal 
 
 
 
N 
The Mission has attached Nepal's Foreign Policy document in original (Nepali) 
and in-house English translation of the same.The document looks more like an  
annual report. 
 
104 
 
New Zealand 
 
Y 
New Zealand has a foreign policy strategy document called “Strategic 
Intentions”. 
105 Netherlands N Nil 
 
 
106 
 
 
Nicaragua 
 
 
N 
Nicaragua does not seem to have any grand Foreign Policy Document/Strategy  
and as per their Foreign Office the fundamental rules guiding their foreign  
policy are respect for sovereignty, neither interference nor acceptance of 
pressure from other states, friendship, solidarity and cooperation. 
107 Niger N Nil 
 
 
108 
 
 
Nigeria 
 
 
Y 
Nigeria has a National Security Strategy document. The document appears to be 
a all of Government approach with the preface and foreward penned by the  
President and National Security Advisor 
 
 
109 
 
North 
Macedonia 
 
 
N 
North Macedonia is awaiting the commencement of EU accession negotiations  
this year and also does not seem to have a grand foreign policy document or  
strategy either, as per our research and enquiries. 
 
 
 
110 
 
 
 
Norway 
 
 
 
N 
The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has issued a document titled 
'Norway-India 2030' detailing the government's strategy for cooperation with  
India. As far as foreign policy strategy in general is concerned, the Foreign  
Minister of Norway, Ms. Ine Eriksen Soreide, had presented a speech to the  
Storting (Parliament) in March 2020 in this regard. 

122  
111 Oman N Mission has sent a document titled "Principles - A good Neighbour". 
112 Pakistan N Nil 
113 Palestine N Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Panama 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
In Panama each government lays out the way forward for it’s five years of  
governance in various strategic plan documents . The last government of 
President Varela had made a five year plan for the Ministry of External Affairs  
of Panama (MIRE), a 52 page document with is enclosed along with the 
translation of the most relevant pages for perusal. 
 
In 2015 the Foreign Ministry also issued two major documents. The first being  
Panama Cooperates 2030, which was the National plan of International 
Cooperation of the Republic of Panama. It listed the Strategies, Objectives and  
Instruments of International Cooperation of Panama in the era of the sustainable 
Development Objectives. MIRE also published a national strategy for cultural  
diplomacy to expand the traditional scope of diplomacy. A copy each of both  
these documents in English is attached for ready reference. 
 
The new government under President Laurentino Cortizo took over in July  
2019 and  a new Foreign Policy strategy is being finalized. The local 
interlocutors have been approached for the same and the Mission will forward it 
to the Ministry as soon as the same is received. 
 
115 
Papua New 
Guinea 
 
N 
 
Nil 
116 Paraguay N Nil 
117 Philippines N Nil 
 
118 
 
Poland 
 
Y 
The Mission has attached a document titled “the Polish Foreign Policy Strategy 
2017-2021” 
 
 
119 
 
 
Portugal 
 
 
N 
The Mission tried to search for Portugal's 'Grand Foreign Policy 
Document/Strategy’ but was not able to find any specific document in this 
regard. 
120 Peru Y Peru has a five-year foreign policy document titled "Multi-annual Strategic Plan 
for Foreign Affairs of Peru for 2015-2021" 
121 Qatar N Nil 
 
122 
Republic of 
Congo 
 
N 
 
Nil 
 
123 
Republic of 
Guinea 
 
N 
 
Nil 
 
124 
Republic of 
Korea 
 
N 
 
The Republic of Korea publishes a Diplomatic White Paper on an annual basis. 

123  
125 Romania N Nil 
 
126 
 
Russia 
 
Y 
Russia has a Foreign Policy Concept (approved by President of the Russian 
Federation Vladimir Putin on November 30, 2016). 
127 Rwanda N Nil 
128 Saudi Arabia N Nil 
129 Senegal N Nil 
 
 
130 
 
 
Serbia 
 
 
Y 
No document by this name has been issued by the Government of Serbia. 
However, Serbia adopted a National Security Strategy in December 2019, 
which has plenty of foreign policy component. A copy of the document 
(National Security Strategy of Serbia) is attached. 
 
 
131 
 
 
Seychelles 
 
 
N 
Mission has stated that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has updated its website  
on April 5th 2021 and has added a document titled, “Executive Summary of the 
Seychelles Foreign Policy 2021-25. The document provides guiding principles. 
However, a detailed strategy document is not available in public domain. 
132 Sierra Leone N Nil 
133 Singapore N Nil 
 
134 
 
Slovenia 
 
Y 
The document is called: Safe, Successful, Globally respected. The Foreign 
Policy of Republic of Slovenia. 
135 Slovakia N Nil 
 
 
136 
 
 
Spain 
 
 
Y 
Spain has a four year External Action Strategy, recently released for 2021-24. 
The original plan is in Spanish but the translated Executive Summary is 
attached. 
 
137 
Solomon 
Islands 
 
N 
 
Nil 
138 Somalia N Nil 
 
 
139 
 
 
South Africa 
 
 
Y 
Mission has shared two documents namely, “Strategic Plan 2020-2025” by 
Department of International Relations and Cooperation (DIRCO) and "The 
Diplomacy of Ubuntu”- White Paper on South Africa’s Foreign Policy. 
140 South Sudan N Nil 
141 Sri Lanka N Nil 
142 Sudan N Nil 
 
143 
St. Kitts & 
Nevis 
 
N 
 
Nil 
144 Sweden N Nil 
145 Switzerland Y Mission shared 8 documents containing: 

124  
   ⚫ Foreign Policy Strategy 2020-23 of the Foreign Ministry; 
⚫ Foreign policy vision for Switzerland till 2028; 
⚫ Strategy for Communication abroad 2021-24; 
⚫ Mena strategy 2020-2024 
⚫ China strategy 2021-24 
⚫ Switzerland’s International cooperation strategy 2021-24 
⚫ Sub-Saharan Africa strategy 2021-24 
Digital Foreign Policy Strategy 2021-24 
146 Syria N Nil 
147 Tajikistan N Nil 
 
 
 
148 
 
 
 
Tanzania 
 
 
 
N 
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania does have a Foreign 
Policy Document - the "New Foreign Policy of 2001". However, this document 
is not available in the public domain except a gist as given in the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs' website at the 
link https://www.foreign.go.tz/index.php/about/category/foreign-policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
149 
 
 
 
 
 
Thailand 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
Thailand has a 20-YEAR FOREIGN AFFAIRS MASTERPLAN for the 
period 2018-2037. A synoptic version of the master-plan, in English language, 
is available on Thai MoFA's website at the following link: 
https://image.mfa.go.th/mfa/0/mkKfL2iULZ/%E0%B9%80%E0%B8%AD%E0 
%B8%81%E0%B8%AA%E0%B8%B2%E0%B8%A3/mfa-s-strategy.pdf. 
150 The Gambia N Nil 
151 The Holy See N Nil 
152 Togo N Nil 
 
153 
Trinidad & 
Tobago 
 
N 
 
Nil 
 
154 
 
Tunisia 
 
N 
The mission has shared a 1.5-page document titled "Outline of Tunisian 
Diplomacy". This is an outline document 
 
 
 
155 
 
 
 
Turkey 
 
 
 
Y 
Mission has shared two documents in Turkish language namely, “2019 -2023 
Strategic Plan” for the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs &"Turkey's 
Enterprising and Humanitarian Foreign Policy - A Synopsis".  The “2019 -23 
Strategic Plan” document (available only in Turkish) looks like a Grand 
Strategy document. 
 
 
156 
 
 
Turkmenistan 
 
 
N 
While President of Turkmenistan Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov had outlined 
the “Concept of foreign policy of Turkmenistan for 2017 -2023” in February  
2017, it appears there is no "Grand Foreign Policy Document / Strategy" that 
the country has devised / developed 
157 UAE N Nil 
158 Uganda N Nil 

125  
 
 
 
 
 
159 
 
 
 
 
 
Ukraine 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
Ukraine does not have any Grand Foreign Policy Document/Strategy as sought 
in the query. However, a broad based Foreign Policy “Mission and Strategy” is 
published on the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, which 
outlines key functions of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, as well as 
the goals and strategic priorities of the Foreign Office. The link to the same is 
placed below for kind information: https://mfa.gov.ua/en/misiya-ta-strategiya 
 
 
160 
 
 
Uruguay 
 
 
N 
Uruguay does not have any Grand Foreign Policy Document/Strategy. 
The Uruguayan Foreign Ministry has, however, published a Five-Year Strategic 
Plan (2020-2025) for the country. 
 
 
161 
 
United 
Kingdom 
 
 
Y 
UK has an document titled, Integrated Review of Security, Defence, 
Development and Foreign Policy. It is presented to the President by the Prime 
Minister and has been formulated by the PM’s office. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USA 
 
 
 
 
Y 
Mission informed that the US, however, publishes a "National Security Strategy 
Report", a comprehensive statement articulating the worldwide interests, goals, 
and objectives of the United States that are important to its national security. 
Under the Goldwater-Nichols Defense Department Reorganization Act of 1986, 
the US President is required to submit a report on the national security strategy 
of the United States to Congress each year. In recent years, however, the reports 
have been made late or not made at all. 
 
 
 
163 
 
 
 
Uzbekistan 
 
 
 
N 
Uzbekistan has a foreign policy document that is an overview/Mission/Vision 
statement. This cannot be called as a Grand strategy document 
164 Venezuela N Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vietnam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
Vietnam does not have any long term foreign policy document. However, the 
Vietnamese foreign policy is guided by the Party Resolution adopted every five 
years at the National Party Congress. The recently held 13th Party Congress’ 
Resolution for the term 2021-2026 has the following broad foreign policy 
guidelines: 
 
“Implementation of the foreign policy of independence, self-reliance, peace, 
friendship, cooperation and development, diversification and multilateralization; 
proactively integrating into the world in a comprehensive, extensive and 
effective manner; maintain a peaceful and stable environment; constantly 
improve Vietnam's international status and reputation”. 
166 Zambia N Nil 
167 Zimbabwe N Nil 

126  
Table B - List of Countries that produce strategy documents 
 
S.no Country Name of Document Issuing Authority 
1. Australia Foreign Policy White 
Paper 2017 
Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade 
2.  
Austria 
Austrian Security Strategy Office of Head of Government(Chancellor) 
2.  
Azerbaijan 
Azerbaijan in the 
International Arena 
Administrative Department of the President 
3. Belgium Comprehensive Approach 
- Strategy Note 
Council of Ministers 
4. Bosnia & Herzegovina The foreign policy 
strategy of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina 2018 – 2023 
Office of Head of State 
5. Costa Rica Institutional Strategic Plan 
2021-2025 
Ministry of External Affairs 
6. Czech Republic Concept of the Czech 
Republic’s Foreign Policy 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
7. Ireland Statement of Strategy Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. (Such 
statements are released by various ministries) 
8. Ecuador Agenda De Politica 
Exterior 
Ministry for External Relations 
9. European Union Shared Vision, Common 
Action: A Stronger 
Europe 
European External Action Service 
10. Estonia Estonoan Foreign Policy 
Strategy 2030 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
11. Finland Finnish Foreign and 
Security Policy 
Ministry for Foreign Affairs 
12. Malawi Malawi Foreign Policy: A 
Catalyst for Sustainable 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International 
Cooperation (Foreword by President) 

127  
  Development  
13. New Zealand Strategic Intentions Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
14. Nigeria National Security Strategy Office of the President 
15. Poland The Polish Foreign Policy 
Strategy 2017-2021 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
16. Peru Multi-annual Strategic 
Plan for Foreign Affairs of 
Peru for 2015-2021 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
17. Russia Foreign Policy Concept Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 Serbia Strategy of National 
Security of Republic of 
Serbia 
National Assembly 
18. Slovenia Safe, Successful, globally 
respected. The Foreign 
Policy of Republic of 
Slovenia 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
19. Spain External Action Strategy Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
20. South Africa Strategic Plan 2020-25 Department of International Relations and 
Cooperation 
(Made separately by various Ministries) 
21. Switzerland Foreign Policy Strategy 
2020-23 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
22. Thailand 20-year foreign affairs 
masterplan (2018-2037) 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
23. Turkey 2019-23 Strategic Plan for  
the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
24. United Kingdom Global Britain in a 
Competitive Age: the 
Integrated Review of 
Security, Defence, 
Prime Minister’s office. 

128  
  Development and Foreign 
Policy 
 
25. United States of America National Security Strategy 
Report 
Office of the President 
 
(As on 23 June 2021) 
 
*** 

129  
 