 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject 
‘India and Bilateral Investment Treaties’] 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
APRIL, 2022 /CHAITRA, 1944 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2021-22) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
14 
 

 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs                                            
on the subject ‘India and Bilateral Investment Treaties’] 
 
  
 
 Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 09.05.2022 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2022 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.04.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
APRIL, 2022 /CHAITRA, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................  19 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...………………………………… 28   
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  29 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………  35 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth  Sitting of the Committee held on   06.04.2022…………        36                                                           
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)………………………………………………..      38 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.   Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
6.   Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
10.   Shri P. C. Mohan  
11.   Smt. Queen Oja 
12.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
13.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
15.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana  
16.   Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
17.   Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
18.   Shri Rebati Tripura 
19. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
20.   *Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
21.   Vacant 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.   Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.   Smt. Misha Bharti   
25. Shri Brijlal  
26.   Shri P. Chidambaram  
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
28.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
29. Shri Sanjay Raut 
30. Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.   **Vacant 
Secretariat  
1. Shri P. C. Koul     –  Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Joint Secretary 
3.       Smt. Maya Lingi    –   Director  
4. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
* Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
7.02.2022.  
** Shri K. Somaprasad , Member of Parliament , Rajya Sabha ceased to be Member  of the Committee  consequent upon his 
retirement on 02.04.2022. 
(iii) 
 

  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2021-22) having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth  
Report of the  Committee on the subject ‘India and Bilateral Investment Treaties’. 
 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker under Direction 71A of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 10 September 2021 and presented to the Parliament on 6 
December, 2021. The Action  Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 21 February, 2022. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on     
6 April, 2022. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix -I to the 
Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                     
06 April, 2022                                                                                            Chairperson,                                 
16 Chaitra,1944 (Saka)                                                Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
Tenth Report on the subject „India and Bilateral Investment Treaties‟ which was 
presented to Hon‟ble Speaker on 10 September, 2021 under Direction 71A of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 06 December, 2021. 
 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the 14 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. 
These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i)    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government.  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12 and 14 
Total – 10 
Chapter - II 
  
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
 NIL            Total – Nil 
            Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government   
have not been accepted by the Committee. 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 5, 11 and 13   
Total – 03 
Chapter - IV 
 

2 
 
 (iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final repl y of the 
Government is still awaited. 
  
 Recommendation No.  8       Total – 01 
            Chapter – V 
 
3.    The Committee desire that final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and the Observation/Recommendation contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations. 
 
MORE NEGOTIATIONS ON BITs/IIAs TO BE INITIATED 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
5. The Committee had noted that India started its  Bilateral Investment Treaty 
(BIT) programme in 1994 and up to 2015, BITs were signed with 83 countries out 
of which 74 were enforced. BITs in India  did not attract much attention until the 
end of 2010 and India also had only marginal involvement  with investment treaty 
arbitration. Since 2011 when India received  its first adverse award in  the White 
Industries Australia Limited V s Republic of India case, global and Indian 
experience with  investment treaties a nd the substantial increase in international 
arbitration cases arising out of these  treaties, the earlier Model BIT text had been 
revisited and a new Model text was adopted in 2015. Based on  the new model BIT, 
the MEA ha d issued termination notice to 77 countries since 2016 and  BITs are 
still in force with 06 countries out of which Joint Interpretative Statements ha d 
been signed with Bangladesh and Columbia.  The Committee, however, had been 
astonished to note that India ha d signed BITs/ Investment Agreements only with 
Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Taiwan and Brazil and negotiations of various International 
Investments Agreements (IIAs) are in the various stages. The  Committee had 
treated the number of  BITs/Investment Agreements   signed post 2015 and the 
number under negotiations as inadequate and had found that it was not 
commensurate with the growth of India‟s  interest in this domain and our rising 

3 
 
stature in global affairs. The Committee were of the view that  signing of new 
BITs/Investment Agreements especially in priority/core sectors particularly with 
the countries with whom there were such treaties in the past should be encouraged 
while keeping  in mind the need for balancing investment protection of foreign 
investors in the country and Indian investors  abroad with India‟s regulatory power 
without compromising our national  interests and priorities.  The Committee, had 
therefore, desired that MEA being responsible for international treaties and being 
an integral part of BIT negotiations should actively facilitate the process so that 
more and more negotiations for BITs/IIAs are initiated in the shortest possible time. 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs has stated that t he Economic Diplomacy 
Division of the MEA , which is the nodal division within the MEA for matters 
pertaining to investment treaties, with the assistance of the Indian Missions abroad 
and the territorial divisions, have been facilitating negotiation of investment 
treaties with various countries.  
7. The Committee had treated the number of  BITs/Investment 
Agreements signed post 2015 and the number  under negotiations as 
inadequate and had desired that MEA being responsible for international 
treaties and being an  integral part of BIT negotiations, should actively 
facilitate the process so that more and more negotiations for  BITs/IIAs are 
initiated in the shortest possible time. The Committee are aware about the role 
played by the Ministry  of External Affairs in investment treaties matrix. 
However, the Committee do not recognize any fresh result-oriented initiative 
taken by the Ministry or any change in approach leading to tangible outcome 
and reasonable number of BITs/I IAs signed , in keeping with the growing 
interest of the country in this domain. The Committee, therefore, urge the 

4 
 
Ministry to improve/strengthen its coordination with concerned 
Ministries/Departments so that adequate number of BITs/ IIAs are negotiated 
and signed without much delay. 
COORDINATION BETWEEN MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS FOR 
EARLY CONCLUSION OF INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
8. The Committee were not satisfied with the progress of the negotiations of 
International Investment Agreements with 37 countries/blocks. Presently, 
negotiations are ongoing with 20  countries while they are still at the preliminary 
stage in respect of 15 countries/blocks. The Committee  were   conscious of the 
realities of negotiations with sovereign Governments but were of the view that  the 
long drawn out process of negotiations should be reduced especially if there 
appeared to be limited areas of convergence.  In view of the likely impact of such 
delays on investment, FDI  inflow and increased production under the BIT regime, 
the Committee had urged the Ministry to take pro-active steps and coordinate with 
the concerned Ministries/Departments so that negotiations  are concluded and the 
agreements are finalized at the earliest. 
9. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, t he Ministry has 
informed that MEA has been coordinating with the respective Indian Missions 
abroad and proactively facilitating negotiations. However, it may be noted that the 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance leads the Indian side at the 
negotiations and are responsible for the c onclusion of negotiations and 
implementation of the investment treaties. 
10. The Committee had urged the Ministry to take  pro-active steps and 
coordinate with the concerned Ministries/Departments so that negotiations  of 
International Investment Agreements are concluded and finalized  at the 
earliest. The Ministry, i n its Action Taken Reply, has  submitted a stereotype 

5 
 
reply that MEA has been coordinating with the respective Indian Missions 
abroad and proactively facilitating negotiations. The Committee are aware 
that the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance leads the 
Indian side at the negotiations and are responsible for the conclusion of 
negotiations and implementation of the investment treaties.  However, it is the 
responsibility of the Government as a whole and MEA cannot absolve itself of 
the responsibility for conclusion of negotiations and finalization of Agreements, 
especially as the Ministry has to play an instrumental role in this regard 
through a separate Division i, e, the Economic Diplomacy Division for dealing 
with matters pertaining to investment treaties . Since there is a significant 
impact of International Investment Agreements on FDI  inflow and increased 
production under the BIT regime,  such delays are not desirable at all.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to play a pro -active role and extend 
all possible assistance to the Department of Economic Affairs for an early 
conclusion of negotiations and finalization of investment Agr eements.  The 
proactive contribution of the Ministry is all the more imperative as the 
country aims to be a $ 5 trillion  economy by 2025. 
 
 
 

6 
 
COMBINED EFFORTS FOR DEVELOPING IN-HOUSE EXPERTISE AND 
PANEL OF LAWYERS  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
11. The Committee had felt that the drafting of international treaties, whether it 
was investment related or trade specific is crucial to avoid any ambiguity or leave 
scope for wider interpretation  by arbitrators and tribunals as well as abuse of 
certain provisions by investors. Loosely drafted  or broad provisions should be  
avoided and safeguards put in place at the drafting stage itself. The Committee, had 
therefore, desired that the MEA should work in close coordination with the 
Department of Legal Affairs, Department of Economic Affairs and other concerned 
Ministries/Departments and make a combined effort to develop in -house expertise 
and panel of  lawyers who have experience in investment treaty law so that best 
international treaties are drafted with least scope of arbitrations. 
12. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that the investment treaty 
negotiations are carried out by a team which comprises of representatives from the 
Department of Economic Affairs and Department of Legal Affairs apart from 
representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs. The Ministry, under the Host 
Country Agreement signed with the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), The 
Hague has organi zed the PCA -India Conference series where workshops in 
investment treaty and investment treaty arbitrations were conducted. The resource 
persons at these workshops included Judges, PCA officials, people from academia 
and lawyers from various jurisdictions across the world. The resource persons were 
selected by the PCA and the PCA -India Committee. The Ministry has also been 
engaging with the UNCITRAL and the UNCITRAL National Coordination 
Committee regarding capacity building exercises and for advice. The MEA had 
also organized a virtual course for GoI officials . The Ministry has als o engaged 
Legal Consultants who have experience and expertise in terms of qualification and 
work in the field of arbitration and investment treaty law and investment treaty 
arbitration. 
13. The Committee had desired that combined efforts should be made to 
develop in-house expertise and panel of  lawyers who have experience in 

7 
 
investment treaty law. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has informed 
that PCA-India Conference series has been organized in which worksho ps in 
investment treaty and investment treaty arbitrations were conducted. The 
Ministry has also been engaging with the UNCITRAL and the UNCITRAL 
National Coordination Committee regarding capacity building exercises and 
for advice. Virtual course for GoI officials has also been organized and Legal 
Consultants who have experience and expertise in terms of qualification and 
work in the field of arbitration and investment treaty law and investment 
treaty arbitration had been engaged . While appreciating these initiatives, the 
Committee a re constrained to point out that the Ministry has chosen to 
remain silent on the important issue of making combined effort s with the 
Department of Legal Affairs, the Department of Economic Affairs and other 
concerned Ministries/Departments to develop in -house expertise and a panel 
of lawyers who have experience in investment treaty law . The Committee 
desire a specific reply on the issue at the earliest.   
DISPUTES UNDER BITs 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
14. The Committee had noted that there have been thirty seven notices of 
dispute or letters intending  to raise a dispute by claimants or investors against 
Republic of India under various BITs out of  which India has won only four 
arbitrations so far; lost two arbitrations; received adverse award  in three 
arbitrations and all the three cases are pending challenge to the arbitral  award at 

8 
 
the seat of arbitrations. Further, in one dispute the investors withdrew their claim; 
three disputes have been resolved amicably and in fourteen disputes, the claimants 
did not pursue the matter  after the initial request under BIPA. Eight disputes are 
still active at different stages of arbitration and two new notices have been received. 
The Ministry had also stated that till date, out of the nine disputes concluded so far, 
only the White Industries case had resulted in India paying the claimant the arbitral 
award. Keeping in view the huge cost to the Exchequer in just  one arbitral award, 
the Committee had felt that such losses to the country are unaffordable and  should 
be avoided at all costs in future by leaving no ambiguity in BITs. The Committee 
had, therefore, desire d that the Ministry, in consultation with other concerned 
Ministries/Departments should make all out efforts to draft BITs cautiously leaving 
no scope of investment disputes and reduce the number of BIT claims against India. 
Steps may also be taken to settle such disputes  outside of arbitration/before it 
proceeds to arbitration or comes up before the Tribunals through the mechanism of 
pre-arbitration consultation/negotiation. 
15. In the Action Taken Reply of the Government, it has been stated that t he 
disputes under the BITs pertain to BITs signed prior to the new Model BIT of 2015. 
The new Model BIT of 2015 was drafted by the DEA after inter -ministerial 
consultations taking into view the loopholes in the earlier BITs and it tries to 
address the issues.  
16. On the disputes under the investment treaties, the MEA is a part of the Inter 
Ministerial Group (IMG) handling investment treaty disputes. These IMGs are 
chaired by the respective Ministry to whom the dispute pertains. MEA offers its 
inputs as and  when sought and has always asked the respective Ministries to 
analyse each case on its merits and to take a call on the feasibility of settlement of 
the dispute or the need for arbitration. 
 
17. The disputes/notices/awards have arisen not only on account of ambiguity in 
older version BITs but also on account of wide interpretations of BITs by 
respective adhoc Tribunals. The disputes under the BITs pertain to BITs signed 
prior to the new Model BIT of 2015. The new Model BIT of 2015 was drafted after 
inter-ministerial consultations taking into view the limitations in the earlier BITs. 
The Model has several safeg uards inbuilt based on experiences of India and other 
cases worldwide, to deal with disputes by having a more detailed Dispute 
settlement provision to govern the arbitration proceedings and several exceptions 

9 
 
in the Scope and Definition of Investment to pr eserve policy space. Further there 
are several provisions to dismiss frivolous claims and prevent broad interpretation 
of the substantive obligations of the treaty.  
18. Further, in the absence of any jurisprudence regarding BIT interpretations 
and the fac t that there are more than 3000 BITs world over, the arbitral tribunals 
while giving the arbitral awards in BIT disputes tend to undermine the sovereignty, 
democratic decision making and right to regulate. The nature of disputes and the 
awards have also br ought forth the problems of inconsistent and selective 
interpretations adopted by some of the tribunals handling arbitrations worldwide, 
leading to adverse orders worldwide. Nevertheless, to balance the demand of many 
countries to include the international  arbitration as a mode of dispute resolution, 
India has formulated a mechanism of dispute settlement which provides an option 
for international arbitration after an investor has exhausted local remedies before 
domestic courts for five years. This duration can also be utilized at the same time 
to enter into talks with the claimants and attempt to settle the dispute, based on the 
genuineness of the claim. GoI has also been advising to the concerned Ministries 
(handling the dispute), to try to settle the dispu te amicably wherever it‟s possible 
and it is in the  interest of country and/or has been advised by Counsels. 
19. The Committee acknowledge that investment disputes, both settled and 
ongoing under the BITs, have arisen due to ambiguity in older version BITs as 
well as on account of wide interpretation of BITs by respective adhoc 
Tribunals. It was against this backdrop that the Committee had desired 
drafting of BITs cautiously and settlement of disputes/claims before it 
proceeds to arbitration or comes up before a Tribunal. The new Model BIT of 
2015 addresses some of the issues but certain areas of ambiguity  still remain.  
Moreover, the concerns of the Committee are based on past experience and 
are still relevant since BITs are signed separately with different 

10 
 
countries/blocks/regions and variation in the provisions exists for each BIT 
signed. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
urge that BITs should be drafted cautio usly after extensive consultation 
among all the Ministries/Departments concerned so as to leave no scope for 
ambiguity and consequent investment disputes  and costly arbitral awards 
against India . All o ut efforts should also be made to settle such disputes 
amicably through pre-arbitration mechanism. 
INDIA AS A HUB FOR INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
20. The Committee had noted that the Ministry has signed a Host Country 
Agreement with the  Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) and through this 
Agreement, India and the PCA have established a legal framework under which 
future PCA administered proceedings could be conducted in India. The Committee 
had welcomed this step as it could result in India being a preferred  location for 
international arbitrations. The Committee, had therefore, urge d the Ministry to 
ensure the implementation of this Agreement at the earliest so as to make India a 
hub for international  arbitration. The Committee would like to be apprised of the  
endeavours made by the Ministry and the result thereof, at the earliest. 
 
21. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has 
informed that MEA has organi zed the PCA -India Conference series under the 
ambit of the Host Country Agreement with the  PCA. The Ministry is also 
coordinating with the PCA and internally to work out the modalities of establishing 
arbitration hearing facilities in India.  
22. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry is coordinating 
with the PCA and internally to work out the modalities f or establishing 

11 
 
arbitration hearing facilities in India . The Committee urge the Ministry to 
finalize the modalities at the earliest so that arbitration hearing proceedings 
could commence  as a step towards India becoming a hub for international 
arbitration.  
DOMESTIC TALENT FOR INVESTMENT TREATY ARBITRATION 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
23. The Committee had noted that investment arbitration requires 
lawyers/judges who possess the  expertise and experience at international fora. 
India is still lacking in adequate number of persons who have the expertise and 
experience in this domain. The Committee had been informed that law firms and 
lawyers, both Indian and international have been engaged to represent the country 
in the hearings of arbitration. In order to avoid payment of huge fees for  foreign 
lawyers and international law firms and costly arbitral awards against the country, 
the Committee had felt that developing local expertise in this domain is crucial. 
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that MEA, DoLA, DEA and other 
concerned Departments/Agencies should work in close coordination to develop 
domestic talent in the form of panel of domestic  lawyers and law firms who will 
have the requisite expertise and experience to represent India  successfully in 
investment treaty arbitrations. 
24. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply,  has stated that the MEA has been 
organizing capacity building workshops and seminars aimed at developing 
domestic expertise in the field of investment treaty arbitration. Indian Judges and 
lawyers and law firms, have been invited to these workshops and seminars. 
25. The Ministry has informed that it has been organizing capacity building 
workshops and seminars aimed at developing domestic expertise in the field of 
investment treaty arbitration. Indian Judges and lawyers and law firms have 
been invited to t hese workshops and seminars  but since such seminars and 

12 
 
workshops have not been able to achieve  this objective, the Committee had 
recommended that MEA, DoLA, DEA and other concerned 
Departments/Agencies should work in close coordination to develop domestic 
talent in the form of panel of domestic  lawyers and law firms who will have 
the requisite expertise and experience to represent India  successfully in 
investment treaty arbitrations . The Committee, therefore, reiterate that 
combined efforts are needed to create a pool of domestic  lawyers and law 
firms with the desired expertise and experience to represent India successfully 
in investment treaty arbitrations. 
SIGNING OF BITs FOR ATTRACTING MORE FDIs 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
26. The Committee had noted that FDI decisions and inflows into the country 
are a complex function of several factors including market, ease of doing business, 
infrastructure, human resources, availability of raw materials, competitiveness and 
productivity etc. As per a  study commissioned by DEA to ICRIER, though there 
may be some spillover benefits for  investment inflows from the BIT regime as a 
whole, a relationship between investment and  signing a particular treaty cannot be 
established. The Committee were aware that BITs are  not the sole factor for 
attracting FDIs into the country. However, it ha s been taken for  granted under 
standard economic theories that investment lead to more employment and  more 
production in the economy. The Committee had felt that in a developing country 
like India, FDI inflows is essential for economic development and BITs have the 
potential to attract FDIs in that they could provide foreign and Indian investors a 
higher degree of confidence in investment. The Committee, had therefore, desired 
that signing of BITs should be  encouraged selectively in identified core/priority 
sectors/areas to attra ct more FDIs which  will lead to growth and development of 

13 
 
the economy. The Ministries/Departments/Agencies  concerned may identify the 
core/priority sectors in this regard and MEA may facilitate the same. 
27. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has stated that the treaties are signed with particular countries and 
not sector based. The MEA has always been facilitating BIT negotiations with any 
country as requested by the nodal Ministry. 
28. The Committee had desired that signing of BITs should be  encouraged 
comprising core/priority sectors/areas to attract more FDIs which  will lead to 
growth and development of the economy. The 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies concerned may identify the core/priority 
sectors in this regard and MEA may facilitate incorporation of  the same in  
treaties. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
has rightly stated that the treaties are signed with particular countries and are 
not sector based. But it is also true that t he MEA has always been facilitating 
BIT negotiations with any country as requested by a particular Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore,  would l ike to emphasize the need for identifying the 
core/priority sectors in the country  for signing of BITs/IAs incorporating 
specific sectors with the particular country, region or block. MEA may play a 
more pro-active role as facilitator  and the Economic Dipl omacy Division in 
the Ministry may also be made more effective.    
 

14 
 
EARLY CONCLUSION OF BITs/IAs WITH USA AND EU 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
29. The Committee had noted that negotiations with the USA on a BIT are being 
held since  2009. The Investment Incentive Agreement signed in 1997 with 
the US Development Finance Corporation has been extended till December 2021 
and a new Investment Incentive Agreement is being negotiated. With regard to the 
EU, preparations are underway on both sides to start negotiations on a stand-alone 
investment protection agreement. The Committee had felt that signing of 
BITs/Investment Protection Agreements in high-technology manufacturing/sectors 
with USA and EU is in keeping with the Government‟s initiatives of Atmanirbhar 
Bharat and Make in India and would benefit the  country‟s manufacturing sector 
especially in high -tech goods. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the 
process of negotiations should be started and concluded early so as to  contribute 
towards increasing investment in priority sectors and high technology 
manufacturing. 
30. The Government has stated  in an Action Taken Reply furnished to the 
Committee that t he India -USA IIA was signed in 1997 (the total investment 
support till date being of USD 2.88 billion comprising of loan of USD 0.99 billion, 
investment guarantee of USD 1.5 billion, insurance of USD 13 million and equity 
support only of USD 100 million). India received the request for the negotiation of 
a new Agreement from USA in June 2020. This proposal was analysed and in view 
of the possibility of limiting the policy space of the country and chances of 
bringing in of claim under dispute arbitration mechanism under the said agreement, 
it was decided to terminate the 1997 Agreement and renegotiate a replacement 
Agreement. The latest text of the Agreement under negotiation is to provide 
investment protection to investment support of a US organization i.e., US 
Development Finance Corporation (USDFC). 
31. With regard to India -EU BIT, both India and EU have agreed for a stand-
alone investment protection agreement” and the DEA has requested EU for their 
written text proposal, so that the negotiations of a standalone investment agreement 
may be commenced. 
32. Investment decisions depend on a wide variety factors -infrastructure, 
political stability, market size, human resources, ease of doing business, 

15 
 
availability of raw - materials and intermediates, investment protection policies, 
rule of law etc. Also, invest ment protection is offered through a variety of ways, 
local laws, robust justice system, upholding rule of law, BITs offering institutional 
arbitrations etc. Investors while investing, look for a political stability and good 
governance including a robust justice system. While, BIT is not the only condition 
for investments, but it may provide comfort to some foreign investors while 
making their investment decisions in countries with high risk in terms of political 
stability or political uncertainty. It also provides comfort of protection to Indian 
investors in other countries. Thus, in negotiations under BIT a fine balance has to 
be maintained in terms of investor protection and sovereign country rights to 
regulate and policy space therein, which requires con sensus on both the sides 
negotiating the text. 
33. The Committee had desired that the process of negotiation of an 
Investment Protection Agreement with USA and a standalone Investment 
Agreement with EU should be started and concluded early so as to contrib ute 
towards increasing investment in priority sectors and high technology 
manufacturing. The Committee note with regret that not much headway has 
been made  in this regard . The Ministry has also stated that in negotiations 
under BIT, a fine balance has to be maintained in terms of investor protection 
and sovereign country rights to regulate and policy space therein, which 
requires consensus on both the sides negotiating the text. While 
acknowledging the constraints being faced by the Government, the Committee 
desire that all out efforts should be made to arrive at a consensus with the 
USA and the EU on the Investment Agreements through skilled negotiations 
and deeper engagements for finalization of the said Agreements without 

16 
 
further loss of time. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
REMOV AL OF AMBIGUITY IN BITs 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
34. The Committee had noted that in a departure from the open ended asset 
based definition of investment in the older BITs, the Model BIT 2015 adopts an 
enterprise based definition of investment  and aligns the BIT regime with the 
Indian FDI policy. This definition also clarifies the types of assets of the enterprise 
which are entitled to protection of the treaty. Further, an  investment also has to 
demonstrate certain minimum characteristics such as commitment of  capital, the 
expectation of gain or profit, the assumption of risk and have significance for the  
development of the host State in order to qualify for protection under the treaty. 
While appreciating the intention of the Government to reduce the number of BIT 
claims and adverse arbitral awards against the country, the Committee had felt that 
there is still ambiguity in certain  areas like duration of the enterprise, significance 
for the development of  the host State,  etc. They had, therefore, desire d that 
continuous efforts are required to remove any ambiguity so as to  reduce arbitral 
discretion for varied interpretations. 
35. It has been stated in the reply of the Government that d efinition of 
„investment‟ has been related to that of the characteristics of investment. The most 
influential decision in this respect has been the decision of an ICSID tribunal in 
Salini Costruttori SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco; ICSID Case N o. ARB/00/4, para 
46 (“Salini”). In Salini, the tribunal, while recognizing that the parties could, in 
principle, agree on the kind of disputes that could be submitted to arbitration under 
the treaty, explicitly recognized the existence of objective criter ia that have to be 
met if a particular asset is to be considered an “investment” for the purposes of the 
ICSID Convention. The tribunal considered that its jurisdiction depended upon not 
only the existence of an “investment” within the meaning of the appli cable 
International Investment Agreement (IIA), in this case the BIT between Italy and 
Morocco (1990), but also on the basis of the ICSID Convention, in accordance 
with case law. Salini is often quoted as the key case espousing the objective, which 

17 
 
requires five conditions to identify such an investment under the ICSID 
convention: 
1) certain duration; 
2) regularity of profit and return; 
3) assumption of risk; 
4) substantial commitment; and 
5) significance for the host State's development. 
36. Although there  is no concept of binding precedent in investment treaty 
jurisprudence, subsequent tribunals have referred to the Salini approach. India has 
also adopted the „Salini‟ test. Accordingly, the definition of an investment under 
revised Model BIT must also meet  the objective Salini criteria. Substantively, 
however, in the absence of specific treaty provisions, tribunals have held that 
duration is a flexible term 1 that could range from months to years and that the 
requirement is to be considered holistically. Man y tribunals have determined to 
this extent that a period of two to five years meets the requirement of certain 
duration2, thus excluding ordinary or one -time commercial transactions. Further, it 
is worth noting that tribunals have found that a contribution  to the development of 
the host State is rather an “expected consequence” of the investment instead of a 
requirement in itself. 
37. Using an enterprise -based approach enables a government to provide 
enhanced treaty protections to those companies that have actually made a 
commitment to pursue economic activity in the host country. 
 
 
 
                                                           
1   Mason Capital v. Republic of Korea, PCA Case No. 2018-55 
2   Manchester Securities v. Poland, PCA Case No. PCA Case No. 2015-18 

18 
 
38. The Committee had felt that there is still ambiguity in areas like 
duration of the enterprise, significance for the development of  the host State 
etc. in the Model BIT 2015 and had desired that continuous efforts should be 
made to remove any ambiguity so as to  reduce arbitral discretion for  varied 
interpretations. In its action taken reply, the Government has stated that 
many Tribunals have determined that a period of two to five years meets the 
requirement of certain duration and a contribution to the development of the 
host State is rather an `expected consequence’ of the investment instead of a 
requirement in itself. The Government has further averred that using an 
enterprise-based approach enables a Government to provide treaty 
protections to those companies who have actually made a commitment to 
pursue economic activity in the host country. The intention of the Committee 
was to have precise and clear -cut provisions in the Model BIT thereby 
obviating the need for interpretation by Tribunals. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Government to make 
continuous efforts in consultation with all the Ministries/Departments 
concerned for removal of any ambiguity in the Model BIT 2015 so as to avoid 
arbitral discretion for varied interpretations. 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 The Committee note that India started its  Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) 
programme in  1994 and up to 2015, BITs were signed with 83 countries out of 
which 74 were enforced. BITs in India  did not attract much attention until the end 
of 2010 and India also had only marginal involvement  with investment  treaty 
arbitration. Since 2011 when India received  its first adverse award in  the White 
Industries Australia Limited V Republic of India case, global and Indian 
experience with  investment treaties and the substantial increase in international 
arbitration cases arising out of these  treaties, the earlier Model BIT text was 
revisited and a new Model text was adopted in 2015. Based on  the new model BIT, 
the MEA has issued termination notice to 77 countries starting since 2016 and BITs 
are still in force with 06 countries out of which Joint Interpretative Statements have 
been signed  with Bangladesh and Columbia.  The Committee, however, are 
astonished to note that India ha s signed BITs/ Investment Agreements only with 
Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Taiwan and Brazil and negotiations of various International 
Investments Agreements (IIAs) are in the various stages. The  Committee treat the 
number of BITs/Investment Agreements   signed post 2015 and the number  under 
negotiations as inadequate and find that it is not commensurate with the growth of 
India‟s interest in this domain and our rising stature in global affairs. The 
Committee are of the view that  signing of new BITs/Investment Ag reements 
especially in priority/core sectors particularly with the  countries with whom there 
were such treaties in the past should be encouraged while keeping  in mind the 
need for balancing investment protection of foreign investors in the country and 
Indian investors abroad with India‟s regulatory power without compromising our 
national interests and priorities. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA being 
responsible for international treaties and being an  integral part of BIT negotiations 
should actively facilitate the process so that more and more negotiations for  
BITs/IIAs are initiated in the shortest possible time. 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Economic Diplomacy Division of the MEA, which is the nodal division 
within the MEA for matters pertaining to investment treaties, with the assistance of 
the Indian Missions abroad and the territorial divisions, have been facilitating 
negotiation of investment treaties with various countries.  
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of the negotiations of 
International Investment Agreements with 37 countries/blocks. Presently, 
negotiations are ongoing with 20  countries while it is still at the preliminary stage 
in respect of 15 countries/blocks. The Committee  are conscious of the realities of 
negotiations with sovereign Governments but are of the view that  the long dr awn 
out process of negotiations should be reduced especially if there appears to be  
limited areas of convergence.  In view of the likely impact of such delays on 
investment, FDI  inflow and increased production under the BIT regime, the 
Committee urge the Mi nistry to take  pro-active steps and coordinate with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments so that negotiations  are concluded and the  
agreements are finalized at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 The MEA has been coordinating with the respective Indian Missions abroad 
and proactively facilitating negotiations. However, it may be noted that the 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance leads the Indian side at the 
negotiations and are responsible for the conclusion of negotiations and 
implementation of the investment treaties. 
 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
 

21 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
The Committee feel that the drafting of international treaties, whether it is 
investment related or trade specific is crucial to avoid any ambiguity or leave scope 
for wider interpretation  by arbitrators and tribunals as well as abuse of certain 
provisions by investors. Loosely drafted or broad provisions should be avoided and 
safeguards put in place at the drafting stage itself. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the MEA should work in close coordination with the Department of Legal 
Affairs, Department of Economic Affairs and other concerned 
Ministries/Departments and make a combined effort to develop in -house expertise 
and panel of  lawyers who have experience in investment treaty law so that best 
international treaties are drafted with least scope of arbitrations. 
Reply of the Government 
 The investment treaty negotiations are carried out by a team which 
comprises of representatives from the  Department of Economic Affairs and 
Department of Legal Affairs apart from representatives from the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Ministry under the Host Country Agreement signed with the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), The Hague has organised th e PCA-India 
Conference series where workshops in investment treaty and investment treaty 
arbitrations were conducted. The resource persons at these workshops included 
Judges, PCA officials, people from academia and lawyers from various 
jurisdictions across the world. The resource persons were selected by the PCA and 
the PCA -India Committee. The Ministry has also been engaging with the 
UNCITRAL and the UNCITRAL National Coordination Committee regarding 
capacity building exercises and for advice. The MEA had also organised a virtual 
course for GoI officials, the Ministry has also engaged Legal Consultants who have 
experience and expertise in terms of qualification and work in the field of 
arbitration and investment treaty law and investment treaty arbitration. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 The Committee  note that the  Ministry is organizing capacity building 
workshops and courses by engaging experts from India and abroad. Under the PCA 

22 
 
- India Conference series,  workshops in investment treaty and investment treaty 
arbitrations were conducted. MEA has also conducted capacity building exercises 
with UNCITRAL National Coordination Committee  and virtual course for GoI 
officials has also been conducted by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, London. 
While appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry in this regard, the  Committee 
desire that a full term course for Government officials  in the field of  investment 
treaty and investment treaty arbitration may also  be started and the workshops for 
training and developing young counsels of the country in these fields may also be 
organized on priority. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of External Affairs has been organising capacity building 
workshops and webinars and some of these workshops have been open to lawyers 
from across the country. The MEA continues to engage with the Indian legal 
fraternity through these workshops and capacity building workshops. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the process of investment treaty arbitration is 
complex, lengthy  and involves coordination between multiple 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies of the Government.  In the opinion  of the 
Committee, delay in arbitration is very costly and should be avoided  through 
effective coordination among the concerned Ministries/Departments/Agencies of 
the Government. MEA being a part of the Inter Ministerial Group handling 
investment treaty disputes, the Committee desire that the Ministry should take 
proactive steps for better coordination and strengthening of the IMG. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The MEA is a part of the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) handling investment 
treaty disputes. These IMGs are chaired by the respective Ministry to whom the 

23 
 
dispute pertains. MEA offers its inputs as and when sought. The MEA has also 
been proactively assisting the IMG and the nodal ministry whenever the assistance 
of the MEA is sought. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 The Committee note that the New Delhi International Arbitration Centre has 
been established by replacing  the International Centre for Alternate Dispute 
Resolution and subject to  the agreement of the tribunal and the parties of 
arbitration, this Centre can be used as a place of  arbitration. The Committee desire 
that this Centre should be promoted and strength ened to  become a world class 
arbitration centre which is widely accepted as a dispute resolution centre by  all 
countries involved in investment disputes. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Centre is being set up by the Ministry of Law and Justice. The MEA is 
willing to extend all possible support to the New  Delhi International Arbitration 
Centre.  
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 The Committee note that investment arbitration requires lawyers/judges who 
possess the expertise and experience at international fora. India is still lacking in 
adequate number of persons who have the expertise and experience in this domain. 
The Committee have been informed that law firms and lawyers, both Indian and 
international have been engaged to represent the country in the hearings of 
arbitration. In order to avoid payment of huge fees for  foreign lawyers and 
international law firms and costly arbitral awards against the country, the  
Committee feel that developing local expertise in this domain is crucial. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that MEA, DoLA, DEA and other concerned 
Departments/Agencies should work in close coordination to develop domestic 
talent in the form of panel of domestic  lawyers and law firms who will have the 

24 
 
requisite expertise and experience to represent India  successfully in investment 
treaty arbitrations. 
Reply of the Government 
 The MEA has been organising capacity building workshops and seminars 
aimed at developing domestic expertise in the field of investment treaty arbitration. 
Indian Judges and lawyers  and law firms, have been invited to t hese workshops 
and seminars. 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
The Committee note that FDI decisions and inflows into the country are a 
complex function of several factors including market, ease of doing business, 
infrastructure, human resources, availability of raw materials, competitiveness and 
productivity etc. As per a  study commissioned by DEA to ICRIER, though there 
may be some spillover benefits for  investment inflows from the BIT regime as a 
whole, a relationship between investment and signing a particular treaty cannot be 
established. The Committee are aware that BITs are  not the sole factor for 
attracting FDIs into t he country. However, it has been taken for  granted under 
standard economic theories that investment lead to more employment and  more 
production in the economy. The Committee feel that in a developing country like  
India, FDI inflows is essential for economic development and BITs have the 
potential to attract FDIs in that they could provide foreign and Indian investors a 
higher degree of  confidence in investment. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
signing of BITs should be  encouraged selectively in identified core/priority 
sectors/areas to attract more FDIs which  will lead to growth and development of 
the economy. The Ministries/Departments/Agencies  concerned may identify the 
core/priority sectors in this regard and MEA may facilitate the same. 
Reply of the Government 
 The treaties are signed with particular countries and not sector based. The 
MEA has always been facilitating BIT negotiations with any country as requested 
by the nodal ministry. 

25 
 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
The Committee note that the Model BIT 2015 attempts to create a balance 
between the Government's right to regulate and investment protection. They have 
been informed that in any  treaty based on Model BIT, 2015 text, the position of 
India in dealing with international arbitration as a respondent would improve. The 
Committee are aware that the Model BIT 2015  is an improvement over the earlier 
and older BITs as it addresses several issues faced in the past.  The Committee, 
however, feel that there is still scope for fine tuning, especially in some of the  
provisions like Investor State Dispute Settlement mechanism in which the scope is 
limited to  awarding monetary compensation alone, exhaustion of local remedies 
for five years prior to  commencing international arbitration, non mandatory 
investor obligations, enterprise to be operated by an investor in good faith  etc. It 
should be the endeavour of MEA, DEA, DoLA and  other concerned 
Departments/Agencies to bring about improvement and suitable amendments in 
the light of new experience gained in disputes and arbitration arising out of BITs 
and the overall change in the global economic outlook. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that review of  the Model BIT 2015 should be  a continuous process for a 
balanced and comprehensive BIT. 
Reply of the Government 
 DEA along with suggestions of DoLA and MEA, is considering to amend 
certain provisions and add new proposals in the current ongoing BIT negotiations 
taking cue from global developments in the BIT re gime. The ongoing BIT 
negotiations focus on both the investor‟s right to get protection and also sovereign 
interest and States right to regulate. The negotiations also focus on the type of 
dispute settlement mechanism to later avoid the interpretations by the Tribunals. 
 For example, recently signed, India -Brazil ICFT does not include ISDS 
mechanism for dispute settlement and only has SSDS. India -Brazil ICFT creates a 
Joint Committee composed of government representatives of both state parties to 
oversee the resolution of disputes, followed by arbitration. Unlike most 
investment agreements, it expressly provides that a tribunal set up between 
State- State dispute cannot award compensation. Instead, it only permits a 

26 
 
tribunal to interpret the BIT without awarding compensatio n. It is noted that 
continuous endeavour shall be made on Model BIT to achieve a balanced and 
comprehensive BIT.  
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
The Committee note that the Model BIT 2015  has been prepared based on  
analysis of various other models and agreements, extensive consultations with 
national and international  legal experts, consultations with industry groups, law 
firms, non-governmental, inter- governmental and academic institutions, comments 
of stakeholder s and jurisprudence in treaty  arbitration, academicians and experts 
working on the subject, etc. The Committee also desire  that an indepth study may 
be made of the working and outcome of such treaties adopted by  advanced 
countries and their best practices and provisions may be incorporated in the Indian  
Model BIT. 
Reply of the Government 
  DEA has in -house consultants/Young Professionals having legal 
expertise who provide their inputs based on learning from developments across 
world during the negotiations of BIT with a country. Before the negotiations, a 
comparative analysis of the important provisions of BITs, signed by the specific 
country (with which the negotiation takes place) with other countries is done by the 
team of the DEA. At the same time, resea rch on the country position of that 
particular country in UNCITRAL and also on the ISDS disputes brought in by the 
investors against that country is done by DEA. DEA also seeks suggestions of 
DoLA and MEA during the negotiations. 
 
 Further, the BITs are in an evolving state since the adoption of Model 
BIT and it aims to provide appropriate protection to foreign investors in India and 
Indian investors in the foreign country, while maintaining a balance between the 
investor‟s rights an d the Government obligations. Indian BITs endeavour to 
incorporate the relevant and suitable provisions from different BITs, signed world 
over and has adopted the mechanism of Joint Committee for resolution of disputes 
from Brazilian model BIT. The exhaust ion of local remedy before the domestic 
courts for 5 years included in the model BIT (before the parties go for international 

27 
 
arbitration) is also a departure from the usual fork in the road clause in other 
international BITs. However, it may be noted that  the BITs conclude with the 
consent of both the parties and both the parties should agree on all the proposals 
which are to be included in the BIT. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
CHAPTER III 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 The Committee note that there have been thirty seven notices of dispute or 
letters intending to raise a dispute by claimants or investors against Republic of 
India under various BITs out of  which India has won only four arbitrations so far; 
lost two arbitrations; received adverse award  in three arbitrations and all the three 
cases are pending challenge to the arbitral award at the seat of arbitrations. Further, 
in one dispute the investors withdrew their claim; three disputes  have been 
resolved amicably and in fourteen disputes, the claimants did not pursue the matter  
after the initial request under BIPA. Eight disputes are still active at different stages 
of arbitration and two new notices have been received.  The Ministry has also 
stated that till date,  out of the nine disputes concluded so far, only the White 
Industries case had result ed in India  paying the claimant the arbitral award. 
Keeping in view the huge cost to the Exchequer in just  one arbitral award, the 
Committee feel that  such losses to the country are unaffordable and  should be 
avoided at all costs in future by leaving no ambiguity in BITs. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry, in consultation with other concerned 
Ministries/Departments should make all out efforts to draft BITs cautiously leaving 
no scope of investment disputes and reduce the number of BIT claims against India. 
Steps may also be taken to settle such disputes  outside of arbitration/before it 
proceeds to arbitration or comes up before the Tribunals through  mechanism of 
pre-arbitration consultation/negotiation. 
Reply of the Government 
 The disputes under the BITs pertain to BITs signed prior to the new Model 
BIT of 2015. The new Model BIT of 2015 was drafted by the DEA after inter -
ministerial consultations taking into view the loopholes in the earlier BITs and it 
tries to address the issues.  

30 
 
 On the disputes under the investment treaties, the MEA is a part of the Inter 
Ministerial Group (IMG) handling investment treaty disputes. These IMGs are 
chaired by the respective Ministry to whom the dispute pertains. MEA offers its 
inputs as and w hen sought and has always asked the respective Ministries to 
analyse each case on its merits and to take a call on the feasibility of settlement of 
the dispute or the need for arbitration. 
 
 The disputes/notices/awards have arisen not only on account of ambiguity in 
older version BITs but also on account of wide interpretations of BITs by 
respective adhoc Tribunals. The disputes under the BITs pertain to BITs signed 
prior to the new Model BIT of 2015. The new Model BIT of 2015 was drafted after 
inter-ministerial consultations taking into view the limitations in the earlier BITs. 
The Model has several safeguards inbuilt based on experiences of India and other 
cases worldwide, to deal with disputes by having a more detailed Dispute 
settlement provision to gove rn the arbitration proceedings and several exceptions 
in the Scope and Definition of Investment to preserve policy space. Further there 
are several provisions to dismiss frivolous claims and prevent broad interpretation 
of the substantive obligations of the treaty.  
 Further, in the absence of any jurisprudence regarding BIT interpretations 
and the fact that there are more than 3000 BITs world over, the arbitral tribunals 
while giving the arbitral awards in BIT disputes tend to undermine the sovereignty, 
democratic decision making and right to regulate. The nature of disputes and the 
awards have also brought forth the problems of inconsistent and selective 
interpretations adopted by some of the tribunals handling arbitrations worldwide, 
leading to adverse orders worldwide. Nevertheless, to balance the demand of many 
countries to include the international arbitration as a mode of dispute resolution, 
India has formulated a mechanism of dispute settlement which provides an option 
for international arbitration af ter an investor has exhausted local remedies before 
domestic courts for five years. This duration can also be utilized at the same time 
to enter into talks with the claimants and attempt to settle the dispute, based on the 
genuineness of the claim. GoI has  also been advising to the concerned Ministries 
(handling the dispute), to try to settle the dispute amicably wherever it‟s possible 
and it is interest of country and/or has been advised by Counsels. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 

31 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 The Committee note that negotiations with the USA on a BIT are being held 
since 2009. The Investment Incentive Agreement signed in 1997 with the US 
Development Finance  Corporation has been extended till December 2021 and a 
new Investment Incentive Agreement is being negotiated. With regard to the EU, 
preparations are underway on both sides to start negotiations on a stand-alone 
investment protection agreement. The Committee feel that signing of 
BITs/Investment Protection Agreements in high-technology manufacturing/sectors 
with USA and EU is in keeping with the Government‟s initiatives of Atmanirbhar 
Bharat and Make in India and would benefit the  country‟s manufacturing sector 
especially in high-tech goods. The Committee, therefore  desire that the process of 
negotiations should be started and concluded early so as to  contribute towards 
increasing investment in priority sectors and high technology manufacturing. 
Reply of the Government 
  The India-USA IIA was signed in 1997 (the total investment support 
till date being of USD 2.88 billion comprising of loan of USD 0.99 billion, 
investment guarantee of USD 1.5 billion, insurance of USD 13 million and equity 
support only of USD 100 million). India received the request for the negotiation of 
a new Agreement from USA in June 2020. This proposal was analysed and in view 
of the possibility of limiting the policy space of the country and chances of 
bringing in of claim under dispute arbitration mechanism under the said agreement, 
it was decided  to terminate the 1997 Agreement and renegotiate a replacement 
Agreement. The latest text of the Agreement under negotiation is to provide 
investment protection to investment support of a US organization i.e., US 
Development Finance Corporation (USDFC). 
 With regard to India -EU BIT, both India and EU have agreed for a stand -
alone investment protection agreement” and the DEA has requested EU for their 
written text proposal, so that the negotiations of a standalone investment agreement 
may be commenced. 
 Investment decisions depend on a wide variety factors -infrastructure, 
political stability, market size, human resources, ease of doing business, 
availability of raw - materials and intermediates, investment protection policies, 
rule of law etc. Also, investment  protection is offered through a variety of ways, 

32 
 
local laws, robust justice system, upholding rule of law, BITs offering institutional 
arbitrations etc. Investors while investing, look for a political stability and good 
governance including a robust justice system. While, BIT is not the only condition 
for investments, but it may provide comfort to some foreign investors while 
making their investment decisions in countries with high risk in terms of political 
stability or political uncertainty. It also prov ides comfort of protection to Indian 
investors in other countries. Thus, in negotiations under BIT a fine balance has to 
be maintained in terms of investor protection and sovereign country rights to 
regulate and policy space therein, which requires consens us on both the sides 
negotiating the text. 
 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
The Committee note that in a departure from the open ended asset based 
definition of investment in the older BITs, the Model BIT, 2015 adopts an 
enterprise based definition of investment  and aligns the BIT regime with the 
Indian FDI policy. This definition also clarifies the types of assets of the enterprise 
which are entitled to protection of the treaty. Further, an  investment also has to 
demonstrate certain minimum characteristics such as commitment of  capital, the 
expectation of gain or profit, the assumption of risk and have significance for the  
development of the host State in order to qualify for protection under the treaty. 
While appreciating the intention of the Government to reduce the number of BIT 
claims and adverse  arbitral awards against the country, the Committee feel that 
there is still ambiguity in certain  areas like duration of the enterprise, significance 
for the developm ent of the host State,  etc. They, therefore, desire that continuous 
efforts are required to remove any ambiguity so as to  reduce arbitral discretion for 
varied interpretations. 
Reply of the Government 
 Definition of „investment‟ has been related to that of the characteristics of 
investment. The most influential decision in this respect has been the decision of 
an ICSID tribunal in Salini Costruttori SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco; ICSID Case 
No. ARB/00/4, para 46 (“Salini”). In Salini, the tribunal, while recognizing that the 

33 
 
parties could, in principle, agree on the kind of disputes that could be submitted to 
arbitration under the treaty, explicitly recognized the existence of objective criteria 
that have to be met if a particular asset is to be considered an “investment” for the 
purposes of the ICSID Convention. The tribunal considered that its jurisdiction 
depended upon not only the existence of an “investment” within the meaning of the 
applicable International Investment Agreement (IIA), in this case the BIT between 
Italy and Morocco (1990), but also on the basis of the ICSID Convention, in 
accordance with case law. Salini is often quoted as the key case espousing the 
objective, which requires five condition s to identify such an investment under the 
ICSID convention: 
1) certain duration; 
2) regularity of profit and return; 
3) assumption of risk; 
4) substantial commitment; and 
5) significance for the host State's development. 
  
 Although there is no concept of  binding precedent in investment treaty 
jurisprudence, subsequent tribunals have referred to the Salini approach. India has 
also adopted the „Salini‟ test. Accordingly, the definition of an investment under 
revised Model BIT must also meet the objective Sa lini criteria. Substantively, 
however, in the absence of specific treaty provisions, tribunals have held that 
duration is a flexible term 3 that could range from months to years and that the 
requirement is to be considered holistically. Many tribunals have determined to 
this extent that a period of two to five years meets the requirement of certain 
duration4, thus  
                                                           
3
   Mason Capital v. Republic of Korea, PCA Case No. 2018-55 
4
   Manchester Securities v. Poland, PCA Case No. PCA Case No. 2015-18 

34 
 
excluding ordinary or one-time commercial transactions. Further, it is worth noting 
that tribunals have found that a contribution to the development of the host State is 
rather an “expected consequence” of the investment instead of a requirement in 
itself. 
 Using an enterprise -based approach enables a government to provide 
enhanced treaty protections to those companies that have actually made a 
commitment to pursue economic activity in the host country. 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER V 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
The Committee note that the Ministry has signed a Host Country Agreement 
with the  Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) and through this Agreement, 
India and the PCA have established a legal framework under which future PCA 
administered proceedings can be conducted in India. The Committee welcome this 
step as it could result in India being a preferred  location for international 
arbitrations. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure the  
implementation of this Agreement at the earliest so as to make India a hub for 
international arbitration. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
endeavours made by the Ministry and the result thereof, at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of External Affairs has organised the PCA -India Conference 
series under the ambit of the Host Country Agreement with the  PCA. The Ministry 
is also coordinating with the PCA and internally to work out the modalities of 
establishing arbitration hearing facilities in India.  
 
 
[O.M No. AA/Parl/125/61/2021) dated 21/02/2022] 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                     
06 April, 2022                                                                                            Chairperson,                                 
16- Chaitra,1944 (Saka)                                                Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
  

36 
 
Appendix I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2021-22) HELD ON 6 APRIL, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday,  6 April 2022 from 1000 hrs. to  1030 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
4.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
5.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
6.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
Rajya Sabha  
 
7.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
8. Shri Brijlal  
9.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
11.  Shri K.J. Alphons 
 
 Secretariat 
  
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the 
Committee on the subject „India and Bilateral Investment Treaties‟ 

37 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. The members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

38 
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  TENTH 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (17 TH LOK 
SABHA) 
                                      
(i) Total Number of Recommendations     14                                                              
              
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12 and 14 
          Total-10 
Percentage:  71.43% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
  
  NIL 
        Total- Nil 
 Percentage: 0 % 
 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos.    5, 11 and 13 
         Total-03 
 Percentage: 21.43% 
 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply  of 
 Government is still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 8. 
                                            
Total- 01 
Percentage: 7.14% 