 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
INDIA’S NEIGHBOURHOOD FIRST POLICY  
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2023 /Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
22 
 

 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 INDIA’S NEIGHBOURHOOD FIRST POLICY 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 25  July, 2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 July, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
COEA NO.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20)……............................................................  (ii) 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……............................................................  (iii) 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……............................................................  (iv)
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……............................................................  (v)                                        
  
   INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………… (vi)      
     
    REPORT 
 
  Chapter I India’s Neighbourhood First Policy – Concept and Relevance………………..     1 
  Chapter II India’s Engagement with its Neighbours ………………………………………     19                     
 A. Afghanistan           25 
B.  Bangladesh           29 
C.  Bhutan            40 
D.  Maldives           49 
E.  Myanmar            56 
F.  Nepal            64 
G.  Pakistan            75 
H.  Sri Lanka           78 
 
  Chapter III Regional Frameworks under India’s Neighbourhood First Policy………….    94 
   A. South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation…………………………         98 
   B. Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation 102 
  
        
 APPENDICES 
 
 Annexure I Minutes of the Twenty Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
   (2019-20) held on 8 September, 2020………………………………………………. 108 
 
 Annexure II Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2020-
   21) held on 18 December,  2020………………………………………………...        111  
 
 Annexure III Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2020-
   21) held on 12 January, 2021………………………………………………………   114 
  
 Annexure IV Minutes of the Twenty Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
   (2020-21) held on 29 July, 2021……………………………………………………. 117  
 
 Annexure V Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2021-
   22) held on 16 December, 2021……………………………………………………. .120 
 
 Annexure VI Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2022-
   23) held on 19 December, 2022……………………………………………………...123 
 
 Annexure VII Minutes of the -------- Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2022-
   23) held on ------July, 2023…………………………………………………………..126
   

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
 Lok Sabha   
  
2.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
3.  Shri Margani Bharat   
4.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
5.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8.  Shri Pakauri Lal Kol   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha   
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao  
16.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
17.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
18.  Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan  
19.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
21.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
  
Rajya Sabha  
  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi* 
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas  
29.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
31.  Vacant**  
*Shri Ranjan Gogoi, Member, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 23.07.2020, Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 59970 and 
**Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel and Shri Sharad Pawar, Members, Rajya Sabha ceased to be Members of the Committee  
w.e.f. 09.04.2020. 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Shri Navneet Ravi Rana  
17.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
18.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Vacant$ 
21.  Vacant* 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta# 
28.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
29.  Shri Abdul Wahab@@  
30.  Shri Brij Lal 
31.  Vacant@ 
 
$ Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma passed away on 17 March, 2021. 
* Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi ceased to Member of the Committee on her appointment as Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021. # Shri Swapan Dasgupta resigned on 17.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@@ Shri Abdul Wahab retired on 21.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. @ Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee on his appointment as Cabinet Minister w.e.f. 
07.07.2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.   Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
6.   Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
10.   Shri P. C. Mohan  
11.   Smt. Queen Oja 
12.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
13.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
15.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana  
16.   Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
17.   Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
18.   Shri Rebati Tripura 
19. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
20.   Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer* 
21.   Vacant 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.   Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.   Smt. Misha Bharti   
25. Shri Brijlal  
26.   Shri P. Chidambaram  
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
28.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
29. Shri Sanjay Raut 
30. Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.   Shri K. Somaprasad 
 * Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha nominated to the Committee 
w.e.f. 7.02.2022.    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
    Lok Sabha  
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
    Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut  -  Deputy Secretary 
  
 
 
   
 
      

      
      
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2022-23) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Second Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’.  
2. The Committee selected the subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’ for detailed 
examination during 2019-20 and continued the examination during 2020-21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23. Briefing on the subject was held on 8 September, 2020. Thereafter, the Committee 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 18 December, 
2020; 29 July, 2021; 16 December, 2021 and 19 December, 2022. Further, the Committee 
heard the views of two experts on the subject namely, Dr. Constantino  Xavier, Fellow, Centre 
for Social and Economic Progress, New Delhi and Dr. T C A  Raghavan, Director General, 
Indian Council of World Affairs, New Delhi on 12 January, 2021 in accordance with Rule 331 
(L) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 20 July, 
2023. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs as well as 
the experts for placing material information as well as tendering evidence and views before the 
Committee.  
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
20 July, 2023                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                                  Committee on External Affairs 
 

1 
 
                                                            CHAPTER I 
  
INDIA’S NEIGHBOURHOOD FIRST POLICY - CONCEPT AND RELEVANCE 
1.1      India’s ‘Neighbourhood First’ Policy is a flagship addition to India’s foreign policy 
discourse in recent years. It was conceived in order to forge strong neighbourhood relations 
based on a consultative, non-reciprocal and outcome-oriented approach. The stage for enhancing 
partnerships with neighbouring countries was set on the occasion of the swearing in ceremony of 
the Government on 26 May 2014, during which an invitation to Heads of the Governments of all 
SAARC countries was extended. The subsequent invitation to BIMSTEC leaders in the 2019 
swearing in ceremony was testament to ‘Neighbourhood First’ becoming one of the central 
pillars of India’s foreign policy framework. 
1.2      The principles of engagement in the neighbourhood has been outlined in the form of 
Samman (respect), Samvad (dialogue), Shanti (peace), Samriddhi (prosperity) and Sanskriti 
(culture). The ‘Neighbourhood First’ Policy underlines the renewed primacy that India seeks to 
attach to its neighboring countries to comprehensively upgrade and strengthen the current 
relationship framework and achieve the goal of lasting peace, stability and prosperity in the 
region. This Policy has evolved into an institutional priority for all the relevant arms of the 
Government managing relations and policies with our neighbourhood. 
1.3      The region is tied together with intricate civilizational bonds of history, culture, language, 
and geography. Therefore, countries in the neighbourhood are of special significance to us. This 
creates opportunities while also making the region susceptible to peculiar threats and 
vulnerabilities. Policy initiatives taken by India and its neighbours, have implications for each 
other. Ties with the neighbouring countries have a direct relevance to our States bordering these 
countries. India also realizes its prosperity and growth are linked to that of its neighbours. We 
cannot develop unless our neighbours develop. On this basis, all countries in our region work 
towards developing better partnerships with each other. The overarching philosophy is to ensure 
that our partners in the region draw benefits and values from the growth, development and rise of 
India. 
1.4      During the course of briefing on the subject on 8 September 2020, the Foreign Secretary 
enumerated on the genesis and evolution of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy as under:- 
“Neighbourhood First construct as a policy came about sometime around in 2008 when 
we looked at how we could increase our, let us say, close cooperation with our 
neighbouring countries. Neighbourhood First Policy is a continuation of our foreign 
policy. I do not think it can be seen as something which is specific to Governments. It is a 
generic platform for our foreign policy in which we attach priority to our neighbours. 
That is continued through Governments and that I think has got more focus and more 
salience after 2014 when the current Government took over and decided that the 
neighbourhood needs to actually get even more attention than it has got before”. 
1.5      The Foreign Secretary also explained the concept of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy 
in his opening statement on 8 September 2020:-  
  
 “Arguably, the Neighbourhood First Policy is an effort to accord institutional priority 
and centrality across all relevant arms of Government to the management of our policies 

2 
 
towards our South Asian partners. It has built on the recognition that the optimal 
management of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbourhood is as much a 
domestic security and economic imperative, as it is strategic in foreign policy 
requirement. In general, this holds good for all nations. However, in our South Asian 
context, this is more so than most of the other regions in the world. Even the complex 
civilizational bonds of history, culture, language and geography connect us to our 
immediate neighbours.  
  
I also want to inform the Committee that the Cabinet Secretary issued a letter to 
all   Government Ministries and Departments informing them that the Neighbourhood 
First is  the Central pillar of our foreign policy. While implementation of this is with the 
Ministry of External Affairs, every Ministry has a certain responsibility in terms of 
prioritizing its initiatives, planning visits, networks,bilateral mechanisms, training and 
promoting business ties with our neighbourhood. In other words, we have mainstreamed 
the Neighbourhood First Policy into the entire Government process. In specific terms, the 
Policy aims to coordinate across our Government Ministries and   Departments an 
approach to these partner countries that is consultative, non-reciprocal and outcome 
oriented. 
  
The objective is to create mutually beneficial and people-oriented partnerships in South 
Asian region with focus on development, connectivity and capacity building. We also 
made sustained efforts to support regional frameworks aimed at promoting greater 
connectivity, economic integration and a collective approach to deal with 
shared   challenges in the region. 
  
Our larger philosophy is to ensure that everyone in the region sees benefit from the 
growth, development and strengthening of India and it is on this basis that all countries 
in   the region could work together, developing closer partnerships for  mutual benefit”. 
  
1.6      The representative of MEA further highlighted some of the elements of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy while tendering evidence before the Committee on 18 December 
2020 :- 
“The Neighbourhood First Policy is a Central pillar of India’s foreign and national 
security policies……The primacy focus of this policy is our South-
Asian   neighbourhood.  The priority countries are Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Nepal, Maldives, Myanmar, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.  These countries are of unique and 
special significance to India, both, because they are closely connected with us 
through   the ties of geography, culture and history and also because the internal and 
external dimensions of our policies and theirs directly intersect and overlap with each 
other.  With the exception of Pakistan, the central principle of Neighbourhood First 
Policy is to accord   the greatest attention and emphasis to these countries in our 
diplomatic efforts.  We   have   been promoting greater connectivity with our neighbours 
with physical, economic, energy, digital or even cultural projects. We have focussed on 
infrastructure development, capacity building and overall socio-economic development 
projects in our neighbouring countries.  We are working to enhance people-to-people 
contacts in various ways.  We are encouraging trade and investment linkages towards a 
larger goal of closer economic integration.  We are working on defence and security 

3 
 
issues to address our shared security challenges.  We have commenced cooperation in 
previously uncharted territories such as space, information, cyber security, civil nuclear 
energy, disaster management, etc.  We are prioritising the neighbourhood in terms of 
allocation of funds and resources so that we can enhance our development partnership 
with a sharper focus on timely implementation.  A consultative and non-    reciprocal 
approach permeates all our activities.  We are working with our neighbours not just 
bilaterally but also in plurilateral and regional constructs.  Our overall vision is that 
stability, growth and prosperity of our neighbours helps India and is in India’s 
interest.  We are also working to showcase our neighbours that India’s continued growth 
and development is beneficial to them. This will create its own dynamics for the greater 
interconnection and     integration. Domestically, we are working to mainstream 
Neighbourhood First Policy through the entire Government machinery so that all other 
Ministries and Departments approach their interaction with the neighbourhood from a 
similar proactive perspective. We had requested Cabinet Secretary to write to all 
Secretaries to inform that Neighbourhood First is a central pillar of our foreign policy and 
to take suitable actions in pursuance of the same. This has helped in raising awareness 
about the policy and we are working with various Ministries to take forward specific 
initiatives. 
  
 Our  Neighbourhood First Policy also has close linkages with development in our border 
areas, particularly, in the North East Region of our country. The Policy creates various  
opportunities for States in the North East, greater cross border trade, investment   and  
movement of people, infrastructure development as well as improved connectivity”. 
  
1.7      During the course of evidence on 19 December 2022, the Foreign Secretary summed 
up  India’s Neighbourhood First Policy as under:- 
  
“Central thrust, connect and converge, overcome asymmetry through preferential non-
 symmetrical, non-reciprocal offers, connectivity, stability, security and link up the 
prosperity of these countries with ourselves, demand driven people centric development. 
It is people thread runs through this and do in a manner that Neighbourhood First is not 
just good for the people of India but for the people of neighbourhood but it spreads the 
goodness. It is a virtuous cycle of good economic situation, good political stability, 
secure societies, transmitting and converting themselves into large regional and global 
good. That is the start and the focus of the Neighbourhood First”. 
  
1.8      Regarding the institutional mechanism under the Neighbourhood First Policy for optimal 
management of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbours to achieve the objectives, the 
Ministry has stated that India’s Neighbourhood First Policy is driven by the recognition that the 
optimal management of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbours is not only a domestic 
security and economic imperative, but also a strategic and foreign policy requirement. Therefore, 
our immediate neighbourhood forms the first circle of priority in India’s relations with the world. 
  
1.9      To that effect, there are established institutional mechanisms with neighbouring countries 
for monitoring and reviewing the various aspects of the bilateral cooperation. These vary from 
country to country, but broadly include high-level mechanisms such as Joint Commission 
Meetings at Foreign Minister-level, Foreign Office Consultations at Foreign Secretary-level and 
Inter-Governmental Committees at the Secretaries-level. At the functional level, there are Joint 

4 
 
Working Groups which deal with sector-wise cooperation including political and security issues; 
trade, commerce and investment; development cooperation; human resource development, 
education and culture. In addition, Joint Project Monitoring Committees and Oversight 
Mechanism exist for monitoring progress of various development assistance projects. Regional 
Border Committee Meetings and Boundary Working Group talks are held regularly, in addition 
to Staff Talks between all three defence services have been held in recent years with our 
neighbours. 
  
1.10    Discussions at these mechanisms are guided by Government’s Neighbourhood First 
policy as well as the directives flowing from the regular high-level visits, telephonic exchanges, 
and virtual summits at the level of HoS/HoG/EAM. Alongside bilateral mechanisms, our 
engagement with our neighbours is also driven by multilateral and regional mechanisms such as 
BIMSTEC, BBIN and SAARC. 
  
1.11    When asked to justify the need for an umbrella Neighbourhood First Policy under the 
existing robust foreign policy, the Ministry has stated that the Policy is an effort to accord 
institutional priority and centrality across all relevant arms of Government to the management of 
policies towards our partners in our immediate neighbourhood: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. The region is tied together with 
complex civilizational bonds of history, culture, language, and geography. These commonalities 
and complexities give way to unique opportunities while also making the region susceptible to 
peculiar threats, granting South Asia a principal place in our foreign policy thinking. 
  
1.12    The Neighbourhood First Policy is driven by a recognition that the optimal management 
of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbours is not only a domestic security and 
economic imperative but also a strategic and foreign policy requirement. Therefore, our 
immediate neighbourhood forms the first circle of priority in India’s relations with the world. 
  
1.13    The overarching philosophy is to ensure that our partners in the region draw benefits and 
values from the growth, development and rise of India and on this basis, all countries in our 
region work towards developing better partnerships with each other. This is a logical extension 
of the Government’s policy of Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, aur Sabka Vishwas into the foreign 
policy arena. The Neighbourhood First Policy is aimed at enhancing physical, digital and people 
to people connectivity across the region, augmenting trade and development, and ultimately 
contributing towards building a secure and stable neighbourhood. 
  
1.14    India’s foreign policy has received a potent boost from its multiple spatial and thematic 
verticals and policy orientations. This allows focused, holistic and impactful management of 
policy across all relevant Government bodies. Herein, the fundamental spatial orientation of our 
policy remains Neighbourhood First because of the incontrovertible importance of the region to 
India. India can contribute towards building a safe, secure, prosperous, and well-connected South 
Asia. 
 
1.15    The Committee enquired whether there has been a paradigm shift in our efforts for 
reshaping of India’s foreign policy towards our neighbours. The Ministry has informed that the 
Neighbourhood First Policy is a flagship addition to India’s foreign policy discourse in recent 
years. It underlines the renewed primacy that India seeks to attach to its neighbouring countries 
to comprehensively upgrade and strengthen the current relationship framework and achieve the 

5 
 
goal of lasting peace, stability, and prosperity in the region. In that way of renewed importance, 
there has been a shift in our relationship with our neighbours. 
  
1.16    India’s Neighbourhood First Policy is not a static policy. It is a dynamic policy that 
adjusts to our renewed interests in the region, and to evolving regional circumstances. It is a 
constant endeavour to adapt to the contemporary realities of our immediate neighbourhood. 
  
1.17    The importance of the neighbourhood was evident not only during Prime Minister Shri 
Narendra Modi’s first term but also after his re-election. PM Modi invited leaders of SAARC 
countries for his first swearing-in ceremony in 2014, and leaders of BIMSTEC countries for his 
2019 swearing-in ceremony. This indicates the increasingly important place the Neighbourhood 
occupies in India’s foreign policy space. 
  
1.18    India has expanded the quantum of development cooperation in its partner countries in the 
neighbourhood. This includes projects in the fields of agriculture, education, culture, health, 
human resource development, drinking water and sanitation, disaster relief and rehabilitation, 
capacity building, trade and investments as well as defence and security. Trade has been 
enhanced with these countries. With new air, land and river and sea connectivity corridors, India 
is now better connected with its neighbours. 
  
1.19    In Afghanistan, where India has committed over US $3 billion in its developmental 
efforts, India provide one of the largest programmes in the world for education, infrastructure, 
capacity building, skills and human development, which is scheduled to continue till 2022. Our 
Land Boundary Agreement (LBA) with Bangladesh in June 2015 has been a milestone in 
bilateral relations and the maritime border between the two countries have been amicably 
resolved. In Bhutan, during the 11th Five Year Plan (2013-18), 83 major and 595 small High-
Impact Community Development Projects of bilateral cooperation were implemented with GoI 
assistance. ‘India First’ has now become a stated policy of the Government of Maldives. As the 
country where Act East policy begins and where it converges with our Neighbourhood First 
policy, Myanmar acts as a bridge for ASEAN. With Nepal, our economic partnership has 
expanded to new initiatives in agriculture, inland waterways connectivity and energy 
cooperation. PM Modi’s first visit to Sri Lanka in 2015 was historical as the first stand-alone 
bilateral visit by the PM of India since 1987. 
  
1.20    There has also been a paradigm shift in dealing with threats emerging from our immediate 
neighbourhood. India now pre-emptively quells the threat posed by cross-border terrorism. The 
Government of India is firmly and resolutely committed to taking all necessary measures to fight 
the menace of terrorism. It fundamentally believe that bilateral relations with our neighbours can 
only be held in an atmosphere free from terror, hostility and violence. 
1.21    On being asked about the renewed role of MEA and other stakeholders  in implementing 
this Policy in letter and spirit, the Ministry has informed that Government accords the highest 
priority to India’s relations with our neighbouring countries. The MEA has implemented this 
Policy into action by signing several Agreements and MoUs with the respective Foreign 
Ministries of our neighbouring countries. India is an active political and economic partner of its 
neighbours and is involved in various infrastructural and development projects with these 
countries. We also have extensive education, culture, trade and investment linkages with our 
neighbours. Over the last six years, this Policy in action has helped in delivering benefits like 
greater connectivity, improved infrastructure, stronger development cooperation in various 

6 
 
sectors, regional security, and robust people-to-people contacts. Our neighbouring countries 
support India’s membership at the UNSC. We actively support each other’s candidature and 
positions at the various international bodies. 
1.22    When asked about the platforms through which the philosophy of Neighbourhood First 
Policy can be shared with our neighbours, the Ministry has stated that the philosophy and 
objectives of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy are shared regularly through high-level bilateral 
interactions and Foreign Office Consultations with the neighbouring States. SAARC and 
BIMSTEC have also served as remarkably effective platforms for sharing the essence of our 
objectives. SAARC Leaders’ Video-conferencing held on 15 March 2020 at the invitation of 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, with the objective to jointly combat COVID-19 Pandemic in the 
region, served as a crucial podium for India to display its commitment to the region at the time of 
the Pandemic. Despite many such platforms for dialogue existing, in their view, it is the 
successful implementation of the Policy that can best convey the philosophy to our neighbours. 
This requires concerted efforts such as timely execution of development projects and enhancing 
mutually beneficial cooperation. India also holds regular Parliamentary Exchanges with its 
neighbouring partners which is also a substantial platform for the implementation of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy. 
 
1.23    On being asked to furnish the details regarding participation of Parliamentarians/ 
Parliamentary exchanges in strengthening the Neighbourhood First Policy in the recent years, the 
Ministry has stated that a 10-member delegation led by Speaker of the People's Majlis of 
Maldives,  Mohammed Nasheed visited India from 8 to 13 December 2019. 
1.24    On the query of the Committee regarding facilitating interaction of Parliamentarians of 
India and those of our neighbouring countries, the Foreign Secretary during evidence on 19 
December 2022 stated:- 
“We will be happy to do that. We, in fact, bring young Parliamentarians from 
these   countries often for a visit to India. We would be happy to arrange interaction 
between our  young Parliamentarians and their young Parliamentarians”. 
1.25    The Committee also enquired about the difference between our ‘Neighbourhood First 
Policy’ and ‘Act East Policy’ and the manner in which synergy can be established between these 
two policies. The Ministry has informed that the first circle of priority for the Government is 
neighbourhood. Under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Government is committed to 
developing friendly and mutually beneficial relations with all its neighbours. The Policy includes 
within its ambit 3 Cs that have become integral to its implementation. These are Connectivity, 
Commerce and Cultural Commonalities. Implementation of the Neighbourhood First Policy, 
based on this approach, has strengthened the spirit of mutual respect and closer cooperation 
between India and her neighbours. 
  
1.26    While ‘Neighbourhood First’ Policy exclusively focuses on India’s immediate 
neighbourhood, ‘Act East Policy’ focuses on the extended neighbourhood in the Asia-Pacific 
region. In that sense, the Act East Policy is a logical extension of the Neighbourhood First 
Policy. 
  

7 
 
1.27    Act East Policy was set into motion during Prime Minister Modi’s maiden visit to 
ASEAN-India Summit in 2014, where he emphasised on practicing a more action-oriented 
policy towards ASEAN and the wider East Asia. Prime Minister placed ASEAN at the core of 
India’s Act East Policy. Enhancing connectivity with our Asian neighbourhood is one of our 
strategic priorities, making ASEAN our bridge to the wider Indo-Pacific region. This enhanced 
connectivity will undoubtedly bring multifarious benefits to all countries of the region. However, 
it holds immense potential to bring about a significant positive developmental impact on the 
North-Eastern region. 
  
1.28    The key principles and objectives of Act East Policy are to promote economic 
cooperation, cultural ties and develop strategic relationship with countries in the Indo-Pacific 
region through continuous engagement at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels, hereby 
providing enhanced connectivity in its broadest sense, including political, economic, cultural and 
people-people relations. The Prime Minister articulated India’s vision for a free, open, inclusive 
and rule-based Indo-Pacific in Singapore in 2018 promoting Security and Growth for All in the 
Region (SAGAR). 
  
1.29    Both Neighbourhood First and Act East Policies focus on creating a stable and prosperous 
neighbourhood through continued engagement at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. For 
instance, Myanmar is the only country where both Neighbourhood First and Act East Policies 
converge. 
 
1.30    When asked whether India has explored the possibility of broader soft power diplomacy 
to strengthen our relations with neighbouring countries and the details of steps taken to infuse 
soft power diplomacy in this regard, the Ministry has informed that ICCR has been the cultural 
institution under the MEA mandated to cultivate the elements of soft power for furthering India’s 
relations internationally and earning goodwill through various instrumentalities such as running 
Cultural Centres, Chairs of Indian Studies, Conferences & Seminars, visits of performing art 
groups, fine art exhibitions etc. The focus of ICCR’s activities has been to organize its activities 
in such a way as to cover each of the regions of the world. Focusing on the region in India’s 
neighbourhood, ICCR has been running Indian Cultural Centres in Nepal, Sri Lanka, 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Afghanistan, Maldives and Myanmar which are the nodal point for 
promoting our cultural relations in these countries. Academic cooperation is an important part of 
ICCR’s activities. ICCR has been administering special scholarships schemes for the nationals of 
these countries on behalf of MEA. Regular exchanges in the fields of performing/fine art and 
academics are held with these countries in consultation with MEA. 
1.31    Regarding the positive impacts of Neighbourhood First Policy on bilateral/multilateral 
and regional ties and in terms of improving our relations with our neighbouring countries, the 
Ministry has stated that the dividends of the Policy have translated into strong support for India 
in various multilateral fora such as the UN, NAM, Commonwealth, SAARC and BIMSTEC. 
India works in close cooperation with its neighbouring partners in these groupings towards 
ensuring the security and growth for all in the region. 
1.32    When the Committee desired to know about the achievements of the new dynamics of 
India’s foreign policy during the last six years, the Ministry informed that tangible results of 
diplomacy are often seen in the long-term. The achievements of this Policy have been the 
delivery of benefits like greater regional connectivity, improved infrastructure, stronger 

8 
 
development cooperation in various sectors, enhanced security and broader people-to-people 
contacts. It has brought a new impetus to our bilateral relations with neighbours, whilst 
cooperation with them at multilateral fora has introduced a regional/sub-regional dimension to 
bilateral relations and led to a stronger understanding of the region.  
1.33    When enquired whether the Government has reviewed its Neighbourhood First Policy and 
formulated any fresh strategy to bring about greater relevance to meet the present needs in view 
of the evolving regional circumstances and the contemporary realities of our immediate 
neighbourhood, the Ministry has informed that  India’s Neighbourhood First Policy is an effort 
to accord institutional priority and centrality across all relevant arms of Government to the 
management of policies towards our partners in our immediate neighbourhood.  It is driven by a 
recognition that the optimal management of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbours is 
not only a domestic security and economic imperative but also a strategic and foreign policy 
requirement. 
1.34    The overarching philosophy is to ensure that our partners in the region draw benefits and 
values from the growth, development and rise of India and on this basis, all countries in our 
region work towards developing equitable partnerships with each other. This is a logical 
extension of the Government’s policy of inclusive growth and inclusive development into the 
foreign policy arena. The salient characteristics of this approach are that it is consultative, non-
reciprocal and outcome-oriented.   
1.35    India’s Neighbourhood First Policy is a dynamic policy that adjusts to our renewed 
interests in the region, and to evolving regional circumstances. It is a constant endeavour to adapt 
to the contemporary realities of our immediate neighbourhood. 
1.36    Regarding assessment of our Neighbourhood First Policy, the Foreign Secretary while 
tendering evidence before the Committee on 19 December 2022 submitted:- 
“….it is an assessment which is made every week within our divisions mainly because 
the impact of those decisions is felt on the ground in a very real way. We can measure it, 
we can feel it, we can record it, we can quote it as an evidence”. 
1.37    A non-official witness, while deposing before the Committee on 12 January 2021 stated:- 
“If I may summarize my evaluation of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy into one 
sentence, it would be this. India is on the right track and doing more than ever before in 
the neighbourhood, but it is still far too little”. 
1.38    Elaborating on what India’s approach and focus in the neighborhood should be, the non-
official witness also made the following submission before the Committee:- 
“Political and security factors must continue to inform India’s approach to the region. 
But   India’s strategic interests must focus primarily on attaining economic and 
infrastructural connectivity with its neighbours. This is easier said than done. As a result 

9 
 
of economic  protectionism, India has neglected its border lands and neighbours.  Our 
research shows that India was some times better connected to its neighbours back in the 
1950s and 1960s than it is today. For example, there were more railway connections 
between India and East Pakistan in the early sixties than they are today with Bangladesh. 
It was easier to fly from Kolkata to Yangon and back in the 1950s than it is today. 
We like to say that India-Nepal border is an open border on paper. But anyone who has  
visited its crossing border between, say Uttar Pradesh and Bihar and Nepal knows 
that   circulation is extremely difficult due to the absence of basic infrastructure. 
To correct these connectivity gaps requires an extraordinary effort, both financially 
and   mentally. At the level of capabilities, it requires India to invest massively in 
upgrading infrastructure – from roads to rail, from inland waterways to ports, from 
energy and telecommunications to digital customs. And at the level of the mind, it 
requires a change to think about economic openness and connectivity to the 
neighbourhood as an advantage  and not as a threat to India’s security”. 
1.39    He further added:- 
“……free trade and investment deals will be of limited effect unless there is basic 
connectivity infrastructure in place, from cross-border roads and ports to digital links. 
India must sustain and continue to expand efforts to develop regional infrastructure in 
border areas which will help tie neighbouring countries to the Indian economy. One 
avenue to generate this would be through a regional development fund for connectivit 
infrastructure, an idea that could be further tested under BIMSTEC institution”.  
1.40    On the issue of  border infrastructure, the Foreign Secretary during the course of evidence 
on 19 December 2022, stated:- 
“I would encourage some of other Parliamentary Committees to look at our 
border   infrastructure. There is a huge deficiency here. This deficiency relates to the way 
our border districts are developed compared to those facing the districts across the 
country.   So, if you take the entire stretch of 1,600 plus kilometres of border, let us say, 
between India and Nepal or border between India and Bangladesh, India and Bhutan…… 
you will find that the border villages, the border districts, many of them, not all of them, 
on   our side, are less developed than they are on  the other side.” 
                                     
1.41 Responding to the queries of the Members on the need for development of border, the 
Foreign Secretary also made the following submission:- 
“Sir, the ultimate effort is to develop our border. It has to happen at all levels. We must 
raise it with Ministry of Home Affairs. We must mention it in Border District Committee. 
I will give you one classic example of telecom towers in Uttarakhand.…….. I have 
personally invested months only trying to get that done. Eventually, it is getting done. It 

10 
 
did not happen through MHA or through Border District Committee. But as a  Ministry, 
we felt it should be done. We took it up, we found the avenue and plenty of money with 
the Government to do it. It is just a question of converging everybody’s interest and 
focus……” 
  
1.42    When asked to state the manner in which India plan on creating a momentum to the 
relationship amongst the neighbouring countries in order to help address the contentious issues 
related to China and Pakistan, the Ministry has stated that India seeks normal relations with all 
its neighbours including Pakistan. Our consistent position is that issues, if any, should be 
addressed bilaterally and peacefully in an environment free from terror, hostility and violence.  
  
1.43    One of our core concerns is terrorism emanating from territories under Pakistan’s 
control.  Any meaningful dialogue with Pakistan can only be held in an atmosphere free from 
terror, hostility and violence. The onus is on Pakistan to ensure such a conducive atmosphere. 
  
1.44    India has made several attempts to build normal neighbourly relations with 
Pakistan.  India’s initiatives have been responded to with acts of cross border terrorism and 
violence. However, it has been made clear to Pakistan that India will not compromise on issues 
relating to national security and will take firm and decisive steps to deal with all attempts to 
undermine our security and territorial integrity.  
  
1.45    2021, for instance, saw a positive development in the form of the renewed Ceasefire 
Understanding between the Director Generals of Military Operations (DGsMO) of India and 
Pakistan in February. The Understanding held quite well for the first few months, but Pakistan 
again upped the ante in terms of cross-border infiltrations and ceasefire violations from July 
2021 onwards.  
  
1.46    During the year, India, as a result of proactive outreach with the international community, 
successfully thwarted Pakistan’s attempts to present an alarmist situation of the region; interfere 
in internal affairs of India; and internationalise bilateral issues.  
  
1.47    While the Government is aware of China’s engagements with neighbouring countries, 
India’s relations with these countries stand on their own footing and are independent of the 
relations of these countries with third countries. We have also maintained that India and China 
must pursue their relationships with other countries in a manner that does not become a source of 
concern for each other, and is based on mutual respect and sensitivity to each other’s concerns 
and aspirations. 
1.48    On the issue relating to China and Pakistan, one of the non-official witnesses, while 
deposing before the Committee on 12 January 2021 stated:- 
“….China factor is ever present in each of our neighbours which is something 
undeniable. This is going to be a principal challenge which we will face in the decades to 
come. How do we deal with this issue? To some extent, it will require a certain amount 
of   reorientation of our world view and of our general foreign policy approach because 
for a  long time, our approach was based on the premise that if we keep great powers out 

11 
 
of our neighbourhood, it is in our interest and also in the interest of our 
neighbouring  countries…….. 
….while the security factor is very important in our approach to Pakistan because we 
face a major terrorist threat, at the same time, we have to keep non-security elements and 
non-    security approach also as part of our policy. I do think that combining these two is 
important although it is a very difficult process because there is public opinion in India 
which has to be taken into account and there are numerous other complexities, but  
nevertheless how we combine a de-securitized approach with an overall securitized 
relationship is the real challenge with regard to Pakistan”. 
                                    
1.49   The Committee note that India’s Neighbourhood First Policy as a concept came 
about in 2008 and after 2014, it has got more focus and salience. Conceived in order to 
forge strong neighbourhood relations based on a consultative, non-reciprocal and outcome-
oriented approach among the priority countries viz., Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, the Neighbourhood First Policy has 
emerged as a Central pillar of India’s foreign policy in recent years. Our immediate 
neighbourhood forms the first circle of priority in India’s relations with the world. The 
Committee further note that the Neighbourhood First Policy has been a cardinal 
component of India’s foreign policy and involves the entire Government machinery so that 
all other Ministries and Departments approach their engagement with the neighbourhood 
with a similar proactive perspective. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the 
Ministry as they recognize that optimal management of bilateral relations with our 
immediate neighbours is a strategic foreign policy requirement and not just a domestic 
security and economic imperative. The real impact of the Neighbourhood First Policy 
would, however, depend on how far mainstreaming of the Policy is successful and the 
extent to which the Ministry is able to coordinate across all the relevant arms of the 
Government – Ministries, Departments and agencies concerned to achieve its 
objectives.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to create and maintain an 

12 
 
effective coordination mechanism with all the Ministries, Departments and agencies of the 
Central and State Governments for implementation of the Neighbourhood First Policy in 
letter and spirit. MEA being the nodal Ministry for implementation of the Neighbourhood 
First Policy should establish a Cell to identify specific initiatives, projects and programmes 
that can be taken up by the various Ministries and Departments with our neighbouring 
countries and bring about convergence in the implementation of such initiatives, projects 
and programmes for greater impact. 
                                                                                              (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
1.50     The Committee note that high-level mechanisms and Joint Working Groups exist 
for optimal management of bilateral relations with our immediate neighbours. In addition, 
there are Joint Project Monitoring Committees, Oversight Mechanism, Regional Border 
Committee Meetings, Boundary Working Group Talks and Staff Talks between the 
defence services. India’s engagement with its neighbours is also driven by multilateral and 
regional mechanisms such as SAARC, BIMSTEC and BBIN. While acknowledging the 
initiatives undertaken through the said mechanisms/platforms, particularly in recent years, 
the Committee feel that the impact of the Neighbourhood First Policy should be felt on the 
ground in a more effective and extensive manner. This calls for strengthening of the 
institutional and multilateral/regional mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to conduct periodic review of its bilateral and multilateral/regional relationship 
framework on the basis of contemporary realities and upgrade, strengthen and energize 
these mechanisms on a continuous basis. 
                                                                                           (Recommendation Sl. No. 2 ) 
 1.51    The Committee observe that in keeping with Neighbourhood First Policy, India 
desires normal neighbourly relations with all neighbouring countries free of terror, 

13 
 
hostility and violence. However, for more than three decades the country has been facing 
threats and continuous tension, instability and heightened possibility of terrorist and 
militant attacks from our immediate neighbourhood. The Committee fully endorse the 
changed approach of the Government to quell the threats posed by cross-border terrorism 
in a pre-emptive manner as well as maintaining a tough stand that bilateral relations with 
our neighbours can only be held in an atmosphere free from terror, hostility and violence. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that India should  work towards more closer cooperation 
amongst the member States in the region to create an environment where all neighbouring 
countries speak in one voice against the countries engaged in such activities and take pro-
active steps to counter the menace of terrorism and help to achieve the goal of lasting 
peace, stability and prosperity in the region. 
                                                                                              (Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
1.52    The Committee note that the philosophy of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy are 
regularly shared through high-level bilateral interactions and Foreign Office Consultations 
with the neighbouring States and through the platforms of SAARC, BIMSTEC, video-
conferencing, dialogues, etc. However, in Committee’s view, a successful implementation of 
the Policy can only convey the best and convince our neighbours and requires concerted 
efforts, such as, timely execution of development projects and enhancing mutually 
beneficial cooperation. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure that 
development projects undertaken in the neighbourhood are executed within a timeframe 
by strengthening the Joint Project Monitoring Committees and Oversight Mechanisms for 
monitoring the progress of various development assistance projects for their timely 
execution. The scope of mutually beneficial cooperation with our neighbours may also be 
enhanced with fresh initiatives. 

14 
 
                                                                                              (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
1.53    The Committee find that there aren’t enough Parliamentary exchanges between 
India and its neighbourhood countries and there has been only one Parliamentary visit 
from the People’s Majlis of Maldives in the recent years. The Committee are of the strong 
view that regular Parliamentary Exchanges with neighbouring partners can also play a 
pivotal role in the implementation of the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to utilize the Parliamentary forum in a better way by 
facilitating more and more Parliamentary exchanges between India and its neighbouring 
countries for better interaction between Parliamentarians of India and the countries in the 
neighbourhood so that the philosophy of the Neighbourhood First is widely shared and 
upheld in its true spirit. 
                                                                                              (Recommendation Sl. No. 5 ) 
 
1.54    While considering the principles and objectives of ‘Neighbourhood First Policy’ and 
‘Act East Policy’, the Committee note that the Neighbourhood First Policy exclusively 
focuses on India’s immediate neighbourhood while the Act East Policy focuses on the 
extended neighbourhood in the Asia-Pacific region. Both Neighbourhood First and Act 
East Policies focus on creating a stable and prosperous neighbourhood through continued 
engagement at bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. The Act East Policy can also be 
seen as a logical extension of the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee further note 
that enhanced connectivity with our Asian neighbourhood, which is one of the strategic 
priorities under Act East Policy, holds immense potential to bring about a significant 
positive developmental impact on the North-Eastern Region. The Committee feel that 
economic development of the North-Eastern Region which shares land borders with many 
of the neighbouring countries is also integral to the success of the Neighbourhood First 

15 
 
Policy and would impact the successful implementation of the Act East Policy. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to maintain a synergy between these two 
important foreign policies as it holds significant potential to bring about connectivity, 
economic development and security of the North-Eastern Region and apprise the 
Committee about the outcome 
accordingly.                                                                                                                                       
                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 6 )  
 1.55    The Committee note that ICCR being the cultural institution under the MEA 
mandated to cultivate the elements of soft power for furthering India’s international 
relations by earning goodwill, has been running Indian Cultural Centres in Nepal, Sri 
Lanka, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Afghanistan, Maldives and Myanmar. These cultural centres 
are the nodal points for promoting our cultural relations in these countries. In view of the 
importance of cultural  engagement in our Neighbourhood First Policy, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should make an assessment of the adequacy of such centres  in our 
neighbouring countries and strengthen the existing ones in a balanced manner. The  
academic cooperation, special scholarships schemes and exchanges in the fields of 
performing/fine arts  undertaken by ICCR may be scaled up in consultation with the 
Ministry so that increased participation in the said activities strengthen our  
neighbourhood relations.  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                        (Recommendation Sl. No. 7 ) 
1.56    The Committee observe that India’s Neighbourhood First Policy has achieved over 
the years benefits like greater regional connectivity, improved infrastructure, stronger 
development cooperation in various sectors, enhanced security and broader people-to-
people contacts with our immediate neighbours. Further, regular assessments are being 

16 
 
done and the impact on the ground is measured in a real way. The Committee while 
acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry are of the view that more needs to be done, 
especially, addressing the  huge deficiency in our border infrastructure. The Committee 
find that the deficiency relates to the way our border districts are developed compared to 
those facing the districts across the country. As our border areas are pivotal in unlocking 
the potential of our engagements with our neighbours, the need to stabilise and develop 
the border regions have become critical. So, for more effective engagement with our 
immediate neighbours, connectivity infrastructure like cross-border roads, railways, inland 
waterways and ports, energy, telecommunication and digital links, etc. needs to be 
enhanced. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
take it up with various Central Ministries, Departments and agencies concerned the need 
for regional infrastructure development of the border areas through increased 
allocation/investment, pooling of resources and above all, convergence of   everybody’s 
interest and focus.  The Committee also desire that the feasibility of setting up a regional 
development fund for connectivity infrastructure under regional frameworks like 
BIMSTEC may also be explored. 
                                                                                               (Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
1.57 The Committee are also seized of the fact that India is facing continuing threats from 
cross-border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and contrabands, 
trafficking in drugs and weapons, etc. and find it imperative to enhance security 
infrastructure at the borders. The Committee had also discussed the issue of border safety 
and security with the representatives of MEA, MHA and MoD during their meetings as 
well as during on-the-spot study visits. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to 
take comprehensive measures for upgrading border security apparatus and bridge 
connectivity gaps at the borders under the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee 

17 
 
also desire that Demographic changes through illegal migration in the bordering areas may 
also be monitored vigilantly and the Committee be apprised accordingly in this regard. 
                                                                                              (Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
1.58   The Committee note that the dividends of the Neighbourhood First Policy have 
translated into strong support for India in various multilateral fora such as the UN, NAM, 
Commonwealth, SAARC and BIMSTEC. India works in close cooperation with its 
neighbouring partners in these groupings towards ensuring the security and growth for all 
in the region. The Committee desire that the Government should not be complacent but be 
ever vigilant of the new developments in the neighbourhood and the region to leverage the 
support and cooperation from all countries in various multilateral fora in the coming years. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to remain focused on building closer relationships as a 
strong regional player while positioning itself as supporting the growing aspirations of its 
smaller neighbours. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
1.59    India’s Neighbourhood First Policy is a dynamic policy that adjusts to our renewed 
interests in the region while evolving according to regional circumstances. Being aware of 
China’s Belt and Road vision and America’s Indo-Pacific vision, the Committee are of the 
considered view that it is in India’s strategic interests and foreign policy requirements to 
focus on wider engagements and deepening of ties with smaller neighbours. The Committee 
also desire that the opportunities presented by an open and competitive South Asian 
market may also be grasped and consolidated from both security and economic 
perspectives.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 

18 
 
1.60    The Committee observe that unlike India’s relationship with other countries in the 
neighbourhood, bilateral relations with Pakistan and China has been plagued by 
contentious issues. One of the core concerns with Pakistan is terrorism emanating from 
territories under its control. The Ministry has stated that the onus is on Pakistan to ensure 
a conducive atmosphere for any meaningful dialogue.  The Committee have also been 
informed that as a result of proactive outreach with the international community, India has 
successfully thwarted Pakistan’s attempt to present an alarmist situation of the region; 
interfere in its internal affairs and internationalize bilateral issues. In view of the 
belligerent attitude of Pakistan, the Committee desire that the Government should continue 
to proactively engage with the regional and multilateral bodies/organizations extensively so 
as to sensitize them of the role played by Pakistan in fostering terrorism and win their 
support in the fight against terrorism on its soil. Efforts may also be made to establish a 
common platform for countering terrorism under the Neighbourhood First Policy. Despite 
the lack of progress on the diplomatic front, the Committee urge the Government to 
consider the establishment of economic ties with Pakistan if they come forward and work 
towards broader people-to-people contacts in view of the cultural commonalities and 
civilizational linkages between our two countries and no feeling of enmity amongst citizens 
of both the countries. 
                                                                                             (Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
                                                          
  
                                                            
 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
                        INDIA’S ENGAGEMENT WITH ITS NEIGHBOURS 
2.1       Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal, Myanmar, Pakistan and Sri Lanka 
are the priority countries under our Neighbourhood First 
Policy.                                                                                                                           
Physical Connectivity with Neighbourhood Countries 
2.2      An inter-connected region with higher economic growth fosters trade and investment 
opportunities that offer the region a win-win situation. The massive investments in infrastructure 
have steadily led to improving physical connectivity- by road, by water, by railway and by air 
and often by a combination of them. 
2.3      Chabahar port and the Zaranj Delaram highway improve connectivity to landlocked 
Afghanistan and link South Asia to Central Asia. Landlocked Bhutan has access through Indian 
inland waterways and improved road networks to Bangladesh and the Bay of Bengal. India 
shares its longest land border with Bangladesh, which includes five States. India and Bangladesh 
are also linked by 54 rivers and share a coastline. Connectivity through road, rail, inland and 
coastal waters with Bangladesh has been a priority area of cooperation. Fourth and final trial runs 
for the operationalization of the 2015 Agreement to use Chattogram and Mongla Port was 
completed on 19 October 2022. Once operationalized, the Northeastern States will get access to 
the sea through Bangladesh. A direct cargo ferry between India and Maldives moves containers 
between the two countries. 
2.4      Another line of communication to North East India, and therefore between South and 
South East Asia is being created through the Kaladan multi-modal transport project, which pivots 
on Sittwe port in Myanmar. The Trilateral Highway project to Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam will 
provide land connectivity between South Asia and South-East Asia. 
2.5      Railways between countries are causing a "rapid shrinking of South Asia’s 
geography”.  Sustained effort has been made with Bangladesh to leverage historical railway 
connections into a contemporary network. 5 of 6 pre-1965 rail links between Bangladesh and 
India have been reactivated. Another rail link is being restored and a new rail link, connecting 
Akhaura and Agartala is being built. India is now connected to Nepal through the Jayanagar- 
Kurtha railway line. The Jogbani-Biratnagar railway link is in advance stages of implementation. 
A Raxaul Kathmandu railway line is on the anvil. A preliminary study for construction of a 
railway line between Gelephu (Bhutan) and Kokrajhar (India) has been carried out by the 
Ministry of Railways for establishing rail connectivity between India and Bhutan. The emerging 
railway networks are a win-win solution that can drive greater connectivity and growth in what 
we call BBIN - Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal - configuration. 
2.6      Passengers wishing to travel between India and Bangladesh can use trains, such as Mitali, 
Maitree and Bandhan Express, or 5 cross-border bus service routes connecting cities such as 
Dhaka, Kolkata, Agartala, Guwahati etc.  Numerous bus services operate between India and 
Nepal. A bus service that links Mandalay with Imphal has been agreed upon. A network of land 
ports and integrated check posts are being built along our land borders to upgrade the cargo 
transshipment and passenger transit experience. Air connectivity has also improved. A Chennai-

20 
 
Jaffna passenger air link, started in 2019 was suspended due to Covid 19 pandemic, and the same 
has since been resumed from 12 December 2022. 
Energy Connectivity with Neighbourhood Countries 
2.7      In the field of energy connectivity, easier movement of hydrocarbons is being promoted 
across the region. Cross-border pipelines link India and Nepal - via Motihari and Amlekhgunj. 
Another is being planned between Siliguri and Jhapa. An India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline 
linking Siliguri to Parbatipur in northern Bangladesh is also being constructed.  Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) has recently been empanelled as a G2G supplier of refined petroleum 
products to Bangladesh. India has major investments in exploration and upstream hydrocarbon 
production in the region. Indian energy majors have invested USD 1.4 billion in gas assets in 
Myanmar. Indian companies are also active in hydrocarbon sectors in Myanmar and Sri Lanka. 
2.8      Grid interconnection is the foundation of any meaningful cooperation in the electricity 
sector. The Indian grid is connected to Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh through high-capacity 
connections. These are being augmented. Grid interconnection with Sri Lanka and Maldives is 
under discussion. A small radial interconnection also exists between India and Myanmar. These 
connections allow India to currently supply about 1160 MW of power to Bangladesh, about 700 
MW to Nepal, and import 1.8 GW from Bhutan. Trans-national movement of electricity in the 
neighbourhood is thus a reality. A transformative step in promoting regional trade of electricity 
was taken recently with the notification of procedures for export and import of electricity with 
our neighbouring countries. These will not only allow export and import of power but will also 
facilitate transit of power through India between two neighbouring countries. This also opens up 
our vast power trading market to our neighbours. 
2.9      India has also taken the lead in creating power capacity that is available to the region. The 
most successful example of regional cooperation has been between India and Bhutan. India has 
created 2136 MW of hydropower capacity in Bhutan. More is being created. India is also 
constructing a 1320 MW Maitree Super Thermal Power Project in Bangladesh. The Unit-I of 
Maitree Super Thermal Power Plant was unveiled during the visit of Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina in September 2022 and is expected to be commissioned soon. Indian companies are 
implementing hydropower projects of more than 4000 MW capacity in Nepal. 
2.10    The Government is working on the possibility of wind energy projects with Myanmar and 
renewable energy projects with Sri Lanka. India has also offered a USD 100 million Line of 
Credit for the development of solar power projects in Sri Lanka. India is also working on 
distribution of solar power in five townships of Rakhine State in Myanmar. 
2.11    India has invested in technology as a bridge. The South Asia Satellite, a first of its kind 
initiative, was launched in May 2017. A number of capacity building programmes were 
conducted virtually during the pandemic. Tele-learning and tele-medicine are a few areas in 
which our neighbours might seek our assistance. India-Bhutan Sat, jointly developed by India 
and Bhutan was recently (Nov 2022) launched from Sriharikota by ISRO. 
 
Trade Connectivity with Neighbourhood Countries 

21 
 
2.12    Neighbourhood First policy has a strong economic dimension. India share a common 
geographic space with our neighbours. It share resources and commons. It share economic 
challenges. Many of our problems have the same solutions. Prime Minister’s vision of "Sabka 
Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishvas Sabka Prayas” encompasses our approach to the 
neighbourhood. 
2.13    Bangladesh remains our largest trade partner in the region and we remain Bangladesh’s 
largest trade partner in Asia. In 2021-22, bilateral trade increased by 68% from USD 10.78 bn to 
USD 18.14 bn. Goods and people move between the two countries through a network of 36 Land 
Customs Stations including 4 Integrated Check Posts. 
2.14    As Bhutan’s primary economic and trade partner, the Government has worked closely 
to diversify the market for its goods in India and increase avenues for its trade with other 
countries. In this regard, India has opened new trade routes for Bhutan’s bilateral and transit 
trade with India in last two years. Further, special market access and special export quotas 
have also been provided to Bhutan. Efforts have been made to step up the current level of 
trade between India and Maldives from existing USD 400 million. 
2.15    India is Nepal’s largest trading partners and foreign investor and also facilitates transit 
for the majority of Nepal’s third-country trade. Our economic partnership has expanded to 
new initiatives in agriculture, inland waterways connectivity and energy cooperation. 
2.16    In 2021, India was Sri Lanka’s second largest trading partner with the bilateral 
merchandise trade amounting to about USD 5.45 billion. During the year, India was Sri 
Lanka's third largest export destination and the second biggest source of imports. In addition, 
India is also one of the largest contributors to Foreign Direct Investment in Sri Lanka. 
2.17    Indian development partnership in the neighbourhood invests in the well-being of our 
neighbours and in the expansion of their capacities. Creation of institutions is supported. It aim 
to improve the lives of people. 
2.18    India’s Lines of Credit to its neighbours have jumped from USD 3.27 billion in 2014 to 
USD 14.7 billion in 2020. Almost 50% of our global soft-lending goes to our partners in the 
neighbourhood. 
2.19    A key differentiating feature of India supported projects in the neighbourhood is their 
people-centric nature. Whether it is hospitals in Sri Lanka, Maldives, Nepal and Afghanistan; an 
ambulance project in Sri Lanka; institutes of higher learning in Myanmar; construction of tens of 
thousands of houses after the tsunami in Sri Lanka and the earthquake in Nepal; Supreme Court 
building in Mauritius; the Salma Dam in Afghanistan, or upgradation of skills and capacities 
across the neighbourhood, projects funded by India are primarily human-centric.  
Maritime Connectivity with Neighbourhood Countries 
2.20    India has taken the lead in expanding maritime security in the region. Maritime Domain 
Awareness has been enhanced through linked radar systems with our Indian Ocean neighbours. 
Coordinated patrolling with Bangladesh, counter terrorism exercises with our BIMSTEC 
neighbours, Search and Rescue and Pollution Control operations with Sri Lanka are just some 
examples of activity in this area. India has also assisted in upgrading security capacities and 
capabilities of some of its neighbours. 

22 
 
Humanitarian Engagement with Neighbourhood Countries 
2.21    India is also the first responder to many humanitarian disasters in the neighbourhood. 
Indian HADR capacities were rapidly and effectively deployed in response to disasters ranging 
from the tsunami in Sri Lanka and water crisis in Maldives, to the earthquake in Nepal, to natural 
disasters and inflow of displaced persons in Bangladesh, to extreme weather events in Myanmar. 
2.22    More people are moving around the neighbourhood than ever before. Bangladesh today is 
India’s largest world-wide visa operations. Prior to the pandemic, close to 1.7 million visas were 
issued to visitors from Bangladesh. Our missions in Sri Lanka and Yangon report an increasing 
trend of visas being issued. Travel between India and Maldives now no longer requires visas. 
Educational and Healthcare Engagement with Neighbourhood Countries 
2.23    India is the educational hub of the neighbourhood. Tens of thousands of students from the 
neighbourhood at any given time are enrolled in Indian institutions ranging from primary schools 
to super-specialised training centres. The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation 
programme leverages these strengths. 
2.24    India is the healthcare hub for the neighbourhood. A large number of patients from our 
neighbouring countries travel to India for their medical treatment. During the pandemic, India 
provided COVID-19 related medical items and dispatched rapid response teams to its neighbours 
to help them deal with the crisis. Vaccine Maitri, the complex and far-reaching effort to make 
India’s vaccine manufacturing capacity available for the greater good of mankind at a difficult 
time, is Neighbourhood First policy in action. Bhutan, Maldives, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri 
Lanka and Nepal were the first destinations for Indian made vaccines. 
2.25    Whether it is the ‘India First’ policy of Maldives; ‘Sonali Adhyay’ in India-Bangladesh 
ties; B4B – Bharat for Bhutan and Bhutan for Bharat – spirit, the epithets describing India’s 
relations with its neighbours are not by coincidence. They are manifestations of our 
Neighbourhood First policy in action. 
2.26    The dividends of the Neighbourhood First Policy have translated into strong support for 
India in various multilateral fora such as the UN, NAM, Commonwealth, SAARC and 
BIMSTEC. India works in close cooperation with its neighbouring partners in these groupings 
towards ensuring the security and growth for all in the region (SAGAR). 
Engagement with Neighbourhood Countries during COVID 19 Pandemic 
2.27    When asked about the nature of collaboration and coordination with neighbouring 
countries to deal with corona virus disease in the region, the Ministry has informed that during 
the lockdown, while the borders closed for movement of nationals, movement of goods 
continued through India’s borders with its neighbors as previously by land as well as air. In 
addition, India facilitated in repatriation of nationals of Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar, 
and Pakistan through its land borders during the lockdown. This gesture was reciprocated by the 
neighboring countries. These countries also facilitated evacuation of foreign nationals of third 
countries via India. India assisted nationals of Bhutan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Myanmar in third 
countries to travel back to their respective countries via India, after following due procedures of 
quarantine and testing as per guidelines laid down by MHA. 
  

23 
 
2.28    India also assisted its neighbours by providing medicines and medical equipment to 
combat corona virus through bilateral aid as well as through its commitments in the SAARC, as 
committed by Hon’ble Prime Minister in video conference with SAARC Leaders in March 
2020. The Presidents of Afghanistan, Maldives and Sri Lanka; the Prime Ministers of 
Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan, the Minister of State for Health of Pakistan, and the Secretary-
General of SAARC joined the Indian Prime Minister at the video conference. During the Video 
Conference, among other initiatives, India had proposed to create a COVID-19 Emergency Fund 
based on voluntary contributions from the member countries. India made an initial offer of 10 
million US dollars of unilateral contribution to the fund to meet the costs of immediate 
actions. In the spirit of collaboration, voluntary contributions have also been committed by other 
Member states: Sri Lanka (USD 5 million), Bangladesh (1.5 million), Nepal (USD 1 million), 
Afghanistan (USD 1 million), Maldives (USD 200,000) and Bhutan (USD 100,000). Pakistan 
has pledged USD 3 million subject to the condition that it be administered by SAARC 
Secretariat in accordance with SAARC Charter. 
                                                             
2.29    The Committee note that under the Neighbourhood First Policy, 
India’s  engagement with its neighbours range from connectivity projects including 
economic, energy and digital connectivity to cultural projects; education and health care; 
developmental and technological cooperation;  cooperation in maritime security to 
humanitarian and disaster relief. It is seen that massive investment in infrastructure has 
improved physical connectivity in the neighbourhood. In the field of energy connectivity, 
India is promoting easier movement of hydrocarbons across the region and as a part of 
this, cross-border pipelines including the India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline have been 
constructed. In the electricity sector, grid interconnection with our neighbouring countries 
is being augmented. The Committee find that India is also working on wind energy 
projects, renewable energy projects and solar power projects with some of the 
neighbouring countries. In the field of technology, the South Asia Satellite was launched in 
May 2017 and the India-Bhutan Satellite in November 2022. Tele-learning and tele-
medicine have emerged as new areas for assistance to our neighbours. Further, India is the 
educational hub and health care hub for the neighbourhood. On the economic front, 

24 
 
bilateral trade with our neighbouring countries have improved and there has been a 
quantum jump from USD 3.27 billion in 2014 to USD 14.7 billion in 2020 in India’s Lines of 
Credit to its neighbours. In fact, almost 50% of our global soft-lending goes to our partners 
in the neighbourhood. Maritime security in the region has been expanded and the security 
capacities and capabilities of some of our neighbours upgraded through India’s efforts. 
Above all, India is the first responder during many humanitarian disasters in the 
region.  The Committee acknowledge the efforts and  initiatives taken so far, however, in 
view of the incontrovertible  importance of the region to India and the potential of our 
country to contribute towards building a safe, secure, prosperous and well-connected South 
Asia, the Committee urge the Ministry to  continue to uphold the “non-reciprocal policy” 
towards its smaller neighbours in the sub-continent and its immediate perimeter in the 
fields of capacity building,  cooperation in information and digital technologies, space, 
cyber security, etc. Moreover, the Committee would like that a clear roadmap should be 
prepared for promoting trade connectivity and contact among people of neighbouring 
countries so that India can achieve global role through defined role and contribution of 
these countries. 
                                                                                           (Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
2.30    The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Government in ensuring 
continued movement of goods and people through India’s borders during the COVID-19 
lockdown facilitating the repatriation of nationals of Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal, 
Myanmar, Pakistan and other countries and in providing medicines/medical equipment to 
combat corona virus through bilateral aid as well as through its commitments in the 
SAARC. The initiative taken by India for creating a COVID-19 Emergency Fund based on 
voluntary contributions from the Member countries and the offer of 10 million US dollars 

25 
 
as unilateral contribution to the fund are highly commendable. The Committee are of the 
view that India should continue to take the lead in humanitarian outreach as such efforts 
reap good will and foster the spirit of solidarity amongst our neighbours. As countries in 
our immediate neighbourhood are prone to natural disasters like earthquake, tsunami, 
extreme weather events, etc., the Committee desire that the Ministry should also explore 
the feasibility of creating a Disaster Relief Fund on the lines of the COVID-19 Emergency 
Fund under the aegis of the Neighbourhood First Policy. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 14 ) 
2.31    The country-wise details of India’s engagements with its neighbours are enumerated 
below:- 
  
A.        Afghanistan 
  
2.32    In the last 20 years, our developmental partnership with Afghanistan has centered around 
five pillars: (a) large infrastructure projects; (b) human resource development and capacity 
building; (c) humanitarian assistance; (d) High impact community development projects; and (e) 
enhancing trade and investment through air and land connectivity. 
  
2.33    Over USD 3 billion has been committed to development efforts in Afghanistan. In August 
2021, Afghanistan witnessed a major change in its political landscape. The deterioration of 
security after the developments of August 15 prompted the Government to evacuate Indian and 
Afghan nationals from Afghanistan and to provide humanitarian assistance to Afghan people in 
need. As an immediate measure, our Ministry set up a 24x7 Special Afghanistan Cell on August 
16, 2021. India also committed to provide 50,000 MT of wheat, Covid-19 Vaccine doses and 
lifesaving drugs to the people of Afghanistan.  
  
2.34    Recently, a consignment of essential medicines has been sent to Kabul. Further, to assist 
Afghan refugees in Iran, India has already gifted one million doses of COVAXIN to the 
Government of Iran. 
  
2.35    India has been at the forefront of an effort to ensure a pivotal role for the UN in 
Afghanistan. During our rotating Presidency of the UN Security Council in August 2021, the 
UNSC met thrice to discuss the evolving situation in Afghanistan, resulting in four outcome 
documents. On 30 August 2021, the UNSC adopted Resolution (UNSCR) 2593. At the 
international level, our Ministry continues to engage with partners for ways to help and support 
the Afghan people. 
  

26 
 
2.36    Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that post 2021, with changes in the political 
regime, India's approach to Afghanistan continues to be guided by its historical friendship. In 
order to assist Afghan people, India has supplied several shipments of humanitarian assistance 
consisting of 40,000 MT of wheat, 55 tons of medicines and 500,000 doses of COVID Vaccine.  
2.37    In the wake of tragic earthquake that struck Eastern Afghanistan on June 22, 2022, India 
as a first responder, dispatched 28 tons of emergency relief assistance in two flights for the 
people of Afghanistan. 
2.38    On being asked about the quantum of investment made, aids, loans and line of credit 
offered to Afghanistan currently and whether the Government has any plan to enhance the same, 
the Ministry has stated that given the current political situation in Afghanistan, India has decided 
to provide humanitarian assistance for the people of Afghanistan.  
2.39    Regarding the details and status of projects/development projects undertaken through 
Lines of Credit/soft loans along with the amount involved in Afghanistan, the Ministry has 
informed that India has been engaged in a development partnership with Afghanistan that is 
based on the objectives of building capacities for governance; training human resource; creating 
infrastructure; enhancing connectivity; promoting trade and investment. India’s development 
partnership with Afghanistan includes more than five hundred projects spread across each of the 
34 provinces of the country. They cover critical areas such as power, water supply, road 
connectivity, healthcare, education, agriculture and capacity building.  
2.40    Large infrastructure projects completed include construction of 218 Kms road from 
Delaram to Zaranj (on Iranian border) which provides alternate connectivity for Afghanistan 
through Iran; India–Afghanistan friendship dam; and the Afghan Parliament building which was 
inaugurated in 2015, a symbol of Afghan democracy, setting up of power sub-stations at Doshi- 
Charikar in northern Afghanistan, setting up of an Afghan National Agriculture Science and 
Technology Univsersity in Kandahar, Afghanistan, amongst others. Completed projects have 
already been handed over to the Government of Afghanistan. 
2.41    The vast majority of the projects committed to by the India in Afghanistan have been 
completed and handed over. 
2.42    The details and status of connectivity projects (rail network and roads) undertaken in 
Afghanistan is as under:- 
2.43        Zaranj Delaram Project (218 kms) 
2.44  Chabahar Port: During the visit of the Prime Minister to Iran in May 2016, a Trilateral 
Agreement to establish the International Transport and Transit Corridor (Chabahar Agreement) 
was signed by India, Iran and Afghanistan. India is participating in the development of the first 
phase of the Shahid Behesti Terminal, Chabahar Port in cooperation with the Government of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran to provide sea-access to land locked countries of the region, including 
Afghanistan. 

27 
 
2.45    The Indian company, India Ports Global Limited (IPGL), through its wholly owned 
subsidiary, India Ports Global Chabahar Free Zone (IPGCFZ), took over the operations of the 
Chabahar Port w.e.f. 24.12.2018. Since then, it has handled 250 vessels, 17,203 TEUs (Twenty-
foot Equivalent Units) and 5.7 million tons of bulk and general cargo from various countries 
including Russia, Brazil, Thailand, Germany, Ukraine, Oman, Romania, Bangladesh, Australia, 
Kuwait, Uzbekistan and UAE. 
2.46    India has committed total grant assistance of USD 85 Million and a credit facility of USD 
150 Million for development of Shahid Behesti Terminal, Chabahar Port. As part of our 
commitment towards infrastructure development of  Shahid Beheshti Terminal, Chabahar Port, 
India has supplied 06 Mobile Habour Cranes (two 140 tons and four 100 tons capacity) and other 
equipment worth USD 25 Million. 
2.47    The Chabahar Port has provided much needed sea-access to the landlocked Afghanistan. 
The port has also emerged as a commercial transit hub for the region. It is a more economical 
and stable route for landlocked countries of the region to reach India and the global market. 
Recently, it facilitated the delivery of humanitarian assistance, especially during the COVID-19 
pandemic. India has utilized the Chabahar port to ship 75,000 MT of wheat as humanitarian food 
assistance to Afghanistan in 2020. Till date, a total of one lakh ten thousand tons of wheat and 
two thousand tons of pulses has been trans-shipped from India to Afghanistan. 
  
2.48    When asked to furnish the details regarding cooperation between India and Afghanistan in 
various fields and the achievements so far, the Ministry stated that post-2021, with changes in 
the political regime, India's approach to Afghanistan continues to be guided by its historical 
friendship. In order to assist Afghan people, India has supplied several shipments of 
humanitarian assistance consisting of 40,000 MT of wheat, 55 tons of medicines, 500,000 doses 
of COVID Vaccine and winter clothing. In the wake of tragic earthquake that struck Eastern 
Afghanistan on June 22,2022. India as a true first responder, dispatched 28 tons of emergency 
relief assistance in two flights for the people of Afghanistan. The relief consignments were 
handed over to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UN 
World Food Program, Indira Gandhi Children Hospital and Afghan Red Crescent Society. 
 
2.49    When the Committee enquired about the details of the Joint efforts made to stop cross 
border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and 
weapons and the outcome thereof, the Ministry responded that in view of our special historical 
and civilizational relationship with Afghan people, a decision was taken to engage with the 
current Taliban authorities to provide humanitarian assistance for welfare of the Afghan people. 
During the various official interactions, Taliban authorities have assured India of its core issues 
including that the Afghanistan’s soil should not be used for anti-Indian activities and terrorism in 
any manner. 
2.50    Furthermore, India has been at the forefront to support a pivotal role of the UN in 
Afghanistan. India held the rotating Presidency of the UN Security Council in the month of 

28 
 
August 2021. Under our Presidency, the UN Security Council met thrice to discuss the evolving 
situation in Afghanistan, resulting in four outcome documents. These included three press 
statements and a resolution. At the last of these meetings, on August 30, the Council adopted 
UNSC Resolution (UNSCR) 2593, which comprehensively addressed the main pending issues 
relating to Afghanistan. The resolution demands that the Afghan territory should not be used to 
threaten or attack any country or to shelter or train terrorists or to plan and finance terrorist acts, 
pursuant to UNSCR 1267 (1999). 
2.51    When asked about the status of India’s diplomatic relations with the Taliban regime in 
Afghanistan, the Ministry has stated India's approach to Afghanistan continues to be guided by 
its historical friendship. In order to assist Afghan people, India has supplied several shipments of 
humanitarian assistance.  
 
2.52    In June 2022, an Indian technical team was deployed at the Embassy of India, Kabul to 
monitor and coordinate India’s efforts to provide humanitarian assistance.  
2.53    India has a civilizational relationship with the Afghan people and those long-standing 
links and UNSC Resolution 2593 would continue to guide our future approach on Afghanistan. 
                                                  
 2.54 The Committee note that India’s development partnership with Afghanistan 
covers   areas such as power, water supply, road connectivity, healthcare, education, 
agriculture and capacity building running into more than five hundred projects spread 
across each of the 34 provinces of the country. India has committed over USD 3 billion for 
developments in Afghanistan. The Committee have also been informed that the majority of 
our projects in Afghanistan have been completed and handed over. The Committee further 
note that despite the changes in the political landscape of Afghanistan since August 2021, 
India continue to provide humanitarian assistance to the people of that country. Shipments 
of 40,000 MT of wheat, 55 tonnes of medicines and 500,000 doses of COVID vaccine have 
been supplied to the Afghan people. In the wake of the earthquake which struck Eastern 
Afghanistan in June, 2022, India as a true first responder had dispatched 28 tonnes of 
emergency relief assistance to the Afghan people. In view of the long standing civilizational 
relationship with the Afghan people, the Committee desire that the Government should 
continue as per the past practice to provide humanitarian assistance to the people of 

29 
 
Afghanistan in times of need. As far as pending projects committed earlier are concerned, 
concerted efforts should be made to complete them and hand them over at the earliest 
possible and also keep our arms open for other diplomatic gestures in the changed political 
scenario. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 15 ) 
2.55    Under India’s Presidency, the UN Security Council met thrice to discuss the evolving 
situation in Afghanistan, resulting in four outcome documents. These included three press 
statements and a resolution. At the last of these meetings on 30 August 2021, the Council 
adopted UNSC Resolution 2593, which demands that the Afghan territory should not be 
used to threaten or attack any country or to shelter or train terrorists or to plan and 
finance terrorist acts. In view of the urgent need to prevent cross-border terrorism in the 
country, the Committee urge the Ministry to make diplomatic efforts for implementation of 
the said Resolution in letter and spirit so that terrorist networks and safe havens are not 
nurtured in the soil of Afghanistan.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 16 ) 
  
B.        Bangladesh 
2.56    India and Bangladesh share an international border of more than 4000 km. Five States-
Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura and West Bengal border Bangladesh. The land boundary 
has been amicably settled between the two sides with the ratification of the historic protocol to 
Land Boundary Agreement in 2015.  
2.57    Prime Ministers of both countries have met 13 times since 2015. In 2021, both countries 
celebrated 50 years of diplomatic relations, Golden Jubilee of Bangladesh’s liberation and the 
birth centenary of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. After the historic State visits by the 
President and the Prime Minister to Bangladesh in 2021, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid a 
State Visit to India on 5-8 September 2022 at the invitation of our Prime Minister. 
2.58    Some of the recent notable developments include the unveiling of the Unit-I of Maitree 
Super Thermal Power Plant, inauguration of the Rupsha railway bridge, one of the longest rail 

30 
 
bridges in Bangladesh as well as the completion of the four trial runs of the 2018 Agreement on 
the Use of Chattogram and Mongla Ports. 
2.59    Bangladesh is India’s largest development partner. India became the top development 
cooperation partner for Bangladesh in terms of funds disbursement during the last financial year. 
India has extended concessional credits amounting to almost USD 10 billion to Bangladesh, 
including through three of its largest bilateral Lines of Credit,  in various sectors including roads, 
railways, shipping, ports and power. 
2.60    Bilateral trade touched a record high of USD 18.14 billion in FY 2021-22, witnessing a 
record increase of 68% against the trade of USD 10.8 billion in FY 2020-21. Bangladesh is 
India’s largest trade partner in South Asia and India has become the largest export destination for 
Bangladesh in Asia. 
2.61    With the operationalization of the Haldibari (India) – Chilahati (Bangladesh) rail link, five 
out of six pre-1965 rail links have been revived between India and Bangladesh. Third passenger 
train service “Mitali Express” from New Jalpaiguri to Dhaka was flagged off by the two rail 
Ministers on 1 June 2022. Inland Water connectivity between two sides has also been 
strengthened with both sides signing the 2nd Addendum to the Protocol on Inland Water Transit 
and Trade in May, 2020. Trade through protocol routes is cost effective and an environmentally 
cleaner mode of transportation. Both sides are accordingly undertaking dredging of certain routes 
in Bangladesh to improve navigability. 
2.62    There is active cooperation between various agencies of both countries working jointly to 
combat illicit drug trafficking, fake currency, human trafficking, and cooperate on police matters, 
anti-corruption activities, among others. Mechanisms for the peaceful and cooperative 
management of the 4,096 kms-long international border are also actively focused on border 
fencing, joint inspection of boundary pillars, joint boundary demarcation including of riverine 
boundaries, among others. 
2.63    Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that during the recent State Visit of Prime 
Minister Sheikh Hasina, both sides acknowledged the importance of leveraging the potential of 
new and emerging areas of cooperation and directed authorities on both sides to augment 
cooperation in cutting edge areas of peaceful use of outer space, green energy, peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and technology enabled services in finance, health and education.  
  
2.64    It was agreed to collaborate in new areas of cooperation, such as, environment, climate 
change, cyber security, ICT, space technology, green energy and blue economy. Both sides are 
looking at cooperation to strengthen trade and economic ties including through a bilateral 
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CEPA).  
2.65    On the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement with Bangladesh, the Foreign 
Secretary during the course of evidence on 19 December 2022 stated as under:- 

31 
 
  
“We are also working to launch negotiations on the Comprehensive 
Economic       Partnership Agreement with Bangladesh. This is still being discussed 
between the two     commerce ministries. We do not have a clear landing zone on the start 
date for it but this is something which is in the works, of course, the increasing 
connectivity which I mentioned……,integrated check post, cross border rail networks, 
road networks,waterways connectivity, and, of course, air connectivity is a given”. 
2.66    When asked about the quantum of investment made, aids, loans and line of credit offered 
to Bangladesh currently and whether the Government has any plan to enhance the same, the 
Ministry has stated that USD 3.55 billion of Indian investment proposals have been registered 
with the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority. India has extended concessional credits 
amounting to almost USD 10 billion to Bangladesh, including through bilateral Lines of Credit 
worth USD 7.862 billion and USD 1.6 billion under Concessional Financing Scheme. 
                                          
2.67    Regarding the details and status of projects/development projects undertaken through 
Lines of Credit/soft loans along with the amount involved, the Ministry has informed that 
Bangladesh is India’s largest development partner. India has extended concessional credits 
amounting to almost USD 10 billion to Bangladesh, including through Lines of Credit, worth 
USD 7.862 billion (Rs. 59,000 crores), comprising around 25% of India’s entire LOC portfolio. 
These include LOCs of USD 862 million (LOC-I), USD 2 billion (LOC-II), USD 4.5 billion 
(LOC-III) covering 42 projects across a wide range of sectors like roads, railways, ports, airport, 
power, urban development, special economic zones, information technology, and renewable 
energy.  
  
2.68    In addition there is a separate LOC of USD 500 million dedicated only for defence related 
projects.  Out of the 42 projects covered under the three LOCs, 14 projects have already been 
completed, while 8 projects are currently under execution. 7 projects are under tendering, while 
13 projects are under preparation stage. USD 1.6 billion is also being provided to Bangladesh 
under Concessional Financing Scheme.  
  
2.69    In addition to LOCs, India has also been providing grant assistance to Bangladesh for 
various infrastructure projects including, construction of Akhaura-Agartala rail link, dredging of 
inland waterways in Bangladesh and construction of India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline for 
supply of High Speed Diesel into Bangladesh.  
2.70    High Impact Community Development Projects (HICDPs) constitute an active pillar of 
India’s development assistance. India has funded 74 HICDPs including construction of student 
hostels, academic buildings, skill development and training institutes, cultural centers, and 
orphanages as well as various heritage restoration projects. 
2.71    Regarding connectivity projects (rail network and roads), GoI is undertaking 6 rail 
connectivity projects worth USD 1514.3 Million through Line of Credit (LOC) in Bangladesh. 

32 
 
The projects are Khulna-Mongla Railway Project (USD 388.93 Million),  Dhaka-Tongyi-
Joydebpur Railway Line Project (USD 235.10 Million), Kulaura-Shahbazpur Railway Project 
(USD 78.10 Million), Khulna-Darsana Railway Project (USD 312.48 Million), Parbatipur-
Kaunia Railway Line Project (USD 120.41 Million) and Bogra-Shaheed M Monsur Ali Railway  
Line project (USD 379.29 Million).  
2.72    GoI has also sponsored 4 Road connectivity projects worth USD 872 Million (funded by 
LOC). These are improvement of Ashuganj River Port-Sarail-Dharkhar-Akhaura Land Port Road 
- a 4 Lane national Highway project (USD 50.58 Million), 4 laning of Benapole-Jessore-Narail-
Bhatiapara-Bhanga Road Project (USD 100 Million), 4 laning of Ramgarh to Baruerhat road 
(USD 80.06 Million) and 4 laning of Comilla (Mynamoti)- Brahmanbaria-Sarail road project 
(USD 345.37 Million).  
  
2.73    GoI has also sponsored 1 Rail connectivity project worth INR 1101.25 crore (Akhaura-
Agartala Rail Link Project) of which the Bangladesh portion is being undertaken through a GoI 
grant of INR 392.52 crore. 
2.74    The Ministry has provided the following details regarding cooperation between India and 
Bangladesh in various fields and the achievements so far:- 
2.75    Heritage Restoration Projects: Several heritage restoration projects have been undertaken 
under High Impact Community Development Projects in Bangladesh through grant assistance. 
Reconstruction work at National Sree Sree Ramna Kalimandir & Sree Maa Anandamoyee 
Ashram in Dhaka, reconstruction of Shree Shree Kanailal Jiur Mondir in Narsingdi and 
reconstruction of Sri Sri Radha Gobindo Jiu Mandir in Jamalpur are complete. Restoration of 
Rabindranath Tagore’s Shiladaha Kuthibari has also been undertaken through HICDP. 
  
2.76    Capacity building and Human Resource Development: An important ITEC partner 
country, Bangladesh annually sees around 800 participants availing benefits of the ITEC training 
courses.In March 2021, India announced 1000 “Suborno Jayanti Scholarships” for Bangladeshi 
students and in February 2022, a dedicated website was launched for desirous Bangladeshi 
students wanting to study in premier Govt of India educational institutes, including the IITs and 
NIITs, and pursue under-graduation, post-graduation and M.Phil/ PhD courses.  
  
2.77    Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: We have offered HADR assistance to 
Bangladesh as and when required. India also participates in the annual multi-national disaster 
relief exercise conducted in Bangladesh as well as other HADR exercises conducted under aegis 
of multi-lateral forums. India gifted 3.3 million Covishield vaccines to Bangladesh to assist in its 
ongoing effort to fight against the pandemic. This is the largest tranche of Made-in-India Covid 
vaccines gifted to any country by India. Government of Bangladesh, BEXIMCO 
Pharmaceuticals Limited of Bangladesh and the Serum Institute of India (SII) signed a trilateral 
MOU to commercially procure 30 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine from the SII. Two 

33 
 
‘Mobile Oxygen Plants’ were gifted to Bangladesh with the help of INS Savitri in September 
2021. India operated ‘Oxygen Express’ trains to transport Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) in 
railway containers, as part of commercial purchases made by Bangladesh. 20 such trains 
operated during the second wave of Covid-19.  
2.78    ITEC assistance:  An important ITEC partner country, Bangladesh annually sees around 
800 participants availing benefits of the ITEC training courses.  
  
2.79    Defence and Maritime Security Cooperation: There is a robust defence partnership with 
Bangladesh with deepening engagements at all levels. Bangladesh Armed forces personnel 
undergo various training courses including certain customized and tailor made courses related to 
defence in India. Both sides also held Annual Defence Dialogue chaired by Defence Secretaries 
as well as talks between respective services.  
2.80    Operational interactions include annual bilateral and Special Forces exercises apart from 
training visits at each other defence services establishments. In addition, high level, functional 
and Subject Matter Expert Exchanges (SMEE) further strengthen the relationship. To enhance 
Maritime security cooperation and to combat transnational illegal activities at sea, a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Indian Coast Guard and Bangladesh Coast 
Guard was signed in June 2015. Furthermore we also have offered a USD 500 million Line of 
credit to Bangladesh. 
2.81    Trade:  Bilateral trade touched a record high of USD 18.14 billion in FY 2021-22, 
witnessing a record increase of 68% against the trade of USD 10.8 billion in FY 2020-21. 
Bangladesh is India’s largest trade partner in South Asia and India has become the largest export 
destination for Bangladesh in Asia. A Joint Study Report for CEPA between both countries has 
been finalized and it was announced to start the CEPA negotiations during the visit of Prime 
Minister Sheikh Hasina to India in September 2022. Department of Commerce has announced 
that the negotiations will be commencing soon. 
2.82    Technology: Technology has been one of the key areas of cooperation between India and 
Bangladesh. Recently during the VVIP visit of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, India and 
Bangladesh Signed 3 MoUs to boost bilateral technology cooperation, the first is MoU on 
Collaboration in IT systems and applications for Bangladesh Railways, second is MoU on 
Scientific and Technological Cooperation between Council for Scientific & Industrial Research 
(CSIR), India and Bangladesh Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (BCSIR) and last one 
is MoU on Cooperation in the Areas of Space Technology. MoUs between the two countries 
promote cooperation in the areas of e-governance, m-Governance, e-public services delivery, 
cyber security, software technology parks, start-ups etc. India and Bangladesh are involved in 
talks to explore new areas of technological cooperation like start-up ecosystem, cyber-security, 
emerging technologies, Fintech Sector (particularly UPI), and tech-skilling. A start-up delegation 
from Bangladesh will visit India soon. This was also announced during the recent VVIP visit.  

34 
 
2.83    Tourism: People-to-people relations are another critical element of our relationship, with 
Bangladesh today as India’s largest world-wide visa operations. Prior to the pandemic, close to 
1.7 million visas were issued to visitors from Bangladesh. There are buses and flights operational 
between both countries for enabling better tourism. Large number of visitors come to India from 
Bangladesh seeking medical treatment.  
2.84    On the issue of pending disputes between India and Bangladesh and the fresh initiatives 
and meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has 
informed that with the exchange of Instruments of Ratification of the India-Bangladesh Land 
Boundary Agreement on 6 June 2015, the land boundary between India and Bangladesh have 
been settled. There are established bilateral mechanisms such as Joint Boundary Working Group 
and Joint Boundary Conference which are held at regular intervals to discuss boundary related 
issues.  
2.85    Regarding the Teesta Issue, India is committed to sign the agreement as and when there is 
consensus on this issue. 
                                                 
2.86    Regarding improvement and strengthening of border under the Neighbourhood First 
Policy, the Ministry has informed that efforts are being undertaken to strengthen the border 
infrastructure by opening and upgrading infrastructure at Integrated Check Posts (ICPs)/ Stations 
(LCS) and border haats at India-Bangladesh border. There are bilateral working mechanisms to 
discuss infrastructural and capacity constraints and procedural issues at border under the 
mechanisms of Sub-group on Infrastructure of ICPs/LCS, Commerce Secretary level talks 
(CSLT) and Joint Group on Customs(JGC) meetings. India-Bangladesh border has a network of 
36 customs stations which includes 4 ICP and 5 Rail Custom Stations. Work is ongoing for 
upgradation of 6 more LCSs to ICPs on the India-Bangladesh border.  
  
2.87    When the Committee enquired about Joint efforts made so far to stop cross border 
terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons 
and outcome of the same, the Ministry responded that these are issues which are discussed at 
established bilateral institutional mechanisms. The issue of illegal migration into India and 
related policy matters come under the purview of Ministry of Home Affairs. MEA assists the 
concerned State Government and MHA to verify the nationality of the individuals for their 
repatriation. MEA has also raised the issue of repatriation of illegal migrants with the 
Government of Bangladesh from time to time. 
2.88    On the efforts being made by the Government to tackle the refugee crisis in India due to 
illegal migration; smuggling and trafficking in drugs and cross-border terrorism, the Ministry has 
informed that the issue of illegal migration into India and related policy matters come under the 
purview of Ministry of Home Affairs. MEA assists the concerned State Governments and MHA 
to verify the nationality of the individuals for their repatriation. MEA has also raised the issue of 
repatriation of illegal migrants with the Government of Bangladesh from time to time. Issues like 

35 
 
trafficking of drugs and other cross-border security concerns are dealt through relevant bilateral 
institutional mechanisms with Bangladesh.   
2.89    Regarding the areas identified for further strengthening India’s relationship with 
Bangladesh under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that apart from 
ongoing cooperation in areas such as connectivity, security, water-sharing, energy & power, 
cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy, space cooperation, new technologies etc.  
2.90    The major initiatives taken by India in the field of defence and security/maritime security 
cooperation and cooperation in energy, health and education sectors with Bangladesh under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and the achievement so far,  is as under:-  
2.91    Defence and security/ maritime security cooperation: We have a robust defence 
partnership with Bangladesh with deepening engagements at all levels. A large number of 
training slots are provided to all Bangladesh Armed Forces. There are regular high level and 
functional visits as well as exchanges.  
  
2.92    Both Navies have an annual bilateral exercise, coordinated patrol and Special Forces 
exercise in addition to their ships frequently visiting each other’s ports. In addition, high level, 
functional, training visits and SMEEs strengthen the relationship. Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between Indian Coast Guard and Bangladesh Coast Guard was signed in 
June 2015 to combat transnational illegal activities at sea.  
2.93    Cooperation in energy, health and education sectors: Cooperation in the energy and power 
sector has become one of the hallmarks of India-Bangladesh relations. India-Bangladesh 
Friendship Pipeline connecting Siliguri to Parbatipur in Bangladesh is being built through a grant 
from GOI to meet the requirements of refined petroleum products in Bangladesh. Recently, 
IOCL has been registered as a G2G supplier for supply of POL products to Bangladesh. 
2.94    During the April 2017 visit of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina to India, a financing 
agreement was signed for construction of 36 community clinics in Bangladesh under GoI’s Grant 
assistance of BDT 9 crores (approx. INR 7.78 crores). These clinics have been constructed in 
remote areas of 5 different districts of Bangladesh namely Sunamganj district and Habiganj 
district of Sylhet division, Jamalpur district & Sherpur district of Mymensingh division and 
Brahmanbaria district of Chittagong division. There are working bilateral mechanisms of 
cooperation in healthcare sector between India and Bangladesh such as JWG on cooperation in 
healthcare.   
  
2.95    Bangladesh annually sees around 800 participants availing benefits of the ITEC training 
courses. In March 2021, India announced 1000 “Suborno Jayanti Scholarships” for Bangladeshi 
students and in February 2022, a dedicated website was launched for desirous Bangladeshi 

36 
 
students wanting to study in premier Govt of India educational institutes, including the IITs and 
NIITs, and pursue under-graduation, post-graduation and M.Phil/PhD courses.  
2.96    On being asked about the details and outcome of capacity building measures and 
technological cooperation between India and Bangladesh during the last three years and in the 
current year, the Ministry has stated that an important ITEC partner country, Bangladesh 
annually sees around 800 participants availing benefits of the ITEC training courses.In addition, 
during this period total 38 customized/ specific courses were organized for Bangladesh including 
Covid Management courses (in Bengali language); Electronic and Digital Media Management 
for Young Journalists; Special training programmes for Bangladesh Teachers on IT; Web 
Designing and Pedagogy etc. In March 2021, India announced 1000 “Suborno Jayanti 
Scholarships” for Bangladeshi students and in February 2022, a dedicated website was launched 
for desirous Bangladeshi students wanting to study in premier Govt of India 
educationalinstitutes, including the IITs and NIITs, and pursue under-graduation, post-graduation 
and M.Phil/PhD courses. 
2.97    When the Committee specifically observed that Bangladesh is going through an economic 
slowdown and enquired whether the Government has sought any assistance from India or India 
has increased its quantum of investment, aids, loans or any other assistance, the Ministry 
responded that Bangladesh remains India’s largest development partner with a development 
cooperation portfolio of approximately USD 10 billion which includes concessional loans and 
grants for various projects. Bangladesh has requested for predictable supply of the essential food 
commodities such as rice, wheat, sugar, onion, ginger and garlic from India.  It has been 
conveyed during the visit of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina to India in September 2022 that 
Bangladesh’s requests will be favourably considered based on prevalent supply conditions in 
India and all efforts will be made in this regard. The Bangladesh side also requested the Indian 
side to assist in meeting its domestic requirement for petroleum products. The decision of the 
Bangladesh side to enlist Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) as a registered G2G supplier of 
refined petroleum products to Bangladesh was a step in that direction. 
  
 
2.98    The Committee note that India and Bangladesh enjoy a robust partnership and 2021 
saw their diplomatic relations completing 50 years. Acknowledging the importance of 
leveraging the potential of new and emerging areas of cooperation, India and Bangladesh 
have agreed to collaborate in new areas of cooperation, such as, environment, climate 
change, cyber security, ICT, space technology, green energy and blue economy. Presently, 
both countries are looking forward to strengthening their trade and economic ties through 

37 
 
a bilateral Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement. As per the Ministry, a Joint 
Study Report on the Agreement has been finalized and the negotiations would be 
commencing soon. The Committee, hence, desire that the Comprehensive Economic 
Cooperation Agreement with Bangladesh, be finalized at the earliest and commence 
negotiations on the same for its early implementation within a time frame. 
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 17 ) 
 2.99    The Committee note that with the exchange of Instruments of Ratification of the 
India-Bangladesh Land Boundary Agreement on 6 June 2015, the land boundary between 
India and Bangladesh have been settled. Mechanisms for the peaceful and cooperative 
management of the 4,096 kms long international border are also actively focused on border 
fencing, joint inspection of boundary pillars, joint boundary demarcation including of 
riverine boundaries, among others. The Committee feel that there should be better 
management of the Indo-Bangladesh Border to prevent infiltration, cross-border 
smuggling, etc. and desire that the bilateral mechanisms for management of this long 
border should be strengthened. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the status of 
border fencing and the demarcation of riverine boundaries between India and Bangladesh. 
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                (Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
2.100  The Committee are aware of the long outstanding issue between India and 
Bangladesh on sharing of Teesta River water and desire that this important issue be 
worked out at the earliest for improved bilateral relations with Bangladesh. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to initiate meaningful dialogues with Bangladesh on a 
regular basis to arrive at a consensus in the matter and the progress/outcome may be 
informed to the Committee. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 19 ) 

38 
 
2.101  The Committee find that Bangladesh being India’s largest development partner, 
concessional credits amounting to almost USD 10 billion has been extended to them, 
including Lines of Credit (LOC) worth USD 7.862 billion (Rs. 59,000 crores), comprising 
around 25% of India’s entire LOC portfolio. These include LOCs of USD 862 million 
(LOC-I), USD 2 billion (LOC-II), USD 4.5 billion (LOC-III) covering 42 projects across a 
wide range of sectors. In addition, there is a separate LOC of USD 500 million dedicated 
only for defence related projects.  Out of the 42 projects covered under the three LOCs, 14 
projects have already been completed; 8 projects are currently under execution; 7 projects 
are under tendering and 13 projects are under preparation stage. Besides, Concessional 
Financing Scheme of USD 1.6 billion is also being provided to Bangladesh. In addition to 
LOCs, India has also been providing grant assistance to Bangladesh for various 
infrastructure projects including construction of Akhaura-Agartala rail link, dredging of 
inland waterways and construction of India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline for supply of 
High Speed Diesel into Bangladesh. 74 High Impact Community Development Projects 
including construction of student hostels, academic buildings, skill development and 
training institutes, cultural centers, orphanages as well as various heritage restoration 
projects have also been funded by India. The Committee feel that the benefits of our 
development partnerships with Bangladesh can best be reaped through timely and effective 
implementation of these projects. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to take effective steps 
for timely completion of all the projects including projects taken up under Lines of Credit 
through regular and intensive monitoring.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
2.102  The Committee note that recently three MoUs have been signed between India and 
Bangladesh viz. MoU on Collaboration in IT systems and applications for Bangladesh 
Railways; MoU on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between Council for Scientific 

39 
 
& Industrial Research, India and Bangladesh Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 
and MoU on Cooperation in the Areas of Space Technology, to boost bilateral technology 
cooperation. Talks to explore new areas of technological cooperation like start-up 
ecosystem, cyber-security, emerging technologies, Fintech Sector (particularly UPI) and 
tech-skilling are also on between India and Bangladesh. The Committee desire that the 
MoUs and talks may result in enhanced cooperation between the two countries in various  
areas.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 21  ) 
2.103  The Committee observe that efforts are being undertaken to strengthen the border 
infrastructure by opening and upgrading Integrated Check Posts (ICPs)/Land Customs 
Stations (LCS) and border haats at India-Bangladesh border. They also understand that 
infrastructural capacity constraints and procedural issues at border are discussed under 
the mechanisms of Sub-group on Infrastructure of ICPs/LCS, Commerce Secretary Level 
Talks (CSLT) and Joint Group on Customs (JGC) meetings. Presently, the work for 
upgradation of 6 more LCSs to ICPs on the India-Bangladesh border is on. In view of the 
importance of strengthening the infrastructure at the India-Bangladesh border from 
security and economic/trade perspective, the Committee urge the Government to open 
more ICPs/LCS as well as border haats, wherever required and upgrade the existing ones. 
Bilateral working mechanisms to discuss infrastructural and capacity constraints and 
procedural issues at border may also be strengthened.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 22 ) 
 2.104  The Committee are concerned to note the recurring instances of cross border 
terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and 
weapons from across Bangladesh Border. The Ministry of External Affairs has been 

40 
 
raising the issue of illegal migration but with no outcome and the bilateral institutional 
mechanism has also not been capable enough to tackle the situation. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the existing bilateral institutional mechanisms to control all these 
issues should be strengthened to make it effective. They also desire that MEA should work 
in close coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the State Governments 
concerned to address the issue of  illegal migration by monitoring the demographic changes 
taking place in Indo-Bangladesh border villages and other parts of the country due to such 
migration and take up the issue of repatriation of such illegal migrants with the 
Government of Bangladesh at the highest level for an early resolution. 
                                                                                           (Recommendation Sl. No. 23 ) 
 2.105  The Committee observe that apart from ongoing cooperation in areas such as 
connectivity, security, water-sharing and energy, cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, space cooperation, new technologies, etc. have been identified as the areas for 
further strengthening of India’s relationship with Bangladesh under the Neighbourhood 
First Policy. The Committee expect that the Government would come up with fresh 
mutually beneficial initiatives in these areas and implement the same for enhanced bilateral 
ties and growth and prosperity of both the countries. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 24 ) 
 C.        Bhutan 
2.106  Bhutan remains India’s closest neighbour and partner with deepening ties by the day. 
India’s financial and technical support in line with the Policy has helped advance Bhutan’s 
developmental parameters significantly, and the Kingdom is expected to soon graduate to 
Middle-Income Country status.  
  
2.107  There is also close cooperation between the two countries in the multilateral fora. Without 
exception, Bhutan has been extending support for all of India’s candidatures at various regional 
and multilateral fora. 

41 
 
  
2.108  New areas of cooperation have been identified in line with the ‘Neighbourhood First 
Policy’ to include, space sector, digital connectivity, science and emerging technologies, tertiary 
education, and financial connectivity.  During the pandemic, India was prompt in assisting 
Bhutan with 13 consignments of medical aid to Bhutan, including 550,000 vaccine doses. 
  
2.109  In Bhutan, during the 12thFive Year Plan (2018-23), 82 major and 524 small High-Impact 
Community Development Projects of bilateral cooperation were implemented with assistance 
from the Government of India.  
2.110  Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that hydro-power development is a vital 
catalyst for socio-economic development of Bhutan. Till date, India has constructed four major 
hydro-electric power projects (HEPs) in Bhutan totaling 2136 MW. Keeping at pace with time 
the relationship is diversifying into new and emerging areas of financial as well as digital 
connectivity, space cooperation. 
2.111  During the visit of Prime Minister to Bhutan in August 2019, both countries agreed to 
expand bilateral cooperation in new areas of space, digital connectivity, health, youth exchanges 
and tertiary education. Special emphasis is laid on Youth Exchanges, as well as cooperation in 
Tertiary Education with signing of 04 MoUs in Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) areas between the Royal University of Bhutan and the premier educational 
institutes of India- IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Bombay and NIT Silchar in August 2019.  
2.112  A new M.Tech scholarship (03 slots annually) at IIT Kanpur was instituted from the 
academic year 2020 onward for three Bhutanese students.  In 2020, GoI has established ‘India-
Bhutan e-Library Project’ in all districts of Bhutan with support from Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing (C-DAC). This Project is in sync with the Digital Druk Yul Education 
Flagship Programmes of the Government of Bhutan. 
2.113  The India-Bhutan SAT, jointly developed by India and Bhutan was launched into space 
on 26 November 2022 by ISRO's Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The PSLV C54 carried 
the India-Bhutan SAT, along with India's Earth Observation Satellite -06 and other satellites 
from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, India. It is a new chapter in our advancing 
development partnership. 
2.114  When asked about the quantum of investment made, aids, loans and line of credit offered 
to Bhutan currently and the plan to enhance the same, the Ministry stated that India has 
committed an assistance of Rs. 4500 crores as support to the 12th  Five Year Plan of Bhutan 
(2018 – 2023). A Transitional Trade Support Facility of Rs. 400 crores, and Mangdechhu Tariff 
Adjustment of Rs. 100 crores has also been given to Bhutan during Bhutan’s current plan period. 
  
2.115  India is funding the development of 1200 MW Punatsangchhu – I (40% grant and 60% 
loan) and 1020 MW Punatsangchhu – II HEPs (30% grant and 70% loan) in Bhutan. GoI has 

42 
 
extended a Standby Credit Facility of Rs. 700 Crores at an interest rate of 2.5% in 2022. A 
Currency Swap facility of USD 200 million over and above the existing swap facility of USD 
200 million was offered by RBI to Royal Monetary Authority in 2022.   
  
2.116  India is the leading source of investments in Bhutan, comprising 47% of the country’s 
total FDI. In 2019, FDI from India was USD 10.53 million. A proposal is under examination by 
RBI in consultation with RGoB for the establishment of a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Bank 
of Bhutan (which has 20% shares by SBI), in India. This will be the first such overseas 
financial/banking venture by Bhutan. 
2.117  Regarding the details and status of projects/development projects undertaken through 
Lines of Credit/soft loans along with the amount involved in Bhutan, the Ministry has informed 
that India is funding the Punatsangchhu – I HEP at a cost of Rs. 9375.5 crores (40% grant and 
60% loan) and Punatsangchhu – II HEP at a cost of Rs. 8967 crores under consideration (30% 
grant and 70% loan). In the past, GoI has funded the construction of 336 MW Chukha, 60 MW 
Kurichhu, 1020 MW Tala and 720 MW Mangdechhu HEPs. 
2.118  On being asked about the details and status of connectivity projects (rail network and 
roads) in Bhutan, the Ministry has informed that a preliminary study for construction of a railway 
line between Gelephu (Bhutan) and and Kokrajhar (India) is being carried out by the Ministry of 
Railways for establishing rail connectivity between India and Bhutan. Air Travel Bubble 
Arrangement between India and Bhutan was established on 18 September 2020.  
 
2.119  In digital and financial connectivity, several steps have been undertaken in last few years. 
Complete inter-operability of RuPay card with Bhutan has been achieved with the launch of 
Phase-II of RuPay card in October 2020. BHIM App was also launched in Bhutan on 13 July 
2021 by the Finance Ministers of both countries.  It would help Bhutanese shops to seamlessly 
transact with Indian nationals who travel to Bhutan in large numbers as tourists. 
2.120  Interconnection between India’s Knowledge Network (NKN) and Druk Research & 
Education Network (DrukREN) was established during PM’s visit to Bhutan in August 2019 and 
the bandwidth from 1 GBPS to 5 GBPS has been increased in May 2022 in anticipation of the 
increase in demand. For physical connectivity, Land-port Authority of India is in the process of 
finalizing land for the construction of Integrated Checkpost at Jaigaon. In November 2021, India 
formalised the opening of seven new trade routes for Bhutan’s bilateral and transit trade with 
India. 
2.121  The Ministry has provided the following details regarding cooperation between India and 
Bhutan in various fields and the achievements so far:- 
2.122  Heritage Restoration Projects: India has funded major heritage restoration projects such as 
Restoration of Simtokha Dzong, Restoration of Para Ta Dzong (National Museum), 
Reconstruction of Lingzhi Dzong, Reconstruction of Wangduephodrang Dzong.  

43 
 
2.123  Capacity Building and Human Resources Development: India is an important partner of 
Bhutan in capacity building and human resources development. Presently, India offers a number 
of scholarships to Bhutan, including the well-known Ambassador’s Scholarship, prestigious 
Nehru Wangchuck Scholarship, Five-Year Plan project-tied assistance based Undergraduate 
Scholarship, Nalanda University Scholarship, ICCR Undergraduate Engineering scholarships, 
IIT Kanpur scholarship and AYUSH scholarships, Over 1100 Bhutanese students benefit from 
these scholarships.  
2.124  India also provides training to Bhutanese civil servants and professionals from private 
sector. Approximately 20 Bhutanese civil service officers get training at the premier Indian   
administrative and special training institutions and academies every year. Bhutan is allotted 325 
in-person training slots for upgrading administrative and technical skills of government officials 
and private sector employees.  
2.125  At the request of Royal Government of Bhutan, a special customised ITEC progamme for 
training 100 Bhutanese young entrepreneurs at the prestigious Entrepreneurship Development 
Institute of India (EDII), Ahmedabad started in September 2022.  Teachers from India are 
recruited by Bhutan for school as well as college education. As on date, there are almost 100 
teachers, lecturers and professors from India sharing their knowledge in schools and colleges of 
Bhutan including 2 Indian lecturers who are on deputation under the TCS-Colombo Plan Scheme 
administered by the Development Partnership Administration of the Ministry of External Affairs. 
India has recently launched new STEM-based cooperation initiatives, beyond the traditional 
realms of cooperation, and in line with the priorities of the Royal Government of Bhutan.  
2.126  Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: Bhutan was the first country to receive the 
Made in India Covishield vaccines under Ministry of External Affairs Vaccine Maitri Initiative. 
The first consignment of 150,000 vaccines was gifted on January 20, 2021. On March 22, 2021, 
the India gifted a second consignment of 400,000 doses of the ‘Made in India’ vaccines to the 
Royal Government of Bhutan in keeping with the uniquely close and friendly relations between 
both countries. The total number of 550,000 doses of Covishield were given to Bhutan on a grant 
basis. In addition to 02 consignments of vaccines, the India has delivered 12 medical 
consignments to Bhutan containing essential medicines including Paracetamol, Cetrizine, 
Hydroxychloroquine and medical equipment including PPE kits, N95 masks, RT-PCR test kits 
and 07 portable digital x-ray machines to Bhutan. The 12th medical consignment was handed 
over by EAM to Bhutan on 29th April 2022 during his visit.  
2.127 ITEC Programmes: Every year, a large number of Bhutanese government officials, 
professionals and others undertake ITEC training programmes administered by the Development 
Partnership Administration Division of the Ministry External Affairs. While prior to April 2020, 
Bhutanese nationals were training through in-person physical ITEC programmes; thereafter they 
are undertaking e-ITEC training programmes offered by the Ministry of External Affairs. 

44 
 
2.128  In recent times, the focus has been on developing customized ITEC programmes 
specifically for Bhutanese nationals. In 2020-2021, 250 Bhutanese nationals benefited from the 
e-ITEC training programmes. This number increased to 340 in 2021-22. In 2022, GOI also 
customised special ITEC progammes for training 100 Bhutanese young entrepreneurs at the 
prestigious Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India (EDII), Ahmedabad and 30 
entrepreneurs at the Indian Institute of Packaging. 
 2.129  Trade, Technology and Tourism:  India has consistently been Bhutan’s top trading 
partner. Since 2014, India’s trade with Bhutan has almost tripled from USD 484 million in 2014-
15 to USD 1422 million in 2021-22, accounting for about 80% of Bhutan’s overall trade, with 
the balance of trade in India’s favour.  
2.130  Considering the vital importance to connect farmers in Bhutan with agricultural markets, 
in 2020-21, GoI formalised the opening of seven new trade routes for Bhutan’s bilateral and 
transit trade with India. New market access was also provided for allowing formal export of 12 
agri-products from Bhutan to India (apple, arecanut, ginger, mandarin, potato, cabbage, 
cauliflower, chilli, carrot, soybean, beans, and snow pea) and three agri-products from India to 
Bhutan (okra, onion, and tomato). 
2.131  On the issue of pending disputes between India and Bhutan and the fresh initiatives and 
meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has informed 
that the India-Bhutan boundary is settled. 
 
2.132  Regarding improvement and strengthening of border with Bhutan under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has informed as under:-  
2.133  Entry/Exit points: In line with our ‘Neighbourhood First Policy’, in 2020-21, GoI 
formalised the opening of seven new trade routes for Bhutan’s bilateral and transit trade with 
India, viz. Nagarkata (conversion from temporary to permanent LCS without commodity 
restrictions), Agartala, Pandu riverine port, Jogighopa riverine port, Torsha Tea Garden/Ahllay 
corresponding to Jaigaon/ Phuentsholing, Kamardwisa (Rangapani) and Birpara. GoI also 
opened the first Plant Quarantine (PQ) centre at Jaigaon across Phuentsholing (Bhutan) to 
facilitate the seamless export of Bhutanese agri-commodities to India. LPAI is working on 
finalization of land offered for construction of Integrated Check Post at Jaigaon. 
2.134  Railway: A preliminary study for construction of a railway line between Gelephu 
(Bhutan) and and Kokrajhar (India) is being carried out by the Ministry of Railways for 
establishing rail connectivity between India and Bhutan. 
2.135  When enquired whether Joint efforts have been to stop cross border terrorism, illegal 
migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons, the Ministry 
responded that India shares open border of over 699 km with Bhutan across 4 Indian states 
(Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh).  There are machinists to discuss the 

45 
 
border related issues for better border management and enhanced security cooperation. Two 
Border District Coordination meeting between Bhutan and State of Assam and West Bengal 
separately take place annually. Bhutan Security forces and SSB are in close coordination for 
addressing and sharing the information on smuggling, drugs, fake Indian currency, trafficking, 
etc. 
2.136  On the efforts being made by the Government to tackle the refugee crisis in India due to 
illegal migration; smuggling and trafficking in drugs and cross-border terrorism, the Ministry has 
informed that India shares open border of over 699 km with Bhutan across 4 Indian states 
(Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh).  Cross Border Issues pertaining to 
Migration, smuggling and trafficking in drugs and cross – border terrorism are discussed 
bilaterally under the Border Districts Coordination Meeting Mechanism. Two Border District 
Coordination meeting between Bhutan and State of Assam and West Bengal separately take 
place annually. The 25th Border District Coordination Meeting held between Royal Government 
of Bhutan and State Government of West Bengal on 28-29 September 2022. The 12th Border 
District Coordination Meeting held between Royal Government of Bhutan and State Government 
of Assam was held on 22-23 December 2022.  
 2.137  Regarding the areas identified for further strengthening India’s relationship with Bhutan 
under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that over the years, the 
multifaceted relationship between India and Bhutan has been deepening in  both traditional as 
well as new areas of cooperation, including hydropower, ICT, health, culture, agriculture, space, 
tertiary education, and digital and financial connectivity. 
2.138  During the visit of Prime Minister to Bhutan in August 2019, both countries agreed to 
expand bilateral cooperation in new areas of space, digital connectivity, health, youth exchanges 
and tertiary education. Special emphasis is laid on Youth Exchanges, as well as cooperation in 
Tertiary Education with signing of 04 MoUs in Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) areas between the Royal University of Bhutan and the premier educational 
institutes of India- IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Bombay and NIT Silchar in August 2019. A new 
M.Tech scholarship (03 slots annually) at IIT Kanpur was instituted from the academic year 
2020 onward three Bhutanese students.  
2.139  In 2020, GoI has established ‘India-Bhutan e-Library Project’ in all districts of Bhutan 
with support from Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC). This Project is in 
sync with the Digital Druk Yul Education Flagship Programmes of the Government of 
Bhutan.The India-Bhutan SAT, jointly developed by India and Bhutan was launched into space 
on26 November 2022 by ISRO's Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The PSLV C54 carried 
the India-Bhutan SAT, along with India's Earth Observation Satellite -06 and other satellites 
from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, India. It is a new chapter in our advancing 
development partnership. 

46 
 
2.140  The major initiatives taken by India in the field of defence and security/maritime security 
cooperation and cooperation in energy, health and education sectors with Bhutan under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and the achievement so far,  is as under:-  
2.141 Energy: Cooperation in hydropower energy is a fundamental pillar of India-Bhutan 
bilateral relationship. Out of Bhutan’s total hydropower generation capacity of 2326 MW, nearly 
2136 MW generation capacity has been built with India’s assistance. India has assisted in 
construction and commissioning of 336 MW Chukha HEP, 60 MW Kurichu HEP, 1020 MW 
Tala HEP and 720 MW Mangdechhu HEP. At present, construction is ongoing for 1200 MW 
Punatsangchhu-I HEP and 1020 MW Punatsangchhu-II HEP. With the easing of COVID-19 
restrictions, construction for Punatsangchhu-II HEP picked pace, and is expected to be 
commissioned in 2024.  
2.142  India is the sole importer and buyer of electricity from Bhutan. In 2022, Hydropower 
Sector continued to provide more than 40% of Bhutan’s export revenue. India allowed import of 
400 MW power to Bhutan in lean seasons of January to March 2022, to help Bhutan meet its 
lean power deficit.  
2.143  COVID assistance: In line with India-Bhutan’s unique and special relations, GoI ensured 
continuous supply of trade and essential items to Bhutan, despite COVID-19 related lock-
downs.  GoI provided essential medicines and medical supplies/equipment- including 
Paracetamol, Hydroxychloroquine, PPEs, N95 masks, digital X-Ray machines and test kits to the 
Royal Government of Bhutan. Bhutan was the first country to receive 550,000 doses of the Made 
in India Covishield vaccines in two phases. Another consignment of COVID-19 medical 
supplies/Anti-TB drugs was delivered to Bhutan in April 2022. GoI also facilitated the 
repatriation of over 2000 Bhutanese nationals stranded in various parts of India.  
2.144.  Education: Over 1,100 scholarships are being provided annually by India to Bhutanese 
students for studying in India in a wide range  of disciplines including medicine, pharmacy, 
engineering, etc under various Scholarship Schemes, such as Ambassador’s Scholarship, 
Undergraduate Scholarship under Project Tied Assistance, Nalanda University Scholarships, 
ICCR UG Engineering Scholarships, etc. The first two recipients of the India-Bhutan Friendship 
Scholarship for M. Tech studies at IIT-Kanpur, completed their course in 2022, with three other 
currently undertaking their studies there. Additionally, Bhutanese students have also been 
availing Scholarships under ICCR, AYUSH, SAARC, BIMSTEC Schemes, along with those 
offered by various Indian institutions. In 2022, on popular demand, the slots of ICCR 
Undergraduate Engineering Scholarship and Nalanda University Scholarship were increased 
from 20 to 25 and from 05 to 30 respectively for the Bhutanese students. In 2022, eight 
Bhutanese scholars were awarded India Science Research Fellowship (ISRF) by Indian National 
Science Academy for undertaking research at premier Indian institutions. More than 100 teachers 
are present in various education institutes. 
                                                 

47 
 
2.145  The Committee note that India and Bhutan have agreed to expand bilateral 
cooperation in new areas of space, digital connectivity, health, youth exchanges and 
tertiary education.  Four MoUs in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
(STEM) areas have been signed between the Royal University of Bhutan and the premier 
educational institutes of India- IIT Delhi, IIT Kanpur, IIT Bombay and NIT Silchar in 
August 2019. A new M.Tech scholarship (03 slots annually) at IIT Kanpur was instituted 
from the academic year 2020 onwards.  In 2020, GoI has established ‘India-Bhutan e-
Library Project’ in all districts of Bhutan with support from Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing. In a new chapter in our advancing development partnership, the 
India-Bhutan SAT, jointly developed by India and Bhutan was launched into space on 26 
November 2022 by ISRO's Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle. Another significant milestone 
has been the complete inter-operability of RuPay card with Bhutan. Interconnection 
between India’s Knowledge Network (NKN) and Druk Research & Education Network 
(DrukREN) was established in August 2019. India also formalised in November 2021, the 
opening of seven new trade routes for Bhutan’s bilateral and transit trade with India. The 
Committee desire India and Bhutan to further expand the scope of bilateral cooperation 
under the Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee also desire that such expansion 
should be made on the basis of findings of a 360 degree evaluation of the impact of the 
projects already implemented in Bhutan and MoUs signed for ongoing projects and after 
exploring  the scope of  expansion of bilateral cooperation under the Neighbourhood First 
Policy.   
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 25 ) 
 2.146.  The Committee note that a number of proposals for new projects in Bhutan are 
currently in nascent stage, viz., establishment of a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Bank of 

48 
 
Bhutan (which has 20% shares by SBI) in India; construction of a railway line between 
Gelephu in Bhutan and Kokrajhar in India; construction of Integrated Check Post at 
Jaigaon, etc. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
facilitate for an early finalization and implementation of these projects through effective 
coordination with the Ministries/Departments concerned.   
                                                                                             (Recommendation Sl. No. 26 ) 
 2.147  Presently, India offers seven major scholarships to Bhutan, including the well-
known Ambassador’s Scholarship, prestigious Nehru Wangchuck Scholarship, Five-Year 
Plan project-tied assistance based Undergraduate Scholarship, Nalanda University 
Scholarship, ICCR Undergraduate Engineering scholarships, IIT Kanpur scholarship and 
AYUSH scholarships. Over 1100 Bhutanese students benefit from these scholarships, 
making it an important aspect of our bilateral relationship. A large number of Bhutanese 
civil servants and professionals from private sector and others undertake ITEC training 
programmes administered by the Development Partnership Administration Division of the 
Ministry of External Affairs. In recent times, the focus has been on developing customized 
ITEC programmes specifically for Bhutanese nationals. In 2021-22 alone, 340 Bhutanese 
nationals benefited from the e-ITEC training programmes whereas in 2020-2021, it was 
250. In 2022, GoI also customised special ITEC progammes for training 100 Bhutanese 
young entrepreneurs at the prestigious Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, 
Ahmedabad and 30 entrepreneurs at the Indian Institute of Packaging. Going by this track 
record, the Committee urge the Ministry to further expand the scope of scholarships and 
customized training programmes in the coming years to accommodate more number of 
students, Government officials and professionals.  
                                                                                             (Recommendation Sl. No. 27 ) 

49 
 
2.148  The Committee understand that India shares over 699 km of open border with 
Bhutan across Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. In view of the open 
border between India and Bhutan, the Committee desire that the Government should work 
towards a regular border management and enhanced security cooperation and Central 
Government level by strengthening the existing mechanisms and not only leaving it open 
for annual border districts coordination meetings. The Committee also urge the 
Government to maintain closer coordination at Central level in sharing information on 
illegal activities; smuggling of drugs; fake Indian currency; trafficking; etc. between India 
and Bhutan for a safe and secure regional neighbourhood. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 28 ) 
D.        Maldives 
  
2.149  For India, Maldives has always been a close and important maritime neighbor and our 
multifaceted ties have been strengthened despite the pandemic related disruptions. High level 
engagements have continued throughout 2021 and 2022 with the External Affairs Minister 
visiting Maldives and two visits by the Foreign Minister of Maldives to India. Recently, 
President of Maldives paid an Official visit in August 2022. 
  
2.150  On international issues, Maldives had consistently supported India in multilateral fora, 
such as the UN, the Commonwealth, the NAM and the SAARC. India is seen as a net security 
provider. 
  
2.151  India has been engaging intensively with the political leadership of Maldives. The defence 
partnership is underpinned by a comprehensive action plan for defence signed in April 
2016.  India provides the largest number (more than 70% of training requirements) of training 
opportunities and has trained more than 1250 Maldivian military personnel in the past ten 
years.  India has undertaken key projects in the defence sectors, including construction of the 
Composite Training Facility of the Maldives National Defence Force, construction of the new 
Ministry of Defence headquarters and National Police Academy and setting up the Coastal 
Surveillance Radar System. Our defence cooperation also extends to areas of joint exercises, 
maritime domain awareness, hydrography, disaster management training and gifting of 
hardware. 
  
2.152  India’s assistance to Maldives also entails grants-in-aid, Lines of Credit and budgetary 
support which is well over USD 3 billion. The biggest of it being the iconic Greater Male 
Connectivity Project. It is the largest infrastructure project ever undertaken in Maldives. This 
project will not only boost economic activity and generate employment but also promote holistic 
urban development in the Malé region. 

50 
 
  
2.153  Other development cooperation with Maldives includes the creation of people-friendly 
infrastructure including parliament, judiciary, police, customs, civil services, culture, health and 
capacity building in various government departments. Development projects in water, sanitation, 
urban development, port development and social sectors have been identified and initiated. 
  
2.154  ‘India First’ has now become a stated policy of the Government of Maldives. 
2.155  Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that in the year 2022, a LoC agreement for 
additional USD 100 mn was signed between EXIM bank of India and GoM to meet spill over 
costs of developmental projects already included under previous LOC. A Contract for 
redevelopment of Hanimaadhoo airport under USD 800 mn LoC was signed between GoM and 
JMC projects Ltd in  Sept, 2022.  
2.156  7 MoUs for taking up the 7 new High Impact community Development projects (HICDPs) 
were signed in April, 2022. In Nov 2022, India gave budgetary support of USD 100 mn to GoM 
to overcome impact of ongoing economic crisis. In Dec 2022, RBI and MMA signed a Currency 
Swap Agreement of USD 200 mn.  
2.157  On being asked about the quantum of investment made, aids, loans and line of credit 
offered to Maldives currently and whether the Government has any plan to enhance the same, the 
Ministry has stated that India – Maldives development partnership has expanded rapidly -  Line 
of Credit (LoC), Buyers’ Credit and grant projects worth USD 2 billion have been taken up for 
implementation in the last 4 years itself. LoC projects are being undertaken in the Maldives 
under 5 active LoC that add up to USD 1.3 bn. A USD 40 mn LoC extended in 2011 was re-
purposed in 2021 to finance road development projects.  
2.158  A USD 800 mn credit line agreement was concluded in March 2019, under which several 
large infra development projects are being executed. Greater Male Connectivity Project 
(GMCP), is being undertaken through a separate $ 400 million LoC and $ 100 million grant 
extended in 2020. Defense-related projects and sports infrastructure development projects are 
being taken up through exclusive USD 50 million and USD 40 million LoC extended in Feb 
2021 and Sept 2021 respectively.  
2.159  A LoC agreement for additional USD 100 mn was signed in Oct, 2022. The National 
Police Academy in Addu, inaugurated in March 2022, is India’s largest grant project in the 
Maldives at a cost of over USD 30 million. Conservation of the Friday Mosque in Male’ is a 
project being undertaken by ASI under grant assistance of USD 1.2 million.  
2.160  India is supporting 45 HICDPs through the grant aid of approx USD 16 mn. India has also 
provided budgetary support of USD 1200 mn to GoM during the last 4 years.  
2.161  Regarding the details and status of projects/development projects undertaken through 
Lines of Credit/soft loans along with the amount involved, the Ministry has informed that several 
projects are being implemented under LoCs amounting to USD 1.33 bn extended to Maldives. 9 

51 
 
large infrastructure projects have been taken up for implementation under the USD 800 million 
LoC extended to Maldives in December 2018. Contracts for 2 projects, namely, Addu Roads and 
Establishment of Water and Sanitation Network for 34 islands, were signed  in February and 
March 2021 respectively and physical work is ongoing.  
2.162  Contract of Reclamation & Shore protection work in Addu was awarded by  Maldives to 
Van Oord India in March, 2022 and contract of redevelopment of Hanimaadhoo airport was 
signed with JMC projects Ltd. in September, 2022. Expansion of  Cricket Stadium in 
Hulhumale’, upgrade of MIFCO’s fish processing units; construction of a new port in 
Gulhifalhu; expansion of Gan Airport in Addu and Cancer hospital are at different stages of 
implementation. Govt of Maldives awarded the contract for the GMCP in Aug 2021.  
2.163  The groundbreaking ceremony of this project was held during Aug’22 visit of Maldives 
President to India. Under USD 40 mn sports LoC , 05 sports infrastructure projects are at PQ 
stage. Govt of Maldives proposals under USD 50 mn defence LoC are also at PQ stage.  
2.164  The details and status of connectivity projects (rail network and roads) undertaken in 
Maldives is as under:- 
 Addu road project is a key infrastructure project required for Addu to establish itself as 
the southern regional hub of Maldives. The scope includes roads, street lighting, storm 
water drainage and reclamation for the development of tourism infrastructure. The work 
was awarded in February 2021 by GoM to AFCONS Infra at a cost of USD 73.24 mn.   
 GMCP was awarded to AFCONS Infra in August 2021. The 6.74 km long bridge and 
causeway link will connect capital city Malé with adjoining islands of Villingli, 
Gulhifalhu and Thilafushi. The ground-breaking ceremony of this project was held in 
August, 2022. 
2.165  The Ministry has provided the following details regarding cooperation between India and 
Maldives in various fields and the achievements so far:- 
 
2.166  Heritage Restoration Projects: Conservation of the Friday Mosque in Male’ being 
undertaken by ASI under grant assistance of USD 1.2 million. It was announced during the State 
Visit of PM Modi to the Maldives in June 2019. Physical work has been progressing well. 
Approximately 40% of the work has been completed.  
2.167  Capacity Building and Human Resources Development: India has been a traditional 
partner for the Maldives in human resource development across sectors for decades. In the past 
around 4 years, institutional linkages between counterpart organisations on both sides have 
increased adding heft to capacity building and training initiatives. Since 2019, more than 2000 
Maldivians have been trained in India under various capacity building programmes. Similarly, 
more than 2000 Maldivians have utilised virtual training programmes slots.  
2.168  Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: India was the first responder during 
disasters in the past including during tsunami in 2004 and water-crisis in 2014. India’s 

52 
 
comprehensive assistance to Maldives during the Covid pandemic has reaffirmed this aspect. 
India has continued its commitment to regional cooperation under SAARC with initiatives such 
as launch of South Asia Satellites, and SAARC Disaster Management Center. During Covid-19 
pandemic, India gifted essential medicines (incl 360 k doses of COVISHIED vaccine), and 
essential food.  
2.169  ITEC Programme: Maldives has been a partner of the ITEC programme for several years. 
Under the ITEC in-person, number of Maldivians trained were 47, 28 & 84 in 2017-18, 2018-19 
and 2019-20, respectively. During the COVID19 pandemic, due to suspension of ITEC in-
person, various  e-ITEC / customised e-ITEC programmes were conducted. From Oct 2020 until 
March 2022, close to 500 Maldivians participated in various e-ITEC / customised e-ITEC 
training programs. After the resumption of normalcy and opening of borders >90 Maldivians 
have been trained in India in various ITEC in-person programmes. 
2.170 Defence and Maritime Security Cooperation: The defence partnership is underpinned by a 
comprehensive action plan for defence signed in April 2016.  India provides the largest number 
of training opportunities and has trained more than 1400 Maldivian military personnel in the past 
ten years.  India has been undertaking key projects in the defence sectors, including construction 
of the Composite Training Facility of the Maldives National Defence Force, construction of the 
new Ministry of Defence headquarters and setting up the Coastal Radar System. Our defence 
cooperation also extends to areas of joint exercises, maritime domain awareness, hydrography, 
disaster management training and gifting of ships, hardware, etc. 
2.171  Trade, Technology and Tourism: India and Maldives signed a trade agreement in 1981, 
which provides for export of essential commodities. In July 2021, India extended the agreement 
on quotas for restrictions-free export of 9 essential commodities to the Maldives for the next 3 
years. The quotas have been expanded by 15% as per request of GoM, keeping in view the 
requirements of Indian contractors implementing the LoC projects in Maldives. India-Maldives 
bilateral trade crossed the $ 300 mn mark for the first time in 2021 & India emerged as 
Maldives’ 3rd largest trade partner in 2021.  
2.172  Indian exports to the Maldives include a variety of engineering and industrial products 
like pharmaceuticals, radar apparatus, rock boulders, aggregates, cement and agriculture produce 
like rice, spices, fruits, vegetables and poultry etc. This is a direct consequence of the launch of 
the cargo vessel service between the two countries in Sept 2020 and commencement of work on 
LoC projects since Feb 2021. Indian exports are registering a steady rise. In 2022, the bilateral 
trade as on Nov 2022 is USD 454.61 million with exports from India is USD 448.69 million. 
2.173  Efforts are being made to tap the potential of seafood exports from Maldives to India. 
During Aug 2022 visit of President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih to India, facilitation of duty free 
tuna exports to India from Maldives was announced.  
2.174  The Maldivian economy is heavily dependent on its tourism sector, which directly 
accounts for about 75% of GDP of Maldives. In 2019, India was the 2nd largest source of tourist 

53 
 
arrivals in Maldives. In a pandemic-hit 2020 & 2021, India was the largest source market for the 
Maldives with nearly 63,000 & 2.91 lakh (23% market share) Indians visiting the Maldives, 
respectively. India has maintained its top-spot in 2022 too with a 14.5% market share. 
2.175  On the issue of pending disputes between India and Maldives and the fresh initiatives and 
meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has informed 
that India’s relationship with the Maldives is free of any politically contentious issues. The one-
time claim of Maldives to Minicoy Island was resolved by the Maritime Boundary Treaty of 
1976 between the two countries, whereby Maldives has recognized Minicoy as an integral part of 
India. 
2.176  In response to the specific query by the Committee about the Joint efforts made to stop 
cross border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and 
weapons and the outcome of the same, the Ministry responded that India is working closely with 
Maldives on Defence and security cooperation. There are regular exchanges & cooperation 
between defence and security agencies like military, police, customs & immigration. 
Mechanisms like Colombo Security Conclave (CSC), an NSA level mechanism on marine 
security and JWG on Counter Terrorism (CT) are also active. 
 
2.177  Regarding the areas identified for further strengthening India’s relationship with Maldives 
under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that during the official visit of 
President Solih to India, PM and President Solih agreed to further deepen institutional linkages 
for cooperation in the areas including climate and renewable energy – identified as a frontier area 
for cooperation along with sports in the visit joint statement. Several ongoing initiatives being 
carried out in these new areas of cooperation. Efforts are on to strengthen cooperation in the area 
of renewable energy and grid inter-connectivity. Tourism and health sector are also potential 
areas for investment. 
2.178  The major initiatives taken by India in the field of defence and security/maritime security 
cooperation and cooperation in energy, health and education sectors with Maldives under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and the achievement so far,  is as under:-  
 
2.179  India has been engaging intensively with the political leadership of Maldives. The defence 
partnership is underpinned by a comprehensive action plan for defence signed in April 
2016.  India provides the largest number of training opportunities and has trained more than 1400 
Maldivian military personnel in the past ten years.  India has been undertaking key projects in 
the defence sectors, including construction of the Composite Training Facility of the Maldives 
National Defence Force, construction of the new Ministry of Defence headquarters and setting 
up the Coastal Surveillance Radar System. Our defence cooperation also extends to areas of joint 
exercises, maritime domain awareness, hydrography, disaster management training and gifting of 
hardware. 
2.180  Medical tourism is an important aspect of the India-Maldives health cooperation. India is 
an important medical treatment destination for Maldivians. Due to better, frequent air 

54 
 
connectivity and less travel time, proximity and availability of affordable and quality medical 
services, every year a large number of Maldivians travel mostly to southern Indian states of 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka for medical consultations and treatment. Over the years, there 
is a growing ecosystem catering to medical needs of Maldivians travelling to India. Indian 
doctors do work in Male Hospitals or have clinics in Male where they offer initial consultation to 
patients and refer them to various hospitals in India. Maldivians can travel visa-free to India for 
medical purpose under the " Bilateral Agreement on the facilitation of Visa arrangement" (signed 
in Dec 2018).  Notably, "Aasandha", the health care scheme of Government of Maldives 
provides financial support to Maldivians for overseas treatments which are not available in 
Maldives and in cases of trauma or accidents at empanelled hospitals abroad. Of the 40 such 
empanelled hospitals, 36 are in India. Maldivians also travel to India for treatment at hospitals 
which are not covered under Aasandha scheme.  
2.181  India has been a traditional partner for the Maldives in human resource development 
across sectors for decades. Indian teachers have been a fixture at Maldivian schools across 
islands for decades. India has traditionally offered a substantial number of ICCR scholarships to 
Maldivian youth.  In the past 4 years, institutional linkages between counterpart organisations on 
both sides have increased adding heft to capacity building and training initiatives. 
2.182  On being asked about the details and outcome of capacity building measures and 
technological cooperation between India and Maldives during the last three years and in the 
current year, the Ministry has stated that India has been a traditional partner for the Maldives in 
human resource development across sectors for decades. In the past around 4 years, institutional 
linkages between counterpart organisations on both sides have increased adding heft to capacity 
building and training initiatives. Since 2019, more than a dozens capacity building MoUs have 
been signed and are active. Since 2019, more than 2000 Maldivians have been trained in India 
under various capacity building programmes. Similarly, more than 2000 Maldivians have utilised 
virtual training programmes slots.   
                                                
2.183  The Committee note that Maldives has always been a close and important maritime 
neighbour of India. It has been observed that despite the pandemic related disruptions and 
political instability in Maldives, our multifaceted ties have got further strengthened. In 
April, 2022, MoUs for taking up 7 new High Impact Community Development projects 
were signed with Maldives. In November 2022, budgetary support of USD 100 million was 
given to Maldives by India to overcome the impact of the ongoing economic crisis. RBI and 
MMA also signed a Currency Swap Agreement of USD 200 million in December 2022. Nine 
large infrastructure projects have been taken up for implementation under the USD 800 

55 
 
million LOC extended to Maldives in December 2018. A number of projects, namely, 
construction of Addu Roads and Establishment of Water and Sanitation Network for 34 
islands; redevelopment of Hanimaadhoo airport; expansion of  Cricket Stadium in 
Hulhumale; upgradation of MIFCO’s fish processing units; construction of a new port in 
Gulhifalhu; expansion of Gan Airport in Addu and Cancer hospital; conservation of the 
Friday Mosque in Male, etc. are at different stages of implementation. Besides, five sports 
infrastructure projects and proposals of the Government of Maldives under USD 50 
million defence LOC are also at PQ stage. The Committee further note that several 
ongoing initiatives are being carried out in new areas of cooperation between India and 
Maldives. Efforts are on to strengthen cooperation in the area of renewable energy and 
grid inter-connectivity. Tourism and health sector are also potential areas for investment. 
The Committee feel that effective implementation and early completion of all the ongoing 
and pending projects in Maldives would be of immense mutual benefit to both countries 
and bring a new impetus to our bilateral relations. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to make concerted efforts in this direction. The proposals for sports 
infrastructure projects and defence projects through LOC which are at PQ stage, may be 
finalized at the earliest. The Committee also desire that institutional linkages for 
cooperation in new areas like renewable energy and grid inter-connectivity, tourism and 
health sector, etc. be deepened.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 29 ) 
 2.184  The Committee note that efforts are being made to tap the potential of seafood 
exports from Maldives to India. Facilitation of duty free tuna exports to India was 
announced in August 2022. Recognizing the potential for seafood export-import trade 
between India and Maldives, the Committee desire MEA to work in close coordination with 

56 
 
the Ministries/Departments concerned for promotion of seafood trade between the two 
countries. India should also explore investment and partnership synergies with Maldives to 
tap the full potential for seafood trade between the two countries. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 30 ) 
2.185  The Committee observe that the tourism sector directly accounts for about 75% of 
the GDP of Maldives. Since 2020, India has been the largest source of tourist arrivals to 
Maldives. Further, medical tourism is an important aspect of the India-Maldives health 
cooperation. In view of the opportunities and potential for economic development and 
employment generation offered by the tourism sector under its development partnerships 
with Maldives, the Committee urge the Ministry to promote investment in the tourism 
sector including medical tourism segment under the Neighbourhood First Policy.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 31 ) 
E.        Myanmar 
  
2.186  Myanmar is a key partner for both India’s “Neighbourhood First Policy” and “Act East 
Policy”. Myanmar is India’s land link to ASEAN as it is the only ASEAN country with which 
we share a border. Both countries share strong civilizational, historical and people-to-people ties. 
We have also enjoyed good security and defence cooperation with Myanmar authorities. 
  
2.187  Bilateral trade between India and Myanmar stood at USD 1.895 billion for FY 2021-22, 
as compared to USD 1.299 billion in FY 2020-21. India and Myanmar signed an MoU in June 
2021 under which India provides an annual import quota of 2.5 lakh metric tonnes of 
Black  Matpe  (Urad)  and  1  lakh  metric  tonnes  of  Pigeon Peas (Tur) to Myanmar to be 
imported through private traders for five years i.e. from 2021-22 to 2025-26. In FY2021-22 India 
imported pulses worth USD 760.24 million which is a significant increase from USD 380.35 
million in 2020-21. Our investments in Myanmar’s energy sector are over USD 1.4 billion. The 
ongoing cooperation in defence and security sectors has also been robust. 
  
2.188  As friends of the people of Myanmar, India has continued its human-centric initiatives 
under bilateral development cooperation. India’s development assistance portfolio in Myanmar is 
about USD 2 billion, the bulk of which is in the form of grants. Major projects include the 
Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project; the India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway 
Project, Border Area Development Programme in Chin State and the Naga Self-Administered 

57 
 
Zone; assistance in setting up institutions for higher learning and research, namely Myanmar 
Institute of Information Technology (MIIT), Advanced Centre for Agricultural Research and 
Education (ACARE), Myanmar-India Centre for Enhancement of IT Skills (MICEITS); India-
Myanmar Industrial Training Centres (ITC); Rakhine State Development Programme; the repair 
and conservation of earthquake damaged pagodas etc. 
  
2.189  The pace of implementation of large infrastructure projects has suffered due to the 
security situation in Myanmar including the Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project and 
the India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway Project.  
  
2.190  Capacity building has remained a priority area of cooperation to assist the people, 
especially youth of Myanmar. India is also contributing to capacity building by assisting 
Myanmar to offer various  courses in institutions that have been set up with assistance from 
India. Myanmar Institute of Information Technology in Mandalay and Advanced Centre for 
Agricultural Research and Education (ACARE) have been set up with assistance from India for 
supply of equipment, training material and teaching courses in IT and agricultural research 
respectively. These institutes have been handed over to Myanmar in March 2022. GOI has also 
been providing technical and financial support to set up Indo-Myanmar Industrial Training 
Centres (IMITC) – two centres have already been established in Pakkoku and Myingyan, and 
two more are being set up in Monywa and Thaton. 
 
2.191  Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that the pace of new initiatives being taken 
with Myanmar has slowed down since 2020, firstly due to the pandemic and then due to the 
political crisis that has ensued after the military takeover in February 2021. However, India has 
maintained its bilateral engagements with Myanmar with new initiatives being finalized as and 
when feasible.  
2.192  India has continued with its people oriented and humanitarian projects in the country 
including work on India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway, Kaladan Multimodal Transit 
Transport Project and other capacity building initiatives. In 2022, India signed a Project 
Agreement for Establishment of Modern Integrated Check Post (ICP) at Tamu (Myanmar).  
2.193  On the status of projects/development projects undertaken through Lines of Credit/soft 
loans along with the amount involved in Myanmar, the Ministry has informed that GOI Lines of 
Credit (LoCs) have been used for projects in diverse sectors such as telecommunication, 
railways, renovation of petrochemical refineries, setting up of truck manufacturing plant, power 
transmission lines and irrigation & agriculture projects. Out of 24 projects under these LoCs 
(total worth $ 745.57 million), 21 projects have already been completed. Three projects are 
currently under different stages of implementation under LoCs. 
 
2.194  The details and status of connectivity projects (rail network and roads) undertaken in 
Myanmar is as under:- 

58 
 
i)    Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Project: The Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit 
Myanmar. The project includes a waterway component of 158 km on Kaladan River from Sittwe 
to Paletwa and a road component of about 109 km from Paletwa to Zorinpui on the India-
Myanmar border in Mizoram State. We are working towards the possibility of making the Sittwe 
Port operational in the near future. However, the security situation in   the area has been a 
challenge for progress of KMTTP.  
(ii)      IMT Trilateral Highway Project: India is currently implementing two projects in the India-
Myanmar-Thailand (IMT) Trilateral highway, aimed at boosting connectivity to  Myanmar and 
beyond – (i) 120-km long Kalewa-Yargi sector and (ii) upgradation of 69 bridges on the Tamu- 
Kyigone-Kalewa sector. The pace of implementation of this project has also suffered due to the 
security situation in Sagaing Region in Myanmar. While the work on the Kalewa-Yargi sector of 
the Trilateral Highway has recommenced, the  security situation in the area remains a challenge. 
2.195  The Ministry has provided the following details regarding cooperation between India and 
Myanmar in various fields and the achievements so far:- 
2.196  Heritage Restoration Projects: Technical and financial assistance is being extended to 
Myanmar for conservation and restoration of damaged structures and paintings of the Pagodas in 
Bagan that were damaged in the earthquake that hit the country in 2016. Archeological Survey of 
India has identified 24 structures in 12 pagodas for renovation under the first phase and the work 
started in January 2020 after which it was disrupted due to Covid-19 pandemic.  
  
2.197  Capacity building and Human Resource Development: India has trained more than 300 
civilians and defense personnel every year from Myanmar under various programmes like ITEC, 
ICCR Scholarships etc. in diverse areas at premier institutes of the country. With the disruption 
in international travel in 2020 due to the pandemic, the Indian Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (ITEC) courses had moved to an online mode of learning. 314 slots out of 340 slots 
allotted for ITEC and e-ITEC programmes for FY 2022-23 have already been utilized. 
2.198  India had also offered customized courses for capacity building for part.icipants from 
Myanmar. 30 participants have received training in India in various paramedical courses this 
year. 19 Myanmar nationals are undergoing a Masters programme in Social Work at the Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) in Mumbai. 
2.199  India has also helped Myanmar build its own capabilities through support for initiatives 
like Myanmar Institute for Information and Technology at Mandalay, Advanced Centre for 
Agricultural Research and Education at Yezin University, Rice Bio Park in Nay Pyi Taw, 
Industrial Training Centers, Myanmar Centre for Enhancement of IT Skills (IMCEITS); the 
Myanmar-India Centre for English Language Training and the Myanmar-India Entrepreneurship 
Development Centre (MIEDC) in Yangon. 

59 
 
2.200  Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: India has responded promptly and 
effectively in rendering assistance following natural calamities in Myanmar like Cyclone Mora 
(2017), Komen (2015), earthquake in Shan State (2010), Cyclone Nargis (2008) and the outbreak 
of influenza virus in Yangon in July-August 2017. India has also provided support to Myanmar 
in its fight against COVID-19 through supply of medicines, medical equipment and vaccines 
through 2021 and 2022. Towards this end, two medical oxygen plants were supplied to Myanmar 
in January 2022. India has supplied more than 21 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine to 
Myanmar, including as gift and commercial supplies. India also provided 10,000 tons of rice and 
wheat as humanitarian assistance which was received in Myanmar in March-April 2022. 
2.201  ITEC Programmes: India has trained manpower from Myanmar under the ITEC 
Programme since 1996. Slots allotted to Myanmar under ITEC have increased from 30 in 1996 
to 267 in the year 2021-2022. With the disruption in international travel in 2020 due to the 
pandemic, the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) courses had moved to an 
online mode of learning. 314 slots out of 340 slots allotted for ITEC and e-ITEC programmes for 
FY 2022-23 have already been utilized.  
2.202  Defence and security/maritime security cooperation: Defence cooperation is a key pillar 
of the bilateral relationship. We have continued our defence and security cooperation in areas of 
common interest including border management and maritime security. The defence forces of the 
two countries have been engaged in bilateral initiatives in all the three domains viz- land, air and 
sea. Officers from Myanmar Armed Forces have received training in India under ITEC initiative 
in variety of areas, including English language. GOI has assisted Myanmar in establishing the 
Military Technical Training School (MTTS) for providing vocational training. 
 
2.203  Indian and Myanmar navies conduct Coordinated Patrols twice a year. India-Myanmar 
Naval Exercises are also held periodically. Sharing of white shipping data with Myanmar has 
helped in improving maritime domain awareness. Myanmar Navy has also participated in 
Humanitarian Aid and Disaster Management Exercises in India from 2018-22.   
2.204  Trade: India is the fifth largest trading partner of Myanmar. Bilateral trade between India 
and Myanmar stood at USD 1.895 billion for FY 2021-22, as compared to USD 1.299 billion in 
FY 2020-21. India’s exports were valued at USD 893 million and imports were USD 1001 
million in FY 2021-22. 
2.205  India and Myanmar signed an MoU in June 2021 under which India provides an annual 
import quota of 2.5 lakh metric tonnes 
of  Black  Matpe  (Urad)  and  1  lakh  metric  tonnes  of  Pigeon Peas (Tur) to Myanmar to be 
imported through private traders for five years i.e. from 2021-22 to 2025-26. In FY2021-22 India 
imported pulses worth USD 760.24 million which is a significant increase from USD 380.35 
million in 2020-21. 

60 
 
2.206  Technology: India has helped Myanmar in setting up institutes that have enhanced the 
country’s technological capability in important areas like IT, agriculture etc. Myanmar Institute 
of Information Technology in Mandalay has been set up with assistance and the institute has 
been handed over to Myanmar in March 2022. Advanced Centre for Agricultural Research and 
Education (ACARE) has also been established with assistance from India in supply of 
equipment, training and teaching courses etc. The institute has been handed over to Myanmar in 
March 2022. 
2.207  Tourism: Tourism from Myanmar to India is mainly built on the pillars of religion and 
health. While the COVID-19 pandemic had completely stopped the flow of tourists between the 
countries, resumption of regular flights between Yangon and Delhi, Yangon and Kolkata and 
Yangon and Gaya; and easing of pandemic related restrictions is helping in recovery of tourism. 
Flights on Imphal-Mandalay route are also to commence soon. 
2.208  On the issue of pending disputes between India and Myanmar and the fresh initiatives and 
meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has informed 
that there is no border dispute between India and Myanmar. Boundary demarcation work remains 
to be completed in some sectors of India-Myanmar boundary which is taken up through 
institutionalized bilateral mechanisms. 
2.209  Regarding improvement and strengthening of border with Myanmar under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has informed that there have been various initiatives 
which have been undertaken to strengthen border infrastructure like establishment of an 
Integrated Check Point at Moreh and a Land Crossing Station at Zokhawthar. A Project 
Agreement has been signed with Myanmar in 2022 for establishing a Modern Integrated 
Checkpost at Tamu. Framework for mode of operationalization of Border Haats is also under 
discussion.  
 
2.210  When the Committee enquired about Joint efforts to stop cross border terrorism, illegal 
migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons and the outcome of 
the same, the Ministry responded that these are issues which are discussed at established bilateral 
institutional mechanisms. The issue of illegal migration into India and related policy matters 
come under the purview of Ministry of Home Affairs. MEA assists the concerned State 
Government and MHA to verify the nationality of the individuals for their repatriation. MEA has 
also raised the issue of repatriation of illegal migrants with the Government of Myanmar from 
time to time. 
2.211  On the efforts being made by the Government to tackle the refugee crisis in India due to 
illegal migration; smuggling and trafficking in drugs and cross-border terrorism, the Ministry has 
informed that the issue of illegal migration into India and related policy matters come under the 
purview of Ministry of Home Affairs. MEA assists the concerned State Governments and MHA 
to verify the nationality of the individuals for their repatriation. MEA has also raised the issue of 

61 
 
repatriation of illegal migrants with the Government of Myanmar from time to time. Issues like 
trafficking of drugs and other cross-border security concerns are dealt through relevant bilateral 
institutional mechanisms with Myanmar.   
2.212  Regarding the areas identified for further strengthening India’s relationship with 
Myanmar under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that given the current 
security and humanitarian situation in Myanmar, implementation of various initiatives has been 
slow. As friend of people of Myanmar, India has continued to augment capacity building, 
development and humanitarian cooperation in the country. Capacity building initiatives in areas 
such as constitutionalism and federalism, social work etc. are being explored. In power sector, 
both sides are discussing proposals for a High Voltage High Capacity cross-border power 
transmission and radial interconnections between border villages. 
2.213  The major initiatives taken by India in the field of defence and security/maritime security 
cooperation and cooperation in energy, health and education sectors with Myanmar under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and the achievement so far,  is as under:-  
  
2.214  Defence and security/ maritime security cooperation:  Defence cooperation is a key pillar 
of the bilateral relationship. We have continued our defence and security cooperation in areas of 
common interest including border management and maritime security.  
2.215  Cooperation in energy, health and education sectors: India’s investments in Myanmar’s 
energy sector are more than $ 1.2 billion and include investments made in upstream and 
midstream ventures by Public Sector Units like ONGC, IOCL and GAIL. India supplies power 
through radial interconnection in bordering areas of Myanmar.  
2.216  India and Myanmar had signed a MoU in the area of Health in 2017 that aims at 
establishing greater cooperation in the field through establishing inter-ministerial and inter-
institutional mechanisms between the two countries. India has also provided support for up-
gradation of Yangon Children Hospital and Sittwe General Hospital project which was 
completed in 2018. Separately, under the Border Area Development Programme (BADP) and 
Rakhine State Development Programme (RSDP), projects such as building health centres are 
being undertaken in Chin State and in the Naga Self-administered Zone, and Rakhine State in 
Myanmar respectively. 
2.217  On being asked about the details and outcome of capacity building measures and 
technological cooperation between India and Myanmar during the last three years and in the 
current year, the Ministry has stated that in the last 5 years (2018-19 to 2022-23), a total of 1310 
ITEC Civilian and 1312 Defence ITEC slots have been offered to Myanmar. 13 Specific courses 
were conducted for Myanmar in the last five years (2018-19 to 2022-23). The major areas which 
covered under specialized course were English; Agro-technology; public health; Judiciary; 
Buddha and mid-career training etc. India is also contributing to capacity  building  by  assisting 

62 
 
Myanmar to offer  various  courses in institutions that have been set up with assistance from 
India.  
  
2.218  When asked about the status of India’s diplomatic relations with the military Government 
in Myanmar, the Ministry has stated that as a long neighbour with a long, porous border, the 
ongoing security and humanitarian situation in Myanmar is a cause of grave concern, as it has 
direct implications for India. India has diplomatic relations with Myanmar and maintains close 
contact with the authorities in Myanmar especially for ensuring safety and security at the border. 
                                                
2.219  The Committee note that Myanmar is a key partner for both India’s Neighbourhood 
First Policy and Act East Policy. The pace of new initiatives being taken with Myanmar has 
slowed down since 2020, firstly due to the COVID-19 Pandemic and then due to the 
political crisis that has ensued after the military takeover of that country in February 2021. 
However, India has maintained its bilateral engagements with Myanmar with initiatives 
being finalized as and when feasible. GoI has also been providing technical and financial 
support to set up Indo-Myanmar Industrial Training Centres with two centres established 
in Pakkoku and Myingyan, and two more being set up in Monywa and Thaton. In 2022, 
India signed a Project Agreement for Establishment of Modern Integrated Check Post at 
Tamu. Out of 24 projects under LOCs (total worth $ 745.57 million), 21 projects have 
already been completed. The Committee further note that security situation in the area has 
been a challenge for progress of the Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Project and India-
Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway. The Committee desire that implementation of 
development projects in Myanmar should not suffer on account of change in its political 
landscape and urge the Government to make consistent efforts towards insulating such 
projects from political turmoil and make all out efforts for timely completion of the 
ongoing projects. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 32 ) 

63 
 
2.220  Though there is no border dispute between India and Myanmar, the Committee 
understand that the boundary demarcation work remains to be completed in some sectors 
of the India-Myanmar border. Various initiatives have also been taken to strengthen 
border infrastructure like establishment of an Integrated Check Point at Moreh and a 
Land Crossing Station at Zokhawthar. A Project Agreement has been signed with 
Myanmar in 2022 for establishing a Modern Integrated Check Post at Tamu while 
framework for mode of operationalization of Border Haats is also under discussion. The 
Committee desire that the institutionalized bilateral mechanisms between India and 
Myanmar should be strengthened and boundary demarcation in the remaining sectors of 
India-Myanmar boundary should be completed at the earliest. Concerted efforts may also 
be made to establish Integrated Check Point/Modern Integrated Check Post and Land 
Crossing Station at the finalized locations. The Committee also urge the Ministry to speed 
up the process for establishing a framework for mode of operationalization of Border 
Haats. Progress achieved in this regard may be communicated to the Committee.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 33 ) 
2.221  The Committee note that the issues of cross border terrorism, illegal migration, 
smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons are discussed at 
established bilateral institutional mechanisms with Myanmar. On the issue of illegal 
migration, MEA assists the concerned State Government and Ministry of Home Affairs to 
verify the nationality of the individuals for their repatriation and has also raised the issue 
of repatriation of illegal migrants with the Government of Myanmar from time to time. 
Trafficking of drugs and other cross-border security concerns are dealt through relevant 
bilateral institutional mechanisms with Myanmar. In view of the recurring instances of 
cross border terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency, trafficking in drugs 

64 
 
and weapons, etc., the Committee desire that the bilateral institutional mechanisms to 
check the same may be strengthened. MEA should work in close coordination with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the State Governments concerned for speedy identification 
and repatriation of illegal Myanmarese immigrants. The issue of repatriation of illegal 
migrants may also be taken up with the Government of Myanmar at the highest level. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 34 ) 
F.        Nepal 
  
2.222  The Neighbourhood First Policy has brought a new impetus to our bilateral relations with 
Nepal. Since 2014, there have been frequent high-level political exchanges with 16 meetings at 
the level of Head of State and Head of the Government. Several large-scale and critical 
connectivity and infrastructure projects in Nepal have been completed with India’s assistance.  
  
2.223  In the wake of the earthquake in April 2015, India provided rescue, relief, rehabilitation 
and reconstruction assistance. Operation Maitree became India’s largest post-disaster assistance 
programme outside the country, under which we committed an assistance package of USD 1 
billion including USD 250 million in grants. Major components of the assistance package that 
have seen the light of the day and have been either successfully completed or are progressing 
towards completion, include the sectors of housing, education, health care and cultural heritage 
restoration.  
  
2.224  Our vision of operationalizing cross border rail services is reaching fruition through the 
operationalization of the India-built 34.9 km link connecting Jayanagar (in Bihar) to Kurtha (in 
Nepal). Another rail link under construction is the Jogbani-Biratnagar link which is in advance 
stages of implementation. A Raxaul Kathmandu railway line is also on the anvil. The first Bharat 
Gaurav Tourist Train for Ramayana Circuit connecting the historical city of Janakpur in Nepal to 
other Ramayana circuit destinations in India was flagged off in June 2022. 
  
2.225  Energy cooperation remains another area of immense potential. This has the potential to 
emerge as Nepal’s largest export earner in the near future. Presently, Nepal exports more than 
400 MW of power to India during the wet season. 
  
2.226      Towards development of connectivity, India has upgraded 10 roads of more than 300 
km in the Terai area of Nepal providing better connectivity with India. An MoU was signed in 
Feb 2022 between India and Nepal for the construction of a motorable bridge over Mahakali 
River at Dharchula in Uttarakhand.  
  
2.227  India has also established Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) at Birgunj and Biratnagar which 
are operational. India is now working on ICPs at Bhairahawa and Nepalgunj. 

65 
 
2.228  India has an extensive cooperation with Nepal in the area of flood and inundation 
management. Bilateral mechanisms have been established to discuss these issues regularly with 
Nepal, namely the Joint Committee on Inundation and Flood Management (JCIFM) and the Joint 
Committee on Kosi and Gandak Projects (JCKGP). India and Nepal also cooperate closely in the 
area of flood forecasting for which a network of meteorological and hydro-meteorological sites 
has been set-up in Nepal and in India. 
2.229  During the course of evidence on 19 December 2022, the Foreign Secretary apprised the 
Committee regarding the assistance provided for irrigation and flood management as under:- 
“…..Irrigation and inundation training projects when rivers get flooded. When the Kosi 
gets flooded in Bihar, you cannot distinguish between the borders at that time. So, 
you  need to carry out river training projects across both sides of the border. This is a 
classic case where the irrigation projects and the river training projects are done by the 
Government of Bihar, funded by MEA, but the flood control benefit is for the people of 
Bihar and also for the people of Nepal. We built a huge Kamala-Bagmati embankment 
which runs from the Nepali side all the way to our side. The idea is to insulate 
populations on both sides from the flood situation. This is again funded by the  Ministry 
of External Affairs”. 
2.230  Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that India has expanded our bilateral 
cooperation to new initiatives like agriculture, inland waterways and power sector 
cooperation.  In April 2018, India and Nepal launched the “India Nepal New Partnership” in 
Agriculture which focuses on collaborative projects in agriculture education and R&D. In 2019, 
PMs of two countries announced the Inland waterways connectivity between India and Nepal 
which will enable four multi-modal transportation routes via inland waterway terminals in 
Jharkhand, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Two of the terminals at Varanasi and Sahibgunj have been 
completed in 2018-19 and work is underway for remaining terminals.  
2.231  In April 2022, both the countries unveiled a Joint Vision Statement on Power Sector 
Cooperation. At present GoI has been granted power export approvals to Nepal for exporting 
more than 450 MW of Power to India. In this regard, Indian companies are currently developing 
large Hydro Electric Projects in Nepal including Arun III (900 MW), Lower Arun (679 MW), 
Arun-4 (490 MW), West Seti and SR-6 (1200MW) and Upper Karnali(900 MW). 
2.232  On the quantum of investment made, aids, loans and line of credit offered to Nepal 
currently and whether the Government has any plan to enhance the same, the Committee have 
been informed that India has allocated INR 750 crores under Aid to Nepal budget head for 
various development assistance and infrastructure projects in Nepal in the current financial year 
2022-23. In addition, infrastructure and power projects have been implemented under US$ 1.65 
Billion Lines of Credit extended by GoI to Nepal.  
 

66 
 
2.233  Since 2014, three cross-border transmission lines, Integrated Check Posts at Birgunj and 
Biratnagar, 200-bed emergency & trauma centre in Kathmandu, Pashupati Dharmashala, several 
road stretches and a number of high impact community development projects have been 
completed in Nepal. With focused efforts from both sides, the Motihari-Amlekhgunj petroleum 
products pipeline (implemented and funded by IOCL) was completed much ahead of schedule 
and remotely inaugurated by the two Prime Ministers in September 2019. 
  
                                                 
  
2.234  On being asked about the details and status of projects/development projects undertaken 
through Lines of Credit/soft loans along with the amount involved in Nepal, the Ministry has 
informed that India supported Lines of Credit (LOC) extended by the Export Import Bank of 
India to Government of Nepal. GOI has agreed to provide four lines of credit to the Government 
of Nepal for US$ 100 million, US$ 250 million, US$ 550 million and US$ 750 million. These 
lines of credit were signed in June 2006, September 2007 and September 2016, for execution of 
infrastructure development projects and post-earthquake re-construction projects as prioritized 
by Government of Nepal.  
2.235   India’s Lines of Credits have financed 44 road projects, another 7 projects in hydropower 
and transmission lines and several others in housing and reconstruction, which are spread all 
across Nepal.  A large number of these projects are either completed or are nearing completion, 
including some iconic and major projects such as Solu Corridor Transmission Line, Koshi 
Corridor Transmission Line, Muzzaffarpur - Dhalkebar Transmission line, Rahughat 
Hydroelectric project, Devighat hydroelectric project etc.  
                                                 
2.236  The details and status of connectivity projects (rail network and roads) undertaken in 
Nepal is as under:- 
2.237  Border trade Infrastructure: GoI is upgrading India-Nepal border trade infrastructure at an 
unprecedented pace to reduce bottlenecks, accelerate clearances and promote the creation of 
regional economic hubs. In recent years, India has been assisting Nepal in establishment of 
Integrated Check Posts at Birgunj, Biratnagar, Bhairahawa, and Nepalgunj. Second ICP at 
Biratnagar(Nepal) was inaugurated on 21 Jan 2020. Construction of ICP at Nepalgunj is ongoing 
and implementation of ICP at Bairahawa will commence soon.   
2.238  Petroleum: GoI is working with Government of Nepal for extension of Motihari-
Amlekhganj petroleum pipeline to Chitwan in Nepal and implementation of a new cross border 
pipeline from Siliguri (India) to Jhapa (Nepal). 
2.239  Terai Roads Projects: Since 2016, India has provided grant assistance of INR 500 crores 
to Government of Nepal for construction of 10 roads (divided into 14 road/packages) in Terai 
area of Nepal of approximately 300 kms connecting Indian borders from west to east of Nepal to 

67 
 
facilitate trade, connectivity and smooth movement of people from Nepal to India and vice-
versa. Construction work of the project has been completed. 
2.240  Dharchula Motorable bridge: An MoU was signed in Feb 2022 between GoI and 
Government of Nepal for the construction of a motorable bridge over Mahakali River at 
Dharchula in Uttrakhand, which forms the international boundary with Nepal in this region. We 
have recently done the groundbreaking of the Dharchula bridge. 
2.241  Railways: India is funding cross-border railway link between India and Nepal at Jaynagar 
in India to Bardibas in Nepal, and Jogbani in India to Biratnagar in Nepal. Jaynagar-Kurtha 
stretch of the Jaynagar-Bardibas Project has been operationalised by the two PMs in April 2022. 
Work on the railway connectivity at Kurtha to Bijalpura stretch and extension upto Bardibas and 
on the 17.65 km Jogbani – Biratnagar rail link is on going. Besides this, GoI has also funded to 
carry out feasibility study of proposed Raxaul-Kathmandu broad gauge rail link between both 
countries. 
2.242  RuPay Launch: The Ministry has also informed that during PM Deuba’s visit to India in 
April 2022, both PMs have launched RuPay Card in Nepal. 
                                                 
2.243  The Foreign Secretary also elaborated on the RuPay as a means of digital and financial 
connectivity during the course of evidence on 19 December 2022, as under:-  
“RuPay is the new element of our digital and financial connectivity. In case of Nepal, 
of   course, it is much easier because the Indian rupee and the Nepalese rupee are linked 
at a    fixed rate of currency. In case of Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, of course, there is no 
such peg. So, it is subject to market fluctuations. But interoperability of our financial 
platforms and products is something which is very intrinsic and fundamental to the 
financial and digital connectivity between our two countries. We are now exploring at 
this stage……How can the digital e-market and e-commerce platforms in these countries 
market Indian products? How can Indian e-commerce platforms market their products? 
Products are the same. It is just that a window to the customer is available more easily 
so   to speak. So, today, for example, there is a link between an Indian e-commerce 
platform, Myntra and a Nepalese ecommerce platform, Sasto Deal -- which means cheap 
deal wherein Myntra products can be sold in Nepal through that platform. Of course, 
there is a back-to-back commercial arrangement of fee, etc. But that is a commercial 
thing. The Government is not involved in this. But the Government is an enabler. Our 
regulator is a facilitator. Take the example of UPI. If RBI was not to frame liberal 
guidelines, you will never have UPI interoperability because regulator has to bridge the 
demand on the ground and the supply on the ground, and its connectivity. If the regulator 
does not help, they will remain insulated on both sides. So, again, this is a part of digital 
finance where institutions play a crucial role. It is important that the Bangladesh 

68 
 
regulator, Indian regulator, Nepalese regulator, and Sri Lankan regulator agree that this 
will be a part. Then, rest of it is commercial”. 
2.244  The Ministry has provided the following details regarding cooperation between India and 
Nepal in various fields and the achievements so far:- 
 2.245  Heritage Restoration Projects: Following the earthquake of April 2015, India committed 
US$ 1 billion comprising of US$ 250 million as grant and US$ 750 million as Line of Credit, for 
post-earthquake reconstruction projects in Nepal. Grant of US$ 50 million is allocated for 
reconstruction 28 cultural heritage projects in 7 districts of Nepal. As of now, work is in progress 
in 24 sites, 2 projects are in tendering process and 2 projects are in DPR preparation stage. 
2.246  Capacity Building and Human Resources Development: GoI provides around 3000 
scholarships annually to Nepali nationals studying in India and in Nepal at all levels of education 
in a wide range of disciplines. Under ITEC programme, professional training is offered annually 
to about 250 officials from Nepal at various technical institutes in India. From 2007-08, more 
than 1700 ITEC alumni of Nepal have received trainings under ITEC programme of GoI. 
2.247  Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: India swiftly dispatched National Disaster 
Response Force (NDRF) teams and special aircrafts with rescue and relief materials to Nepal, 
when a devastating 7.8 magnitude earthquake struck Nepal on April 2015. India’s assistance, 
which reached Nepal within six hours of the earthquake, included 16 NDRF teams, 39 IAF 
aircraft sorties with 571 tons of relief material including rescue equipment, medical supplies, 
food, water, tents, blankets and tarpaulin. Medical teams from India were deployed in various 
parts of Nepal. India helped in restoring 3 power sub-stations in Kathmandu valley. The total 
Indian relief assistance to Nepal amounted to over US$ 67 million.  
2.248  Further, India announced a post-earthquake reconstruction package of US$ 1 billion 
(which comprises US$ 250 million grant and US$ 750 million concessional Line of Credit) 
during the International Conference on Nepal’s Reconstruction held in Kathmandu on 25 June 
2015. 
2.249  As part of COVID-19 assistance to Nepal, India has provided about 25 tonnes of essential 
medicines, medical supplies, ICU beds and equipment including Paracetamol, 
Hydroxychloroquine, PCR test kits and ventilators. India has ensured uninterrupted flow of trade 
and supply of essentials to Nepal and assisted in repatriation of Nepalese nationals stranded 
abroad due to COVID-19 situation. On January 2021, India gifted one million doses of ‘Made in 
India’ COVID19 vaccine to Nepal, paving way for Nepal’s nation-wide vaccination drive. A 
state of the art, indigenously developed, 960 LPM liquid Oxygen Plant was expeditiously handed 
over to BP Koirala Institute of Health Sciences in Dharan by the India on August 2021, during 
the second wave of the pandemic. 

69 
 
2.250  ITEC Programmes: Under ITEC programme, professional training is offered annually to 
about 250 officials from Nepal at various technical institutes in India. From 2007-08, more than 
1700 ITEC alumni of Nepal have received trainings under ITEC programme of GoI. 
2.251  Defence and Maritime Security Cooperation: India and Nepal have wide-ranging 
cooperation in the defence sector. India has been assisting the Nepal Army in its modernisation 
by supplying equipment and providing training. Assistance during disasters, joint military 
exercises, adventure activities and bilateral visits are other aspects of India’s defence cooperation 
with Nepal. A number of defence personnel from Nepal Army attend training courses in various 
Indian Army training institutions. The ‘Indo-Nepal Battalion-level Joint Military Exercise 
SURYA KIRAN’ is conducted alternately in India and in Nepal. The last edition of Surya Kiran 
exercise was held in December 2022 at Saljhandi, Nepal. Since 1950, India and Nepal have been 
awarding each other’s Army Chief with the honorary rank of General in recognition of the 
mutual harmonious relationship between the two armies. The Gorkha regiments of the Indian 
Army are raised partly by recruitment from hill districts of Nepal. Currently, about 32,000 
Gorkha Soldiers from Nepal are serving in the Indian Army 
2.252  Trade, Technology and Tourism: India is Nepal's largest trade partner and the largest 
source of foreign investments, besides providing transit for almost entire third country trade of 
Nepal. India accounts for about two-third of Nepal’s merchandise trade, about one-third of trade 
in services, one-third of foreign direct investments, almost 100% of petroleum supplies, and a 
significant share of inward remittances on account of pensioners, professionals and workers 
working in India. 
2.253  India is the largest source country for tourism into Nepal. Indians visit Nepal for its lofty 
mountains, hospitality and cultural diversity. A large numbers of Indians are also attracted to 
Nepal for religious tourism. The same is true for the Nepalese who visit tourist places, shrines 
and temples located in the farthest corners of India. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on 
Cooperation in the field of Tourism was signed between the two Governments on 25 November, 
2014 in Kathmandu. The MoU aimed to deepen and broaden cooperation in the field of tourism 
and also promote cooperation and direct communication between the stake holders of tourism 
and hospitality industry for enhancing tourism cooperation and strengthening economic 
development and employment generation. 
2.254  On the issue of pending disputes between India and Nepal and the fresh initiatives and 
meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has informed 
that the India-Nepal boundary is mostly delineated and demarcated with boundary pillars. The 
boundary pillars are jointly maintained and repaired by the two Governments. There are 
differences of perception on alignment of the boundary in some areas which will be addressed 
through the established bilateral mechanisms.  
2.255  When the Committee enquired about Joint efforts to stop cross border terrorism, illegal 
migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons and the outcome of 

70 
 
the same, the Ministry responded that India shares open border of over 1850 km with Nepal 
across five Indian states (Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim), which 
has contributed to our strong people-to-people contacts of kinship and culture. Steps for better 
border management are continuously being taken through improved border infrastructure and 
enhance security cooperation.  
2.256  Regular meeting at local level in the border districts and that between the border guarding 
forces of both sides-i.e SSB&APF have taken place. In fact this meeting took place in a physical 
format in Kathmandu recently. 
 2.257  There is good sharing of information between the two sides on contraband smuggling, 
drugs, fake Indian currency and on activities of various groups and organisation.  
2.258  Education: Over the years, India’s contribution to the development of human resources in 
Nepal has been one of the major aspects of bilateral cooperation. GoI provides around 3000 
scholarships/seats annually to Nepalese nationals for various courses at the Ph.D/Masters, 
Bachelors and plus–two levels in India and in Nepal. These scholarships cover a wide spectrum 
of subjects including engineering, medicine, agriculture, pharmacology, veterinary sciences, 
computer application, business administration, music, fine arts, etc. 
2.259  The Committee observe that presently, Nepal is going through an economic slowdown 
and enquired whether the Government has sought any assistance from India or India has 
increased its quantum of investment, aids, loans or any other assistance. The Ministry has 
responded that  under the Neighbourhood First Policy, GoI has focused in people-centric 
infrastructure development and increased connectivity in Nepal, which has resulted in 
expeditious implementation and delivery of our bilateral projects. On this front, we have been 
able to successfully complete a number of bilateral projects ranging from major flagship 
connectivity to humanitarian assistance projects. Some of these are South Asia’s first cross 
border petroleum product pipeline (Motihari to Amlekhgunj, Nepal); establishment of Integrated 
Check posts at Raxaul-Birgunj and Jogbani-Biratnagar,  three cross-border power transmission 
lines (Muzaffarpur-Dhalkebar; Kataiya-Kusaha; Raxaul-Parwanipur);  completion of 50,000 
houses under GoI’s Housing Reconstruction Project and the operationalisation of the first cross 
border broad gauge passenger train service between Jayanagar and Kurtha in April 2022 by the 
PMs of both the countries. 
                                              
2.260  The Committee note that India’s bilateral relations with Nepal has expanded to new 
initiatives  in agriculture, inland waterways and power sector cooperation. The ‘India 
Nepal New Partnership’ in Agriculture which focuses on collaborative projects in 
agriculture education and R&D was launched in April 2018. The Inland waterways 

71 
 
connectivity between India and Nepal with four multi-modal transportation routes via  
Jharkhand, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh was announced in 2019. Two of the terminals at 
Varanasi and Sahibgunj have already been completed and work is underway for the 
remaining terminals. India and Nepal have also unveiled a Joint Vision Statement on 
Power Sector Cooperation in April 2022. Indian companies are currently developing large 
Hydro Electric Projects in Nepal including Arun III (900 MW), Lower Arun (679 MW), 
Arun-4 (490 MW), West Seti and SR-6 (1200MW) and Upper Karnali (900 MW). Under 
Lines of Credit, 44 road projects; 7 projects in hydropower and transmission lines and 
several others in housing and reconstruction spread all across Nepal have been financed 
and a large number of these projects are either completed or are nearing completion. The 
Committee desire that the Government should give focused attention to collaborative 
projects in agriculture education and R&D as it would give a boost to the rural economy of 
both the countries. The remaining inland waterway terminals for the multi-modal 
transportation routes may be completed at the earliest. The Committee are aware that 
India would greatly benefit from the commissioning of large hydro electric projects 
currently being developed by Indian companies in Nepal by way of power export and urge 
the Government to monitor the progress of work effectively so that these hydro electric 
projects are completed and operationalized without time and cost overruns. The 
Committee also desire that all the ongoing and pending projects under Lines of Credit, 
including housing and reconstruction projects, should be completed at the earliest. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 35 ) 
2.261  The Committee understand that ‘Operation Maitree’, the rescue, relief, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance provided by India to Nepal in the wake of the 
earthquake in April 2015, was India’s largest post-disaster assistance programme outside 

72 
 
the country. Under  ‘Operation Maitree’ India committed an assistance package of USD 1 
billion including USD 250 million in grants and US$ 750 million as Line of Credit, for post-
earthquake reconstruction projects. Grant of US$ 50 million is allocated for reconstruction 
of 28 cultural heritage projects in 7 districts of Nepal. As of now, work is in progress in 24 
sites; 2 projects are in tendering process and 2 projects are at DPR preparation stage. 
Though major components of the assistance package that have either been successfully 
completed or are progressing towards completion include the sectors of housing, education, 
health care and cultural heritage restoration, the Committee  urge the Ministry to monitor 
the progress of works that are progressing with a view to getting them completed 
expeditiously. Efforts may also be made for timely finalization of the projects at tendering 
stage and preparation of DPR and the Committee may be apprised accordingly.  
                                                                                                 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 36 ) 
2.262  The Committee note that India and Nepal have established bilateral mechanisms for 
regular discussion on the issues of flood and inundation management, namely the Joint 
Committee on Inundation and Flood Management and the Joint Committee on Kosi and 
Gandak Projects. Both countries also cooperate closely in the area of flood forecasting for 
which a network of meteorological and hydro-meteorological sites have been set up in India 
and Nepal. The Committee are aware about the difficulties faced by both the countries due 
to flooding of the Kosi and Gandak rivers. They, therefore, desire that the bilateral 
mechanisms should be strengthened so that regular and meaningful interactions are 
maintained between India and Nepal for cooperation on flood and inundation management 
as well as in carrying out river training projects across both sides of the border. The 
network of meteorological and hydro-meteorological sites in India and Nepal should also be 

73 
 
upgraded with the latest technological advancement for accurate flood forecast and data 
inputs be shared for mutual benefits. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 37 ) 
  
2.263  The Committee note that the Government is in the process of upgrading India-Nepal 
border trade infrastructure with an objective to reduce bottlenecks, accelerate clearances 
and promote the creation of regional economic hubs. In recent years, India has been 
assisting Nepal in the development of border infrastructure through upgradation of 10 
roads in the Terai area; development of cross-border rail links at Jogbani-Biratnagar, 
Jaynagar-Bardibas and establishment of ICPs at Birgunj, Biratnagar, Bhairahawa and 
Nepalgunj. The Committee further note that construction of ICP at Nepalgunj is ongoing 
while operationalization of ICP at Bairahawa would commence soon. Keeping in view the 
vast potential for border trade between India and Nepal, the Committee urge the 
Government to complete the construction work of the ICP at Nepalgunj and operationalize 
it at the earliest. The Committee also expect that the ICP at Bairahawa would commence 
functioning very soon. In order to achieve the goal of economic prosperity and stability in 
the region under the Neighbourhood First Policy, the Committee further urge the 
Government to facilitate the creation of regional economic hubs.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 38 ) 
 2.264  The Committee note that India is funding cross-border railway link between India 
and Nepal at Jaynagar in India to Bardibas in Nepal and Jogbani in India to Biratnagar in 
Nepal. Jaynagar-Kurtha stretch of the Jaynagar-Bardibas Project has been operationalised 
in April 2022. Work on the railway connectivity at Kurtha to Bijalpura stretch and 
extension upto Bardibas and on the 17.65 km Jogbani – Biratnagar rail link is ongoing. The 

74 
 
Government has also provided funding for carrying out feasibility study of the proposed 
Raxaul-Kathmandu broad gauge rail link between both the countries.  In view of the 
importance of cross-border railway link between India and Nepal for  strengthening of 
border infrastructure and greater people to people connect, the Committee urge the 
Government   for early operationalization of the ongoing rail link projects and completion 
of the feasibility study of the proposed Raxaul-Kathmandu broad gauge rail link.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 39 ) 
2.265  The Committee observe that a large number of Indians are attracted to Nepal for 
religious tourism while Nepalese nationals also visit tourist places, shrines and temples 
located in the farthest corners of India. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on 
Cooperation in the field of Tourism was signed between the two Governments on 25 
November, 2014 in Kathmandu. The Committee desire that the Government should make 
sincere efforts to achieve the aims and objectives of the MoU such as, enhanced cooperation 
between India and Nepal in the field of tourism; facilitating direct communication between 
the stakeholders of tourism and hospitality industry and bringing about better and 
improved tourism cooperation while enhancing economic development and employment 
generation in the country. The Committee also desire that periodic assessment of the 
impact of the said MoU may be made under intimation to the Committee. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 40 ) 
2.266  The Committee note that with the launch of RuPay card in India and Nepal, RuPay 
has become the new element of our digital and financial connectivity. Interoperability of 
our financial platforms and products is something which is very intrinsic and fundamental 
to the financial and digital connectivity between our two countries. The Committee, hence, 
desire that the Government should explore the digital e-market and e-commerce platforms 

75 
 
in neighbouring countries to market Indian products and vice versa so as to achieve 
upgraded digital and financial connectivity in the region.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 41 ) 
  
G.        Pakistan 
  
2.267  The details of India’s engagements with Pakistan, as furnished in a written reply by the 
Ministry, are as under:- 
“Humanitarian assistance: India continues to pursue humanitarian issues including 
release of prisoners and fishermen with Pakistan. India has been successful in securing 
the release and repatriation of more than 2,700 Indian prisoners including fishermen, 
from Pakistan’s custody since 2014. This includes 40 Indian fishermen and 05 Indian 
civilian prisoners who were released and repatriated to India in 2022. India has sought 
early consular access and release and repatriation of the remaining Indians in Pakistan’s 
custody.  
The two sides also facilitate religious pilgrimages under the 1974 Bilateral Protocol 
between India and Pakistan on Visits to Religious Shrines. The Government facilitated 
five pilgrimages to Pakistan in the last one year, in which around 5000 Indian pilgrims 
visited various temples and Gurudwaras in Pakistan. During the same period, 406 
Pakistani pilgrims visited various religious shrines in India as part of three pilgrimages 
Kartarpur Corridor: Since its inauguration on 9 November 2019, the Kartarpur corridor 
has been used by more than 1,29,318 pilgrims to visit Gurdwara Darbar Sahib Kartarpur 
in Narowal, Pakistan. The functioning of the Kartarpur corridor was temporarily 
suspended from 16 March 2020  to 17 November 2021 as a precautionary measure to 
contain and control the spread of COVID-19 pandemic. The Kartarpur corridor remains 
functional on all seven days of the week. 
Maritime security cooperation: The Indian Coast Guard and Pakistan Maritime Security 
Agency signed an MoU in 2005 which envisages cooperation in illicit drug trafficking 
and piracy. Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) Mumbai and MRCC Karachi 
are the established points of contacts on matters concerning anti smuggling, anti narcotics 
and anti piracy activities at sea”. 
  
2.268  When asked to furnish the details regarding cooperation between India and Pakistan in 
various fields and the achievements so far, the Ministry has stated that a Composite Dialogue 
Process was initiated between India and Pakistan to discuss various issues including terrorism 
and drug trafficking; peace and security including Confidence Building Measures; Sir Creek etc. 
Several rounds of talks on the issues being discussed under the aegis of the Composite Dialogue 
Process were held between India and Pakistan between 1998 and 2012.   

76 
 
2.269  In 2014, Prime Minister extended an invitation to the then Pakistani Prime Minister Mr. 
Nawaz Sharif for his swearing-in ceremony in May 2014. India’s External Affairs Minister 
visited Islamabad in December 2015, and proposed the resumption of a Comprehensive Bilateral 
Dialogue. Unfortunately all of these initiatives have been responded with acts of cross-border 
terrorism and violence against India including the cross-border terror attack on Pathankot 
Airbase on 2 January 2016; attack on Army Camp in Uri in August 2016; and terror attack on the 
convoy of Indian security forces in Pulwama by Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) on 14 
February 2019. 
2.270  On the issue of pending disputes between India and Pakistan and the fresh initiatives and 
meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has informed 
that an Inter-Ministerial Coordination Group (IMCG) at Secretary-level has been set up as a high 
level mechanism towards mainstreaming of India’s ‘Neighbourhood First’ policy, in line with 
the vision of Prime Minister.  
 
2.271  Inter-ministerial consultations amongst all relevant stakeholders including on all issues 
related to strengthening border infrastructure are part of the remit of the IMCG. 
2.272  Regarding improvement and strengthening of border with Pakistan under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has informed that in a significant development, the 
Director Generals of Military Operation (DGsMO) of India and Pakistan issued a joint statement 
on 25 February 2021 to strictly observe all agreements between the two countries on ceasefire 
and cross border infiltration along the LoC and other sectors, with effect from the midnight of 
24/25 February 2021. Both sides reiterated that existing mechanisms of hotline contact and 
border flag meetings will be utilised to resolve any unforeseen situation or misunderstanding.  
2.273  The Committee enquired whether Joint efforts have been to stop cross border terrorism, 
illegal migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons and if, so, the 
details and outcome of the same. The Ministry has responded that India has always desired 
normal neighbourly relations with Pakistan, and are committed to addressing all issues bilaterally 
and peacefully. The onus is on Pakistan to create such a conducive environment including by 
taking credible, verifiable and irreversible action to not allow any territory under its control to be 
used for cross-border terrorism against India in any manner. 
2.274  On being asked about the details and outcome of capacity building measures and 
technological cooperation between India and Pakistan during the last three years and in the 
current year, the Ministry has stated that established mechanisms including hotlines, flag 
meetings, DGMO talks and diplomatic channels exist to take up all cases of cease fire violations, 
cross-border infiltrations, smuggling of arms and narcotics and airspace violations are taken up 
with Pakistan.  
 
2.275  India has consistently stressed the need for Pakistan to take credible, irreversible and 
verifiable action to end cross-border terrorism against India and fulfil the assurances given to 
India at the highest level in January 2004 to not allow use of territories under its control for 
terrorism against India in any manner. India has repeatedly called upon Pakistan to bring the 

77 
 
perpetrators of Mumbai terror attack to justice. However, there has been no progress, even after 
all the evidence has been shared with the Pakistani side.  
  
2.276  Government continues to consistently raise the issue of Pakistan’s continued support to 
cross-border terrorism and terrorist infiltration in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora. 
Government has also briefed our partners and the international community at large on the 
continued concerns of cross-border terrorism emanating from Pakistan.  
2.277  Many terrorist entities and individuals, who find shelter in Pakistan and also engaged in 
terrorism against India, have been proscribed by the United Nations (UN), the European Union 
and other countries. 
                                                 
2.278  The Committee note that India has been pursuing the humanitarian issue of  release 
of prisoners and fishermen in Pakistan’s custody. Since 2014, India has been successful in 
securing the release and repatriation of more than 2,700 Indian prisoners including 40 
Indian fishermen and 05 Indian civilian prisoners. The Committee are aware that 
many more Indian nationals including fishermen have been languishing in Pakistani 
prisons for a long time and desire that the Ministry should step up its diplomatic efforts to 
secure their early release and repatriation to India.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 42) 
2.279  The Committee note that several rounds of talks were held under the aegis of the 
Composite Dialogue Process between 1998 and 2012 to discuss various issues including 
terrorism and drug trafficking; peace and security including Confidence Building 
Measures; Sir Creek, etc. between India and Pakistan.  The Committee further note that 
many a times, initiatives of India for resumption of the Dialogue have been responded with 
acts of cross-border terrorism and violence by Pakistan. The Committee recommend that 
India should continue to remain active and fully prepared to expose Pakistan’s act of cross-
border terrorism and violence against India at the United Nations and various multilateral 
and regional fora and counter their raising the issue of Kashmir appropriately.  

78 
 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 43 ) 
  
  
H.        Sri Lanka 
  
2.280  India remains one of Sri Lanka’s major development assistance partners with India funded 
projects spreading across the island nation. Apart from the 60,000 houses being built under the 
Indian Housing Project (which is India’s biggest grant assistance project in Sri Lanka), India has 
also been implementing numerous people-oriented High Impact Project in sectors like 
agriculture, health, child and women empowerment, education and livelihood generation. Sri 
Lanka-wide 1990 Emergency Ambulance Service has been saving precious lives in the country 
and was of immense value during the COVID pandemic. Jaffna Cultural Center, an iconic, state-
of-the-art facility is another shining example of partnership in the development cooperation 
sphere between the two countries. 
  
2.281  India has helped restore arterial railway lines, which sustained heavy damage in the 
Tsunami in 2004.  
  
2.282  India has reconnected northern Sri Lanka with the rest of the country by restoring railway 
lines, establishing signaling systems and supplying rolling stocks.  
  
2.283  A total of 13 Lines of Credit worth USD 2.68 billion have been extended to Sri Lanka to 
take up various infrastructure projects as well as solar projects and defence procurement projects. 
  
2.284  There exists an active level of defence cooperation with Sri Lanka, which includes supply 
of military hardware, joint exercises, defence personnel exchanges and goodwill visits by naval 
and post flagships. 
  
2.285  Prime Minister Modi’s first visit to Sri Lanka in 2015 was historical as the first stand-
alone bilateral visit of a Prime Minister of India since 1987. 
  
2.286  In the recent economic crisis that has gripped Sri Lanka, India has been the most 
forthcoming and largest assistance provider. India’s bilateral assistance to Sri Lanka to deal with 
the economic crisis can be divided into two broad categories: 1) assistance to meet the immediate 
requirements and 2) assisting Sri Lanka in its effort to revive the sectors affected due to the 
global pandemic and foreign reserves crisis. 
  
2.287  To meet the immediate requirements, in 2022 India has provided food, health and energy 
security package as well as foreign reserves support amounting to about USD 4 billion including 
a Line of Credit of USD 55 million for the procurement of 65000 MT of Urea fertilizer, a credit 
facility of USD 1 billion to the Government of Sri Lanka for procurement of food, medicines and 
essential items, a Line of Credit of USD 500 million for financing purchase of petroleum 
products. 
  

79 
 
2.288  On energy, several cooperative arrangements have been executed to strengthen the sector 
including an Agreement to jointly develop the Trincomalee oil tanks farm, a joint venture 
between NTPC Limited from India and the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) for developing a 50 
MW Solar Power Plant at Sampur. 
  
2.289  Regarding the way forward, fresh initiatives and development projects taken up under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has stated that the overall endeavour is to reinforce the 
demand-driven and people-centric nature of development partnership in Sri Lanka by delivering 
on projects which have a palpable impact on daily lives of the people of Sri Lanka while also 
implementing country-wide projects that could benefit Sri Lanka as a whole.  
2.290  In 2022, India committed to undertake projects such as Sri Lanka Unique Digital Identity 
Project, Hybrid renewable energy systems in the three islands off Jaffna, Projects to promote 
Buddhist ties between the two countries and establishment of 200 smart classrooms in Galle 
District. The future prospects include reorienting development partnership in accordance with the 
evolving economic situation in Sri Lanka and associated elements. This will include education, 
skill development and capacity building as well. 
 
2.291 When asked about the quantum of investment made, aids, loans and line of credit offered 
to Sri Lanka currently and whether the Government has any plan to enhance the same, the 
Ministry has stated that cumulatively, the quantum of grants, credit lines and buyer’s credit 
pledged by GOI amounts to around USD 5 billion. This is in addition to various other forms of 
support such as forex support, currency swaps etc extended by India. It needs to be highlighted 
that unprecedented, multi-pronged assistance of close to USD 4 billion to Sri Lanka in 2022 is a 
true reflection of ‘Neighbourhood First’ Policy.  
2.292  As per available figures, investments from India currently stand at around USD 2.2 
billion. Moving forward, investments shall be central to the multi-dimensional economic 
partnership with Sri Lanka with increased focus on key sectors such as renewable energy and 
infrastructure development among others. 
2.293  Regarding the details and status of projects/development projects undertaken through 
Lines of Credit/soft loans along with the amount involved in Sri Lanka, the Ministry has 
informed that India-Sri Lanka development cooperation projects under the Lines of 
Credit/Buyer’s Credit are being undertaken in several crucial sectors including railways & 
infrastructure development (about USD 1.684 billion), defence (USD 267 million), renewable 
energy (USD 100 million), water supply (USD 317 million), port development (USD 45.27 
million), supply of essential items (about USD 1.7 billion) etc.  
2.294  Of the above, six Lines of Credit and two Buyer’s Credit facilities (USD 1.468 billion) 
have been completely utilized; Projects are ongoing under six Lines of Credit (about USD 2 
billion) and two Buyer’s Credit (USD 255 million) and two Lines of Credit of USD 450 million 
remain under discussion. 

80 
 
2.295 Recently,125 State-of-the-art made in India Mahindra SUVs were handed over by GOI to 
Sri Lanka Police under the USD 100 million defence LOC. 375 more SUVs will be supplied 
by March 2023. This supply will not only augment the capacities of Sri Lanka Police but also 
strengthen our economic ties and presence of a prominent Indian company in Sri Lanka. In 
addition, implementation of the USD 100 million LOC for Solar projects is progressing well and 
the Consultant appointed for DPR preparation has started ground work. Projects under this LOC 
will further bolster cooperation in the renewable energy sector between India and Sri Lanka. 
  
2.296  On being asked about the details and status of connectivity projects, the Ministry has 
stated that  given India and Sri Lanka’s close geographical proximity, enhancing connectivity 
links is natural and mutually beneficial. The two countries have been pursuing several 
connectivity initiatives in the past years. While air links existed between Colombo (Sri Lanka) 
with several Indian cities, there was a lack of connectivity from India with the Northern and 
other parts of Sri Lanka. In order to enhance economic cooperation and tourism, air links 
between Jaffna and Chennai were established in October 2019 but had to be suspended due to the 
Covid-19 pandemic in March 2020. This connection has been resumed in December 2022 and 4 
flights per week have been started by Alliance Air.  India is extending viability gap funding to 
Alliance Air to make the flight operations viable and sustainable.  
2.297  In addition to air links, commencement of ferry services between Kankesanthurai Port in 
Jaffna and Karaikal in Puducherry is also in advanced stages. The Government of Sri Lanka has 
given approval to potential operators to start ferry services on this route and is in the process of 
completing other procedures such as establishment of immigration facilities, creation of 
necessary infrastructure etc. 
  
2.298  The Ministry has provided the following details regarding cooperation between India and 
Sri Lanka in various fields and the achievements so far:- 
2.299  Heritage Restoration Projects: Heritage restoration is a key pillar in the cultural sphere of 
development partnership. Restoration of the legendary Thiruketheeswaram temple, one of the 
five sacred Ishwarams dedicated to Lord Shiva in Mannar region of Sri Lanka, was taken up by 
GOI, following the temporary closure of the temple for 12 years due to the conflict in Sri Lanka. 
The SLR 326 million project paved way for the devotees to gather at the sacred temple yet again.  
2.300  Commemorating 2600th year of Enlightenment of Lord Buddha, a 16-feet statue of Lord 
Buddha in Sarnath style was installed at the entrance of the International Buddhist Museum 
complex in Sri Dalada Maligawa in the historic capital city of Sri Lanka, Kandy.  
2.301  An Indian Gallery developed by the National Council of Science Museums, encapsulating 
the origins of Buddhism in India and its peaceful spread to other parts of Asia and the world, was 
set up at the Buddha Tooth Relic Temple Kandy, Sri Lanka in 2013. 
2.302  Under High Impact community development Project, GOI restored Sri Lankan Heritage 
dancing school ‘Kandiyan Dancing Academy’ at the Pallekelle in Kandy.  

81 
 
2.303  Capacity Building and Human Resources Development and ITEC Programmes: India’s 
capacity building efforts in Sri Lanka are mainly undertaken through the Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC), a flagship programme of the India. Sri Lanka remains one of the 
most important ITEC partner countries, which receives 402 fully-funded slots every year for 
officials in various Ministries of Government of Sri Lanka and also for other eligible citizens of 
Sri Lanka, for short-term training courses in various prestigious institutions in India to enhance 
their skill-sets. The training courses are spread over a multitude of sectors such as management 
& leadership, international trade, tourism, textiles, agriculture, banking, accounting, artificial 
intelligence, defense and policing, yoga, renewable energy, petroleum & hydrocarbon, media, 
SMEs, Women empowerment, ICT, English language etc.  
2.304  Due to pandemic restrictions on international travel, our capacity building training courses 
were provided virtually to Sri Lankan officials through e-ITEC since early April 2020 to March 
2022, during which around 778 participants from Sri Lanka attended e-ITEC courses.  
2.305  Since March 2022, though ITEC courses were provided physically, the utilisation so far 
by the Mission in Colombo as well as our posts in Kandy, Hambantota and Jaffna is 111 (about 
28%). This is below expected levels mainly due to the ongoing economic crisis in Sri Lanka. 
However, there is rising demand for these slots with the normalisation of situation in Sri Lanka. 
Apart from the participation of Sri Lankan officials to regular courses, customised e-ITEC 
courses for Sri Lankan Police Department and Sri Lankan Ministry of Education were arranged 
during the pandemic to further reinforce the capacity building partnership between India and Sri 
Lanka. In the times of pandemic, several courses related to controlling the COVID-19 pandemic 
such as ‘COVID-19 - Good Governance Practices in a Pandemic’ and e-ITEC course on 
‘Policing during pandemic times’ were offered to Sri Lanka.  
2.306  Other Capacity Building Partnership: Apart from capacity building partnership through 
ITEC, India provides technical and capacity building assistance based on the priorities and needs 
of Sri Lanka. Some of the initiatives include: online bilateral interaction on various aspects of 
organic agriculture and plant nutrient management for Sri Lanka in July 2021, a webinar on 
“Production of Nutrients Enriched Biochar for Organic Agriculture” on the request of Sri Lanka 
council for Agricultural Research and Policy (SLCARP). 
2.307  Human Resource Development: In addition to ITEC, India offers about 750 scholarship 
slots annually for Sri Lankan students to enable them to pursue Undergraduate, Masters and 
Research in diverse subjects in India. The main categories under which the scholarships are 
offered are: Nehru Memorial Scholarship Scheme, Rajiv Gandhi Scholarship Scheme, Maulana 
Azad Scholarship Scheme, Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme and AYUSH Scholarships. 
Further, Indian institutes under ‘Study in India’ Program provide technical expertise across a 
diverse range of courses, and include programs in niche disciplines such as Ayurveda, Yoga, and 
Buddhist Studies. From the academic session 2017-18, Sri Lankan students can also appear for 
National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) in centers in India for MBBS/BDS admissions. 
IIT JEE (Advanced) entrance examinations have commenced in Sri Lanka from 2017. 

82 
 
2.308  Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: Operation Sagar-Aaraksha–I: Panama 
flagged oil tanker New Diamond incapacitated and drifted off East Coast of SL in August-
September 2020. India immediately deployed INS Sahyadri for rescuing stranded crew and 
coordinated fire fighting/salvage efforts. ICG Shaurya, Sujay and Sangram were also deployed 
for assistance along with Pollution Control Vessel Samudra Pehredaar. Integral helicopters of 
Naval Ships and Dornier aircraft were also deployed for fire fighting and assisted SL in averting 
a maritime & environment disaster. 
2.309  Operation Sagar-Aaraksha-II: Singapore registered 186m long container ship MV X-Press 
Pearl carrying hazardous chemicals and oil incapacitated in May 2021. ICG Ships Vajra and 
Vaibhav were deployed along with Dornier aircraft for fire fighting and securing the drifting 
ship. Pollution Control Vessel Samudra Prahari was deployed to carry out the assessment and 
assisted SL in minimising the effects of a maritime & environment disaster. INS Sarvekshak 
undertook survey of the debris from 25 May to 04 June 21and ICG Samudra Pehredaar carried 
out extent of oil spillage off Colombo from 10-11 June 2021. 
2.310  Mission SAGAR: During third wave of COVID pandemic in Sri Lanka, on Government 
of Sri Lanka’s request,India deployed, INS Shakti to suply 100T Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) 
at Colombo on 22 August 21. 
2.311  Delivery of Medical stores & humanitarian assistance: 25.925 MT of general/lifesaving 
medicines worth of INR 5.6 Cr ware provided to SL onboard Indian Naval Ship Gharial in May 
22. 
2.312  Artificial Limb Camp for Sri Lanka armed force personnel: 47 days Artificial Limb Camp 
for the disabled defence personnel of Sri Lanka Armed Forces was conducted on gratis basis 
from 28 Jan 2022 onwards, during which around 700 Artificial Limbs were fitted (450 for 
Armed Forces personnel and 250 for civilians in Northern Province). 
2.313  Air Lifting of Nano Fertilizers by IAF: On Government of Sri Lanka’s request, two C 17 
Aircraft were deployed 04-05 November 21 to airlift 80 T Nano fertiliser from Ahmedabad to 
Colombo to meet urgent requirements of Sri Lankan farmers.  
2.314  Defence and Maritime Security Cooperation: India and Sri Lanka share a robust defence 
and security partnership. Our cooperation includes in the area of capacity building – in defence 
platforms ranging from establishment of Maritime Rescue Coordination Center, Floating Dock 
for Sri Lankan Navy, Dornier Aircraft and ALH training. Sri Lanka is an important partner in 
information sharing and joint patrolling to counter drug/ human/ arms smuggling and maintain 
peace and order at the near shores of Indian Ocean.  
            The 6th Deputy NSA Level meeting hosted at Kochi, India on 7th July 2022 was joined by 
our maritime partners Sri Lanka, Maldives and Mauritius along with Bangladesh and Seychelles 
as observer. Sri Lanka also actively participated in Oceanographer and Hydrographer Conference 
held in India from 15-18 November 2022.  

83 
 
2.315  Trade, Technology and Tourism: India and Sri Lanka enjoy a vibrant and growing trade 
partnership, which has witnessed considerable expansion over the years. India has traditionally 
been among Sri Lanka’s largest trade partners and Sri Lanka remains among the largest trade 
partners of India in the SAARC. The entry into force of the India-Sri Lanka Free Trade 
Agreement (ISFTA) in 2000 contributed significantly towards the expansion of trade between 
the two countries which has increased from US$ 561 million in the year 1999 to US$ 5.45 billion 
currently. To further broaden the scope of FTA and to strengthen the economic, trade, 
investment and technology cooperation between India and Sri Lanka, an Economic and 
Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA) was proposed and negotiations were conducted. 
The ETCA covers both goods and services. Eleven rounds of negotiations have been completed 
so far with the 11th round being held in September 2018. Sri Lankan side has now conveyed its 
willingness to resume ETCA negotiations which is under consideration in GoI.  
2.316  In the year 2021, India was Sri Lanka’s largest trading partner with the bilateral 
merchandise trade amounting to about US$ 5.45 billion. India’s exports to Sri Lanka in this year 
amounted to more than US$ 4.62 billion while Sri Lanka’s exports to India reached US$ 829 
million. This represents an increase of more than 48 % in the overall merchandise trade between 
India and Sri Lanka which stood at US$ 3.68 billion in 2020. Fuel, pharmaceutical products, 
fabric and yarn, iron & steel, sugar, chemicals, cereals, tea & coffee, machinery, plastics etc. 
comprise some of the major exports from India. At the same time, Sri Lanka’s major exports to 
India include: mineral fuels, animal feed, tea; coffee; and spices, furniture, electrical machinery, 
apparel and fabrics etc.  
2.317  The ongoing economic uncertainty in Sri Lanka along with the acute scarcity of forex 
have created challenges in financing of imports from India such as through Letters of Credit. The 
imposition of licensing requirements and restrictions on certain imports by the Government of 
Sri Lanka to reduce forex outflow on imports and help stabilize the economic situation have 
impacted a few of India’s major exports to Sri Lanka such as vehicles. In addition, some pre-
existing challenges in terms of non-tariff measures and regulations have an influence on imports 
into Sri Lanka.  
2.318  These issues faced by Indian exporters and companies are being addressed with active 
support by the Mission. Many of these issues have been resolved successfully while efforts are 
underway to address others. The success of these efforts is reflected by the significant increase in 
bilateral trade, in particular Indian exports to Sri Lanka, during the post-pandemic period and the 
ongoing economic crisis in Sri Lanka.  
2.319  Lines of Credit from India contributed towards sustaining trade during the crisis period. 
Other innovative measure adopted since then such as permitting trade in INR (initiated in 
December 2022) will help sustain the bilateral trade in the long run. Indian business and industry 
has begun adopting innovative means such as assembly of vehicles locally in Sri Lanka to 
overcome the vehicle import restrictions.  
  

84 
 
2.320  Technology: India Sri Lanka cooperation in the field of Science & Technology covers a 
wide variety of areas. There has been a regular exchange of scientists & experts apart from 
know-how sharing. Since 2011, our bilateral cooperation in Science & Technology has been 
steered through the India-Sri Lanka Joint Committee on Science & Technology (JCST) and it has 
held five meetings so far. The last meeting of the Committee was held in January 2022 virtually, 
during which both sides reviewed the ongoing collaborative activities in the 9 areas spanning 
food technology; plant base medicines; meteorology; space research & applications, robotics & 
automation; industrial electronics, renewable energy; waste management; information and 
communication technology. It was also mutually agreed by both sides to extend the Programme 
of Cooperation (POC) for another 3 years between both countries and identified new areas such 
as like waste-water technologies, industry and biotech, sustainable agriculture, aerospace 
engineering, robotics, big data analytics, and artificial intelligence to be included in the POC. 
2.321  Further, under the India Science and Research Fellowship (ISRF) programme, which was 
launched in 2015, India offers fellowship for maximum of 10 mid-carrier scientists/researchers 
of Sri Lanka to undertake research in Indian R&D institutions.  
2.322  Tourism: India and Sri Lanka share a robust partnership in the field of tourism due to their 
enduring people-to-people ties and cultural similarities. India has traditionally been the largest 
source market for tourist arrivals in Sri Lanka and this trend has continued in the post-Covid 
years. By first week of December 2022, with 108,510 arrivals (which was the highest from any 
country), Indians constituted about 17% of total tourist arrivals to Sri Lanka in 2022. On the 
other hand, Sri Lanka was among the top 15 source markets for tourism to India in the year 2021.  
2.323  In order to enhance tourism ties, several initiatives have been taken by the Governments 
of India and Sri Lanka in recent years. An Air travel bubble was created between India and Sri 
Lanka in April 2021 to facilitate travel of tourists, business men, officials etc. Under this air 
bubble, flights between Colombo and multiple locations in India were operated by Air India, Sri 
Lankan Airways, Indigo and Vistara etc. Steps have also been taken to establish greater 
connectivity with other regions in Sri Lanka. In this regard, air links between Jaffna and Chennai 
which were suspended due to the Covid-19 pandemic were resumed in December 2022. 
Discussions on commencement of passenger ferry services between Kankesanthurai Port and 
Karaikal Port (Puducherry) etc have also reached an advanced stage.  
2.324  In order to strengthen religious ties and to promote tourism to Buddhist sites in India, on 
the invitation extended by our Prime Minister during the Virtual Bilateral Summit with Sri Lanka 
in September 2020, the inaugural international flight from Sri Lanka to the sacred city of 
Kushinagar took place on the auspicious ‘Abhidhamma Day’ on October 20, 2021. The sacred 
Kapilvastu Buddha relics from the Rajaguru Sri Subhuthi Maha Vihara of Waskaduwa were also 
taken on the flight for an exposition in India. 
                                                  
2.325  On the issue of pending disputes between India and Sri Lanka and the fresh initiatives and 
meaningful dialogues proposed to be taken to resolve such disputes, the Ministry has informed 

85 
 
that there is no boundary dispute with Sri Lanka. On the fishermen issue, at the recent 5th India-
Sri Lanka Joint Working Group Meeting on Fisheries co-chaired by Fisheries Secretaries, both 
sides agreed on the need to work a long term solution to the fishermen issue. India continues to 
remain engaged with the Government of Sri Lanka to ensure that fishermen can continue to 
pursue their livelihood in a safe, secure and sustainable manner. Recently, Indian fishermen 
resumed their participation in the annual St Anthony’s Festival in Katchachateevu Island in 
2022, after Covid gap restricted movements. 
2.326  Regarding improvement and strengthening of border with Sri Lanka under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy, the Ministry has informed that enhancing Sri Lankan maritime 
domain awareness is in the interest of India and the region as a whole. Colombo Security 
Conclave wherein maritime countries of the region (India, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Mauritius as 
members and Bangladesh and Seychelles as observers) discuss collective security concerns, is 
convened regularly. India and Sri Lanka share a robust defence and security partnership. Our 
cooperation includes capacity building to prevent crimes across maritime boundary. This is 
achieved through providing defence platforms ranging from establishment of Maritime Rescue 
Coordination Center, Floating dock for Sri Lankan Navy, Dornier Aircraft, etc. The security 
cooperation between India and Sri Lanka also involves sharing of information on issues of 
counter terrorism, narcotic smuggling, gold smuggling, human trafficking and illegal migration. 
2.327  When the Committee enquired about Joint efforts to stop cross border terrorism, illegal 
migration, smuggling of fake currency and trafficking in drugs and weapons and the outcome of 
the same, the Ministry responded that the ongoing security cooperation between various agencies 
in India and Sri Lanka has been mutually beneficial to both countries.  The security cooperation 
between India and Sri Lanka involves sharing of information on issues of counter terrorism, 
narcotic smuggling, gold smuggling, human trafficking and illegal migration. Further regular 
meetings with Police and security agencies of Sri Lanka are being held to facilitate inter agency 
cooperation and coordination. Besides on the request of Ministry of Home Affairs, the Mission 
has been regularly approaching SL Government under the provisions of Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaty, for their assistance in investigation of various cases. 
2.328  On the efforts being made by the Government to tackle the refugee crisis in India due to 
illegal migration; smuggling and trafficking in drugs and cross-border terrorism, the Ministry has 
informed that the ongoing security cooperation between various agencies in India and Sri Lanka 
has been mutually beneficial to both countries.  The security cooperation between India and Sri 
Lanka involves sharing of information on issues of counter terrorism, narcotic smuggling, gold 
smuggling, human trafficking and illegal migration. Further regular meetings with Police and 
security agencies of Sri Lanka are being held to facilitate inter agency cooperation and 
coordination. Besides on the request of Ministry of Home Affairs, the Mission has been regularly 
approaching Sri Lankan Government under the provisions of Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, 
for their assistance in investigation of various cases 

86 
 
2.329  The major initiatives taken by India in the field of defence and security/maritime security 
cooperation and cooperation in energy, health and education sectors with Sri Lanka under the 
Neighbourhood First Policy and the achievement so far,  is as under:-  
  
2.330  Energy: In early 2022, Lanka IOC also concluded an arrangement to jointly develop the 
Upper Tank Farm at Trincomalee with CPC for hydrocarbon related businesses including 
storage. Lanka IOC played a key role in enhancing the energy security of Sri Lanka specially 
during the economic crisis and continues to fulfill an important role in the country. National 
Thermal Power Corporation NTPC is working with Ceylon Electricity Board CEB on 
establishing a 50 MW solar power plant at Sampur near Trincomalee as well as a 300 MW LNG-
based power plant at Kerawalapitiya near Colombo. An Indian entity named Petronet LNG 
Limited (PLL) is also interested in getting involved in the establishment of infrastructure in Sri 
Lanka for receiving LNG (LNG FSRU and pipelines). Further, hybrid renewable energy projects 
will be set up on three islands off the coast of Jaffna with Indian assistance.  
2.331  Health: India remains by far the biggest supplier of medicines and medical devices to Sri 
Lanka. Pharmaceutical exports from India consistently feature among the top 10 items of export 
to Sri Lanka. Further, both sides are exploring greater collaboration in terms of manufacturing of 
medicines in Sri Lanka as well as for expedited procurement from India. During the Covid 
pandemic, supply of vaccines from India helped initiate Sri Lanka’s vaccination programme 
earlier than anticipated. Since then both sides have worked together on countering the challenges 
posed by the pandemic including through cooperation on Covid surveillance. India also supplied 
liquid medical oxygen to Sri Lanka when demand had increased due to Covid apart from public 
and private donations of medicines during the economic crisis.  
2.332  Education: India has taken various initiatives in the field of education and human resource 
development in Sri Lanka. Besides the scholarships,Indian institutes under ‘Study in India’ 
Program provide technical expertise across a diverse range of courses, and include programs in 
niche disciplines such as Ayurveda, Yoga, and Buddhist Studies. Further, from the academic 
session 2017-18, Sri Lankan students can also appear for National Eligibility cum Entrance Test 
(NEET) in centers in India for MBBS/BDS admissions. IIT JEE (Advanced) entrance 
examinations have commenced in Sri Lanka from 2017. In addition, India and Sri Lanka are 
working towards collaboration in Higher Education secotor, including by establishment of 
offshore Campuses of Indian Higher Education Institutes in Sri Lanka and extension of their 
courses in Sri Lanka. 
Defence and Maritime Security Cooperation:  
2.333 Capacity Building: 
MRCC: The MoU and Agreements pertaining to MRCC between GoI&GoSL and M/s 
BEL & MoD, Sri Lanka respectively have been signed on 28 March 2022 at Sri Lanka. 

87 
 
Thereafter, contract between MEA and BEL was signed 04 April 2022. The project is 
progressing as per the Project Management Plan. 
Floating Dock: GoI had proposed to supply 4000 T floating dock on grant basis. The G-G 
agreements pertaining to FD was signed on 15 March 2022 in Colombo. The contract 
between M/s Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and Sri Lanka Navy (SLN) was signed on 22 
March 2022 in Colombo. The Contract between MEA and GSL was signed on 04 April 
2022.The project is progressing well and expected to be completed in 2023.  
Dornier aircraft:-IN Dornier (INDO 232) was inducted as SLAF SMR- 846 on 15 August 
2022 at SLAF Base, Katunayake.The IN Do Technical Team (05) arrived at SL on 25 
August 2022.  
ALH Training:-The IN Advance Light Helicopter (ALH) was deployed to Sri Lanka from 
23-31 March 2022, which provided SLAF pilots an excellent training opportunity for co-
pilot experience and deck landing onboard SLNS Sayurala. 
Visits by Naval Ships: Total 16 Indian Naval Ships/ Sailing Boats undertook OTRs in Sri 
Lanka (Colombo, Trincomalee and Hambantota ports) in year 2021 and 2022 each. 
2.334  The details and outcome of capacity building measures and technological cooperation 
between India and Sri Lanka during the last three years and in the current year is as under:- 
2.335  Capacity Building Measures: Since 2019, a total of 1,138 Sri Lankan nationals have 
received capacity building trainings under our ITEC programmes. Details of participants in each 
financial year for the last 3 years are as follows. 
2019-20                       :          279 
2020-21                       :        326 
2021-22                       :          422 
2022- till now :                       111 
  
2.336  Besides the enthusiastic participation for Sri Lankan officials for the regular ITEC 
courses, customised courses for Sri Lankan Police Department, Sri Lanka's Commission to 
Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption and Sri Lankan Ministry of Education were 
arranged in the last 3 years to further reinforce the capacity building partnership between India 
and Sri Lanka. 
2.337  Technological Cooperation: India Sri Lanka cooperation in the field of Science & 
Technology covers a wide variety of areas. There has been a regular exchange of scientists & 
experts apart from know-how sharing. Since 2011, our bilateral cooperation in Science & 
Technology has been steered through the India-Sri Lanka Joint Committee on Science & 

88 
 
Technology (JCST) and it has held five meetings so far. In the last three years, two meetings of 
JCST has been held in August 2019 and January 2022 respectively. During the last meeting of 
the JCST which was held virtually in January 2022, both sides reviewed the ongoing 
collaborative activities in the 9 areas spanning food technology; plant base medicines; 
meteorology; space research & applications, robotics & automation; industrial electronics, 
renewable energy; waste management; information and communication technology. It was also 
mutually agreed by both sides to extend the Programme of Cooperation (POC) for another 3 
years between both countries and identified new areas such as like waste-water technologies, 
industry and biotech, sustainable agriculture, aerospace engineering, robotics, big data analytics, 
and artificial intelligence to be included in the POC. 
2.338  Further, under the India Science and Research Fellowship (ISRF) programme, which was 
launched in 2015, India offers fellowship for maximum of 10 mid-carrier scientists/researchers 
of Sri Lanka to undertake research in Indian R&D institutions.  
2.339  In addition, some important aspects of our bilateral Science & Technology collaboration 
are as follows: 
 South Asia satellite: Sri Lanka was the first country that agreed to be part of South Asia 
satellite, which was launched on 05 May 2017.  
 Civil Nuclear Cooperation: A bilateral agreement on Civil Nuclear Cooperation was 
concluded in February 2015, which entered into force in June 2015. The Joint Committee 
has been constituted on both sides and the first round of JWG was held in Mumbai in 
November 2016. 
 Information & Technology: A MoU on cooperation in Electronics & IT covering e-
Governance, m- Governance, e-Public Services Delivery including e-learning, 
telemedicine, cyber security, etc. was signed in January 2018. Further, Sri Lanka became 
the first SAARC country to join the National Knowledge Network (NKN) which enabled 
Sri Lankan Universities to have digital access to around 1600 universities in India. 
 Agriculture: A MoU on Cooperation in the field of Agriculture was signed in January 
2012.  
 Telecommunications: A MoU was signed in January 2012 that provides for establishing a 
mechanism of technical and institutional cooperation in the field of telecommunications, 
with the purpose of development of telecommunications in both the countries. 
2.340  The Committee observe that presently, Sri Lanka is in the grip of an economic crisis and 
enquired whether the Government has sought any assistance from India or India has increased its 
quantum of investment, aids, loans or any other assistance. The Ministry  has stated that in 
response to requests from Government of Sri Lanka for support in addressing various challenges 
emerging from the economic crisis in the country, India offered Lines of Credit (LOCs) and a 
credit facility with a total value of US$ 1555 million in 2022. These include: US$ 500 million 
LOC for purchase of petroleum products in February 2022, a US$ 1 billion Credit Facility for 
supply of food, fuel and other essential items in March 2022 and a US$ 55 million LOC for the 
procurement of Urea Fertilizer in June 2022. Apart from these, the RBI has provided US$ 400 
million as Currency swap for Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) in January 2022 to support Sri 

89 
 
Lanka. In addition to the financial assistance, RBI has deferred about US$ 2 billion payment 
liabilities by CBSL under the Asian Clearing Union mechanism till June 2022. 
2.341  Investment led growth is perhaps the most sustainable pathway for Sri Lanka to achieve 
expedited economic recovery and ensure sustained long-term growth. Indian public and private 
sector entities are examining various ways and projects to further expand their presence and 
investments in Sri Lanka in areas such as energy, power, real estate, ports & connectivity, 
renewable energy, minerals, and manufacturing. According to information provided by the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka in connection with Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) inflows into Sri 
Lanka, FDI from India amounted to US$ 2,227 million by the year 2021 making India the 3rd 
largest investor in Sri Lanka. Existing investments from India into Sri Lanka involve areas such 
as energy, hospitality, entertainment, real estate, telecommunications, banking, manufacturing 
etc. In the year 2021, India was also the largest source of FDI for Sri Lanka with an inflow of 
US$ 142 million.  
2.342  India has also engaged constructively with Sri Lanka on debt restructuring that will help 
Sri Lanka achieve debt sustainability and also enable the approval of the support programme for 
Sri Lanka under consideration in the IMF. It may be recollected that India had also advocated the 
need for supporting Sri Lanka at the IMF. Some of the marquee Indian investment project have 
either been initiated in the recent past (West Container Terminal at Colombo Port, ITC Tower 
and Hotel) are nearing completion. 
2.343  In addition to the above, India has extended the following support to Sri Lanka: 
 More than 26 tons of drugs and other medical supplies worth around INR 6 crores have 
been provided to Peradeniya University Hospital, Jaffna Teaching Hospital, Hambantota 
General Hospital and Ambulance Service ‘1990’ in April-May 2022 to meet the acute 
shortage of medicines.  
 1 Lakh Rapid Antigen Kits worth INR 99,91,427 were donated in February 2022. 
 Donation by the Government of Tamil Nadu worth more than INR 176 crores including 
40,000 MT rice, 500 MT milk powder and more than 100 MT of medicines in 2022. 
 A consignment of Kerosene (15,000 litres) was delivered for the use of fishermen in Sri 
Lanka. 
 Distribution of dry rations to the needy sections all around Sri Lanka. 
                                                
 2.344  The Committee note that Sri Lanka is one of our major development assistance 
partners. Under the Indian Housing Project, 60,000 houses are being built and numerous 
people-oriented High Impact Projects in sectors like agriculture, health, child and women 
empowerment, education and livelihood generation are under implementation. Several 
projects under Lines of Credit are under discussion. Implementation of the USD 100 

90 
 
million Solar project is expected to bolster cooperation in the renewable energy sector 
between India and Sri Lanka. The Committee further note that eleven rounds of 
negotiations on an Economic and Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA)  covering 
goods and services  have been completed as far back as in  September 2018 and the Sri 
Lankan side has now conveyed its willingness to resume the said negotiations.  The 
Committee understand that the said ETCA would broaden the scope of Free Trade 
Agreement between India and Sri Lanka  strengthening economic, trade, investment and 
technology cooperation and therefore, desire that the negotiations should be resumed  for 
its early  and successful conclusion. It should also be the endeavour of the Government to 
complete all the ongoing projects in various sectors expeditiously while taking up new 
initiatives for cooperation in capacity building and skill development. 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 44 ) 
2.345  The Committee note that the ongoing economic uncertainty in Sri Lanka along with 
the acute scarcity of forex have created challenges in financing of imports from India such 
as through Letters of Credit. Imposition of licensing requirements and restrictions on 
certain imports by Sri Lanka to reduce forex outflow to stabilize their current economic 
situation have impacted a few of India’s major exports to Sri Lanka such as vehicles. In 
addition, some pre-existing challenges in terms of non-tariff measures and regulations also 
have had some repercussions. The Committee also note that many of these issues have been 
resolved successfully while efforts are underway to address others. The Committee feel that 
despite the ongoing economic crisis in Sri Lanka, there is scope for smooth and enhanced 
bilateral trade between the two countries and they, therefore, urge the Ministry and Indian 
Mission to play a more proactive role  in resolving all the pending issues so that significant 
increase in  Indian exports to Sri Lanka is achieved.  

91 
 
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 45 ) 
2.346  The Committee are aware of the long pending fishermen issue between India and Sri 
Lanka. The Ministry has informed that in the 5th Joint Working Group Meeting on 
Fisheries held in March 2022, both countries have agreed on the need to work out a long 
term solution to the fishermen issue. In view of Indian fishermen getting arrested and their 
boats being seized by Sri Lankan Navy every now and then, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to consistently engage with the Sri Lankan Government through meaningful 
dialogues so that a permanent solution to the issue of fishermen and their livelihoods  is 
worked out in a humanitarian manner. The Committee desire that the Ministry should also 
take initiatives for maritime domain awareness in its extended neighbourhood. 
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 46 ) 
2.347  The Committee note that India and Sri Lanka share a robust defence and security 
partnership. Our cooperation includes capacity building to prevent crimes across maritime 
boundary ranging from establishment of Maritime Rescue Coordination Center, Floating 
Dock for Sri Lankan Navy, Dornier Aircraft, etc. Security cooperation between India and 
Sri Lanka also involves sharing of information on issues of counter terrorism, narcotic 
smuggling, gold smuggling, human trafficking and illegal migration. Besides, the Colombo 
Security Conclave wherein maritime countries of the region (India, Sri Lanka, Maldives 
and Mauritius as members and Bangladesh and Seychelles as observers) discuss collective 
security concerns, is convened regularly. The Committee desire that security partnership 
with Sri Lanka should further be strengthened for enhanced inter-agency cooperation and 
coordination. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should take fresh initiatives for 
enhancing the maritime domain awareness of Sri Lanka in the interest of the country and 
the region as a whole.  

92 
 
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 47 ) 
2.348  The Committee find that in 2022, India had offered US$ 1555 million credit facility 
to Sri Lanka in response to their requests  for support to tide over the economic crisis they 
were facing. This included US$ 500 million LOC for purchase of petroleum products,  US$ 
1 billion Credit Facility for supply of food, fuel and other essential items  and  US$ 55 
million LOC for the procurement of urea fertilizer. Apart from these, the RBI provided 
US$ 400 million as currency swap for Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) in January 2022. 
In addition to the above financial assistance, RBI also deferred about US$ 2 billion 
payment liabilities by CBSL under the Asian Clearing Union mechanism. Since Sri Lanka 
is still reeling under financial crisis, the Committee desire that the Government should 
continue to be Sri Lanka’s biggest friend in times of crisis and support Sri Lanka by 
offering favourable terms for Lines of Credit,  currency swap and other financial 
measures, if required by Sri Lanka.   
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 48 ) 
2.349  The Committee note that India is also the largest source of FDI for Sri Lanka with 
an inflow of US$ 142 million in 2021.  Indian public and private sector entities are 
examining  ways and projects to further expand their presence and investments in Sri 
Lanka in areas such as energy, power, real estate, ports & connectivity, renewable energy, 
minerals and manufacturing. As investment led growth is perhaps the most sustainable 
pathway for Sri Lanka to achieve expedited economic recovery, the Committee urge the 
Government to facilitate Indian public and private sector companies to invest in projects 
and set up businesses in Sri Lanka . 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 49 ) 

93 
 
 2.350    The Committee has noticed that India has also engaged constructively with Sri 
Lanka on debt restructuring and in enabling the approval of the support programme for 
Sri Lanka in the IMF. The Committee appreciate the approach of India and desire that the 
Government should also strongly advocate the need for supporting Sri Lanka at the IMF, 
to other countries.   
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 50 ) 
                                                           
  

94 
 
CHAPTER III 
 REGIONAL FRAMEWORKS UNDER INDIA’S NEIGHBOURHOOD FIRST POLICY 
3.1      Under the Neighbourhood First Policy, India engage with its neighbours under regional 
frameworks like South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), Bay of Bengal 
Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) and Bangladesh-
Bhutan-India-Nepal (BBIN). 
3.2      When asked to furnish the details regarding India’s engagement under regional platforms 
such as BIMSTEC, SAARC and BBIN and whether the Government has any plan to enhance its 
role for more outcome oriented approach, the Ministry has stated that India remains committed 
to working with member States in SAARC to achieve the objectives laid down in the SAARC 
Charter including cooperation in areas of common interest.  
3.3      In BIMSTEC, India is the Lead Country for security pillar under which there are three 
sub-sectors - Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC), Disaster Management and 
Energy Security.  
3.4      BBIN Motor Vehicle Agreement (MVA) was signed in June, 2015 during the meeting of 
the Transport Ministers of the participating countries in Thimpu, Bhutan. Bhutan, pending 
ratification by its Parliament, in April 2017 gave its consent for implementation of the BBIN 
MVA by the three countries Bangladesh, India and Nepal. A draft MoU to implement the BBIN 
MVA amongst these three countries was agreed in a meeting held in March 2022. Draft Cargo 
Protocol and Passenger Protocol are also under discussion to operationalise the BBIN MVA. 
3.5      During the course of evidence on 16 December 2021, the representative of the Ministry 
highlighted the likely benefits of the BBIN MVA as under:- 
“These Protocols contain the modalities for implementation of the agreement and  
involves technical level discussion. The BBIN MVA will allow BBIN countries to 
move   forward with implementation of land transportation facilitation arrangements, 
enable the exchange of traffic lights and ease cross-border movement of goods, vehicles 
and people thereby helping to expand people to people contact, trade and economic 
exchanges between them. No doubt, BBIN MVA will make border trade and transport 
through North Eastern Region of India to and from Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal very 
much  more efficient and it will definitely have tremendous economic benefits”.  
                                                 
3.6      Regarding the manner in which BIMSTEC, SAARC and BBIN can be made more 
effective for ensuring stability and prosperity in the neighbourhood, the Committee have been 
informed that member States are convinced that given their geographical contiguity, abundant 
natural and human resources, historical linkages and rich cultural heritage, there is great potential 
for promoting deeper cooperation through collective efforts in the BIMSTEC region. At the 5th 

95 
 
Summit, in line with India’s commitment towards strengthening BIMSTEC, Prime Minister 
announced the following initiatives: 
i. A one time grant of USD 1 million to the operational budget of the Secretariat to 
complete institution building tasks - implemented; 
  
ii. A capacity building programme by ICRIER (Indian Council for Research on 
International Economic Relations) in collaboration with ADB on Trade Facilitation – first 
such programme planned for April-May 2023; 
  
iii. Expansion of the scope of the existing BIMSTEC Nalanda Scholarship Scheme - 
implemented; 
  
iv. Establishment of networking scheme among institutes of Marine Sciences in the 
BIMSTEC region – implementation under process; and 
  
v. Commissioned a Study by RIS on creating regional value chains on value added 
agricultural products in the BIMSTEC region – implementation under process. 
  
3.7      The Ministry has further stated that despite its sincere efforts, SAARC is not able to 
function optimally due to hurdles created by one SAARC member State, as a result of which, 
SAARC meetings have not been held in recent years and the progress on this platform has been 
limited.  
3.8      On India’s engagements with BIMSTEC and SAARC, the representative of the Ministry, 
during the course of evidence on 16 December 2021 stated:- 
“ I would talk about SAARC and BIMSTEC where India’s engagement are an important 
element of the Government’s Neighbourhood First Policy. As founding members of both 
SAARC and BIMSTEC, we believe these are important vehicles for building peaceful, 
friendly and prosperous neighbourhood. BIMSTEC’s unique strength is in the 
connectivity it forges between South and South East Asia. In the recent years, it has 
emerged as one of the more promising sub-regional groupings with growing convergence 
in economic and strategic interests in the member-States along the Bay of Bengal…... 
India also continues to make significant contributions to further development of SAARC 
cooperation activities. India initiated a SAARC-level COVID-19 Emergency Fund and 
announced a contribution of 10 million dollars to meet the immediate requirement of 
countries in the region. We provided assistance worth 4.19 million dollars through the 
Fund to the SAARC member-States to support their national efforts against the pandemic 
including supply of medicines, medical equipment and capacity building measures”   

96 
 
3.9      While deposing before the Committee on 12 January 2021, one of the non-official 
witnesses stated:- 
“I think, BIMSTEC which has come up in the last few years very strongly as an 
important regional organization is something in which we should continue to invest 
very greatly. For a very long time, BIMSTEC did not receive the kind of attention it 
deserves because it was seen as a kind of rebound organization that whenever India 
wanted to play down SAARC, it would give more importance to BIMSTEC, but this 
approach has changed. I think, the emphasis of the Government on giving importance to 
BIMSTEC, on dealing with all the BIMSTEC countries, thinking of projects which unite 
all these     countries is a very good step and we should continue with that.       
At the same time, in my view, SAARC has a narrative value which we should not ignore 
and which we have to keep in mind. One very significant sign of that was when our 
Prime Minister convened a summit meeting of SAARC leaders on account of the corona 
virus pandemic in April last year. It was a very significant step. Although Pakistan did  
not reciprocate in the way it should have, nonetheless, as I said, SAARC has a narrative 
value which we should not ignore and we should continue to have an approach which 
utilizes SAARC whenever the occasion arises. I think, to ignore it completely would also 
not be in our interest because, as I said, the China factor is ever present and we do not 
want to ignore something to the extent that the organization starts looking elsewhere”.     
                                                
3.10    The Committee note that India’s engagement with its neighbours under regional 
frameworks like SAARC, BIMSTEC and BBIN is an important element of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee recognize the potential for promoting deeper 
cooperation and regional integration through better partnerships under these regional 
frameworks. From the perspective of security also, a collective and coordinated efforts of 
member States in the region will prove more effective in countering terrorism and keeping 
a check on the various instruments used by terrorists to expand their activities. This would 
result in a secure and peaceful neighbourhood where growth and development can be 
accelerated.    The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make persistent efforts for 
strengthening and re-energizing these regional bodies to make them function more 
effectively. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 51 ) 

97 
 
3.11   The Committee are aware that BIMSTEC has emerged as an important regional 
organization in recent years while not much progress has been made under SAARC due to 
hurdles created by one member State. As one of the founding members of SAARC and 
BIMSTEC, the Committee desire that in the interest of the region, India should play a 
more pro-active role in both the bodies and formulate a fresh strategy for the purpose and 
to keep them active and utilize both whenever the occasion arises. As enhancing greater 
cooperation and partnerships amongst the countries in the neighbourhood is essential to 
achieve regional integration in all spheres, the Committee urge the Ministry to take the 
initiative for collective and coordinated efforts so that the member countries are able to 
work more effectively towards ensuring peace, stability and prosperity in the region and do 
not start looking elsewhere.  
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 52) 
3.12    The Committee find that a draft MoU to implement BBIN Motor Vehicle Agreement 
among Bangladesh, India and Nepal was agreed in March 2022 and draft Cargo and 
Passenger Protocols are under discussion to operationalize the BBIN MVA. As BBIN MVA 
would result in tremendous economic benefits for border trade and transport through the 
North Eastern Region, the Committee urge the Government to make concerted efforts for 
early finalization of the Cargo Protocol and Passenger Protocol for operationalizing  BBIN 
MVA. 
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                           (Recommendation Sl. No. 53) 
  
3.13    The Committee note that networking among institutes of Marine Sciences in the 
BIMSTEC region and study on creating value chains for agricultural products in the 

98 
 
BIMSTEC region are under process. With a view to promoting deeper cooperation 
through collective efforts in the BIMSTEC region, the Committee urge the Government to 
actively coordinate with BIMSTEC countries for early implementation of the above 
networking scheme  and urge RIS to  complete  their study  on creating  value chains for 
value added agricultural products in the BIMSTEC region. 
                                                                                             (Recommendation Sl. No. 54) 
 A.        The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation  
3.14    The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), founded in 1985 is a 
regional consensus-based organization consisting of eight member States. Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are the seven founding members. Afghanistan 
joined the regional organization in 2007 through the signing of a Joint Declaration. 
3.15    On the role of SAARC in strengthening regional cooperation and stability of the region 
and whether this regional organization has become defunct and ineffective, the Ministry has 
responded that SAARC had been created with the objectives to promote welfare of the people of 
South Asia and improve their quality of life. The scope and substance of cooperation under 
SAARC has expanded over the years in diverse fields including trade and finance, economic 
integration, security, environment, education, culture, agriculture, border connectivity, 
telecommunication, S&T, etc providing a firm basis for genuine partnership among the people of 
the region. A number of sub-regional and regional projects in social, economic and infrastructure 
fields are at different stages of implementation under the SAARC Development Fund. 
  
3.16    SAARC leaders have pronounced that their ultimate goal is to create South Asian 
Economic Union (SAEU) in a phased and planned manner through a Free Trade Area, a Customs 
Union, a Common Market and a Common Economic and Monetary Union. 
  
3.17    Improved intra-regional connectivity is the sine qua non for effective regional integration. 
SAARC’s quest for strengthening connectivity is manifested in the declaration of 2010-2020, as 
the ‘SAARC Decade of Intra- regional Connectivity’. 
  
3.18    While SAARC has made good progress in some areas of cooperation, it has lagged behind 
in others. SAARC has not been able to achieve its full potential as several important connectivity 
and trade initiatives such SAARC Motor Vehicle Agreement, SAARC Railways Agreement, 
Agreement on Regional Air Services, Agreement on Trade in Services etc. are held up due to 
lack of consensus among all member States. Our efforts toward collective collaboration and 
prosperity have been hampered by acts of terrorism and threats to national security. 
Nevertheless, it has not impeded us in coming together to jointly address the latest challenge 
posed by COVID-19 Pandemic. 
  
3.19    When asked whether SAARC is paramount for regional cooperation and if so, the new 
initiatives to re-energize this regional organization and the bilateral mechanism to review 

99 
 
relations with neighbouring countries, the Ministry has informed that the role of SAARC in 
fostering regional cooperation is indisputable in its 35 years of existence. India plays a pivotal 
role in SAARC because of the historical legacy, cultural commonalities, its geographic position, 
size and economy. Almost all SAARC initiatives are India-driven. At every Summit, it is India 
that makes a number of unilateral offers in the spirit of robust regionalism. 
  
3.20    At the last Summit in Kathmandu in November 2014, India made  a number 
of  announcements to boost regional cooperation including enhancing cross border connectivity 
by rail, road and air; increasing intra-regional tourism and creating cross-border tourist circuits; 
setting up a Special Purpose Facility for Infrastructure Development; introduction of the SAARC 
Business Traveler card; use of solar energy and micro-grids to provide electricity; monitoring 
and surveillance of polio free countries in the region; funds to establish SAARC Regional Supra 
Reference Laboratory for TB; providing immediate medical visas to patients and their attendants 
visiting India for treatment, etc. Some of these announcements have been implemented while 
there is work in progress on others. 
  
3.21    The Ministry has also stated in its Background Note for the sitting of the Committee on 18 
December, 2020 that India’s engagement with SAARC is an important aspect of the 
Neighbourhood First Policy.  Regional cooperation under SAARC has been adversely affected 
due to continued support to cross border terrorism and interference in the internal affairs of 
member States by one country.  
3.22    Regarding Regional Cooperation under SAARC, the representative of the Ministry, 
during the course of evidence on 16 December 2021 submitted:- 
  
“….SAARC Regional Cooperation has been adversely affected due to the reasons 
well     known to the hon. Members. However, various SAARC sectoral cooperation 
mechanisms and SAARC bodies such South Asian University, SAARC Development 
Fund continue to function. India has also continued its commitment to cooperate under  
SAARC such as South Asia satellite and extension of National Knowledge 
Network.  India   also took the initiative to hold a video conference of SAARC leaders 
last year to  lead the regional effort in the fight against the COVID-19 Pandemic. This led 
to the establishment of the SAARC COVID -19 Emergency Fund under which it has 
supplied   medicine and equipment worth Rs. 30.09 crores. Besides which, as I have said, 
we have taken several   capacity building measures for SAARC countries which has been  
appreciated by them”. 
  
                                                 
  
3.23    The Committee enquired whether the Government has taken up the issue of continued 
support to cross border terrorism and interference in the internal affairs of member States by one 
country with other member States for resolving the issue along with the details and outcome of 
the same. The Ministry has informed that India has, on various occasions, reiterated that the 
region’s efforts for greater collaboration have been repeatedly challenged with threats and acts of 
terrorism. India also reiterated that it is necessary to eliminate the scourge of terrorism in all its 
forms, without any discrimination and end the ecosystem of its support, for the region’s survival. 
Several SAARC member States expressed their inability to participate in the 19th SAARC 
Summit that was scheduled in November 2016 in Pakistan due to concerns arising from 

100 
 
increased cross border terrorist attacks in the region and growing interference in the internal 
affairs of member States by one country. Members have also expressed concern at key SAARC 
connectivity initiatives getting delayed due to lack of response by the same country. As a result 
of its actions leading to these developments, the country stands isolated. More recently, during 
the Informal meeting of the SAARC Council of Ministers held on 24 September 2020, India 
reiterated that it is crucial to collectively resolve to defeat the scourge of terrorism including the 
forces that nurture, support and encourage it to generate the much needed trust and confidence to 
collectively build a stronger and prosperous SAARC.   
  
                                                 
3.24    On being asked whether the Government is working on any new strategy/approach to 
strengthen regional cooperation under SAARC, the Ministry has stated that India attaches 
highest priority to the development and prosperity of the region under its Neighbourhood First 
Policy. As a founding member of SAARC, India is committed to strengthening regional 
cooperation and integration. India announced several initiatives in the recent years geared 
towards promoting people-to-people contacts and connectivity in the region. India offered 
extension of its National Knowledge Network to countries in the region; launched the South Asia 
Satellite in 2017; continues to support the South Asian University; and initiated a video 
conference of SAARC Leaders on 15 March 2020 to collectively work together to fight the 
COVID-19 Pandemic. At the conference, India announced the creation of a COVID-19 
Emergency Response Fund for the countries of the region and committed US $ 10 million to 
meet the immediate costs of combating the pandemic. India has so far supplied essential drugs, 
medical consumables, Covid-19 protection and testing kits, and other equipment worth US $ 
4.05 million through the Fund. 
  
  
3.25    The Committee note that the scope and substance of cooperation under SAARC has 
expanded over the years to diverse fields including trade and finance, economic integration, 
security, environment, education, culture, agriculture, border connectivity, 
telecommunication, S&T, etc. providing a firm basis for genuine partnership among the 
people of the region. A number of sub-regional and regional projects in social, economic 
and infrastructure fields are at different stages of implementation under the SAARC 
Development Fund. The Ministry has stated that SAARC leaders have pronounced that 
their ultimate goal is to create South Asian Economic Union in a phased and planned 
manner through a Free Trade Area, a Customs Union, a Common Market and a Common 
Economic and Monetary Union. The Committee desire that tangible outcomes and 
maximum benefits should be ensured under the SAARC Development Fund and urge the 

101 
 
Government to work in close coordination with the member States  towards fulfilling the 
ultimate goal of creating a South Asian Economic Union. 
                                                                                           (Recommendation Sl. No. 55) 
 
 3.26    Though SAARC has made good progress in some areas of cooperation, it has not 
been able to achieve its full potential as several important connectivity and trade initiatives 
such as SAARC Motor Vehicle Agreement, SAARC Railways Agreement, Agreement on 
Regional Air Services, Agreement on Trade in Services, etc. are held up since 2014 due to 
lack of consensus among all member States. Efforts toward collective collaboration and 
prosperity have been hampered by acts of terrorism and threats to national security by one 
country. In view of the vast potential offered by the South Asian region, it should be the 
endeavour of the Government to work towards realization of the full potential of SAARC 
through increased cooperation and collaboration with all other member countries isolating 
the defaulter country. The feasibility of establishing a common platform to fight against 
acts of terrorism may also be explored. The Committee are hopeful that India would be 
instrumental in bringing the SAARC countries together and in jointly addressing the issue 
of cross border terrorism as done during the global COVID-19 pandemic. 
  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 56) 
  
3.27    The Committee note that at the last Summit of SAARC held in November 2014 in 
Kathmandu, India made  a number of  announcements to boost regional cooperation 
including enhancing cross border connectivity by rail, road and air; increasing intra-
regional tourism and creating cross-border tourist circuits; setting up a Special Purpose 
Facility for Infrastructure Development; introduction of the SAARC Business Traveler 
card; use of solar energy and micro-grids to provide electricity; monitoring and 

102 
 
surveillance of polio free countries in the region; funds to establish SAARC Regional Supra 
Reference Laboratory for TB; providing immediate medical visas to patients and their 
attendants visiting India for treatment, etc. Some of these announcements have been 
implemented while work is in progress on others. The Committee are of the view that 
effective implementation of all the said announcements would promote regional integration 
and improved regional cooperation under SAARC and urge the Ministry to make all our 
efforts for effective and  early implementation of all the said initiatives. 
  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 57 ) 
  
3.28    In view of the strategic importance of the regional body SAARC, the Committee are 
of the opinion that  that no member country should be allowed to impede the effective 
functioning of this forum and collective efforts need to be made by the other member 
countries to thwart any attempts to destabilize it. On account of the pivotal role of India in 
SAARC, the Committee urge the Government to take the initiative for coordinated efforts 
amongst the majority of the member countries ignoring the one so that regional 
cooperation under SAARC is promoted and not hampered due to lack of response from 
one country.  
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 58 ) 
  
 
B.        The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
3.29    The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(BIMSTEC)  is a unique regional organization linking South Asia with South East Asia while 
focusing on India’s core concerns in the region thus fulfilling India’s key foreign policy priorities 
of ‘Neighborhood First’ and ‘Act East’. The member countries of BIMSTEC include 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand. India is currently leading 

103 
 
the Security sector out of a total of 7 priority sectors under BIMSTEC Cooperation. The Security 
sector consists of 3 sub-sectors, Counter Terrorism and Trans-national Crime (CTTC); Disaster 
Management; and Energy. The Fifth BIMSTEC Summit was held on 30 March 2022 in 
Colombo, Sri Lanka in virtual mode. At the Summit, the Leaders adopted the BIMSTEC Charter, 
a milestone in the transition of BIMSTEC from a grouping into a regional organization. India 
ratified the Charter on 12 August 2022 and deposited the instrument of ratification with the 
BIMSTEC Secretariat. The leaders also issued a Joint Declaration and witnessed the signing of 
three documents namely, the BIMSTEC Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal 
Matters; MoU on Mutual Cooperation between Diplomatic Academies/Training Institutions of 
BIMSTEC Member States; and the Memorandum of Association on the Establishment of the 
BIMSTEC Technology Transfer Facility in 
Colombo.                                                                                                 
3.30    On the role of BIMSTEC in strengthening regional cooperation and stability of the region, 
the Ministry has stated that BIMSTEC was founded as an informal sub-regional forum in 1997 
with a limited mandate to pursue project-based cooperation. It was envisaged to be a sector-
driven organization with the purpose to create an enabling environment for rapid economic 
development. Over the years, BIMSTEC has evolved into a distinctive regional organization by 
increasing membership, expanding mandate, building formal institutions and laying down norms 
for long-term cooperation. 
  
3.31    Today, BIMSTEC is playing an important role in regional cooperation through numerous 
activities and projects. BIMSTEC cooperation has expanded significantly in a range of 14 
diverse sectors. India is currently leading 4 such areas, namely, counter terrorism and trans-
national crime; transport and communication; tourism; and environmental and disaster 
management. Other areas of cooperation are: Trade and investment; culture, energy, agriculture, 
poverty alleviation, technology, fisheries, public health, people to people contact and climate 
change. There has been extensive cooperation among the Member States in all these areas.  
  
3.32    BIMSTEC countries have institutionalized some important mechanisms for stability, such 
as BIMSTEC Convention on Cooperation in Combating International Terrorism, Transnational 
Organized Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking (2009) while BIMSTEC Convention on Mutual 
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters is ready for signing at the next BIMSTEC Summit. The 
21st Session of Senior Officials Meeting held in September 2020 has also endorsed the final text 
of the BIMSTEC Charter for approval of the 17th BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting. A BIMSTEC 
Transport Connectivity master plan is currently under the process of finalisation and is expected 
to be endorsed at the next BIMSTEC Summit.  
  
3.33    When enquired whether BIMSTEC is paramount for regional cooperation and if so, the 
new initiatives to re-energize this regional organization and the bilateral mechanism to review 
relations with neighbouring countries, the Ministry has responded that over the years, BIMSTEC 
has proved to be a key body for regional cooperation. It is a unique link between South Asia and 
South East Asia. Activities under BIMSTEC have served as a visible input into our 
‘Neighbourhood First Policy’ and ‘Act East Policy’. BIMSTEC leaders were invited at our 
Government’s swearing-in ceremony in May 2019. 

104 
 
  
3.34    India has announced several unilateral initiatives at the 4th BIMSTEC Summit in 
Kathmandu in August 2018 in diverse sectors of security, disaster management, trade, blue 
economy, agriculture, health, digital connectivity, etc. Some of the initiatives have been 
implemented, including BIMSTEC Military Exercise (MILEX) and Army Chiefs’ Conclave; 
BIMSTEC Ministerial Conclave at India Mobile Congress 2018; BIMSTEC Disaster 
Management Exercise; Scholarships to students from BIMSTEC countries at Nalanda University 
and some capacity building programmes. There is work in progress on other initiatives. 
  
3.35    On being asked to state whether the Government has any proposal for effective regional 
cooperation under BIMSTEC, the Ministry has stated that India is committed to further building 
the momentum of regional cooperation and making the organization stronger, vibrant, more 
effective, and result-oriented. India is currently leading BIMSTEC cooperation in four priority 
sectors, namely, Counter Terrorism & Trans-national Crime, Transport & Communication, 
Tourism, and Environmental & Disaster management. In August 2018, PM had announced a 
number of initiatives at the Fourth BIMSTEC summit in Kathmandu.  These initiatives included 
HADR exercises, start-up conclaves and hackathons; capacity building; cooperation in science, 
technology and space; and establishment of Parliamentary forum.  BIMSTEC also provides an 
important regional platform for security cooperation through the mechanism of annual meetings 
of national security chiefs. Member States are going to finalize the BIMSTEC Charter to further 
formalize and guide the functioning of this sub regional grouping. Member States have recently 
also finalized a “Master Plan for Transport Connectivity” that would lay down a long term road 
map for even closer connectivity in the BIMSTEC sub region. The Master Plan, when 
implemented, will improve connectivity of India’s North East and beyond. 
  
                                    
3.36    The Committee note that BIMSTEC has evolved from a sub-regional forum in 1997 
into a distinctive regional organization. The BIMSTEC Charter was also adopted in 2022. 
BIMSTEC is playing an important role in regional cooperation through numerous 
activities and projects in 14 diverse sectors with extensive cooperation among the member 
States. The Committee further note that BIMSTEC countries have institutionalized some 
important mechanisms for stability, such as BIMSTEC Convention on Cooperation in 
Combating International Terrorism, Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit Drug 
Trafficking (2009) while BIMSTEC Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal 
Matters is ready for signing at the next BIMSTEC Summit. The Committee are aware that 
regional growth and prosperity cannot be achieved without stability and urge the Ministry 
to work towards strengthening BIMSTEC and ensuring the effective functioning of its 

105 
 
institutionalized mechanisms, in close coordination with other BIMSTEC countries. The 
Committee also desire that India should take more initiatives for elimination of de-
stabilizing forces like terrorism, organized crime, drug trafficking, etc. in the region 
through collective efforts of all the member countries. 
  
                                                                                           (Recommendation Sl. No. 59) 
  
3.37    Over the years, BIMSTEC has proven to be a key body for regional cooperation 
serving as a unique link between South Asia and South East Asia. Activities under 
BIMSTEC have served as a visible input into our ‘Neighbourhood First Policy’ and ‘Act 
East Policy’. Several unilateral initiatives announced by India including BIMSTEC 
Military Exercise (MILEX) and Army Chiefs’ Conclave; BIMSTEC Ministerial Conclave 
at India Mobile Congress 2018; BIMSTEC Disaster Management Exercise; Scholarships to 
students from BIMSTEC countries at Nalanda University and some capacity building 
programmes have been implemented while work is in progress on other initiatives. In view 
of the pivotal role of BIMSTEC in regional cooperation, the Committee desire that work in 
progress on other initiatives may be implemented speedily. BIMSTEC being a unique 
regional organization focusing on India’s core concerns in the region and thus fulfilling 
India’s key foreign policy priorities of ‘Neighborhood First’ and ‘Act East Policy’, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to take fresh initiatives to nurture and re-energize the 
organization to make it more outcome oriented. Inputs derived from India’s engagement 
with BIMSTEC may also be optimally utilized in our foreign policy agenda.  
                                                                                                 
                                                                                            (Recommendation Sl. No. 60) 
  

106 
 
3.38    The Committee note that India is currently leading BIMSTEC cooperation in four 
priority sectors, namely, Counter Terrorism & Trans-national Crime, Transport & 
Communication, Tourism and Environmental & Disaster Management. Besides, initiatives 
including HADR exercises, start-up conclaves and hackathons; capacity building; 
cooperation in science, technology and space; and establishment of Parliamentary forum 
have also been announced in 2018. The Committee welcome these initiatives as active 
collaboration and hope that mutual assistance on matters of common interest in the 
economic, social, technical and scientific fields would be promoted. Moreover, 
establishment of Parliamentary forum will facilitate interaction and discussion on common 
areas of interests, key areas of concern and also serve as a forum for building consensus. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the new initiatives announced for the BIMSTEC 
region including establishment of Parliamentary forums should be realised at the earliest.  
  
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 61) 
   
3.39    The Committee find that BIMSTEC member States have also recently finalized a 
‘Master Plan for Transport Connectivity’ that would lay down a long term roadmap for 
even closer connectivity in the BIMSTEC sub-region. Implementation of the Master Plan 
would improve connectivity of India’s North East and beyond. In the opinion of the 
Committee, improved connectivity in the North Eastern Region of India will greatly  
 
 
 
 
 
 

107 
 
contribute to the socio-economic development of the region and by virtue of the region’s 
close proximity to Myanmar which acts as a bridge for ASEAN, would be instrumental in 
the success of the Act East Policy. The Committee, therefore, desire that the BIMSTEC 
Master Plan for Transport Connectivity should be implemented at the earliest and urge the 
Government to make coordinated efforts in this regard.  
                                                                                          (Recommendation Sl. No. 62 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
20 July, 2023                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                                  Committee on External Affairs 
  

108 
 
        ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) HELD ON 8 
SEPTEMBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
3. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
4.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
5. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kisan  
6. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
7. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri K. J. Alphons 
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla - Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Naveen Srivastava  - Joint Secretary (EA) 
3. Shri Arindam Bagchi  - Joint Secretary (North) 
4. Ms. Smita Pant   - Joint Secretary (BM) 
5. Shri Amit Narang    - Joint Secretary (IOR) 
6. Shri Robert Shetkintong  - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
7. Shri J.P. Singh   - Joint Secretary (PAI) 
 

109 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  - Additional Director (EA & PAC)  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing on ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’. 
After outlining the subject for deliberation, the Chairperson drew the attention of 
all the witnesses about the provisions of Direction 55(1) and Direction 58 of 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain confidentiality of the 
proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee about the aims and 
objectives of the India’s Neighbourhood First Policy and the Government’s efforts 
to enhance India’s economic and strategic interest through such a focused foreign 
policy, which institutionally enhances the priority that our immediate 
neighbourhood requires and deserves. 
4. During the course of deliberation, Members of the Committee raised several 
queries which inter-alia included salient features of India’s Neighbourhood First 
Policy, status of infrastructure being constructed for transport and energy in 
coordination with Bangladesh along with safe border areas and defence and 
security cooperation between the two nations, complications in Indo-Bangladesh 
relationship, issue of smuggling, forged currency, human trafficking and border 
management along Indo-Bangladesh border, tourism inflow from Bangladesh, visa 
for medical tourism, territorial challenges of Bhutan, significance of defence and 
security cooperation between India and Maldives,  challenges in India’s relation 
with Nepal, incorporation of some territorial portion of India in the territorial 
mapping of Nepal, impact of investment of China in relationship of South Asian 

110 
 
countries, cooperation with Myanmar to deal with extremist groups and issue of 
Rohingya refugees, soft power diplomacy with Pakistan and India’s relation with 
Afghan Government and Taliban etc. In the meantime, the Foreign Secretary also 
responded to the queries of the Members. 
5. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee in due 
course. 
    (The witnesses then withdrew) 
   The Committee then adjourned 
 A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           

111 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 18 DECEMBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
5. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
6. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
7. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
8. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
9. Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
10. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
11. Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri K. J. Alphons 
13. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Vinay Kumar   - Additional Secretary (IO & Summits) 
2. Shri Arindam Bagchi  - Joint Secretary (North) 

112 
 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Rai  - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
3. Ms. Smita Pant   - Joint Secretary (BM) 
4. Shri Amit Narang    - Joint Secretary (IOR) 
5. Shri J.P. Singh   - Joint Secretary (PAI) 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  - Additional Director (EA & PAC)  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have evidence on ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’. 
After underlining the points for deliberation on the subject, the Chairperson drew 
the attention of all the witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) and Direction 
58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of External Affairs briefed the 
Committee about the various aspects, priorities and progress made in relations with 
neighbouring countries under the aegis of India’s neighourhood first policy. 
4. During the course of deliberations, the Members raised several queries 
which inter-alia included new political map of Pakistan, impact assessment of 
abrogation of Article 370 on cross border terrorism, status of opening of Kartarpur 
Sahib Corridor, Government’s stand on management of Kartarpur Saheb 
Gurudwara by a non-Sikh body, status of Kushinagar International Airport, 
negotiations with Taliban, rail link from Assam to Kolkata via Bangladesh, India’s 
official stand on Rohingya issue, fencing along borders, progress on finalizing the 
boundary demarcation with Nepal and Bhutan, arrest of Indian fisherman by 
authorities in Sri Lanka, gaps in meeting maritime security  challenges, threats and 

113 
 
competitiveness in the Indian ocean, etc. The witnesses responded to the queries of 
the Members. 
5. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee to the 
Secretariat at the earliest. 
   (The witnesses then withdrew) 
   The Committee then adjourned 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

114 
 
         
        ANNEXURE -III 
 
MINUTES OF THE  TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 12 
JANUARY, 2021 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri P.P. Chaudhary  – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
3.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
4. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
5. Shri P.C. Mohan 
6. Dr. K.C. Patel 
7. Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri K. J. Alphons 
9. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
10. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
11. Shri Brijlal 
 
 
 
 

115 
 
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES/EXPERTS 
 
1. Dr. T.C.A. Raghavan - Director General, Indian Council of   
     World Affairs (ICWA), New Delhi .  
2. Dr. Constantino Xavier - Fellow, Centre for Social and    
     Economic Progress (CSEP), New Delhi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   - Additional Director  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the non-official witnesses/experts to the Sitting of the Committee convened to hear 
the  opinion  of the non-official witnesses/experts on the subject  ‘India’s 
Neighbourhood First Policy’ in accordance with Rule 331L of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. He then drew their attention to 
the provisions of Direction 55(1) and Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, the experts shared their views/suggestions on various facets of 
the subject which inter-alia included regional connectivity, trade imbalance 
between India and South Asian Countries, growing influence of China in 
neighbourhood, negotiations between the Taliban and the Afghan Government, 
India’s role as a major economic, social and cultural power in South Asia, role of 
BIMSTEC as an important regional organization, capacity gap between Indian and 
neighbouring countries, pursuance of open doors policy, challenges and possible 
solutions under the Neighbourhood First Policy, etc. 

116 
 
4. The Members of the Committee then raised several queries on issues such as 
difference in general public and Pakistani  establishment towards India, 
clarification regarding narrative value of SAARC, focus on non security aspects in 
relationship with Pakistan, free export of pepper from Sri Lanka, investment by 
China in neighbouring countries, democracy in neighbouring countries, strategy 
towards Afghanistan, Challenges for India in establishing relationship with 
Afghanistan, role of India in ongoing peace talks with Taliban and China’s 
footprint in Maldives, etc.  The witnesses responded to the queries of the Members. 
5. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson thanked the witnesses for their 
valuable inputs on the subject. 
   (The witnesses then withdrew) 
   The Committee then adjourned 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  

117 
 
        ANNEXURE -IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 29 JULY, 
2021 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1655 hrs. in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Kunwar  Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
3. Shri  Dileshwar Kamait 
4.  Smt.  Preneet Kaur 
5. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
6. Shri  P.C. Mohan 
7. Shri  Ritesh Pandey 
8. Shri  N.K. Premchandran 
9. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri  K. J. Alphons 
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
12. Shri  Swapan Dasgupta 
13. Shri  Abdul Wahab 
14. Shri Brijlal 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri  Harsh Vardhan Shringla - Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri  Anurag Srivastava  - Joint Secretary (North) 
3. Shri  Anil Kumar Rai  - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
4. Shri  Amit Narang   - Joint Secretary (BM)   

118 
 
5. Shri J.P. Singh   - Joint Secretary (PAI) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director   
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence on ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’ 
with particular reference to recent developments in Afghanistan. In his opening 
remarks, outlining the issues to be discussed, the Chairperson drew the attention of 
the witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) and Direction 58 of Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary briefed the Committee about the priorities 
of India’s defined foreign and national security policy with primary focus on 
South-Asian neighbourhood countries namely Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Nepal, Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka since 2014 and impact of relations with 
these countries on India’s States that border them. He then briefed the Committee 
on recent developments in Afghanistan and its implications for India and India’s 
response to the fast evolving scenario therein. 
4. During the course of deliberations, Members of the Committee raised 
several queries which inter-alia included negotiation for peace, stability and lasting 
solution in the region, influence of Taliban, recognition of Taliban by world 
community, role and involvement of Pakistan and China on evolving situation of 
Afghanistan, India’s contributions to Afghan stability and development, effect of 
Afghanistan situation on India’s Neighbourhood First Policy,  nexus between  
Pakistan, Taliban and China,  infiltration of terrorists in Punjab, change in Russia’s 

119 
 
policy towards Afghanistan,  strategy and policy behind withdrawal of US forces 
from Afghanistan,  strategic change in India’s foreign policy in Afghanistan, stand 
of Saudi Arabia in Afghanistan affairs, future scenario in various situations, etc. 
5. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members of the 
Committee. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for the valuable and 
insightful inputs on the topic. As regards the queries which had remained 
unresponded, the Chairperson directed the Ministry to submit replies to the 
Secretariat at the earliest. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
           
 
  

120 
 
          ANNEXURE-V 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) HELD ON 16 DECEMBER, 2021 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1655 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3.  Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
6. Shri  P.C. Mohan 
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
9. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
10. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
12. Shri Brijlal  
13. Shri  Swapan Dasgupta 
14. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
15. Shri K. Somaprasad 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Smt. Riva Ganguly Das - Secretary (East) 
2. Shri Harsh Kumar Jain - Additional Secretary (BIMSTEC &   
      SAARC) 
3. Shri  Anurag Srivastava - Joint Secretary (North) 
4. Shri  Anil Kumar Rai - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord)  

121 
 
5. Shri J.P. Singh  - Joint Secretary (PAI) 
6. Shri Kartik Pande  - Joint Secretary (IOR) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence on the subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First 
Policy’. In his opening remarks while underscoring the aspects of our 
Neighbourhood First Policy to be discussed in the context of the changing realities 
in the Region, the Chairperson drew the attention of the witnesses to the provisions 
of Direction 55(1) and Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, Secretary (East), M/o External Affairs, briefed the Committee 
about the elements of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy which have been the 
defining features of India’s foreign policy since 2014. The witness also apprised 
the Committee that this policy brings focus of our diplomatic efforts on our 
immediate neighbourhood and makes this as a central pillar of our foreign policy. 
4. During the course of deliberations, Members of the Committee raised 
queries on a wide range of issues which inter-alia included nature of cooperation 
with new regime in Afghanistan in order to dismantle terror sanctuaries and safe 
havens operating across the Durand Line; assessment or perception of terrorist 
threat and action plan to deal with it; impact of new regime in Myanmar in the 
region; present  position of Afghanistan after takeover by Taliban and withdrawal 
of American forces; future prospects of establishing good relationship with new 

122 
 
Afghan regime;  impact of CAA on relationship with Bangladesh, efficacy of 
SAARC; feasibility and implications of  non-reciprocal nature and principle of 
Neighbourhood First Policy;  status of Indian assets and India run projects in 
Afghanistan; Infiltration of Rohingyas and status of their apprehension and 
deportation from India; discussion with new regime in Myanmar on Rohingya  
issue, etc. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
5. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witness to furnish 
written replies to the points raised by the Members which remained unanswered 
and also desired that replies to the points which related to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs ought to be obtained from them and furnished to the Secretariat at the 
earliest. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

123 
 
         ANNEXURE-VI 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 19 
DECEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th December, 2022 from 1515 hrs. to 1705 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
          
         MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 4.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 5.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 6.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 7.    Shri Ritesh Pandey 8.    Dr. K. C. Patel 9.    Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 10.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
   
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
11.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
12.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
  
1. Shri Vinay Kwatra   -  Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Anurag Srivastava  -  JS (North)  
3. Ms. Smita Pant    -  JS (BM) 
4. Dr. Sumit Seth    -  JS (PP & R) 
 

124 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. XXX   XXX    XXX 
3. XXX   XXX    XXX 
4. XXX   XXX    XXX 
5. XXX   XXX    XXX 
6.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
7. XXX   XXX    XXX 
8. XXX   XXX    XXX 
 9. Thereafter, Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs to the Sitting of the Committee convened for taking oral 
evidence on ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy with Special Reference to 
Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka’ in connection with examination of the 
subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’. Outlining the issues to be 
discussed, Chairperson drew the attention of all the witnesses to Direction 55 
(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha pertaining to maintaining the 
confidentiality of the Proceedings and Direction 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. He then requested the witnesses to introduce themselves 
before making submissions before the Committee.   

125 
 
10. The Foreign Secretary highlighted the overall approach, principles and 
key elements of the Neighbourhood First Policy and gave a detailed 
presentation on various aspects of India’s   relations with the neighbouring 
countries, specially Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka.  
11. Thereafter, the Chairperson and the Members raised various issues which 
inter alia included steps taken in coordination with other Ministries for 
development of border; infrastructure for connectivity; structure of economic 
cooperation with our neighbours; growing influence of China in neighbouring 
countries; non-inclusion of China under the Neighbourhood First Policy; border 
issues with China; irrigation and flood control measures; problems at Indo-
Nepal border; emigration from Sri Lanka; issue of Pakistan sponsored 
terrorism; role of Parliament under the Neighbourhood First Policy and need for 
interaction between Parliamentarians of India and neighbouring countries, etc.   
  12. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the 
queries of the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of 
the Ministry for valuable and insightful inputs on the subject and also directed 
them to furnish written replies on the points raised during the discussion, to the 
Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
  

126 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 20 JULY, 2023 
 
  The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th July, 2023 from 1600 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in 
 Committee Room No. ‘3’, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  Present 
           Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri. Dileshwar Kamait 
 3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
 4. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
 5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
6. Shri P. C. Mohan 
 7. Smt. Queen Oja 
 8. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
 9. Dr. K. C. Patel 
 10. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
 11. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
 12. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
 13. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
  
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 14. Shri Anil Desai 
 15. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 16. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
  
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director  
 3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports:- 

127 
 
   (i) Draft Report on the subject ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’.  
 (ii) XXX               XXX             XXX               XXX 
4.       The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Reports. The Members suggested some minor modifications. After deliberations, the 
Committee adopted the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament. 
  The Committee then adjourned 
 
 