 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Contours of 
Cooperation 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
26 
 

 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Contours of 
Cooperation 
 
  
 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA No. __     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (____________ Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha 
Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
      PAGE 
   
      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)  …………............  (ii)    
                                     
      INTRODUCTION…………………………………………. .………….…………(iii)     
      
REPORT 
Chapter I Overview of India’s Relation With GCC Countries………… 1 
 
Chapter II India’s Political Relation with GCC Countries………………. 8 
 
Chapter III Cooperation in Energy, Health, Space, Education and 
Digital Technology……………………………………………….. 
 
16 
 
Chapter IV India-GCC Cooperation On Defence and Security…… 31 
 
Chapter V Trade and Investment with GCC Countries……………. 35 
 
Chapter VI Cultural and Other Areas of Cooperation……………….. 46 
 
Chapter VII Welfare of Indian Diaspora In GCC Countries………… 50 
 
 
  
  
ANNEXURES 
 
I Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee held on   
9 May, 2023……................................................................. 
 
 
76 
II Minutes of the Twenty First Sitting of the Committee held on 
27 July, 2023……............................................................ 
 
 
79 
 
 
III Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 7 
December, 2023………………………………………………………………. 
 
82 
 
       
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2023-24) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
21.  Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 
31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai     –  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –  Director  
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anurag Sandil    - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (ii) 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty 
Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – 
Contours of Cooperation’.  
2. The Committee selected the subject ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – 
Contours of Cooperation’ for detailed examination during 2022-23 and continued the 
examination during 2023-24. Briefing on the subject was held on 29 May, 2023. 
Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs on 27 July, 2023 in which representatives of the Ministry of Commerce 
and the Department of Economic Affairs were also present.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
7 December, 2023. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the 
Report. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs for 
placing material information, tendering evidence and views before the Committee  as well 
as the Ministry of Commerce and the Department of Economic Affairs for appearing 
before the Committee.  
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
NEW DELHI                                          P.P. CHAUDHARY,                       
December, 2023                                                     Chairperson,                                
Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)          Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
OVERVIEW OF INDIA’S RELATION WITH GCC COUNTRIES 
1.1       The Gulf region has historical, political, economic, energy, strategic and 
cultural significance for India. The region constitutes the extended neighbourhood of 
India separated only by the Arabian Sea. India’s relations with the Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) countries have seen exceptional growth in all domains in the past 
decade. There has been intense high-level engagement between India and GCC 
countries during this period.  
1.2       The GCC organisation comprises of six countries i.e. Saudi Arabia, UAE, 
Oman, Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain. GCC headquarters is located in Riyadh.  
Objectives of GCC 
1.3       The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) was established by an agreement 
concluded on 25 May 1981 in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia among Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE in view of their special relations, geographic proximity, 
similar political systems based on Islamic beliefs, joint destiny and common 
objectives. Presently it encompasses a total area of 2,672,700 sq.km. The official 
language is Arabic. 
1.4       The GCC Charter states that the basic objectives are to have coordination, 
integration and inter-connection between Member States in all fields, strengthening 
ties between their peoples, formulating similar regulations in various fields such as 
economy, finance, trade, customs, tourism, legislation, administration, as well as 
fostering scientific and technical progress in industry, mining, agriculture, water and 
animal resources, establishing scientific research centres, setting up joint ventures, 
and encouraging cooperation of the private sector. 
Organizational  Structure 
1.5       The structure of the GCC consists of the Supreme Council, the Ministerial 
Council and the Secretariat General. The Secretariat is located in the city of Riyadh.  
1.6       During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
elaborated on the long standing and deep rooted relationship between India and the 
Gulf countries in his opening statement: 
“….as far as India’s relations with the Gulf countries are concerned, we have 
long- standing historic deep-rooted relationships with all       the Gulf countries which 
goes back    to several centuries.  In fact, it goes back to almost 3000 BC when India 
had relationship  with the Mesopotamian Civilisation; and we also had 1000 BC 
relationship between India  and Egypt.  So, it is a long relationship which we have 
been consolidating over a period of time.  Then, you are also aware that India has a 
trading relationship particularly, with    the Gulf countries what we known is the Hejaz 
area of the Saudi Arabia. Our people have  been going on for pilgrims.  Also, in the 
history, you would have seen that a large number  of Arabian Persian scholars had 
come here like Ibn Battuta and Alberoni. There is also  record of Guru Nanak Dev-ji 

2 
 
having visited Baghdad. So, that is the basis of our ties with   the Gulf. So, these 
relationships have actually consolidated in the modern times, in  the form of a very 
strong relationship. 
            ….when we celebrated the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, 75 years for our 
Independence,     at the same time, we have also celebrated 75 years of the 
establishment of  formal diplomatic relationship with countries like Saudi Arabia, 
Egypt, and Turkey.  With  Kuwait, we are celebrating 60 years of our relationship. 
With Bahrain, we are celebrating  Golden Jubilee. 
            So, what we say is that these historic relations have been transformed in the 
modern times into very dynamic and mutually beneficial relationship….We have 
maintained    good relations all these years.   
1.7       In a written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has further stated 
that our relationship with Gulf countries have consolidated in modern times, in the 
form of a very strong relationship.  The GCC as a collective entity has tremendous 
significance for India. GCC has emerged as a major trade and investment partner for 
India. The GCC’s substantial oil and gas reserves are of vital importance for India's 
energy security. Defence and security cooperation with GCC has also been 
increasing. The GCC countries collectively host 8.7 million strong Indian expatriate 
community. The cultural and people-to-people ties between India and Gulf are a 
bedrock of the bilateral relations.  
1.8       This strong cordial historical relationship has continued to flourish. Formal 
engagements between India and GCC Secretariat started in 2003 with the 
commencement of India-GCC Political Dialogue held on the sidelines of the UNGA. 
There are various institutional mechanism between India and GCC, including political 
dialogue at the level of Foreign Ministers; MoU on Mechanism for Consultations; 
India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting at Secretary level and India-GCC Industrial 
Conference. There is also a framework on India-GCC FTA negotiations.   
1.9       When asked to state the specific steps being taken to ensure strong and 
stable relations with all GCC countries, the Ministry has informed that India has 
excellent relations with all countries of GCC, straddling almost all domains of 
cooperation like political, economic, energy, security, culture and people-to-people 
ties. The strong and stable relations with all GCC countries are ensured through 
several specific steps which inter alia included the following: 
i. Regular exchange of high-level visits between India and Gulf countries. Prime 
Minister Modi has visited Gulf countries 10 times since May 2014. These 
include 5 visits to UAE, 2 visits to Saudi Arabia and one each to Oman, Qatar 
and Bahrain. Saudi Arabia, UAE and Bahrain have conferred their highest 
civilian awards on PM Modi. There has been regular exchange of ministerial 
visits.  
ii. Maintaining strategic partnership with three countries, namely Saudi Arabia, 
UAE and Oman. All three GCC strategic partners have been invited for G20 
meetings under India’s presidency. Saudi Arabia is a member of G20 while 

3 
 
Oman and UAE are special invitees. India is also actively engaged in the I2U2 
together with UAE.  
iii. Improving trade relationship with all GCC countries. The GCC region 
contributes to about one-sixth of India’s total trade. UAE is India’s third largest 
trade partner while Saudi Arabia is at the fourth place. In FY 2022-23, India’s 
trade with GCC countries was approximately USD 184 billion. This was 
almost a 20% rise from FY 2021-22. To further enhance trade relationship, 
India signed Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with 
UAE on February 18, 2022. We are also discussing FTA with GCC.  
iv. Promoting investments from GCC countries into India by engaging sovereign 
wealth funds in the region as well as private companies. Total FDI from GCC 
countries into India currently stands at about USD 20 billion. 
v. Expanding energy cooperation by moving from a buyer-seller relationship to a 
more comprehensive relationship by encouraging participation in India’s 
strategic petroleum reserves, negotiating long term gas supply arrangements, 
getting concessions in oilfields and renewable energy cooperation.  
vi. Strengthening defence and security cooperation with GCC countries including 
through exchange of high-level visits, bilateral exercises, training and 
participation in exhibitions.  There is good cooperation on counter terrorism, 
intelligence sharing, cybersecurity, maritime security, prevention of human 
trafficking and narcotics smuggling. Our strengthened relationship was also 
evident recently when Saudi Arabia provided excellent cooperation to Indian 
Air Force and Indian Navy for Operation Kaveri under which we evacuated 
about 3800 Indian nationals through Jeddah. India has also become 
Associate Partner in the multilateral Combined Maritime Forces in Bahrain in 
2022. 
vii. Working with Gulf countries for the welfare of the Indian workforce. The 
meetings of Joint Working Groups on labour and manpower issues with 
various Gulf countries are regularly convened to discuss issues related to 
Indian workers. Government is also working with the GCC countries on issues 
like skill harmonization and connecting worker recruitment platforms so that 
Indian workers get better and more transparent working conditions.  
viii. Strengthening cultural cooperation by organizing events such as International 
Day of Yoga with involvement of local authorities in Gulf countries and 
promoting educational cooperation through Indian schools and higher 
education institutes. 
ix. Enhancing cooperation in multilateral organization such as with UAE in UN 
Security Council in 2022 when both India and UAE were non-permanent 
members of the Council.    
x. Strengthening institutional relationship through the GCC Secretariat.   In 
September 2022, India and GCC signed an MOU on Mechanism of 
Consultations for regular political dialogue between India and GCC Troika at 
EAM/FM level.  
  

4 
 
1.10     The growing relationship between India and GCC countries has been 
highlighted by the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during the course of evidence on 27 July 
2023 as under: 
  
“….India’s relations with all the GCC countries are moving ahead rapidly in a 
very positive direction, covering cooperation in all domains like political relations, 
trade  and investment, energy, defence and security, culture and people to people 
ties. The   regular high level visits between India and GCC countries reflect strong 
political will to   strengthen the relations”.   
1.11     The Committee have also been informed that India is maintaining strategic 
partnership with three GCC countries, namely Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Oman. 
When further asked the status of the remaining GCC countries and the efforts being 
made in this regard, the Ministry responded that the Gulf constitutes to be the 
“extended” neighborhood of India separated only by the Arabian Sea.  The GCC has 
emerged as a major trade and investment partner for India. The GCC’s substantial 
oil and gas reserves are of vital importance for India's energy security. Defence and 
security cooperation with GCC has also been increasing. The GCC countries 
collectively host 8.7 million strong Indian expatriate community. The cultural and 
people-to-people ties between India and Gulf are a bedrock of the bilateral relations. 
Even though India has strategic partnership with three Gulf countries, it has 
maintained a multifaceted relationship with all GCC countries, with cooperation in 
diverse domain including political, defence, commercial, etc.   There are various 
institutional mechanisms with GCC countries to elevate the relationship to higher 
level based on mutual interests and cooperation.  
1.12     During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, when the Committee sought 
to know the developments taking place under I2U2 (India, Israel, UAE and USA) 
grouping on specific issues in the Gulf, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) responded as 
under: 
 “….I2U2 which consist of India, Israel, UAE and USA is aimed at encouraging 
joint investments in mutually identified areas such as water, energy, 
transportation, space, health and food security.…in the virtual summit of I2U2 
leaders which happened on 14 July, 2022…. an announcement of 
investments worth USD 2 billion were made by UAE to develop integrated 
food parks in India. Subsequent to that, we have had visits from UAE 
delegations to India and we have facilitated their interaction with the relevant 
stakeholders both in Government as well as the private sector. There was 
another project that was announced in the Leaders’ Summit last year which 
was a project that entailed US Trade and Development Agency funding a 
feasibility study on 300 MW wind and solar hybrid renewable and energy 
storage project in Dwarka in Gujarat. All these ideas were discussed to further 
the business and innovation and economic links in the I2U2. The Sherpas 
further met in February 2023 earlier this year and at that time a business 
forum was also held at the same time. So, there are ideas which are coming 
in the I2U2 which we will be taking forward along with our other partners in the 
I2U2.” 

5 
 
1.13     On the initiatives taken so far under 12U2, the Ministry has stated that I2U2 
demonstrates the strategic convergence of India, Israel, the United Arab Emirates 
and the United States. The I2U2 is aimed to encourage joint investments in six 
mutually identified areas such as water, energy, transportation, space, health, and 
food security. It intends to mobilize private sector capital and expertise to help 
modernize the infrastructure, decarbonise industries, improve public health, and 
promote the development of critical, emerging and green technologies.  I2U2 aims to 
maximize innovation, technology, skilled workforces, and entrepreneurial dynamism 
in all the 4 countries to benefit the people in the region. Prime Minister Shri Narendra 
Modi participated in the first virtual summit of I2U2 leaders, along with the Prime 
Minister of Israel, the President of the UAE and the President of the USA on 14 July 
2022. They announced two joint projects on Food Corridor and Wind-Solar Hybrid 
Renewable energy and Battery Storage to be set up in India. 
                                                                               
1.14     Observing that a critical aspect that needs to be addressed for strengthening 
the relationship between India and the Gulf countries is the potential differences in 
ideological and religious beliefs, the Committee sought to know whether the Ministry 
outlines the strategies or initiatives that have been taken/needs to be implemented in 
order to foster better understanding and cooperation with the Gulf nations despite 
such differences. In response, the Ministry has stated that India shares close 
political, economic ties with all GCC countries. There have been regular high level 
political exchanges between India and GCC countries. The various engagements 
and multifaceted ties between India and GCC countries have further deepened our 
partnership with all GCC countries. There is understanding and appreciation for 
India’s diversity and secular and democratic traditions in GCC countries. During the 
recent visit of Secretary General of Muslim World League, Dr. Mohammad bin 
Abdulkarim Al-Issa to India in July 2023, he appreciated India's multicultural, multi-
ethnic and multi-religion society and emphasized his respect for the rich Indian 
heritage that upholds harmony and unity. 
1.15     Concluding his opening statement during evidence on 27 July 2023, the 
Secretary (CPV & OIA) summed up the prospects for enhanced relationship between 
India and GCC countries, as under:- 
               “….there are great opportunities for continuous enhancement of our 
cooperation in            multiple areas between India and GCC countries and we are 
making progress in the right  direction” 
1.16     The Committee note that India has a long standing historic deep-rooted 
relationship with GCC countries comprising of Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman, 
Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain which has consolidated into a very strong 
relationship in modern times. The GCC countries are home to 8.7 million 
strong Indian expatriate community and cultural and people-to-people ties 

6 
 
between India and Gulf are bedrock of the bilateral relations. The Committee 
further note that GCC has emerged as a major trade and investment partner for 
India. The GCC’s substantial oil and gas reserves are of vital importance for 
India's energy security while defence and security cooperation with GCC has 
also been increasing. There are various institutional mechanism between India 
and GCC, including political dialogue at the level of Foreign Ministers; MoU on 
Mechanism for Consultations; India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting at Secretary 
level and India-GCC Industrial Conference. The Committee understand that 
India has been maintaining close political and economic ties with all the GCC 
countries but strategic partnership is mostly with three countries, namely 
Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Oman. In view of the GCC as a collective entity 
having tremendous significance for India, the Committee desire that the 
Government should consider to elevate India’s strategic partnership based on 
mutual interests and cooperation with the remaining GCC countries viz. 
Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain to a higher level. The efforts and progress made in 
this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
                                                                                           (Recommendation No. 1) 
 
1.17     The Committee find that there are great opportunities for continuous 
enhancement in India’s relationship with GCC countries in multiple areas of 
interests and new and emerging fields for cooperation. In Committee’s view, 
India and the GCC countries have significant scope to enhance their 
cooperation in various multilateral bodies including the UN bodies. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to formulate a fresh strategy 
encompassing all these aspects and establish a robust Institutional 
mechanism for strengthening its relationship with GCC countries and 

7 
 
expanding it to multilateral bodies. New initiatives may also be taken to 
deepen the cultural and people-to-people ties between India and GCC 
countries including the active participation of the 8.7 million strong Indian 
expatriate community to foster better understanding and cooperation. 
 (Recommendation No. 2) 
 
1.18     The Committee note that India, together with UAE is actively engaged in 
the I2U2 grouping which aims to encourage joint investments in six mutually 
identified areas such as water, energy, transportation, space, health, and food 
security. In the first virtual summit of I2U2 leaders on 14 July 2022, two joint 
projects on Food Corridor and Wind-Solar Hybrid Renewable energy and 
Battery Storage have been announced to be set up in India. The Committee are 
pleased at the initiatives taken by the I2U2 as these projects would contribute 
towards India’s energy and food security and urge the Government to ensure 
its effective implementation. New ideas and innovation in the field of water, 
space, health, technology, skilled workforces and entrepreneurial dynamism 
etc. may be taken forward in the I2U2 so that India is able to fully capitalize on 
its partnership with  UAE and further with other GCC countries. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 
                                                             
  

8 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
  
                        INDIA’S POLITICAL RELATION WITH GCC COUNTRIES 
  
2.1       India’s excellent relations with all countries of GCC are reflected in the 
regular exchange of high-level visits between India and Gulf countries, at top 
leadership level as well as ministerial levels. Prime Minister Modi has visited Gulf 
countries 10 times since May 2014. These include 5 visits to UAE, 2 visits to Saudi 
Arabia and one each to Oman, Qatar and Bahrain. The last visit of PM to UAE was 
on July15, 2023. Prime Minister also attended a virtual summit of I2U2 (India, UAE, 
Israel, US) in July 2022. Saudi Arabia, UAE and Bahrain have conferred their highest 
civilian awards on PM Modi. 
  
2.2       During his short visit to UAE on 15 July 2023, Prime Minister met HH Sheikh 
Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE and the Ruler of Abu Dhabi. 
The two leaders witnessed the exchange of three significant MoUs: 
  
(i).        MOU for the establishment of a framework to promote the use of local 
currencies            (INR-AED) for cross-border transactions by Governors of the 
respective Central Banks. 
  
(ii).       MOU on interlinking payment and messaging systems by Governors of the 
respective    Central Banks. 
             
(iii).      MOU for planning to establish Indian Institute of Technology – Delhi in Abu 
Dhabi. 
  
2.3       A Joint Statement was also issued in which both sides inter alia appreciated 
the plan of Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA) to set up a presence in GIFT City, 
a financial free zone in Gujarat, in the next few months. Both leaders also reiterated 
their commitment to further enhance bilateral cooperation in various fields including 
energy (traditional, renewable and grid connectivity) and food corridors project in 
India. 
2.4       Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi and Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince/Prime 
Minister HRH Mohammed bin Salman held a telecon on June 8, 2023 and discussed 
issues of mutual interest with the two countries putting further momentum in strategic 
partnership. 
2.5.      Vice President of India Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu paid a visit to UAE in May 
2022 to convey condolences on behalf of India on the demise of then UAE 
President. He also paid a visit to Qatar in June 2022. Vice President Shri Jagdeep 
Dhankhar also visited Qatar in November 2022 for attending the Opening Ceremony 
of FIFA World Cup.Speaker of Lok Sabha, Shri Om Birla visited UAE in February 
2022 during which he addressed the Federal National Council of UAE. He also led 
the Indian delegation to Bahrain in March 2023 for 146th Inter Parliamentary Union 
(IPU).  

9 
 
2.6       Over the past few years India hosted visits of Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi 
(2016 & 2017), Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia (2019) and Amir of Qatar (2015). PM 
Modi also had several telephone calls with Gulf leaders during Covid to ensure the 
welfare of Indian community and coordinate response to the pandemic. India has 
strategic partnership with UAE, Saudi Arabia and Oman in the Gulf. All three 
countries have been invited for G-20 meetings under India’s presidency: Saudi 
Arabia as a G-20 member and UAE and Oman as special invitees. India conferred 
Gandhi Peace Prize 2019 on Sultan Qaboos in March 2021.  
2.7       India got the support of all GCC countries for its membership of UNSC for 
2021-22 term. Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman and Bahrain have joined the International 
Solar Alliance. India’s firm stand against terrorism has been acknowledged by GCC 
countries.    
2.8       India had welcomed the Abraham Accords for normalization of UAE and 
Bahrain’s relations with Israel in September 2020. Similarly, India also welcomed the 
Gulf rapprochement achieved at GCC Summit in January 2021. India had hoped that 
both these developments will promote peace, progress and stability in the Gulf 
region. Similarly, India has also welcomed initiatives for peace and political dialogue 
in Yemen. 
2.9       When asked to state whether India is planning to take further steps to 
strengthen its relations with GCC countries and Iran for greater regional security and 
stability, the Ministry responded that India has always advocated dialogue and 
diplomacy for peaceful resolution of differences between countries, including in Gulf. 
India had welcomed the reconciliation and rapprochement between Saudi Arabia-
UAE-Bahrain-Egypt and Qatar at GCC Al Ula Summit in January 2021. Similarly, 
India had also welcomed the Abraham Accords signed by UAE, Bahrain, Israel and 
US in September 2020. India will continue to work with all partners in the Gulf for 
peace, progress and stability in the region. India has also increased its defence ties 
with Gulf countries and continues to engage as the region is on our extended 
neighbourhood and critical for us for trade, investment, energy and security of 
Indians living in Gulf.  
2.10    The Committee also observed that India’s relation with the GCC plays a 
pivotal role in world political arena but the presence of China and Pakistan is 
potential threat for the position of India in the Gulf and sought to know the steps 
being taken by the Ministry to neutralize their presence. In response, they have been 
apprised that India continues to strengthen its historical relations with GCC countries 
across a wide range of areas. Our historical and cultural relations and geographic 
nearness give us a distinct advantage. India is also working with other like-minded 
countries on specific issues in the Gulf. I2U2 is one such grouping. Our NSA also 
visited Saudi Arabia recently and met NSAs of Saudi Arabia, UAE and US. India is 
focused on building stronger relationship with Gulf countries by working on several 
areas of mutual benefit such as infrastructure, oil and petrochemicals, grid 
connectivity, green hydrogen, food security, health care, logistics and new 

10 
 
technology like AI. The two-way investments between India and Gulf countries are 
also building mutual inter-dependencies.  
  
India-GCC Political Dialogue 
2.11    The first-ever India-GCC Political Dialogue between EAM and the GCC 
Chairman, the Secretary General and Ambassadors/representatives from GCC 
countries was held on the sidelines of the UNGA in September 2003. Further 
Political Dialogues were held on the sidelines of UNGA in the years 2004, 2005, 
2008, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2014 and 2015. The 10th India-GCC Political Dialogue was 
held in the troika format on the margins of 74th UNGA in September 2019 in New 
York. The 11th India-GCC Troika Meeting was virtually held in November 2020. 
2.12.   Then GCC Secretary General Dr. Nayef Falah M. Al-Hajraf visited India in 
November 2021 and in November 2022. During EAM’s visit to Saudi Arabia in 
September 2022, he also met GCC Secretary General. Both leaders signed an MOU 
on Mechanism of Consultations to institutionalize the political dialogue between India 
and GCC.  Under this MOU, the first round of India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting, at 
Secretary level, was held on March 20, 2023 in Riyadh. Both sides proposed 
formation of Joint Working Groups to cater to particular areas of cooperation 
between India and GCC countries.  
2.13    India and GCC have also discussed resumption of negotiations on a Free 
Trade Agreement. This issue has been discussed in meetings of EAM and CIM with 
GCC Secretary General in 2021 and 2022 but GCC is yet to firm up its position. Two 
meetings for negotiating an FTA between India and GCC took place between 2006 
and 2008. India and GCC have also held four industrial conferences to discuss ways 
of enhancing trade and investment, the last being in 2015. 
2.14    The Committee enquired about the Dialogues/ Summits held so far between 
India and GCC, the details of issues discussed, outcome of the said 
dialogues/summits as well as the agenda and preparedness for the next India and 
GCC dialogue. The Ministry has informed that ten rounds of India-GCC Political 
Dialogue were held on the sidelines of UNGA  (from 2003 – 2019). The dialogues 
usually happen with our EAM in a troika format comprising GCC Secretary, current 
chair of GCC and the next chair of GCC. 11th India-GCC Political Dialogue was held 
virtually in November 2021. In September 2022, India and GCC signed an MoU on 
Mechanisms for Consultation between both sides. The MoU  encapsulates  a 
dialogue between EAM and the GCC troika (GCC SG, FM of the country holding the 
GCC presidency and FM of the next country to hold the GCC presidency) and also 
instituted a dialogue at the SOM level. The first India-GCC SOM meeting took place 
on March 20, 2023. During this meeting Indian side proposed to form five JWGs in 
the fields of political and security issues; economic cooperation and trade; cultural, 
education, youth and sports; health and pharmaceuticals; maritime security and 
counter terrorism. 

11 
 
2.15    When further enquired about the status and areas of cooperation of the Joint 
Working Groups, the Ministry has informed that during the first India-GCC Senior 
Officials Meeting (SOM) held in March 2023, it was proposed to form five Joint 
Working Groups in the fields of political and security issues; economic cooperation 
and trade; cultural, education, youth and sports; health and pharmaceuticals; 
maritime security and counter terrorism. They are in touch with GCC side regarding 
the proposed JWG. 
2.16    When the Committee sought to know the steps being taken for peace and 
political stabilization in the Gulf region, the Ministry in a written reply, has informed 
that India has always advocated dialogue and diplomacy for peaceful resolution of 
differences between countries, including in Gulf. India had welcomed the 
reconciliation and rapprochement between Saudi Arabia-UAE-Bahrain-Egypt and 
Qatar at GCC Al Ula Summit in January 2021. Similarly, India had also welcomed 
the Abraham Accords signed by UAE, Bahrain, Israel and US in September 2020. 
India will continue to work with all partners in the Gulf for peace, progress and 
stability in the region.  
 
GCC and India’s claim for a permanent seat at a reformed UN Security Council  
2.17    In its Background note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated 
that India got the support of all GCC countries for its membership of UNSC for 2021-
22 term. Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman and Bahrain have joined the International Solar 
Alliance. India’s firm stand against terrorism has been acknowledged by GCC 
countries. India is also working together with Gulf countries on the issue of Climate 
Change. UAE is the President of COP28 and India is actively engaged with UAE 
side.   
 
2.18    On the stand of the GCC members on India’s permanent membership in the 
UNSC, the Ministry in its written reply, has stated that among the GCC countries, 
Oman, UAE and Bahrain have conveyed support to India’s claim for a permanent 
seat at a reformed UN Security Council. However, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar 
have not, so far, publically expressed their support for India’s claim to a permanent 
seat and as such, eliciting support remains a work in progress. India is regularly and 
consistently engaging at the highest levels to seek expressions of support for its 
claim for a permanent seat at a reformed UN Security Council.  
  
GCC and India’s G20 Presidency   
2.19    India is hosting the G-20 Summit this year and Saudi Arabia as a G-20 
Member and the UAE and Oman have been invited as special invitees. When 
enquired about other GCC member nations, especially Kuwait, the Ministry 

12 
 
responded that during its G20 Presidency, India has invited Bangladesh, Egypt, 
Mauritius, Netherlands, Nigeria, Oman, Singapore, Spain and UAE as Guest 
countries. With 9 Guest countries, India has one of the largest geographic and varied 
representations in its G20 meetings. Among the three Gulf countries that are 
participating in G20 this year, Saudi Arabia is a member of G20. UAE and Oman are 
the invitee countries. All three countries have a strategic partnership with India.  
2.20    On the issue of Kuwait, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during the course of 
evidence on 27 July 2023 stated: 
  
“The participation is primarily of G-20 member countries.  But there are a 
few countries where we have extended invitations as guests.  Among the 
Gulf countries, we have extended invitation to Oman and UAE.  Both these 
countries are strategic partners of India.  That is one parameter to see that 
we already have a strategic partnership and so to say, we would like to 
continue our engagement with them.  With Kuwait, we do not have any 
such strategic partnership as of now…. 
    
However, we are keen to elevate the relationship with Kuwait. You are 
aware that Kuwait has been facing internal issues. There have been so 
many changes within their own Governments in the last two years. Many 
Governments have come and fallen.  
       
So, this is one of the issues. But at other levels, we have been engaging 
with Kuwait and we have recently concluded the Foreign Office 
Consultations. Kuwait is a very important country from our manpower 
perspective”. 
  
  
India-GCC Cooperation on Climate Change  
2.21    India is also working together with Gulf countries on issue of Climate Change. 
UAE is the President of COP28 and we are actively engaged with UAE side. 
2.22    On being asked about the progress regarding India and UAE’s consultations 
on climate change issues including India’s initiatives and priorities in this regard, the 
Ministry has stated that India and UAE have held regular consultations on climate 
change issues this year in view of our G-20 presidency and UAE’s COP-28 
presidency. UAE’s Climate Change Envoy and COP-28 President-designate started 
his international consultations with a visit to India in February 2023. Our Ministry of 
Forests and Climate Change has also established a Joint Working Group with UAE.  
2.23    India has also pioneered several global initiatives contributing to fight against 
climate change and impacts of climate change. India has launched the Mission LiFE 
(Lifestyle for Environment) to bring individual behavioral change at the forefront of 
the global climate action narrative, and envisions replacing the prevalent use-and-
dispose economy with a circular economy. Through various initiatives, India has 
been assisting developing countries in scaling up rural households’ use of renewable 

13 
 
energy, developing climate disaster risk financing framework, climate information 
and early warning systems in vulnerable communities and capacity building.  The 
India-UN Development Partnership Fund supports demand-driven and 
transformational sustainable development projects across the developing world with 
a focus on least developed countries and SIDS. Together with partner countries, 
India has also launched   important global initiatives including International Solar 
Alliance (ISA), Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CRDI), Infrastructure for 
Resilient Island States (IRIS), Leadership Group on Industry Transition (LeadIT). 
2.24    Under India’s Presidency, G20 has accorded high priority to climate change. 
The commitment to implement sustainable, inclusive and just transitions globally is 
underlined in the G20 Development Minister’s outcome documents: G20 2023-Action 
Plan on Accelerating Progress on the SDGs and High-Level Principles on Lifestyles 
for Sustainable Development. These documents highlight that the access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all is a moral imperative and 
a basic human need. The G20 members have also adopted a High Level Voluntary 
Principles on Hydrogen to build a sustainable and equitable global hydrogen 
ecosystem that benefits all nations. The Indian Presidency is coordinating with other 
G20 countries towards delivering other initiatives at the G20 Summit on 09-10 
September 2023. 
  
2.25    The Committee note that the Gulf region is considered as our extended 
neighbourhood and critical for trade, investment, energy and security of 
Indians living in the Gulf. The Committee also note that India is having good 
long standing relations with all the GCC countries. To maintain peace, 
progress and stability in the region, the Committee desire that the Government 
should make constant endeavour to strengthen and deepen its political, 
economic and cultural ties with the GCC countries. India should remain 
focused on building stronger relationship with Gulf countries through regular 
exchange visits including high level interactions and working on several areas 
of mutual benefits and emerging areas of cooperation. At the same time, India 
should work with GCC countries to create architecture for safety and security 
of the region and a coordinated response mechanism to deal with threats 

14 
 
including piracy in high seas, environmental threats, response during 
disasters etc. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
2.26    The Committee note that political dialogues between India and GCC 
have been held over the years. A Memorandum of Understanding on 
Mechanism of Consultations to institutionalize the political dialogue between 
India and GCC was signed in September 2022. This MoU also instituted a 
dialogue at the Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) level. The Committee further 
note that during the first India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting held in March 
2023, it was proposed to form five Joint Working Groups in the fields of 
political and security issues; economic cooperation and trade; cultural, 
education, youth and sports; health and pharmaceuticals; maritime security 
and counter terrorism. The Committee welcome the proposal for formation of 
five mutually beneficial JWGs and urge the Government to make all out efforts 
for the finalization of all the groups and start working at an early date.  
                                                                                           (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
2.27    The Committee note that out of the six GCC countries, Oman, UAE and 
Bahrain have conveyed support to India’s claim for a permanent seat at a 
reformed UN Security Council. However,   Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have 
not, so far, expressed their support for India’s claim publicly.  The Committee 
feel that India should continue it’s diplomatic efforts to gain support of India’s 
claim for a permanent seat at a reformed UN Security Council. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 

15 
 
2.28    The Committee note that during India’s G20 Presidency, Saudi Arabia as 
a member of G20 and UAE and Oman as invitee countries have participated in 
the G20 summit. The Committee further note that these three countries are 
having strategic partnerships with India. The Committee understand that India 
is keen to elevate its relationship with Kuwait and have been engaging with 
Kuwait at other levels. In view of the importance of Kuwait from our manpower 
perspective, the Committee urge the Government to actively engage with 
Kuwait including at the highest level for a positive outcome of the 
engagements.    
                                                                                           (Recommendation No. 7) 
  
2.29    The Committee note that India is also working together with Gulf 
countries on issue of Climate Change. India and UAE have held regular 
consultations on climate change issues this year in view of our G-20 
presidency and UAE’s COP-28 presidency. Ministry of Environment, Forests 
and Climate Change has also established a Joint Working Group with UAE. 
Under India’s Presidency, G20 has accorded high priority to climate change. 
India has also pioneered several global initiatives contributing to fight against 
climate change and impact of climate change such as Mission LiFE (Lifestyle 
for Environment), India-UN Development Partnership Fund, International Solar 
Alliance(ISA), Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CRDI), 
Infrastructure for Resilient Island States (IRIS), Leadership Group on Industry 
Transition (LeadIT) etc. The Committee desire that the Government should 
impress upon the GCC countries to join and actively participate in the global 
initiatives pioneered by India for combating climate change and its impact.  
(Recommendation No. 8) 

16 
 
 
 CHAPTER III 
COOPERATION IN ENERGY, HEALTH, SPACE, EDUCATION AND DIGITAL 
TECHNOLOGY 
I. Energy 
3.1       GCC has been an important partner in catering to India’s energy security. 
GCC countries contribute almost 35% of India’s oil imports and 70% of gas imports. 
India’s overall crude oil imports from the Gulf in 2022-23 were about $58 billion of 
which Saudi Arabia contributed $29.07 billion, UAE $16.08 billion, Kuwait $8.02 
billion, Oman $2.65 billion, Qatar $1.87 billion and Bahrain negligible amounts.  
  
3.2       India’s overall LNG and LPG imports from the Gulf in 2022-23 were about 
$26 billion of which Qatar contributed $12.36 billion, UAE $7.08 billion, Saudi Arabia 
$2.8 billion, Kuwait $2.31 billion, Oman $1 billion and Bahrain $0.12 billion. India and 
the Gulf countries have also been discussing enhancing their partnership in the field 
of renewable energy.  
3.3       The crucial role played by GCC countries towards India’s energy security has 
been emphasized by the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during briefing on 29 May 2023, as 
under: 
  
“We are a net energy importing country, and GCC countries are indispensable 
in this regard. The share of GCC countries is about thirty-five per cent in 
crude oil and seventy per cent in natural gas. We are having long-term energy 
partnerships with some countries.”  
3.4       The Secretary (CPV & OIA) further reiterated this position while tendering 
evidence before the Committee on 27 July 2023: 
  
“The Gulf countries have been indispensable partners in our energy security. 
The share of the GCC countries is about 35 per cent in our crude oil imports 
and 70 per cent in our gas imports. During the last financial year, our crude oil 
imports from Gulf countries were about USD 58 billion and our gas imports 
from GCC were in the range of USD 26 billion. We are also working together 
with Gulf countries on renewable energy, including solar and green hydrogen. 
On July 13, 2023, UAE’s ADNOC and IOCL signed a long-term agreement for 
supplying 1.2 million metric tonnes per annum of LNG for a 14-year period 
starting from 2026 to 2039.” 
 
  
3.5       The Ministry has further stated that India has also been working to transform 
the energy partnership between India and the Gulf countries from a buyer-seller to a 
more comprehensive relationship. UAE was the first country to participate in the 
India’s Strategic Petroleum Reserves in 2018. It also awarded concession to Indian 
companies in one of its oil fields in Lower Zakum (2018) and to BPCL and IOC in 
Abu Dhabi Onshore Block I (2019). On July 13, 2023, UAE’s ADNOC and IOCL 

17 
 
signed a long- term agreement for supplying of 1.2 MMTPA LNG for 14 years from 
2026-39. Oman awarded stakes to IOC in its Mukhaizna oilfields in 2018. With 
Qatar, long term LNG contracts were renegotiated during PM’s visit to Doha in 
2016.   
  
 
3.6       On the efforts made to evolve the energy partnerships with GCC countries 
from a mere transactional buyer-seller relationship into a comprehensive energy 
partnerships, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during the course of evidence on 27 July 
2023 stated as under: 
  
“….We have a very strong energy partnership with all the GCC countries and 
our effort has been to evolve this partnership into a comprehensive energy 
partnership rather than mere transactional buyer-seller relationship. Towards 
this effort, the Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited in January 2017 
signed a definitive agreement on oil storage and management with Abu Dhabi 
National Oil Company for storage of 5.86 million barrel of crude oil in 
Mangalore SPR at its own cost. Additionally, with Aramco, the national 
company of Saudi Arabia, an MOU was signed in October 2019 during the 
visit of Prime Minister for similar thing. So far, they have not started 
implementing the agreement, but the agreement is in place. It was also 
decided in April 2020 that the crude will be filled at our own cost and after the 
Cabinet approval in July 2021 for the development for the commercial-cum-
strategic reserves under Phase-II at Chandikhol with 4 mmt capacity, and at 
Padur with 2.5 mmt capacity on PPP model. ISPRL has been engaging with 
GCC member countries for their participation in the Phase-II of their 
programme. 
….IOCL and UAE’s ADNOC  has already signed a long-term agreement for 
supplying 1.2 million metric tonnes of LNG annually for 14 years. Also with 
Qatar, we have long-term LNG contracts which we have re-negotiated during 
hon. Prime  Minister’s visit to Doha in 2016. These contracts expire in 2028. A 
Task Force on energy has also been set up in Qatar. Also, you would be 
aware that the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia visited India in February, 2019. 
There was a major announcement made for the possible construction of the 
largest greenfield oil refinery called the West Coast Refinery at Raigarh in 
Maharashtra at a cost of USD 44 billion. Now, the discussions have been 
going on since then. Now, there has been a consensus between the two sides 
that instead of one big refinery of 60 MMTPA, they would go in for three small 
refineries of 20 MMTPA. So, these are some of the developments which are 
taking place on the energy side. At the same time, some countries have been 
awarding concessions to Indian companies. For example, UAE has awarded 
a concession in one of his oil fields, Lower Zakum in 2018 to BPCL, and to 
IOC in the Abu Dhabi Onshore Block 1. Oman has also awarded stakes to 
IOC in the Mukhaizna oil field in 2018. Likewise, we do have some progress in 
the renewable energy sector. Many Indian companies are looking at 
opportunities for investments in the green hydrogen and green ammonia 
sector in the GCC. There are some companies like ACME has invested in the 
green hydrogen in Oman. More companies are interested in making similar 
investments in Saudi Arabia and Bahrain”.  

18 
 
3.7       When asked about the planning of the Ministry to further strengthen and 
diversify the energy partnership with the GCC, the Ministry in a written reply has 
stated that India’s relation with GCC member countries in the field of hydrocarbon is 
mutually reinforcing and beneficial. With GCC countries, India is working to elevate 
this existing buyer seller relation to a strategic partnership. NOC’s of GCC countries 
are partnering Indian PSUs under the overall value chain of oil & gas sector including 
E&P assets, participation in India’s Strategic Petroleum Reserves, and technological 
advancement in clean energy. Towards this, Indian PSUs have also made 
investment in producing blocks in UAE & Oman. The Indian PSUs IOCL (30%),, OVL 
(40%) and BPRL (30%)  own  Falcon Oil & Gas B.V. has a 10% PI in the Lower 
Zakum Concession, UAE which produces approx. 350,000 barrels of oil per day 
(b/d). IOCL (50%) and BPRL (50%) are partners in Block Onshore-1, UAE. Indian 
PSUs are constantly on the lookout to acquire more hydrocarbon assets in the GCC 
countries.  
3.8       The Committee further enquired about the strategies/initiatives being pursued 
by the Ministry to deepen the comprehensive energy cooperation between India and 
the GCC countries, the Ministry responded that India is engaging with the GCC 
countries on multiple levels to deepen the cooperation in the area of energy. This 
includes exchanges/dialogues at various levels, Ministerial level meetings, 
institutional frameworks such as JWGs and Free Trade Agreements.  India has 
commercial arrangements including the storage of UAE’s crude oil in India’s 
Strategic Petroleum Reserve. After the participation of the UAE in India’s Strategic 
Petroleum Reserve (SPR) in 2018, an MoU was signed with Saudi Arabian National 
Oil Company – Saudi Aramco for its participation in India’s SPR in 2019. However, in 
order to benefit from low crude oil prices fall in 2020, India purchased the crude for 
filling up the SPR.  India is now executing Phase-II of the SPR and several countries, 
including GCC countries, have expressed interest in participation in the Phase-II of 
India’s SPR.  
 
3.9       In a written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has also stated that 
India has been engaging with GCC member countries at multiple levels to strengthen 
the energy security of the country including through participation of GCC member 
countries in Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPRs) of India. As a result of these 
efforts, Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL), on 25th January 2017, 
signed a Definitive Agreement on Oil Storage and Management with Abu Dhabi 
National Oil Company (ADNOC)) for storage of 5.86 million barrels crude oil in the 
Mangalore SPR at its own cost. Additionally, with  Aramco, the National Oil company 
of Saudi Arabia, a MoU was  signed between ISPRL and them on 29.10.2019 to 
explore possibility of filling one cavern of Padur on the sidelines of PM visit to Saudi 
Arabia. However, given the benefit which would accrue, on account of the low 
prevailing crude prices at that time (April 2020),  it was decided to fill the crude at our 
own cost. After the Cabinet approval in July 2021, for development of Commercial 
cum Strategic reserves under Phase II at Chandikhol (4MMT) and Padur (2.5 MMT) 
on PPP mode, ISPRL has been engaging with GCC member countries for their 
participation in Phase -II program. 

19 
 
3.10    When enquired whether any long-term agreements or collaborations are in 
the pipeline following recent milestones like the NOC-IOCL-LNG agreement as well 
as the stakes awarded to Indian companies, the Ministry has informed that the 
national oil companies of Abu Dhabi (UAE)- ADNOC & Saudi Arabia -  Saudi Aramco 
are interested to participate in the upcoming Ratnagiri Refinery and Petrochemical 
Complex in Maharashtra and have signed an MoU with the Indian promoters – IOCL, 
BPCL and HPCL of the Refinery. 
  
3.11    The Committee observed that India along with GCC member countries are 
also giving impetus to the ongoing momentum to tap the huge potential in terms of 
trade, investment and collaboration under the clean energy transition and sought to 
know the status in this regard. The Ministry has informed that despite GCC being a 
major oil and gas exporter, they have shown keen interest in clean energy related 
discussions including green hydrogen and bio fuels. India and Saudi Arabia have 
had two rounds of discussions replicating the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana in 2022 
under the aegis of the Saudi Green Initiative and the Middle East Green Initiative and 
has requested for further sharing India’s experience in designing and implementation 
of PMUY. GCC countries are focusing on India as preferred investment destination 
under natural gas, green hydrogen, and clean energy technologies on broadening 
our relationship. 
Green Energy 
3.12    During briefing on 29 May 2023, the Committee sought to know the projection 
regarding green hydrogen and its likely impact on the trade deficit with the GCC 
countries. In response,  the Secretary (CPV & OIA) stated: 
  
 “….there are large number of companies which are looking at investing in 
these countries in the green technologies.  We do have MoU signed with 
Saudi Arabia, UAE and others.  For example, we have four companies which 
have committed $18 billion investment in green energy typically to set up the 
green hydrogen and green ammonia in Oman and in Egypt.  Similarly, one of 
these companies called Occior which was known as Azure power  before, has 
also expressed interest in setting up of plants in Saudi Arabia with an 
investment to the tune of $2 billion.  Similarly, what is also happening is that, 
Saudi Arabia under its Vision 2030 and other countries with similar long-term 
visions are giving encouragement to increments in the field of renewable 
energy. When these partnerships blossom, we would also have a distinct 
advantage because our companies are actually, investing there and 
producing there, much of it is for buy back.  For example, a company called 
Sanmar Group from Chennai, has been a major investor in Egypt in the 
petrochemical sector.  Its entire produce is imported back.  We are trying to 
adopt a similar strategy for fertilizers and other products.  Although we cannot 
match our exports with the deficit coming out of the energy imports, I think, 
there is a long-term trend which we can see, of our companies committing 
huge investments in these sectors which are of interest to us including the 
renewable energy sector automobile sector, not very much as of now on the 
EV sector, as also but other sectors.  

20 
 
International Solar Alliance 
3.13 International Solar Alliance (ISA) is the first treaty based inter-governmental 
organization headquartered in India. Since its inception in 2018, ISA has been 
working with the objective of making solar as the energy source of choice, through 
the development, deployment, and funding of solar-powered energy solutions and 
applications on a large scale.  
3.14    It aims to contribute to the implementation of the Paris Climate Agreement 
through rapid and massive deployment of solar energy. The ISA aims to bring 
together countries to provide a collective response to the main common obstacles to 
the massive deployment of solar energy in terms of technology, finance and 
capacity. ISA has three key global drivers – Energy Access, Energy Security, and 
Energy Transition. As of date, 116 countries have signed the Framework Agreement 
of the ISA, of which 94 countries have also ratified it. Saudi Arabia, Oman, UAE and 
Bahrain have signed and ratified the ISA Framework Agreement. 
  
Green Grids Initiative and the One Sun One World One Grid Initiative   
3.15    The Ministry, in a written reply has informed that India and GCC Countries are 
also engaging within Green Grids Initiative and the One Sun One World One Grid 
initiative. This initiative was Hon’ble PM of India’s vision in 2018 which was launched 
in May 2021 by the United Kingdom and India jointly at the COP26 Summit. The 
GGI- OSOWOG will interconnect generators and demand centres across continents 
with an international power transportation grid. Cross-border connections would also 
be combined with community grids, smart vehicle charging and interactive 
appliances to ensure that grids are green and resilient at all levels. In this regard, 
India is looking forward to explore potential cooperation and has invited GCCIA, UAE 
and Saudi Arabia to OSOWOG- GGI initiative for setting up interconnected cross 
border grids.  
II. Health 
3.16    The Committee observed that during COVID-19 pandemic, both India and 
GCC had extended their assistance to each other because of which the health sector 
cooperation emerged as a big opportunity for the two sides and enquired about the 
manner in which the Ministry will explore this cooperation further ahead. They have 
been informed that India and the GCC countries cooperated closely during the Covid 
pandemic. Initially, in 2020 India supplied Hydrochloroquine (HCQ) tablets in large 
quantities to Gulf countries. Subsequently, India supplied 4.5 million Covishield 
vaccine doses to Saudi Arabia and 200,000 doses each to UAE and Kuwait. In 
addition, 100,000 vaccine doses each were gifted to Bahrain and Oman. GCC 
countries also helped India with supply of Liquid Medical Oxygen and containers 
during the Delta wave of Covid in 2021.  
3.17    India and GCC countries continue to take forward their healthcare 
cooperation following Covid pandemic. This includes discussions between India and 

21 
 
GCC countries on promoting medical and wellness tourism to India, collaborations 
between hospitals and medical institutions, development of reliable supply chains of 
vaccines and medicines, investments in rapidly growing health infrastructure in India, 
enhanced access of Indian pharmaceuticals to GCC countries and joint health 
cooperation in third countries especially in Africa. As needed, these objectives will be 
taken forward through signing of MOUs.  
3.18    On being asked about the details and status of MoUs on health cooperation,  
the Ministry in its written reply has stated that India has ongoing cooperation in 
health sector with GCC countries and has also entered into various agreements. 
With Oman, MoU on Cooperation in Health-care  has been signed. Under this MoU, 
the Joint Working Group (JWG) has been constituted, to discuss various areas of 
cooperation  like pharmaceutical cooperation, exchange of medical professionals, 
medical value travel etc.  India and Saudi Arabia are currently negotiating an MoU on 
Health. This will further expand the existing cooperation in the health sector including 
areas such as investments in health care industries, capacity building, exports of 
medical products, joint ventures, exchange of knowledge and service exports. A draft 
MoU for Cooperation in the Healthcare and a MoU for cooperation in traditional 
medicines such as AYUSH, Unani and Homeopath, etc. are also under discussion 
with UAE. 
3.19    There is a MoU for cooperation in the field of traditional medicine and 
homeopathy under discussion with Qatar. India has signed an MoU on Medical 
Cooperation with Kuwait, under which Joint Working Group (JWG) on Medical 
Cooperation has been set up to discuss areas like  medical technology, generic 
drugs, exchange of knowledge etc. India and Bahrain have signed an MOU for 
cooperation in the field of Healthcare. JWG meeting has been held to discuss 
cooperation in the field of pandemic management, exchange of medical 
professionals and ways to enhance trade in pharmaceuticals & medical devices and 
medical value travel.  India has proposed an MoU on Pharmacopoeial Cooperation 
and an annex titled “Bilateral Cooperation on Pharmaceutical Products” under the 
existing MoU with Bahrain.  
III.        Space 
3.20    Space is another area of cooperation between India and the GCC countries. 
In 2017 India launched a UAE nano-satellite on a PSLV. India also has space 
cooperation with Saudi Arabia, Oman and other GCC countries. Recently, a 
Department of Space delegation from India visited Oman in June 2023 to discuss 
enhancing cooperation inter alia in building communication satellite. 
                                                                                          
3.21    Regarding the specific initiatives and collaborative projects being considered 
to enhance space cooperation in the GCC region and the plan of the Ministry to 
further strengthen and expand space cooperation with the GCC countries, the 
Committee have been informed that India has been actively engaging with all GCC 
countries to strengthen partnership in Space cooperation.  There are ongoing 

22 
 
discussions between the Space Agencies of India and GCC countries like UAE, 
Saudi Arabia, Oman to explore further collaboration. Under the framework of 
Strategic Partnership Council, space agencies of India and Saudi Arabia have been 
coordinating regarding potential areas of collaboration. Both sides are also 
negotiating an MoU on cooperation in space sector. A MoU on Space cooperation 
signed with Oman lays the foundation for collaborative efforts in space exploration, 
satellite technology, academic collaboration and research. There have been efforts 
to further expand the horizon of bilateral cooperation with Qatar in Space sector, 
especially in Satellites. India has signed a MoU with Kuwait on Cooperation in the 
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. India and Bahrain have 
signed a Statement of Intent for cooperation in Space Sector. A Collaboration 
Framework between New Space India Limited (NSIL), India and National Space 
Agency (NSSA) Bahrain  in the areas of capacity building; space technology & 
applications; Ground Segment support; and Consultancy services is under 
discussion.  
IV.       Education  
3.22    During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
explained  the importance accorded to the education sector between India and GCC 
countries as under: 
  
“Education is another area….which has emerged as a strong area of 
cooperation between India and GCC. This will get further strengthened with 
the signing of the MoU for establishment of an IIT campus in Abu Dhabi”.  
3.23    On the issue of educational collaborations, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) stated: 
  
            “Now, you have also talked about the educational collaborations, particularly, 
when the  hon. Chief Minister, Kerala, visited UAE.  There was a talk of the 
University in Sharjah  and other places also. As a matter of policy, we encourage 
educational collaboration  between institutions.  In fact, with many countries, we 
have MoUs for collaboration in  the field of education.  Having said that, I would like 
to say that much of these  collaborations are university to university in the private 
sector where the Government’s    role is rather limited.  Only in case of IIT Delhi 
recently during the Prime Minister’s visit  there was a role for Government.  For 
example, if any State University wants to open up     or enter into a collaboration with 
any university in the Gulf countries, our embassies  would be very happy to facilitate. 
It can be a university-to-university collaboration or  department-to-department 
collaboration or faculty exchange.  So many options are there  and we would 
certainly like to do facilitate”.   
3.24    During briefing on 29 May 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) apprised the 
Committee on the initiatives being taken for educational and cultural collaborations 
with universities globally, as under:. 
            “….we are identifying 40 top universities globally in which our diaspora is 
playing a role  in the form of faculty members or senior researchers.  You are aware 
that Indian students  are one of the largest in many countries like US, UK and 

23 
 
Australia.  Again, this is an initiative which we are taking on the directions of the Hon. 
Prime Minister so that in the leading 40 universities in the world, we will have 
educational and cultural  collaborations”. 
3.25    When asked to state the role of the Ministry in facilitating higher and technical 
education, the Ministry has informed that an MoU was signed during the visit of 
Prime Minister to UAE in July 2023 to establish an IIT campus in the UAE.  As per 
the MoU, IIT Delhi-Abu Dhabi (IIT-DAD) will start its first Master’s program from Jan 
2024 in Energy Transition and Sustainability and bachelor’s, other master’s and PhD 
programs will follow from September 2024 onward. As a matter of policy, 
collaboration between educational institutions in India and countries abroad is 
encouraged.  Our Missions also facilitate collaborations in education sector.  
  
V. Digital Technology 
3.26    The Committee observed that India’s Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) is a 
success story that has attracted worldwide attention and sought to know the steps 
taken by the Ministry to promote and facilitate the adoption of India’s DPI by the 
GCC countries. The Ministry informed the Committee that India has held discussions 
related to the UPI platform with various Gulf countries. The Rupay card is already 
functional in UAE and MoUs for the same have also been signed with Saudi Arabia, 
Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE are also engaged in discussions on possible 
integration of the UPI platform with UAE payment platform. Similarly, India is also 
engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing mechanisms for 
bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. 
3.27    The MEA has further stated that proposals related to trade in local currencies 
and UPI connectivity are being pursued with Kuwait.  
3.28    On the progress made  regarding the initiatives related to the UPI platform, its 
impact and the merits of UPI platform established with UAE and Japan also, the 
Ministry has stated that UPI is not merely a Real Time Payment system providing 
Person to Person Payment system but it is a comprehensive payment scheme 
where the online transaction processing, Interbank settlements and Customer 
dispute life cycle management are encompassed holistically. At present, Indians who 
visit different countries have to pay for any expenses via international cards. With the 
introduction of UPI, Indians will now be able to use multiple bank accounts to make 
payments via a single mobile application. UAE has accepted India’s UPI interface 
while talks are ongoing with the Central Bank of Oman for technical integration of 
UPI. 
3.29    The Reserve Bank of India has allowed transactions in domestic currencies to 
promote growth of global trade with emphasis on exports from India and to support 
the increasing interest of global trading community in INR. This mechanism will allow 
businesses to directly trade in Indian Rupees thereby reducing risks related to 

24 
 
dependence on hard currencies. As of August 1, 2023, RBI has permitted 20 
Authorized Dealer banks in India for opening of Special Rupee Vostro Accounts from 
22 countries including Oman from GCC. 
3.30    The implementation of UPI in overseas markets is a significant step towards 
promoting digital transactions and fostering closer economic cooperation between 
India and foreign countries. With UPI's user-friendly and secure interface, Indian 
tourists will be able to make payments seamlessly, eliminating the need for currency 
exchange. This will enhance our bilateral trade as well as tourism. 
Internationalization of UPI will also help in reducing the cost of cross border 
payments.  
 
3.31    The Committee note that GCC countries are contributing almost 35% of 
India’s oil imports and 70% of gas imports. India and the GCC countries have a 
very strong energy partnership and efforts have been made to evolve this 
partnership into a comprehensive energy partnership rather than mere 
transactional buyer-seller relationship. UAE was the first country to participate 
in India’s Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) in 2018. An MoU was signed with 
Saudi Arabian National Oil Company – Saudi Aramco for its participation in 
India’s SPR in 2019. India is now executing Phase-II of the SPR and several 
countries, including GCC countries, have expressed their interest for 
participation in the Phase-II of India’s SPR. The Committee further note that 
National Oil Companies of GCC countries are partnering Indian PSUs under 
the overall value chain of oil & gas sector including E&P assets and 
technological advancement in clean energy. Indian PSUs have also been 
awarded stakes in oilfields in UAE & Oman. Long term agreements for supply 
of LNG was also signed with UAE and Qatar. The Committee are pleased at the 
progress made towards a comprehensive energy partnership with GCC 
countries. Keeping in view India’s energy security needs, the Committee 
desire that the Government should keep up the ongoing momentum and make 
constant efforts to enhance the energy partnership including in the field of 

25 
 
renewable energy. The Committee also urge the Government to actively 
engage with the GCC countries to secure their participation in Phase II of its 
Strategic Petroleum Reserve for an early implementation. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
3.32    The Committee further note that India is engaging with the GCC 
countries on multiple levels to deepen the cooperation in the area of energy 
through exchanges/dialogues at various levels, Ministerial level meetings, 
institutional frameworks such as JWGs and Free Trade Agreements.  The 
Committee desire that through these exchanges/dialogues and Agreements, 
GCC countries may be persuaded to invest in India as well as provide more 
investment opportunities to Indian PSUs, including in renewable energy sector 
like solar and green hydrogen, green ammonia sector and hydrocarbon assets. 
Indian PSUs may also be facilitated and incentivized by the Government for 
such investments in GCC countries. The Committee also desire that the 
Government should explore the opportunity of signing more MoUs/Long Term 
Agreements and collaborations for India’s energy security. 
  (Recommendation No. 10) 
3.33    The Committee note that GCC countries are focusing on India as 
preferred investment destination under natural gas, green hydrogen and clean 
energy technologies on broadening our relationship. India and Saudi Arabia 
have had two rounds of discussions replicating the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana in 2022 and has requested for further sharing of India’s experience in 
designing and implementation of PMUY. The Committee desire that the 
Government should maximize the focus on India as preferred investment 

26 
 
destination by GCC countries and reciprocate through creation of favourable 
environment and incentives/concessions for investment, where applicable.  
(Recommendation No. 11) 
3.34    The Committee further note that Indian PSUs have invested in green 
energy/technologies in GCC countries. India has signed MoU with Saudi 
Arabia, UAE and others. Large number of companies in India are looking at 
investing in these countries in the green technologies. Saudi Arabia under its 
Vision 2030 and other countries with similar long-term visions are giving 
encouragement to increments in the field of renewable energy. The Committee 
desire that as per India’s Long Term Vision for the energy sector to cater to 
our energy security needs, the Indian PSUs should be encouraged, facilitated 
and incentivized to invest in green energy/technologies in GCC countries so 
that they can contribute towards our energy security through importing/buying 
back of the product.   
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
3.35    The Committee note that Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman and Bahrain have 
joined the International Solar Alliance while two GCC countries namely, Kuwait 
and Qatar are yet to join the ISA. The Committee desire that all the GCC 
countries should be brought under the ISA as India is already having 
cooperation with GCC countries in the energy sector. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government to make extra efforts to persuade Kuwait and 
Qatar to join the Alliance at an early date. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
3.36    The Committee note that India and GCC countries are also engaging 
within the Green Grids Initiative and the One Sun One World One Grid initiative 

27 
 
under the aegis of the International Solar Alliance. The GGI-OSOWOG will 
interconnect generators and demand centres across continents with an 
international power transportation grid. Cross-border connections would also 
be combined with community grids, smart vehicle charging and interactive 
appliances to ensure that grids are green and resilient at all levels. The 
Committee further note that India is looking forward to explore potential 
cooperation and has invited GCCIA, UAE and Saudi Arabia to GGI-OSOWOG 
initiative for setting up interconnected cross border grids. The Committee are 
of the view that cooperation between India and GCC under the GGI-OSOWOG 
initiative would greatly enhance its partnership in the renewable/green energy 
sector and urge the Government to make vigorous efforts for meaningful 
dialogues so that interconnected cross border grids with GCC countries are 
set up at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
3.37    The Committee observe that India and the GCC countries cooperated 
closely during the COVID pandemic. India supplied Hydrochloroquine tablets 
and Covishield vaccine doses to the Gulf countries. GCC countries helped 
India with supply of Liquid Medical Oxygen and containers during the Delta 
wave of COVID in 2021. In the post pandemic period, both countries continue 
to take forward their healthcare cooperation which includes discussions on 
promoting medical and wellness tourism to India, collaborations between 
hospitals and medical institutions, development of reliable supply chains of 
vaccines and medicines, investments in rapidly growing health infrastructure 
in India, enhanced access of Indian pharmaceuticals to GCC countries and 
joint health cooperation in third countries especially in Africa. The Committee 
feel that mutually beneficial healthcare cooperation between India and GCC 

28 
 
countries should continue unabated even in the post COVID world and thus 
urge the Government to formalize/institutionalize the said objectives in the 
form of MoUs/Agreements.  
 (Recommendation No. 15) 
3.38    The Committee note that India has entered into various 
agreements/MoUs in the health sector with Oman, Kuwait and Bahrain while 
several MoUs are under negotiation with the GCC countries. India and Saudi 
Arabia are currently negotiating an MoU on Health; a draft MoU for 
Cooperation in the Healthcare and a MoU for cooperation in traditional 
medicines such as AYUSH, Unani and Homeopath, etc. are under discussion 
with UAE and an MoU for cooperation in the field of traditional medicine and 
homeopathy is under discussion with Qatar. India has also proposed an MoU 
on Pharmacopoeial Cooperation and an annex titled “Bilateral Cooperation on 
Pharmaceutical Products” under the existing MoU with Bahrain. The 
Committee are pleased at the progress made so far and the initiatives and 
ongoing discussions/negotiations for cooperation in the health sector. They, 
however, desire that MEA should facilitate appropriately so that the 
discussions/negotiations are concluded at the earliest and the 
agreements/MoUs on health cooperation between India and some of the GCC 
countries are signed and operationalized.  
 (Recommendation No. 16) 
3.39    The Committee note that Space Agencies of India and GCC countries 
like UAE, Saudi Arabia, Oman are in the process of discussion to explore 
further collaboration while space agencies of India and Saudi Arabia have 
been coordinating regarding potential areas of collaboration under the 
framework of Strategic Partnership Council and also negotiating an MoU on 

29 
 
cooperation in space sector. Efforts have been made to further expand the 
horizon of bilateral cooperation with Qatar in Space sector, especially in 
Satellites. Moreover, a Collaboration Framework between New Space India 
Limited (NSIL), India and National Space Agency (NSSA) Bahrain  in the areas 
of capacity building; space technology & applications; Ground Segment 
support; and Consultancy services is under discussion. In order to enhance 
and strengthen partnerships in space cooperation and bring about further 
collaboration in this sector between India and GCC countries, the Committee 
urge the Government to bring all the ongoing discussion and collaborative 
efforts to a fruitful conclusion for an early implementation. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
3.40    The Committee note that the education sector has emerged as a strong 
area of cooperation between India and the GCC countries. As a matter of 
policy, collaboration between educational institutions in India and countries 
abroad is encouraged.  Indian Missions also facilitate collaborations in 
education sector.  
There is an ongoing process of identifying 40 top universities globally in which 
Indian diaspora are playing a role in the form of faculty members or senior 
researchers as a part of educational and cultural collaborations with 
universities across the world .  The Committee also note that an MoU was 
signed in July 2023 to establish an IIT campus in the UAE. The Committee feel 
that educational collaborations between India and GCC countries should be 
enhanced and urge the Government to explore more avenues for partnerships 
in this sector so that more MoUs for facilitating higher and technical education 
would be signed. Indian Missions abroad may be pursued to play a more 

30 
 
proactive role in facilitating educational collaborations between institutions in 
India and in the GCC countries. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
complete the exercise regarding identification of top universities having 
involvement of diaspora at the earliest for promotion of educational and 
cultural collaborations. 
  (Recommendation No. 18) 
 3.41    On the adoption of India’s Digital Public Infrastructure by GCC 
countries, the Committee note that the Rupay card is already functional in UAE 
while MoUs for the same have also been signed with Saudi Arabia, Oman and 
Bahrain. India and UAE are also engaged in discussions on possible 
integration of the UPI platform with UAE payment platform. India is also 
engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing 
mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. Moreover, 
proposals related to trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being 
pursued with Kuwait. The Committee understand that besides promoting 
digital transactions, integration of the UPI platform with the payment platforms 
of GCC countries would go a long way in fostering closer economic 
cooperation through enhanced bilateral trade  as well as tourism and at the 
same time, reduce the cost of cross border payments. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government to pursue the GCC countries and enter into 
constructive talks with UAE, Kuwait and others for an early finalization of 
India’s UPI connectivity and its integration with the payment Platforms of the 
GCC countries. Efforts made and success achieved in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 

31 
 
  
CHAPTER IV 
INDIA-GCC COOPERATION ON DEFENCE AND SECURITY 
4.1       India’s defence and security relationship with the Gulf countries is 
continuously expanding, with high level visits, bilateral exercises, ship visits, training 
and participation in exhibitions. There is also good cooperation in areas such as 
counter-terrorism, intelligence sharing, cyber security and maritime security. Saudi 
Arabia provided good assistance to Indian Air Force aircrafts and Indian Navy ships 
for evacuation of Indian nationals from Sudan under Operation Kaveri in April and 
May 2023. Similarly, during the second wave of Covid in April 2021, Gulf countries 
provided timely access to Indian Navy ships for transportation of liquid medical 
oxygen and containers.  
  
4.2       A number of high-level defence visits have taken place between India and 
Gulf countries in recent years. For example, the first ever visit of Army Chief to Saudi 
Arabia took place in December 2020. In return, Commander of Saudi Land Forces 
visited India in February 2022.   Our Army Chief also visited UAE in December 2020 
while Air Chief visited UAE in August 2021. Chief of Naval Staff visited Oman in 
September 2021. UAE has also provided assistance in the transport of Rafale jets 
from France to India.  
  
4.3       Joint naval and air exercises have also taken place bilaterally with GCC 
countries.  The first ever joint naval exercise between India and Saudi Arabia called 
‘Al-Mohed al-Hindi’ took place in August 2021 while the second edition took place in 
May 2023. A joint exercise between Indian and Omani armies, Al Najaf IV, was held 
in August 2022 in India. Air Forces of both countries held Eastern Bridge Exercise-VI 
in February 2022 in Jodhpur. MOUs on defence cooperation have been signed with 
UAE, Saudi Arabia and Oman in past few years. Two MOUs on defence cooperation 
with Oman were renewed in May 2021. India also joined the multilateral Combined 
Maritime Forces, headquartered in Bahrain as an Associate Partner in 2022. This will 
strengthen cooperation in regional security in the western Indian Ocean.  
  
4.4       There have also been NSA/Dy. NSA level dialogues with various GCC 
countries. NSA visited Saudi Arabia in May 2023 and met his counterparts from 
Saudi Arabia, US and UAE. NSA also visited Oman in June 2023 and met his 
counterpart. A Dy. NSA level dialogue with Oman was held in January 2023. 
4.5       During briefing on 29 May 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) highlighted the 
important developments on defence and security aspects between India and GCC 
countries, as under:- 
 “….there is a growing cooperation with GCC at all levels in the defence and 
security matters. There have been contacts at senior levels but more 
important is that we have been inviting them for our joint exercises. In fact, in 
Saudi Arabia, recently, we have the second joint naval exercise. With UAE 
and Oman, we already have such a mechanism. On Duqm, construction work 
has started. So, these are very important developments on the security side. 
We are also in touch with Gulf countries enhancing for cooperation in 
maritime security and cyber security”. 

32 
 
4.6       The Secretary (CPV & OIA) also elaborated on the strengthening cooperation 
between India and GCC countries in defence and security in the past few years 
during evidence on 27 July 2023: 
“India and all the GCC countries have strengthened defence and security 
cooperation in the past few years, including through exchange of high-level 
visits, bilateral exercises, shipping visits. There is also a very good 
cooperation on counter terrorism, intelligence sharing, space cooperation, 
cyber security, maritime security, prevention of human trafficking, narcotics, 
and narcotics smuggling. There have also been NSA and Deputy NSA level 
dialogues with various GCC countries. NSA visited Saudi Arabia in May 2023 
and met his counterparts from Saudi Arabia, USA, and UAE. NSA had also 
visited Oman last month in June 2023 and met his counterpart. Recently, the 
Secretary, Department of Space, and the Chairman, ISRO visited Oman to 
discuss avenues for cooperation in the field of space”. 
 
4.7       The Committee further enquired about the efforts being made by the Ministry 
to foster collaboration in emerging areas such as cyber security, science & 
technology, artificial intelligence, etc. The Ministry responded that India and GCC 
countries continue to exchange information and best practices on cyber security in 
various defence and security related dialogues. MOUs on cyber security cooperation 
are also being discussed between India and various Gulf countries. Ministry 
continues to facilitate meetings and road shows between the relevant stakeholders, 
public and private, to promote cooperation in these areas. There are many 
institutional mechanisms with various countries to deepen the partnership in area of 
technology including Joint Working Groups. There are also various exchanges, 
delegation visits to further deepen cooperation in science and technology. Various 
Indian IT companies also have presence in GCC countries.   
   
  Cyber Security 
4.8       The Committee observed that India and GCC countries continue to exchange 
information and best practices on cyber security in various defence and security 
related dialogues. MoUs on cyber security cooperation are also being discussed 
between India and various Gulf countries.  
 
4.9     On being asked to furnish the details and efforts being made to finalize these 
MoUs at the earliest, the Ministry has reiterated that India and GCC countries 
continue to exchange information and best practices on cyber security in various 
defence and security related dialogues. MoUs on cyber security cooperation are also 
being discussed between India and various Gulf countries. The MoUs on Cyber 
Security cooperation between CERT-In and its equivalent organisation in GCC 
countries are currently under discussions at various stages.   
 
II. Maritime  Security 
 
4.10     The Ministry, in a written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated that 
maritime security has been high on the agenda of cooperation between India and 
GCC countries. This is reflected in high level visits such as that of Chief of Naval 
Staff to Oman in September 2021, joint naval exercises such as ‘Al-Mohed al-Hindi’ 

33 
 
exercises between India and Saudi Arabia that took place in August 2021 and May 
2023, signing of MOU on White Shipping Information with Oman in 2021 and India 
joining the multilateral Combined Maritime Forces in Bahrain as an Associate 
Partner in 2022. Maritime security is discussed in various security and defence 
meetings between India and GCC. 
 
4. 11    The Committee note that India’s defence and security relationship with 
the Gulf countries consist of  high level defence visits, joint naval and air 
exercises, NSA and Deputy NSA level dialogues, ship visits, training and 
participation in exhibitions, cooperation in areas such as counter-terrorism, 
intelligence sharing, cyber security, maritime security, etc. The Committee 
further note that MoUs on defence cooperation have been signed with UAE, 
Saudi Arabia and Oman in the past few years and two MoUs on defence 
cooperation with Oman were renewed in May 2021. The Committee 
acknowledge the growing cooperation between India and GCC countries in 
defence and security matters but are surprised that MoUs have been signed 
with only few countries so far. The Committee, are, therefore of the view that 
India-GCC cooperation on defence and security needs to be scaled up with 
proper mechanism for intelligence sharing on terrorism, human trafficking, 
smuggling of narcotics, etc. An institutional framework for cooperation in new 
and emerging areas such as cyber security, maritime security, use of science 
and technology and artificial intelligence in the detection and countering of 
terrorist threats, etc. may be evolved to strengthen our partnerships in the 
field of defence and security. The Committee also desire that security 
dialogues between India and GCC countries may be held regularly at the 
highest level.   
(Recommendation No. 20) 
4.12    The Committee note that India and GCC countries continue to exchange 
information and best practices on cyber security in various defence and 

34 
 
security related dialogues. MoUs on cyber security cooperation are also being 
discussed between India and various Gulf countries. The MoUs on Cyber 
Security cooperation between CERT-In and its equivalent organisation in GCC 
countries are currently under discussions at various stages.  The Committee 
are of the view that MoUs on cyber security between India and GCC countries 
are long overdue especially in the backdrop of severe challenge posed by 
cyber terrorism globally. They, therefore, desire that the Government should 
make concerted efforts to evolve a mechanism for cooperation with GCC 
countries through MoUs/Agreements on cyber security expeditiously. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to facilitate the ongoing discussion on MoUs 
regarding cyber security cooperation between CERT-In and its equivalent 
organisation in GCC countries for its early and successful conclusion. 
                                                                                        (Recommendation No. 21 ) 
4.13     The Committee note that high priority has been attached to maritime 
security in India’s cooperation with GCC countries. Given the pivotal role of 
the Gulf countries in maritime trade, its enormous oil and natural gas 
resources and India’s dependence on these countries for our energy security, 
the Committee desire that India-GCC cooperation  on maritime security should 
be considerably enhanced including signing of more MoUs/Agreements, if 
required, so as to ensure maritime safety and unhindered transportation of 
energy resources in the region. The Committee also urge the Government to 
extend all support to the GCC countries for protection of its maritime routes to 
prevent instability which has the potential to impact our economy as well as 
the global economy. 
                                                                                          (Recommendation No.22 ) 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER V 
TRADE AND INVESTMENT WITH GCC COUNTRIES 
5.1       The GCC region contributes to about one-sixth of India’s total trade. UAE is 
India’s third largest trade partner while Saudi Arabia is at the fourth place. During FY 
2022-23, India’s trade with GCC countries was approximately USD 184 billion. This 
was almost a 20% rise from FY 2021-22 when our total trade with GCC was about 
USD 154 billion.  In FY 2022-23, India’s imports from GCC were USD 133 billion and 
India’s exports were USD 51 billion.  
  
5.2       Country-wise figures (in billion USD) of India’s trade with GCC countries 
during F.Y. 2022-23 were as follows: 
Country India’s exports India’s imports Total trade 
UAE 31.6 53.2 84.8 
Saudi Arabia 10.72 42.03 52.76 
Qatar 1.96 16.8 18.77 
Kuwait 1.56 12.24 13.80 
Oman 4.47 7.91 12.38 
Bahrain 0.96 1.01 1.97 
Total 51.27 133.19 184.46 
        
 
5.3       The major items of India’s imports and exports from/to GCC countries have 
been  highlighted by the Secretary (CPV & OIA) in his opening statement during the 
course of evidence on 27 July 2023, as under: 
  
“Petroleum and petroleum products are the main export items for    GCC 
countries to India. From India, the main items of export   include cereals and food 
items, jewelleries, synthetic fibres and yarns, textiles, apparels, machinery, iron and 
steel products and   plastic products”.   
5.4       Explaining the reasons for the trade deficit between India and GCC countries, 
the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during briefing on 29 May 2023, stated as under: 
  
“One of the important reasons of our trade deficit is high energy prices. Of 
late, as you know the energy prices have really gone up. Since we are a net 
importer of energy, this is actually widening our trade deficit. At the same 
time, the important part is also that our exports are also increasing. So, in 
some measure, it is actually bridging this gap.  
….for exports to UAE, which were $ 16.68 in 2020-21, are now standing at 
$31.6 billion.  The exports to Saudi Arabia, which were $5.85 billion in 2020-

36 
 
21, now, again nearly doubled, $10.72 billion.  It is the same trend for all the 
countries”.  
5.5       The Committee observed that trade between India and GCC Countries is 
actually a UAE and Saudi Arabia dominated trade as both of these country have lion 
share of almost 75% of the total trade between India and the GCC. India’s trade with 
GCC countries stood at 184.46 billion US dollar in FY 2022-23 with Indian exports of 
51.27 billion US dollars and Indian imports of 133.19 billion US dollars indicating a 
negative trade balance.  
5.6       On being asked to state the steps being taken by the Ministry to address 
these issues, the Ministry responded that the underlined trade balance is owing to 
heavy energy dependence of India on Gulf nations, which are raw material imports. 
Excluding trade in Chapter 27 of the Customs Tariff of India 2023  (oil trade), non-oil 
trade is relatively more balanced with India’s non-oil (exports excluding those in 
chapter 27) exports to the GCC totalling USD 37.98 billion in FY 2022-23 and India’s 
non-oil imports from the GCC during the same period stood at USD 42.45 billion. 
5.7       Regardless, the Government of India is constantly working towards 
enhancing Indian exports to Gulf countries. As a result, Indian exports to all GCC 
countries has seen an increase in recent years. Exports to Saudi Arabia increased 
from USD 5.85 bn in 2020-21 to USD 10.7 billion in 2022-23, similarly exports to 
UAE increased from USD 16.68 bn in 2020-21 to USD 31.6 bn  in 2022-23. The 
efforts are also being made towards further diversification of India’s exports basket 
by including sectors such as pharma, gems and jewelry, electronic and engineering 
goods among others. Our Missions in association with Industry bodies/associations, 
has been taking efforts, including through trade and investment promotion events, 
facilitation of visits of delegations, addressing non-tariff barriers, and so on, to 
increase Indian exports to GCC countries.  
5.8       When enquired about the areas and sectors, apart from oil and gas, where 
trade and commerce can be increased between India and GCC, the Ministry has 
informed that GCC is one of the most important trading and investment partners of 
India. Our bilateral trade with GCC was close to US$ 184 billion in FY 2022-23, 
making it our largest regional trading partner. Petroleum and petrochemical products 
are the main export items for GCC countries to India.  
5.9       Based on secondary data research, there seems be a scope in a number of 
products, including mineral fuels and mineral oils, for increasing exports and overall 
trade to GCC countries. Some of the non-oil products with export potential are as 
follows: gems and jewellery, machinery and mechanical appliances, automobiles, 
pharmaceutical products, electrical machinery and equipment, iron and steel, 
plastics and articles thereof, articles of iron and steel, chemical products and 
foodstuff.  
5.10     The Committee further sought to know the steps being taken by the Ministry 
to improve India’s trade deficit with Saudi Arabia and whether  the MEA is in touch 

37 
 
with Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Ministry of Finance to improve the trade 
imbalance in favour of India. They have been informed that as per DGCIS data, 
India’s bilateral trade with Saudi Arabia stood at USD 52.76 billion in FY 2022-23 
with Indian exports of USD 10.73 billion and Indian imports of USD 42.03 billion 
indicating a negative trade balance. However, bulk of the imports from Saudi Arabia 
are energy imports (crude petroleum - raw material).  
5.11     Bilateral non-oil trade (excluding products under Chapter 27 of the 
Harmonized System at 2-digit level) between the two countries is balanced with 
India’s non-oil exports to Saudi Arabia and Indian non-oil imports from Saudi Arabia 
being almost evenly matched around USD 8.8 billion in FY 2022-23.  
5.12     Ministry of External Affairs and Department of Commerce are working 
together, including in partnership with the Indian Missions in Saudi Arabia, and 
making dedicated trade and investment promotion efforts to enhance Indian exports 
to Saudi Arabia and also to increase inward investments from Saudi Arabia to India. 
5.13     When asked to state the manner in which the MEA  can use India’s 
dominance in sectors like IT, space, automobiles, etc. for balancing the trade with 
GCC countries in its favour, the Ministry responded that the trade deficit with Gulf 
countries is mainly due to high imports of oil and gas from these countries. Ministry 
of External Affairs and Department of Commerce are working together, including in 
partnership with the Indian Missions in Gulf countries, and making dedicated trade 
and investment promotion efforts to enhance Indian exports to these countries and 
also to increase inward investments to India.  Efforts are being made to further 
enhance trade relations through trade and investment promotion events, facilitation 
of visits of delegations, addressing non-tariff barriers, and so on, to increase Indian 
exports to GCC countries.  
 i)  Free Trade agreement between India and GCC Countries 
5.14     The Ministry has also stated that one of the major achievements in recent 
years has been the India-UAE Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 
(CEPA) which was signed between the two nations on February 18, 2022 and 
officially entered into force on May 1, 2022. The Agreement was negotiated in a 
record time of 88 days and is the first free trade agreement of India with an Arab 
country. CEPA is expected to increase the total value of bilateral trade in goods to 
over US$100 billion within five years. India and GCC are also discussing re-launch of 
their Free Trade Agreement (FTA) negotiations.  
 
5.15     During briefing on 29 May 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) elaborated on 
the status of the FTA negotiations between India and GCC countries as under: 
             
            “Now, coming to the FTA negotiations, we have resumed the FTA 
negotiations with  GCC countries and as you would be aware that the former GCC 
Secretary General Dr. Nayef Falah Mubarak Al Hajraf had visited India twice - in 
November, 2021 and in   November, 2022. So, what we have done now is that both 

38 
 
sides have exchanged the    Terms of Reference ….The terms of reference have 
been exchanged and we are  discussing to finalize this. There is keenness and 
willingness on GCC to conclude this very soon with us and we are also hopeful that 
this may be done in the next six months or  so. Our side is also keen but we have to 
cross this bridge. At the same time, we are    getting feelers from some other 
countries like Oman who would like to start similar FTA  negotiations. In fact, some 
discussions have taken place and some   suggestions have  come from Oman 
whereby they have said that can they make use of our CEPA with UAE. We have the 
provision under the UAE to add some other countries. This issue of  the FTA has 
been discussed in meetings both with CIM and EAM and this is continuing. At the 
same time, we also have a mechanism of industry conferences  between of GCC 
and India. Four industrial conferences have taken place so far”. 
5.16     Explaining the reason for the delay in the FTA negotiations, the 
representative of the Department of Commerce (JS, FT-WANA) during  briefing on 
29 May 2023, stated:  
            “….we have re-launched the negotiations with the GCC countries   in 
November last year and we have exchanged the drafts of the terms of reference. So, 
both the sides are  keen to conclude the  terms of negotiator of the GCC side who is 
a Saudi official has been  appointed as their Ambassador to Beijing and now he is 
posted in there. The GCC  Secretariat has requested the Saudi side to re-nominate a 
new official. There is a slight delay because of this.  We are awaiting the nomination 
of the GCC chief negotiator.  As and when it happens, we are willing to conclude the 
terms of reference quickly and re- launch the formal negotiations…. Whenever we 
start the formal negotiations, we hope to  conclude in about six to eight months’ 
time.  That is what we are expecting”. 
5.17     The Committee further enquired about the outcome of FTA meetings held so 
far between India and GCC countries as well as the bottlenecks  for the delay in the 
India-GCC FTA and the steps being taken by MEA to expedite the process. In its 
written reply, the Ministry has stated that in 2005, at the 4th Meeting of the Trade 
Economic Relations Committee (TERC), India and the GCC approved 
commencement of Free Trade Agreement negotiations between the two sides. Two 
rounds of negotiations (March 2006 and September 2008) were subsequently held in 
Riyadh. During these two rounds, the following broad progress was made: creation 
of four Joint Working Groups; adoption of generic Terms of Reference (ToR); 
exchange of trade and tariff data; and exchange of draft FTA texts. 
5.18     However, in 2011, GCC announced deferral of FTA negotiations with all 
countries and economic groups. In 2019, GCC expressed interest in resumption of 
FTA negotiations; a formal request followed from the GCC Secretary General (SG) in 
November 2020. In November 2022, during the visit to India of the Secretary 
General of the GCC, India and the GCC announced their intent to resume the FTA 
negotiations at the earliest. New Terms of Reference for the FTA negotiations are 
currently being negotiated between the two sides. 

39 
 
5.19     During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the Economic Advisor from 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry apprised the Committee regarding the status 
of the India-GCC FTA negotiations, as under: 
  
“….regarding the India-GCC FTA …. we had negotiations in 2005 and 2006 
which were  stopped in 2011. In November 2019, GCC Secretariat again welcomed 
the resumption of  FTA negotiations. After that, in March 2021, the Secretary 
General (GCC) again sent a  message proposing resumption of India-GCC FTA 
negotiations. In December 2021 to January 2022, we worked on the constitution of 
Joint Working Group. The preliminary  virtual meeting of the Joint Working Group to 
examine issues related to the proposed India-GCC FTA was held in February 2022. 
In November 2022, there was a visit of   Secretary General of GCC Secretariat to 
India in which we announced the intent to  pursue negotiations on the India-GCC 
FTA. So, Sir, the technical teams have been  constituted and also, we are working 
on the modalities and terms of reference. But the recent delay was due to the non-
appointment of Chief Negotiator from the GCC side. Now, we have been informed by 
the GCC Secretariat that we have a new Chief  Negotiator from the GCC in place. 
So, we have actually spoken to our Ambassador in Saudi Arabia to take up this issue 
with GCC Secretariat so that we can begin the formal  negotiations on India-GCC 
FTA”.  
 
5.20     On the prospects of trade enhancement between India and GCC countries 
after signing of the proposed FTA, the Economic Advisor from the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry during the said evidence, submitted as under:- 
“….the Department of Commerce has undertaken several FTA negotiations 
with our bilateral partners, including the UK and Canada. So, we have signed a 
Free Trade Agreement with Australia. Since the GCC is a significant trading 
bloc, we feel that the GCC FTA is great. Going by the early signs of the India-
UAE CEPA, which we signed last year, we see a significant growth in our 
bilateral trade. Also, we have done feasibility studies in India with regard to 
what the gains of India-GCC trade would be. We have come to the conclusion 
that the tariff elimination that we would get for our products would lead to a 
substantial increase in trade. With the tariff barriers, both for goods and 
services, we would have more free flow of our goods and also more manpower 
to GCC countries, which would actually be a trade booster both in goods and 
services. This is the strategy that our Ministry is following. 
  
The signing of trade agreements also integrates us into the global value chain. 
If we are more integrated into the global value chains, it is going to be a 
positive thing for us when we look at the global trade scenario in the future. We 
are very hopeful that this FTA will make a positive difference for us”. 
  
ii) Foreign Direct Investment between India and GCC Countries 
  
5.21     Gulf countries have also made substantial investments in India, both FDI and 
portfolio. The total FDI of GCC countries stood at about USD 20 billion as of 
December 2022. The data for FDI in India from GCC countries for the period April 
2000-December 2022 is as follows: UAE ($15.32 billion), Saudi Arabia ($3.15 

40 
 
billion), Oman ($588 million), Qatar ($496 million), Bahrain ($ 183 million) and Kuwait 
($89 million).   
  
5.22     The Sovereign Wealth Funds of the Gulf countries such as ADIA and 
Mubadala (UAE), PIF (Saudi Arabia), QIA (Qatar) and KIA (Kuwait) have been 
positive on increasing their investments in India. They have invested in several 
companies in India. Other public/private companies from the Gulf have also been 
increasing investments in India. For example, Dubai based DP World has invested in 
India through National Investment Infrastructure Fund (NIIF). Some UAE companies 
have also shown interest in investing in the UT of J&K. 
                                                                                          
5.23     Having observed that more than 90% of the FDI inflow is from UAE and 
Saudi Arabia, the Committee sought to know the reason for the low  contribution of 
other Gulf Countries and the efforts of the Ministry to improve the situation. The 
Ministry responded that Government has put in place a liberal and transparent policy 
for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), wherein most sectors, except certain 
strategically important sectors, are open for 100% FDI under the automatic route. 
The Government reviews the FDI policy on an ongoing basis and makes changes 
from time to time, to ensure that India remains an attractive & investor friendly 
destination. It has been the endeavour of the Government to put in place an enabling 
and investor friendly FDI policy. The intent is to make the FDI policy more investor 
friendly and remove the policy bottlenecks that have been hindering investment 
inflows into the country. 
  
5.24     FDI policy provisions have been progressively liberalized and simplified 
across various sectors such as Pension, Other Financial Services, Asset 
reconstruction Companies, Broadcasting, Pharmaceuticals, Single Brand Retail 
Trading, Construction & Development, Power Exchanges, e-commerce activities, 
Coal Mining, Contract Manufacturing, Civil Aviation etc. In the recent past, reforms in 
the FDI Policy have been undertaken in sectors such as Defence, Insurance, 
Petroleum & Natural Gas and Telecom. Further, all proposals seeking Government 
approval under FDI route are now filed on National Single Window System (NSWS) 
Portal. 
  
5.25     Trade and Investment is an important component of our bilateral relations 
with GCC countries and our Missions are undertaking various initiatives like 
organising trade and investment promotion events, facilitation of visits of delegations, 
addressing non-tariff barriers to showcase India has an attractive investment 
destination.  
  
5.26     When asked about the possibilities for further improvement in investments by 
Gulf countries in India, the Ministry has stated that Gulf countries have made 
substantial FDI investments in India over the past few years and the figure currently 
stands at close to USD 20 billion. Ministry is actively engaged with the relevant 
stakeholders, both government and private, in the Gulf countries for promotion of 
investments in India. There has, in particular, been regular engagement with the 
sovereign wealth funds in the GCC countries for attracting their investments in India. 
These include Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA) and Mubadala of UAE, Public 

41 
 
Investment Fund (PIF) of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) and Qatar 
Investment Authority (QIA). Our Embassies also organize various investment 
promotion campaigns in GCC countries, including some focussed on specific sectors 
and states. India is also currently negotiating Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) with 
UAE, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait which should also help in enhancing investments into 
India. 
iii) Trade Settlement in Local Currencies 
5.27     The Ministry has further stated in its Background note furnished to the 
Committee that the MoUs on establishment of a framework for bilateral trade 
settlement in local currencies (INR-AED) and interlinking payment and messaging 
systems of both countries signed between RBI and Central Bank of UAE on 15 July 
2023, will further enhance the economic engagement between India and UAE. 
                                                                            
5.28     During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs elaborated on the MoUs exchanged with UAE regarding 
RuPay card, linking of India’s UPI with UAE’s Instant Payment Platform  and trade 
settlement in Indian rupee and Dirham, as under: 
  
“First is the acceptance of RuPay Card in the UAE. That is now fairly 
acceptable across many points of sales in the UAE, and it has been in the 
works for the last 2-3 years or more…. 
The second aspect which happened recently during the hon. Prime Minister’s 
visit was the exchange of an MoU on interlinking payment and messaging 
systems by the Governors of the respective Central Banks. With this MoU, 
once it becomes operationalised, it will link India’s UPI with UAE’s Instant 
Payment Platform, and this will then help users in either country to make safe 
fast and cost-effective cross-border transactions.  
And, the third thing that we have worked with the UAE is the trade settlement 
in Indian rupee and Dirham. On this, again there was an MoU exchanged in 
front of the two leaders, the hon. Prime Minister and the UAE President, 
during the Prime Minister’s visit to establish the framework to promote the use 
of local currency, that is, the Indian rupee and the Emirati Dirham for cross-
border transaction. This was again done by the Central Banks of both the 
countries. With this, the exporters and importers in both the countries can 
invoice in their local currencies. There are lots of technical details which are 
associated with it. A whole consignment happened under this MoU. So, this is 
already functional with that but greater details and guidelines, etc., will be 
coming through this MoU as well.”  
5.29     When asked whether the Ministry plan on facilitating such agreements with 
other countries of the GCC in the near future, the Committee have been informed 
that India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing 
mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. The Rupay card is 
already functional in UAE and MoUs for the same have also been signed with Saudi 
Arabia, Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE are also engaged in discussions on 
possible integration of the UPI platform with UAE payment platform. The proposals 

42 
 
related to trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued with 
Kuwait.  
 
5.30    The Committee note that the contribution of the GCC region to India’s 
total trade is about one-sixth while the total volume of India’s trade with GCC 
countries stood at 184.46 billion USD during the FY 2022-23. Out of the total 
volume, India’s exports stood at 51.27 billion USD and its imports at 133.19 
billion USD indicating trade imbalance between the two countries. The Ministry 
has stated that the trade deficit is owing to heavy energy dependence of India 
on Gulf nations and high imports of oil and gas. Petroleum and petrochemical 
products constitute the main items of export for GCC countries to India while 
the main items of export by India include cereals and food items, jewelleries, 
synthetic fibres and yarns, textiles, apparels, machinery, iron and steel 
products and plastic products. The Committee feel that the trade imbalance 
between India and GCC countries should be addressed through collective 
efforts of all the Ministries/Departments/Agencies concerned and urge the 
Ministry to facilitate the process of devising a fresh strategy for enhancing 
India’s exports to GCC countries as well as to increase  inward investments to 
India. Diversification of India’s exports basket by including other sectors such 
as IT, space, automobiles, chemical and pharmaceutical products, etc. should 
also be taken up for enhancing our exports to GCC countries.  The Committee 
also urge the Ministry to impress upon our Missions in these countries to 
make vigorous efforts in trade and investment promotion events, facilitation of 
visits of delegations, addressing non-tariff barriers, and other measures, in 
association with Industry bodies/associations. 
                                                                                         (Recommendation No.23 ) 

43 
 
5.31     The Committee observe that trade between India and GCC countries 
have been dominated by UAE and Saudi Arabia. UAE is India’s largest trade 
partner among the GCC countries with the total volume of trade at Rs. 84.8 
billion USD while Saudi Arabia occupies the second position at 52.76 USD 
during the FY 2022-23. In terms of trade imbalance, India’s exports to Saudi 
Arabia stood at 10.72 and its imports at 42.03 billion USD. The Committee find 
scope for enhancement  in India’s trade and investment with the other GCC 
countries like Kuwait, Qatar, Oman and Bahrain and desire that the 
Government should explore the opportunities collectively with all the 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies concerned. On the issue of the huge trade 
deficit between India and Saudi Arabia, the Committee urge the Ministry of 
External Affairs in coordination with all related Ministries, to make all out 
efforts for improving the trade imbalance in favour of India. 
                                                                                         (Recommendation No.24 ) 
5.32     The Committee note that commencement of negotiations for a Free 
Trade Agreement between India and GCC was approved in 2005 and two 
rounds of negotiations were subsequently held in 2006 and 2008. However, in 
2011, GCC announced deferral of FTA negotiations with all countries and 
economic groups.  GCC Secretariat again welcomed the resumption of FTA 
negotiations in November 2019 and followed it up in 2021. After the 
constitution of Joint Working Group and preliminary virtual meeting of the 
Joint Working held in February 2022, the intent to pursue negotiations on the 
India-GCC FTA was announced in November 2022. As of now, the technical 
teams have been constituted and the modalities and terms of reference are  
being worked upon. The Ministry has also stated that the recent delay was due 

44 
 
to the non-appointment of Chief Negotiator from the GCC side. GCC 
Secretariat has now informed that a new Chief Negotiator from the GCC is in 
place. The Committee feel that the process of negotiation and finalization of 
the FTA between India and GCC has been delayed for long and in view of the 
prospects of substantial increase in trade between India and GCC countries as 
well as India’s integration into the global value chain through the signing of 
the FTA, urge the Government to maintain close coordination with the GCC 
Secretariat so that formal negotiations on the India-GCC FTA commence soon 
for its early conclusion.  
                                                                                          (Recommendation No. 25) 
5.33     The Committee note that the total FDI of GCC countries to India stood 
at about 20 billion USD as of December 2022. The Sovereign Wealth Funds of 
the Gulf countries of UAE, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait have been positive 
on increasing their investments in India while other  public/private companies 
from the Gulf have also been increasing investments in India. The Committee 
further note that some UAE companies have also shown interest in investing 
in the UT of Jammu &Kashmir. India is also currently negotiating Bilateral 
Investment Treaty with UAE, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. The Committee find it 
encouraging that FDI inflow to India from GCC countries have been increasing 
over the years but would like to point out that more than 90% of the FDI inflow 
has been from two countries only i,e UAE and Saudi Arabia. Investments from 
the other four GCC countries like Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait have been 
low. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should assess the 
factors for low FDI inflow to India from these countries and work out a strategy 
for increased investments in India by these countries. The opportunity 

45 
 
presented by some UAE companies for investing in the UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir should also be followed up promptly. The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to take proactive role in facilitating the ongoing Bilateral Investment 
Treaty negotiation with UAE, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait for its early and fruitful 
conclusion for an enhanced FDI inflow into India.  Indian Embassies/Missions 
in GCC countries may also be pursued to organize sustained and vigorous 
country and sector specific investment promotion campaigns to bring more 
FDI inflow to India.  
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 26) 
5.34    The Committee note that MoUs were signed between India and UAE on 
establishment of a framework for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies - 
the Indian rupee and the Emirati Dirham for cross-border transaction and 
interlinking payment and messaging system of both countries. With the 
operationalization of the MoUs, exporters and importers in both the countries 
can invoice in their local currencies. India is also engaged in discussions with 
various Gulf countries on establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade 
settlement in local currencies. The proposals related to trade in local 
currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued with Kuwait. The 
Committee understand that bilateral trade settlement in local currencies and 
interlinking payment and messaging systems of India and GCC countries will 
greatly enhance the economic engagements between the countries resulting in 
increased trade and FDI inflow and urge the Ministry to facilitate the signing of 
such MoUs with all the GCC countries at an early date.  
                                                                                          (Recommendation No. 27) 

46 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
CULTURAL AND OTHER AREAS OF COOPERATION 
6.1       The Gulf region has cultural significance also for India. The cultural and 
people-to-people ties between India and Gulf are a bedrock of the bilateral relations. 
6.2       Some of the steps being taken by the Ministry to enhance cultural and social 
association with all Gulf countries are as follows:- 
i. India regularly signs Cultural Exchange Programmes for enhancing cultural 
cooperation with various Gulf countries. There are regular cultural exchanges 
between India and GCC countries under the CEPs. 
ii. Ministry has been showcasing India's cultural diversity in Gulf countries 
through celebrations of Indian festivals, organizing cultural events, holding of 
special bilateral cultural events. For example, India participated as the ‘Guest 
of Honour’ in prestigious Saudi National Festival of Heritage and Culture – 
Janadriyah in 2018. The year 2019 was celebrated as India-Qatar Year of 
Culture in Qatar. Our Embassy in Kuwait organized a Festival of India in 
2023.  
iii. As part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) celebrations, many events were 
organised in the Gulf countries. The AKAM events in Gulf countries included 
Indian dance and music events, illuminations of iconic buildings in tricolour, 
painting exhibitions, promotion of Indian cuisine etc.   
iv. As we celebrate International Year of Millets, our Embassies in Gulf countries 
are also popularizing Millets based Indian dishes by organizing specific events 
and campaigns.         
v. Popularization of Yoga among Gulf countries is also an important component 
of deepening cultural ties with GCC countries. Saudi Arabia signed an MOU 
with India in 2021 to promote Yoga. ICCR has also posted Yoga teachers in 
some Gulf Embassies. 
vi. Our Embassies regularly organize Indian cultural programs and also 
associate with Indian associations for organizing social and cultural programs. 
vii. Ministry also encourages media cooperation between organizations in India 
and Gulf countries. For example, a visit by mediapersons from some Gulf 
countries was organized in 2023.  
6.3       During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
apprised the Committee regarding the ongoing nature of cultural cooperation 
between India and GCC countries as under: 
            “As far as cultural cooperation is concerned, we do have cultural cooperation 
agreements  with many countries.  So, it is an ongoing exercise”.  
                                                        

47 
 
6.4       On being asked the manner in which the Ministry intends to capitalize on 
India's vast potential in tourism, entertainment and culture to forge strong 
partnerships with GCC countries over the next five years ensuring substantial growth 
and collaboration in these industries, the Ministry has stated that our Missions have 
been proactive in strengthening cultural cooperation with all GCC countries. Indian 
contingents, including cultural troops regularly participate in cultural events.  Series 
of events such as roadshows, cultural exhibitions, and festivals that celebrate the 
rich heritage of India are also being organized regularly.  Apart from government 
agencies a large number of private organizations and individuals are actively 
engaged in the fields of entertainment and culture to promote cultural ties in these 
countries. Our Missions in association with the local communities are supporting 
such initiatives of private organizations and individuals to promote cultural 
interactions.  
 6.5       Food security has emerged as another  important area of cooperation after 
the Covid pandemic and Russia-Ukraine conflict. India kept open its supply to Gulf 
countries during the pandemic, which was highly appreciated by the Gulf leadership. 
Similarly, India supplied wheat on request from Gulf countries in 2022 after the May 
13, 2022 DGFT Notification restricting export of wheat from India. UAE has also 
discussed investments in building food corridors in India for processing and export of 
food items.  
6.6       On being asked about the details of efforts made and initiatives taken by the 
Ministry on the issue of food security, the Ministry has stated that food and food-
related products constitute the bulk of Indian exports to GCC countries. Government 
of India through its Embassy in these countries is encouraging to invest in food and 
agro industries in India. The Integrated Food Corridors Project under I2U2 
Framework was announced during I2U2 Leader’s Summit on 14 July 2022. Under 
the project, the UAE will invest $2 billion USD to develop a series of integrated food 
parks across India while India will provide appropriate land for the project and will 
facilitate farmers’ integration into the food parks. U.S. and Israeli private sectors will 
provide technical and innovative solutions in agriculture and food-processing. In this 
regard, UAE delegations have visited India and held meetings with different 
stakeholders. 
 6.7       The Committee note that under Cultural Exchange Programme, regular 
cultural exchanges have been held between India and GCC countries. Besides, 
specific events and campaigns were conducted including celebration of Indian 
festivals, Indian dance and music events, promotion of Indian cuisine, 

48 
 
popularization of yoga, etc. The Committee further note that media 
cooperation between organizations in India and Gulf countries is also 
encouraged by both the parties. Indian embassies regularly organize cultural 
programmes and Indian associations have also been involved in  organizing 
social and cultural programmes. Keeping in view the fact that cultural and 
people-to-people ties are bedrock to the bilateral relations between India and 
the Gulf and presence of significant number of Indian diaspora, the Committee 
desire that the number, frequency, scope of cultural exchanges, events and 
campaigns and scale of participation should be expanded in a planned 
manner. More number of cultural exchange programmes/cultural cooperation 
agreements should also be signed to deepen the cultural ties and people-to-
people contacts. The Committee also urge the Ministry to actively 
facilitate/further escalate media cooperation between organization in India and 
the GCC countries.    
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 28) 
6.8       The Committee note that apart from Government agencies, a large 
number of private organizations and individuals are actively engaged in the 
fields of entertainment and culture to promote cultural ties in GCC countries. 
Indian Missions, in association with the local communities, have also been 
supporting such initiatives of private organizations and individuals in 
promoting cultural interactions. The Committee desire that in addition to 
encouraging and extending support to the private organizations and 
individuals actively engaged in promoting cultural interactions as well as local 
communities/diaspora associations in GCC countries, Indian Missions should 
provide incentives, whether monetary or otherwise to such entities to achieve 
the goal of deepening cultural ties and people-to-people contacts. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry should formulate a strategy to 
capitalize on India's vast potential in tourism, entertainment and culture to 

49 
 
forge strong partnerships with GCC countries over the next five years for 
ensuring substantial growth and collaboration in these fields. 
                                                                                         (Recommendation No.29 ) 
6.9       The Committee note that food and food-related products constitute the 
bulk of Indian exports to GCC countries. Under the Integrated Food Corridors 
Project under I2U2 Framework, the UAE will invest $2 billion USD to develop a 
series of integrated food parks across India while India will provide 
appropriate land for the project and will facilitate farmers’ integration into the 
food parks. The Committee further note that UAE delegations have already 
visited India and held meetings with different stakeholders. The Committee 
understand that integrated food parks across India would greatly contribute 
towards food security as well as bring benefits to farmers in the country. They, 
therefore,  urge the MEA to facilitate the discussions with all the stakeholders, 
actively coordinate with the Ministry/Department concerned for allotment of 
appropriate land and work out the modalities so that integrated food parks are 
established across the country at an early date. The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to explore avenues for food security cooperation/agreements  with 
other GCC countries.  
                                                                                        (Recommendation No. 30) 
  

50 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
WELFARE OF INDIAN DIASPORA IN GCC COUNTRIES 
7.1       Around 8.7 million Indians reside in Gulf countries. This includes roughly 3.5 
million in UAE, 2.5 million in Saudi Arabia, 1 million in Kuwait, 810,000 in Qatar, 
673,000 in Oman and 350,000 in Bahrain. The Indian diaspora in the GCC countries 
has been recognized for their contribution to the development of the region and are 
also appreciated for their hard working, law-abiding and peaceful nature. The region 
is also an important source of inward remittance to India. 
i) Remittances from Indian Diaspora 
7.2       During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
highlighted the role played by the Indian diaspora in the Gulf region as strong pillars 
for our economic development through inward remittances to India as under: 
“….remittances from the NRIs form a very important dimension of our 
engagement and our economic development. NRIs, especially from the Gulf 
countries have been very instrumental. The last figures for remittances abroad 
from the diaspora and the overall Indians have been more than $120 billion, 
which is a significant figure. It has been a jump from the previous figure of $87 
billion, which was in 2021. In 2022, we saw more than $115 billion, which is 
there.  
According to the figures released by the World Bank Report, remittances by 
the workers contributed to about US $54.42 billion during 2020-2021 and 
earlier also the remittances were in the range of $60 billion and this trend is 
continuing. So, the Indian people who are in the Gulf this Region -- 8.7 million 
people -- are very strong pillars for our economic development in the overall 
picture ”.  
ii) Specific Welfare Measures for Indian Diaspora  
7.3       The Ministry has further stated that Government of India has taken several 
measures for the welfare of the Indian diaspora in Gulf. These include e-Migrate for 
more transparent and orderly migration of Indian workers to the Gulf and other ECR 
countries, MADAD portal for addressing consular grievances and further widening of 
the scope of Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF). Government of India has 
started organizing IIT and NEET exams in several locations in the Gulf, in view of the 
large number of Indian school students in the Gulf.  
  
7.4       India is also working with the GCC countries on issues like skill 
harmonization and connecting worker recruitment platforms so that Indian workers 
get better and more transparent working conditions.  
7.5       In a written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has informed that 
Government of India has taken several measures for the welfare of the more than 
8.5 million Indian diaspora living in the Gulf. All Indian Missions have been sensitized 

51 
 
to extend prompt help to any Indian in distress abroad. The specific measures 
include inter alia the following: 
i. Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) provides financial assistance to 
Indians in distress abroad on a means-tested basis. The scope of ICWF was 
considerably expanded in 2017.  
ii. The on-line MADAD portal enables Indian nationals and their family members 
to register their consular grievances on-line and track their redressal. 
iii. Grievances related to overseas employment in notified Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) countries can also be lodged directly by emigrants/relatives 
on e-Migrate portal or through the Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra 
(PBSK).  
iv. Indian Missions conduct Open Houses on a regular basis where Indians can 
seek redressal of their grievances. Missions have also established 24x7 
Helplines and Toll Free Helplines for the benefit of Indians seeking help. 
v. A multilingual 24X7 Helpline of Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) in 
New Delhi provides information, guidance and grievance redressal on all 
issues and problems pertaining to overseas employment of Indian nationals. 
vi. PBSKs have been set up abroad in Dubai (UAE) and Riyadh and Jeddah 
(Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) to provide guidance and counseling on all matters 
pertaining to overseas Indian workers.  
vii. Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras (KPSK) have been setup in Kochi, 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Lucknow and Delhi to assist emigrants or their relatives 
to redress their problems/complaints regarding overseas employment. 
viii. Grievances brought to the notice of the Ministry and the Missions through 
social media, including twitter, are promptly addressed. 
7.6       The Ministry’s engagement with the Indian diaspora mainly consisting of 
workers, skilled and unskilled in the Gulf countries has been enumerated by the 
representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence on 27 July 2023  as 
given below: 
“Basically, Gulf countries are very important for us in various aspects 
including   politically and a very important aspect of these engagements is people-to-
people contact    which is mainly represented by our expatriate workers including 
professionals and labours. Indians continue to be the largest group of expatriate 
workers in the GCC region. Indian migrants are highly regarded in the GCC 
countries for their hard work and lawful nature. The pull factor behind this trend have 
been the employment opportunities, presence of an extended network of Indian 
migrant workers, geographical proximity, and  financial benefits, that accrue linguistic 
compatibility and cultural affinity. It has been largely observed that there has been a 
shift in the employment landscape in the GCC   region. However, the demand in the 
labour-intensive industries is expected to remain    high in the foreseeable future as 
well. Therefore, the remittance flow from the region is   also expected to have a 
strong edge. It has been reflected in the recent past trend. The demand for 
household domestic workers is also going to stay and that needs more  
specialisation for which the Ministry of Skill Development, Entrepreneurship and 
NSDC  are taking care of imparting necessary skills. 

52 
 
            We have also started Pre-departure Orientation Programme which is a kind 
of soft skill which provides necessary information to our workers who are going 
through safe and   legal channels to their destination countries about dos and don’ts 
and cultural sensitivities   of that country and what are the legal remedies available to 
them. We also provide them   Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana which mainly covers 
accidental death and any kind of accidents and also repatriation and certain other 
benefits are there in case of employment  contract breach. So, this Bima Yojana also 
provides our workers legal assistance.   Otherwise, we have Indian community 
Welfare Fund and that assists any Indian citizens in times of distress and emergency 
in the most deserving cases on a means-tested basis   like boarding and lodging, air 
passage to India, legal assistance, emergency medical care, transportation of mortal 
remains and payment for small fines and penalties etc. ICWF is   extended to all 
Indian missions and posts abroad. Since 2014 till June 2023, around Rs. 588 crores 
have been utilized towards ICWF assistance by Indian missions and posts abroad. 
During this period, around 339 lakh Indians were extended ICWF benefit.  
            The     Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs and agreements signed by 
the Government of India provide the necessary framework for cooperation on labour 
and manpower related issues with GCC countries. These MoUs and agreements 
have  provisions of  implementation through Joint Working Groups and our prevailing 
labour   and manpower related issues can be discussed during these JWG meetings. 
We have more safeguards for the specific interest of domestic workers in GCC 
countries. Agreements on labour cooperation for domestic sector have also been 
signed with Saudi  Arabia, UAE, and Kuwait. Separately, for workers, we have 
established and advertised safe and legal channel of migration which can be done 
through e-Migrate portal. On this portal, we have registered recruitment agents who 
can take benefit of this e-Migrate   portal and our  embassies register foreign 
employers. As of now, we have more than two lakh foreign employers registered in 
e-Migrate portal whereas more than 2000 active recruitment agents are there who 
work through immigration clearance system for ECR passport holders in case they 
are migrating abroad”.  
 
iii) Labour and Manpower Agreements/MoUs 
7.7       The Committee further sought the details of success achieved through 
Labour and Manpower Agreements/MoUs signed by India with various Gulf countries 
in securing the rights of Indian skilled and unskilled workers in the GCC countries. In 
a written reply, the Ministry has stated that the Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MoUs/Agreements that provide the overarching framework for cooperation on labour 
and manpower related issues are in place with the Gulf Cooperation Council 
countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates) and 
Jordan. Further, to safeguard the specific interest of domestic workers in GCC 
Countries, agreements on Labour Cooperation for Domestic Sector have been 
signed with Saudi Arabia, UAE and Kuwait. These MoUs and Agreements have 
been found very useful in securing the rights of Indian workers in GCC countries as 
they have provided institutional mechanism to discuss and resolve all prevailing 

53 
 
Indian labour and manpower-related issues through regular meetings of Joint 
Working Groups. 
iv) Challenges faced by the Diaspora in Gulf Countries 
7.8       When asked about the challenges being faced by the diaspora in Gulf 
countries, the Ministry responded that Indian diaspora workers in GCC countries 
report several problems faced by them in their respective countries of residence to 
the Missions in the GCC countries and the Ministry from time to time. Major 
problems reported by the diaspora are legal cases and imprisonments on false 
allegations and employment related issues, harassment by the employer, cheating 
by recruiting agents, non- payment of wages, emergency medical problems, lack of 
financial resources for returning to India etc.  
7.9       Taking serious note on the common problems faced by the diaspora, the 
Government has established various mechanisms to resolve these problems and to 
ensure welfare and safety of Indian diaspora  working  abroad including in GCC 
countries, such as Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), Dedicated Community 
Welfare/Labour  Wings in the Missions and Posts,  24x7 helplines in Missions and at 
PBSK, New Delhi,  Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) and organizing open 
Houses in Mission/Posts.  Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK) have been 
set up in Dubai, Jeddah and Riyadh to provide guidance and counselling on all 
matters pertaining to the problems faced by Indian diaspora workers. Kshetriya 
Pravasi Sahayata Kendras (KPSK) have also been set up in Kochi, Hyderabad, 
Chennai and Lucknow to assist emigrants and their relatives to redress their 
problems/complaints regarding overseas employment. The online MADAD Portal 
created by the Ministry enables the emigrant workers and their family members to 
register their consular grievances online and track their redressal.  India has signed 
bilateral labour agreements with all Gulf countries to safeguard Indian workers and 
also follow-up the issues of the migrant workers in the Joint Working Group Meetings 
at regular intervals.  
7.10    Apart from above, prospective Indian emigrant workers are imparted  Pre–
Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) to sensitize them about culture, important 
labour laws and Dos & Don'ts about the destination country. They are also made 
aware of the welfare schemes like ICWF and PBBY and grievance redressal 
mechanisms established in the Ministry and Missions/ Posts abroad. The above 
institutional mechanisms have been found successful in resolution of various 
problems faced by Indian diaspora in GCC countries. 
7.11    The Secretary (CPV &OIA) also highlighted some of the challenges faced by 
emigrant workers in the Gulf, during briefing on 29 May 2023 as under: 
            “Of course, there are many challenges which they face. There is a problem of 
passports  which are held by the sponsors. Sometimes, the salaries are not paid on 
time or in the   case of unfortunate death, the death compensation is getting delayed. 
Then, there are  social issues like in many places, there are no Temples or Hindu 

54 
 
crematorium. Also, in some places, we find the difficulty of equalisation of degrees. 
The degrees which obtained here are not recognised in those countries. For 
example, currently, in Kuwait, we are facing this difficulty where the Engineering 
degrees are not being fully  recognised. Despite all this, I would say that the 
satisfaction level of our people working in the Gulf is increasing”. 
v) Safety of Domestic Sector Workers  
7.12    Responding to the concerns raised regarding harassment and exploitation of 
housemaids, the Secretary (CPV &OIA) stated during the said briefing: 
            “….we do get complaints of exploitation of housemaids. Particularly, we have 
been  receiving complaints recently in Oman and Kuwait. A large number of them 
are seeking  refuge in our shelter homes in these missions. Primarily, the root cause 
of this is that  there is a parallel industry which is luring people to go out of India on 
visit Visas and  bypassing our Immigration systems. So, we have no authentic record 
of who are going abroad for what purpose. Let us say, if somebody wants to go on a 
job in Oman, they will   go for a visit Visa to Dubai and from Dubai, they will enter 
Oman and get absorbed in the    job market there. So, they are out of our 
immigration system and no records are available for this. So, this is where we are in 
touch with the State Governments, trying also to seek their help firstly in instituting 
awareness campaign. We have also launched a campaign named ‘Surakshit Jaaye 
Prashikshit Jaaye’ so that people are trained and be aware”. 
7.13    When enquired whether the MEA is having a proper mechanism to ensure 
that recruitment and placements of housemaids to the Gulf countries, especially 
Saudi Arabia, are done in a proper manner, the Ministry has informed that 
recruitment of Indian female Domestic Sector Workers (DSWs) is regulated through 
the provisions of Emigration Act, 1983. To safeguard interests of female DSWs, 
process of their recruitment for employment abroad has been restricted only through 
10 State Run Recruiting Agencies. The Government of India accords highest priority 
to the safety, security and well-being of Indian nationals abroad, including DSWs, 
and encourages migration from India only through e-Migrate portal. The Ministry 
regularly organises outreach programs to sensitise various stakeholders about 
benefits of safe and legal migration and on possible ways of preventing illegal 
migration through fake or unregistered recruitment agencies. A Videsh Sampark 
Programme to Punjab and Haryana was undertaken by the Ministry in May 2023. 
The information about illegal agents is also uploaded and updated on regular basis 
on the e-Migrate Portal. 
7.14    Whenever, instances of illegal recruitment and/or cheating by unauthorised 
agents come to the notice of the Ministry, quick and decisive action is taken. Such 
complaints, along with details and addresses of illegal agents, are forwarded to the 
Police authorities of the concerned State Government urging them to apprehend and 
prosecute such illegal agents as per extant laws and Standard Operating Procedures 
shared by the Ministry.  
  
7.15    The complaints are also referred to Mission/Post abroad for providing 
immediate relief and assistance to the affected Indian national. The concerned 
Mission/Post provide all necessary assistance to the distressed Indian national with 

55 
 
particular focus on female workers, irrespective of category of their passport, 
including legal assistance, boarding & lodging, medical and repatriation to India 
using the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), on means-tested basis. Since its 
launch, a total of 3,33,612 Indian nationals, including DSWs, have been assisted by 
Indian Missions/Posts using the ICWF till March 2023. 
  
vi) Skilling and Skill mobility for Emigrant Workers 
7.16    Explaining the emphasis given to skilling and upskilling of workers going 
abroad, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during briefing on 29 May 2023 stated: 
            “….our emphasis now is also on skilling and upskilling of our people who are 
going  abroad. So, as the External Affairs Ministry, we go and discuss with various 
State Governments as part of a programme called Videsh Sampark. So, the idea is 
that we  talk to the State Governments, especially those having the NRI departments 
or those  which look after skilling and training. We have various departments like 
NORKA in  Kerala and TOMCOM in Telangana. So, my team goes there, and they 
discuss with them about the pre-departure training (PDOT) so that once the people 
are trained and familiar with the customs and traditions and foreign languages, they 
are better prepared  for the jobs. At the level of the Missions, what we have done is 
that there is a regular   mechanism of interaction which has been established with 
the Ministries of Social  Welfare or the Ministries of  Labour of those countries  so 
that the  teething issues are resolved”.  
7.17    The Secretary (CPV & OIA) further added: 
“For skilling, the Government has been laying emphasis on it. Hon’ble Prime 
Minister  himself launched the Skill India mission; new skilling centres have come up. 
In one of  the meetings of the Secretaries, Hon’ble PM said that there should be 
proper global mapping of demand in various professions done by the Indian 
Missions, through our  Ambassadors and Consuls General. 
There is an integrated approach between MEA and the Ministry of 
Employment, Skill  Development and NSDC, and others. What we have seen is also 
the National Skill  Development Corporation, which is concentrating on this aspect. 
For instance, the NSDC has launched a project called TEJAS for the UAE, one of 
the successful programmes to provide skills as per global standards. It is focused on 
training and certifying 10,000 Indian workers in the UAE in 2022–2023, with the help 
of many companies”. 
7.18    The representative of MEA also elaborated on the role played by the Ministry 
for facilitating skill mobility of emigrant workers during the said briefing: 
            “….skill mobility is one of the top priorities. To that extent, MEA plays a part 
between  this and the soft skilling. We concentrate ourselves on providing facilities 
for mobility  and providing a pre-departure orientation training programme. 
The labour and manpower agreement is a cooperation agreement that we 
have in place  with all the GCC countries like Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Jordan. These are very strong components of 
gradual redevelopment and skilling, according to the requirements, in technology 
and skills. Every year, under  these agreements, we work with partners in joint 
working groups to discuss various issues and see how we can improve the skilling 
and reskilling of the workers. 

56 
 
We also have the pre-departure orientation training programmes, where we 
focus on giving pre-departure training to our emigrants on various aspects, including 
their culture,  tradition, social aspects, and languages. We have developed modules 
in several Indian languages that provide pre-departure training. We do it through our 
State Governments and through NSDC. We also work closely with the Ministry of 
Skill Development and  NSDC to facilitate the skill development of workers…. But 
NSDC has also expanded to  other parts of the GCC, including Saudi Arabia, chiefly, 
but also to other countries. Our  Missions and Consulates are also assisting. 
The focus of NSDC is on three aspects: one is to expand employment 
opportunity for our  workers in these countries or wherever they go; the second is to 
provide a platform for recognition and harmonization of skill qualifications. Also, the 
MEA, our Missions and Consulates work very closely with the NSDC. Finally, provide 
skill development according to the demands of these countries. The NSDC also does 
skill surveys. We have also done labour market studies across the entire GCC. Once 
these studies are completed which are in their last phase, we will provide a package 
of information to various RAs  and workers that will give them an idea of these 
markets and how they are going to develop in the future. These are some of the 
ways in which we are assisting skill  mobility. 
vii) Transparent Working Conditions for Emigrant Workers 
7.19    The Committee have been informed that the Government is working with the 
GCC countries to harmonise employee recruitment platforms so that Indian workers 
are provided with better and more transparent working conditions. When further 
enquired the extent to which the Ministry and the Government have been successful 
in achieving these objectives of providing more transparent working conditions for 
Indian workers looking to work in GCC countries, the Ministry has stated that  
Government of India has always ensured that all its policies relating to international 
migration keep the individual migrant worker at the very centre for its formulation. To 
ensure the welfare and protection of its migrant workers, the e-Migrate platform 
provides mechanism for safe and legal migration and grievance redressal for Indian 
migrant workers. The system also makes it mandatory for migrant workers to take 
insurance cover under Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojna (PBBY) to cover job losses and 
accidental deaths.  
7.20    In order to create awareness and facilitate safe and legal migration, Ministry 
of External Affairs has launched the ‘Surakshit Jaaye  Prasikshit Jaaye – Go Safe, 
Go Trained’ campaign. The idea behind using this campaign is to enhance 
awareness among the public about the need to use safe and legal channels for 
migrating for employment purposes. Through PDOT (Pre Departure Orientation 
training Programme), useful and important information is imparted to aspiring 
emigrants free of cost. The PDOT programme is aimed at enhancing the soft skills of 
our migrant workers in terms of culture, language and local rules and regulations of 
the host country.  
7.21    The proposed Emigration Bill of 2023 envisages comprehensive emigration 
management by instituting regulatory mechanisms and developing a regime for safe 
and orderly migration governing overseas employment of Indian nationals for their 

57 
 
protection and welfare. The purpose is to establish a robust, transparent and 
technically advanced structure and maintain a shared database for emigration to 
facilitate and promote overseas employment. 
7.22    Briefing the Committee on the proposed Emigration Bill on 29 May 2023, the 
Secretary (CPV &OIA) stated: 
“A new draft Immigration Bill is being prepared and after getting the opinions 
of other Ministries, we will try to submit it to the Parliament.” 
7.23    The Secretary (CPV &OIA) further added: 
‘We have an Emigration Act of 1983 which needs to be replaced. The 
orientation of this new Bill, instead of being regulatory, will be more affirmative 
and helping the migration issue. So, the orientation has changed now.  
….it is more diaspora-centric.”  
viii) Indian Community Welfare Fund 
7.24    The Committee observed that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) 
was set up in 2009  and enquired about the manner in which the Ministry ensure 
transparency in the utilization of the fund. The Ministry responded that ICWF was set 
up in 2009 with Cabinet's approval in Indian Missions in 17 ECR countries & 
Maldives. Subsequently, in April 2010, the Fund was extended to another 24 
Missions and in March 2011, it was extended to cover all Missions and Posts 
abroad. Guidelines for utilization of ICWF were revised in 17 September 2012 and 
again in July 2017, which came into effect from 1st September 2017 after the 
approval of the Cabinet. Under the revised ICWF guidelines, the scope of welfare 
measures was expanded. Legal/financial assistance to Indian women deserted by 
Overseas Indians/foreign nationals has also been permitted from ICWF. 
Missions/Posts have also been authorized to incur expenditure from the ICWF Funds 
within the scope of the guidelines on Community Welfare and Consular Services 
besides the core welfare activities. Prior to the revision, there were no provisions for 
community welfare activities and improvement in consular services. Main objective of 
setting up of  ICWF was  to assist overseas Indian nationals in times of distress and 
emergency. Fund is used to provide legal assistance, boarding & lodging assistance, 
emergency medical care, air passage to stranded Indians and transportation of 
mortal remains of Indian nationals etc.  
7.25    Detailed guidelines for utilization of ICWF were issued to all Indian Missions 
and Posts in August 2017. These guidelines are to be used by the Missions as 
SOP.  Guiding principles to be followed by the Indian Missions to decide on the 
eligibility of persons to be provided assistance from ICWF are given below: 
(a)       ICWF funds can be used to assist only Indian citizens residing in the host 
country or those in distress while visiting a foreign country. Persons of Indian Origin 
and Overseas Citizens of India Card Holders are not eligible for individual financial 
assistance from ICWF. 

58 
 
(b)       ICWF can be utilized for the benefit of Indian nationals in distress on a means 
tested basis provided the officer approving ICWF expenditure has satisfied himself 
that the beneficiary deserves to be assisted. 
(c)        Ordinarily, only such Indian National(s) who have entered the host country 
legally shall be eligible to receive benefits under this Fund. In cases where it is not 
so, assistance may be provided after the Head of Mission/Head of Post has recorded 
his satisfaction to the effect that the circumstances of the case necessitate providing 
assistance under ICWF. 
7.26    To ensure transparency, proposals for expenditure from ICWF are considered 
by the ICWF committees designated in Missions /Posts. Approval for expenditure 
from ICWF is at the level of HOM /HOP on the recommendation of the ICWF 
committee of the Mission. For expediency, HOM / HOP may authorize 
DCM/DHC/DCG to approve expenditure upto US$2000 per case in ECR countries 
and US$ 1000 per case in other countries. ICWF accounts of all Missions and Posts 
are audited by the office of Principal Chief Controller of Accounts and the office of 
C&AG of India at regular intervals.   
7.27    Responding to a query regarding the size and source of the ICWF, the 
representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence on 29 May 2023, stated 
as under: 
 “As on March 31, 2023 the fund had approximately Rs.558 crore or so. We 
have spent about Rs.565 crore from 2014 to 2023. This assistance has been 
extended to 3,33,607 Indians during this period.  
……this fund is a separate fund. It does not come from the Consolidated 
Fund. It is collected from a portion of the consular and fees that are collected 
by the various Missions. It is administered by the Head of Mission or the 
Consuls General, as the case may be. It is supervised by the Ministry of 
External Affairs.  
ix) Legal Assistance 
7.28    On being asked whether there is any mechanism for providing legal or 
financial assistance to those Indians who are imprisoned by the legal bodies/arrested 
in GCC countries, the Ministry has stated that legal assistance to those Indians who 
are imprisoned by the legal bodies/arrested in GCC countries is provided through 
panel of lawyers appointed by the Mission/Post and expenditure on lawyers fee is 
paid from Indian Community Welfare Fund.  Missions are also authorized to use 
ICWF to make payment of small fines & penalties in respect of Indian nationals for 
minor offences/crimes; for illegal stay in the host country where prima  facie  the  
worker is not at fault, and to enable release of Indian nationals from jail/detention 
center (and to enable his repatriation). Financial assistance is also provided from 
ICWF for payment of air fare of such workers for their return to India. Details of Legal 
Assistance provided from ICWF in each of GCC countries from 2018 till June 2023 is 
given below: 

59 
 
Country Expenditure incurred on legal assistance from 
ICWF (INR) 
Bahrain 5,16,230 
Kuwait 14,20,689 
Oman 32,50,966 
Qatar 8,54,84,905 
Saudi Arabia 11,85,890 
UAE 26,62,916 
  
x) Transportation of Mortal Remains 
7.29    During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the issue of transportation of 
mortal remains and charges for the same was raised wherein the Secretary (CPV & 
OIA) clarified the rule position, as under:- 
  
“….mortal remains is one of the most sensitive issues.  The suggestions from 
both the hon. Members were not to charge for the transportation of mortal 
remains from whichever country back home.  Now, the rule position in the 
Gulf countries is like this.  It is the responsibility of the company and the 
sponsor to pay the charges for dispatch of mortal remains.  This is by law in 
the Gulf countries.  It is not the liability of the employee but it is the liability of 
the employer.  
7.30    On the observation of the Committee regarding defraying of expenses for 
transportation of mortal remains by family members to avoid delay in transportation, 
the Secretary (CPV &OIA) submitted, as under:-.   
“The time taken is not because of the expenditure.  For example, the time 
taken in Saudi Arabia and other countries, is generally due to cumbersome 
procedures which are there.  Even for natural deaths, they are taking a longer 
time.  We have been telling them to reduce the time required for completion of 
formalities.  First, you need a police report, post-mortem report and many 
other things. The only thing is required to from the embassy in the NOC.  The 
NOC is issued on the spot.  This is the service given instantly and for which 
there no charges. If you remember, Sir, in the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs, a decision was taken not to charge for the consular fee for 
giving the NOC for death cases.  The Government of India has done away 
with this fee.  Our people go under some sponsorship and from that 
sponsorship, they go away to some other place.  So, that is a destitute case.  
In those cases, we cannot trace the employer.  So that becomes like a 
destitute Indian. In all such cases, Sir, we ensure that the entire expenditure is 
borne by the ICWF.  In case where the company details are available, we try 
that this is done through the company itself so that we do not have to 
necessarily use the ICWF fund.  We use this fund primarily to assist the 
destitute Indians which includes boarding, lodging, legal assistance, 
emergency medical assistance and transportation of mortal remains.  This 
has been the practice so far.  The ICWF fund has been utilised for helping 
3.39 lakh distressed overseas Indians as of 30th June.  So, it has been used” 
 

60 
 
xi) Pravasi Bhartiya Divas and Pravasi Bhartiya Samman Awards 
7.31    During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
apprised the Committee about the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas and the Pravasi Bhartiya 
Samman Awards as under: 
            “Though our Diaspora engagement policies are holistic for the entire globe, 
there are special elements that I want to highlight which we do for Gulf countries. 
One is of course  the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas celebrations that we do but we always 
make an effort that we have a regional PBD element in that where we take a theme 
related to the Gulf countries.Last time, in 17th PBD, we took workmen as one of the 
themes and there was exchange of  views on how there can be betterment for the 
workmen, what their difficulties are and how best we can address them. That way, 
we are also able to engage them with the  policy-makers in India. There was a good 
contingent of workmen which had come to participate in this PBD programme.  
Also, we got a student contingent from UAE which also came into the youth 
PBD. So, these were the aspects. This is just one example. In previous PBDs 
also, there was some element or the other which was especially focused on 
the Gulf region. 
….Pravasi Bharatiya Samman award is there. Effort is made that from each 
region and from each country, at least, one awardee is selected”. 
7.32    On the initiatives being taken to engage with the diaspora in a more 
structured manner, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during briefing on  29 May 2023, 
stated as under:- 
            “We have been hosting the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas every two years and we 
have been conferring Pravasi Bharatiya Samman awards but the thinking is that we 
should go   beyond this.  The Prime Minister himself has directed us to first and 
foremost create an  alumni of all the award winners with their specialisation.  Many of 
them are doctors, scientists. It is not that we engage with them once and leave 
them.  Of course, our  Missions are engaging with them at the local level but we as a 
Government and as the Ministry of External Affairs would like to engage with them in 
a more structured manner.  So, a diaspora directory based on professions is being 
prepared.  We propose to organise  an interactive session of PBS awardees with all 
the Ministries using their specialisations  so that the diaspora could be mainstreamed 
into our national priorities”. 
7.33    The Committee also enquired about the status and the criteria for selection for 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman awards  and whether it is being awarded to big people. 
In its written reply, the Ministry has clarified that the allegations that Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman Awards is awarded to big people are fallacious. The Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman Awards are given by the Government of India to recognize and 
honour exceptional achievements and contributions made by overseas Indians in 
various fields. These awards are typically bestowed upon individuals who have 
demonstrated outstanding accomplishments in areas such as science, business, 
culture, education, and public service, and who have significantly contributed to the 
welfare of the Indian diaspora or to India itself.  The criteria for selection for the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards are quite stringent, involving a thorough 
assessment of an individual’s accomplishments, and its broader impact. Recognizing 
and honouring exceptional individuals and institutions in this manner helps inspire 

61 
 
others and draws attention to outstanding contributions that can serve as examples 
for others to follow. 
xii) Educational Support for Diaspora Children 
7.34    The initiatives taken by the Ministry for educational support to diaspora 
children has been highlighted by the Secretary (CPV & OIA)  during the course of 
evidence on 27 July 2023, as under:- 
  
“….we also have a scholarship programme for diaspora children. Largely, this 
is for PIO  and NRI children but in that case, we have about 50 scholarships 
reserved for workmen in the region in ECR countries. If their children are studying in 
India in 11th and 12th and   they want to do tertiary education out here, in that 
condition, they are given preference. These 50 scholarships are given so that our 
workers and people whose income is at a certain level can really make their children 
study in India”.  
[Verbatim Proceedings dt. 27.7.2023 page 18] 
7.35    When enquired about the initiatives likely to be taken by the Ministry to reduce 
the high fees charged to diaspora children for education in India, the Committee 
have been informed that the Ministry has always communicated the concerns about 
high fees to Ministry of Education. Apart from this, the diaspora children from the 
Gulf region are the major beneficiaries of the scholarship program of MEA. The 
Ministry offers 150 scholarships under the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora 
Children (SPDC) providing financial assistance to pursue under-graduate courses in 
India for specific professional and non-professional courses (except medical and 
related courses).  For Academic Year 2022-23, a total of 131 scholarships were 
given to children of Indian workers in Gulf countries 
Gulf Countries 
  
No. of students granted SPDC scholarship 
(AY 2022-23) 
Saudi Arabia 25 
Kuwait 7 
Qatar 22 
Oman 32 
UAE 36 
Bahrain 9 
Total  131 
  

62 
 
  
  
xiii) Demolitions in Jeddah area 
7.36    The Committee further observed that Indians are investing their money in 
countries like Dubai, which has made some important provisions, like the provision 
for hundred percent ownership. In view of this, people are investing abroad. But in 
Saudi Arabia, a lot of development is happening, and a lot of demolitions are also 
happening, especially in the Jeddah area.  
7.37    When enquired about the manner in which the MEA create confidence in the 
minds of the diaspora residing there, the Committee have been informed that there 
has been demolitions in old Jeddah area and other places. Saudi authorities have 
conveyed that some of the structures demolished had become structurally weak, 
therefore demolition had to take place. Embassy has taken up the cases where 
compensation to any Indian diaspora is to be made.  
 iv) Bilateral Air Service Agreement 
7.38    During the course of evidence on 27 July 2023, when the issue of high price 
of flight tickets to the Gulf was raised, the Secretary (CPV &OIA) responded as 
under:   
             “….we have always been flagging this to the Civil Aviation Ministry and our 
Embassies have also been talking to two airlines. But you know that this is more of a 
market-driven  exercise and the Government can do very little in this matter. But at 
the same time, what  we are trying to do is to have the bilateral Air Services 
Agreements reviewed with many countries so that the capacities are reviewed very 
frequently.  
            For example, in 2019, we had reviewed the bilateral Air Service Agreement 
with Saudi Arabia and increased the seating capacity to 50,000 seats a month. Of 
course, the current utilisation is around 30,000 seats. It means if airlines carry more 
passengers, then there is  a competition and it will bring down the prices. That is the 
logic. Similar discussion with  Civil Aviation Ministry is going on”. 
 
xv) Passport Service  
7.39    The Committee sought to know the success achieved in reducing the 
appointment time in the issuance of passports for Indian citizens, particularly 
migrants during briefing on 29 May 2023. The Chief Passport Officer stated as 
under: 
“Regarding delays within India, the demand is extremely high. So, we are 
doing our best to release more and more appointments. We have also 
increased the slots for morning and evening. We are opening on several 
Saturdays. Last year, as well as in January-February this year, we opened our 
Seva Kendras to address this demand. Furthermore, we cooperate with the 
Post Offices. Just last week, we opened up our Post Office Passport Seva 

63 
 
Kendras, which number 431 currently, in full strength. Going forward, when 
we launch Passport Sewa Programme version II, we hope to be upgrading not 
only the software but also locations. Many of them are in the pipeline to be 
expanded further so that we can address these long appointments.” 
7.40    Adding further, the Secretary (CPV &OIA) stated: 
“The External Affairs Minister had chaired a meeting to review this a few 
weeks back. We have analyzed that there are about 12 offices out of 36 
where the appointment cycle is quite high. Among them, the highest is in 
Punjab where sometimes the appointment cycle is going up to 60 days and 
beyond. So, of all the measures what we are talking about like opening on 
Saturdays, extending the time daily, one of the things what we have seen is 
that the PSKs have actually reached their capacity. You cannot expand them 
because you cannot put an extra table and chair to place a person. So, we 
have directed the TCS to search for new building so that we are in a position 
to expand. TCS has already  identified about a dozen odd places where all 
these PSKs would be moved, starting from Punjab and then going to other 
places like Ahmedabad. This is going on.  
           Also, when we plan to migrate from PSP version 1 to 2, which is most 
likely before the end of August, in then, I think our systems will be in a better 
position cope up with enhanced demands. There are two major changes in 
the passport by them that are in the office. One is the launching of the e-
passports and the other is the migration of PSP from version 1 to 2. Both are 
in the pipeline. As said, our target is to do it before the end of August this 
year.” 
  
7.41    On the issue of seizure of passports of Indian truck drivers who came back 
after traveling to Yemen which was raised during the course of evidence on 27 July 
2023, the Secretary (CPV &OIA) responded as under: 
            “You are aware that there is a ban imposed by the Government of India on 
travel to Yemen. Those people who have travelled to Yemen after the notification 
was issued and  when they came back, generally their passports are seized.  So far, 
we have 422 passports seized.  Generally, after seizure the immigration officials are 
giving them to the passport  offices and individuals have been given the opportunity 
to make an appeal to RPO and also to the Ministry. The Ministry is the appellate 
authority.  Out of 422, we have  released 169 passports based on the appeals made 
to us on a case-by-case basis. Somebody is having a job there, etc.  We are very 
sympathetic towards these causes.  The ban is still in force and so, we cannot 
instruct the immigration officers not to seize passports.  It is because there is a 
proper ban levied on this sector but at the same time, we have been very 
sympathetically viewing it so that those who have found jobs elsewhere, we have 
been releasing their passports.  So far about 169 cases have been  released”.   
             

64 
 
7.42    The Committee note that the Indian diaspora in the Gulf region 
comprising of around 8.7 million are an important source of inward 
remittances to India. The last figures for remittances from the diaspora has 
been more than $120 billion as compared to the previous figures of $87 billion 
in 2021 and $115 billion in 2022. The Committee recognize the potential for 
further increase in inward remittances and desire that the Ministry should 
motivate the Indian diaspora to make enhanced remittances through 
acknowledgement of their role as strong pillars for our economic 
development. It is also expedient upon the Ministry to bring out a diaspora-
centric policy focused to Gulf region keeping the welfare and protection of 
Indian diaspora at the foremost of our national development agenda. 
                                                                                          (Recommendation No. 31) 
7.43    The Committee note that the Ministry has taken up specific measures 
like Indian Community Welfare Fund, online MADAD portal, e-migrate portal, 
Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras, Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras, 
Open Houses, multilingual 24x7 Helpline, etc. for the welfare of the Indian 
diaspora and for redressal of their grievances. All the Indian Missions have 
been sensitized to extend prompt help to any Indian in distress abroad.  The 
Committee further note that Pre- Departure Orientation Training Programme 
has been started to facilitate safe and legal migration while the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana covers accidental deaths and injury and also provides 
legal assistance. Besides, a number of MoUs/Agreements on Labour and 
Manpower Cooperation have been signed with the GCC countries. India is also 
working with the GCC countries on issues like skill harmonization and 
connecting worker recruitment platforms so that Indian workers get better and 

65 
 
more transparent working conditions. The Committee appreciate these 
measures undertaken by the Ministry for the welfare and protection of the 
Indian diaspora. The Committee, however, desire that the Ministry should also 
focus on the implementation aspects of such measures and assess the impact 
of such initiatives and schemes on the migrant workers and domestic sector 
workers. Since the Ministry is yet to come out with a rehabilitation scheme for 
migrant workers who lost their means of livelihood due to global pandemics or 
natural disasters, the Committee also desire that a comprehensive scheme for 
such workers may be formulated in consultation with all the 
Ministries/Departments concerned. 
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 32) 
7.44    The Committee observe that Labour and Manpower Cooperation 
MoUs/Agreements provide institutional mechanism to discuss and resolve all 
prevailing Indian labour and manpower-related issues through regular 
meetings of Joint Working Groups. Such MoUs/Agreements are in place with 
GCC countries and Jordan, while specific agreements on labour cooperation 
for the domestic sector have been signed with Saudi Arabia, UAE and Kuwait. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should further identify the gaps in this 
regard and work out country-specific  MoUs/Agreements to secure the rights 
of Indian workers in the GCC countries. The Committee also urge the Ministry 
to strengthen the Joint Working Groups to serve as effective mechanism for 
redressing the grievances of migrant workers and domestic sector workers in 
the Gulf region. 
                                                                                        (Recommendation No. 33) 

66 
 
7.45    The Committee note that Indian workers in the Gulf countries are facing 
many challenges on various issues such as legal cases, imprisonments on 
false allegations,employment related issues, harassment by the employer, 
cheating by recruiting agents, non- payment of wages, death compensation, 
exploitation of domestic workers, difficulty in equalisation of degrees, 
emergency medical problems, lack of financial resources for returning to India, 
etc. The Committee desire that the Ministry and Indian Missions should extend 
all assistance to the migrant workers for quick redressal of their grievances 
and ensure that the mechanisms to resolve their grievances such as ICWF, 
MADAD portal, PBSK/SPSK, PBBY, dedicated community welfare/labour wings 
in Missions and Posts are functioning effectively. The Committee also desire 
that fake or unregistered recruitment agencies involved in cheating and luring 
people to bypass the immigration system, should be rooted out completely 
through vigorous checking, identification and prosecution. 
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 34) 
7.46    The Committee note that recruitment of Indian female Domestic Sector 
Workers is regulated through the provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983. To 
safeguard the interests of female DSWs, the process of their recruitment for 
employment abroad has been restricted only through 10 State run Recruiting 
Agencies. The Committee understand that regulating the recruitment for 
female DSWs is necessary for their safety, security and well being but at the 
same time, care should be taken to ensure that restricting the recruitment 
process through only ten State run RAs do not deprive them of the opportunity 
to find means of livelihood abroad. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
maintain a fine balance between strict regulation and employment 

67 
 
opportunities abroad and make all efforts to facilitate the migration of such 
workers through authorized RAs.  
                                                                                        (Recommendation No. 35) 
7.47    The Committee note that a new draft Emigration Bill seeking to replace 
the Emigration Act of 1983 is under preparation since long. The proposed Bill 
envisages comprehensive emigration management by instituting regulatory 
mechanisms and developing a regime for safe and orderly migration 
governing overseas employment of Indian nationals for their protection and 
welfare. The Committee understand that the proposed Bill would facilitate and 
promote overseas employment to a large number of Indian nationals and urge 
the Ministry to commence and conclude the deliberations and consultations 
with other Ministries/Departments and stakeholders while keeping the migrant 
worker at the very core of its formulation, and bring the Bill to Parliament 
within the shortest possible time. 
                                                                                      (Recommendation No. 36) 
7.48    The Committee note that while the National Skill Development 
Corporation focus on providing skills as per global standards, the focus of the 
MEA is to provide facilities for skill mobility and providing a pre-departure 
orientation training programme. However, MEA, Indian Missions and 
Consulates work very closely with NSDC. The Committee feel that there is an 
urgent need for a coordinated approach amongst MEA, Ministry of Labour & 
Employment, Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and NSDC and  
 

68 
 
hence, desire that a defined  mechanism may be worked out for the purpose 
and the Committee may be apprised of accordingly. 
(Recommendation No. 37) 
 7.49 The Committee note that MEA is conducting labour market studies 
across the entire GCC and these studies are in the last phase of completion. 
The Committee are of the view that the findings of the labour market studies 
would be invaluable for the aspiring emigrant workers in terms of its prospects 
for the coming years.  The Committee, therefore,  urge the Ministry to complete 
the studies at the earliest so that the information could be disseminated to all 
the recruiting agents and prospective emigrants.  
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 38) 
7.50    The Committee note that the Government is working with the GCC 
countries to harmonise employee recruitment platforms so that Indian workers 
are provided with better and more transparent working conditions. However, 
the extent to which the Ministry and the Government have been successful in 
achieving these objectives is not known. The Ministry has also not mentioned 
whether any specific MoU or Agreement have been signed with the GCC 
countries in this regard. Keeping in view the security and well being of the 
migrant workers at the foremost, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
commission a study on harmonization of employee recruitment platforms and 
working conditions of migrant workers in the Gulf. The Committee also urge 
the Ministry to ensure better and more transparent working conditions for 
Indian workers as well as prospective emigrant workers in GCC countries.  
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 39) 

69 
 
7.51    The Committee note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund was set up 
in Indian Missions in 17 ECR countries & Maldives in the year 2009. 
Subsequently, the Fund was extended to another 24 Missions in April 2010. In 
March 2011, it was extended to cover all Missions and Posts abroad. Revised 
guidelines for utilization of ICWF came into effect from 1st September 2017. 
Approval for expenditure from ICWF is at the level of HOM /HOP on the 
recommendation of the ICWF committee of the Mission.  The Committee 
further note that as on 31 March 2023, the corpus of the ICWF is approximately 
Rs.558 crore or so. An amount of Rs. 565 crore has been utilized from 2014 to 
2023 covering 3,33,607 Indians during this period. The Committee 
acknowledge the assistance rendered to overseas Indian nationals in times of 
distress and emergency under the ICWF including  air passage offered to 
stranded Indians during the COVID pandemic. In view of the crucial role played 
by the ICWF in providing relief to Indian nationals during extreme hardships 
and emergency conditions, the Committee desire that sanctioning of 
funds/expenditure should be prompt and decisive. The Ministry should ensure 
that there is no delay on the part of the ICWF committee to give its 
recommendations for approval of the expenditure and sanctioning of the same 
by the Competent Authority so that timely assistance is provided during 
exigencies. The Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure transparency in 
the utilization of the Fund for those in need.  
                                                                                          (Recommendation No. 40) 
7.52   The Committee note that legal assistance to Indian nationals imprisoned 
or arrested in GCC countries is provided through panel of lawyers appointed 
by the Mission/Post and expenditure on lawyers’ fee is paid from Indian 

70 
 
Community Welfare Fund.  ICWF can also be used by Missions for payment of 
small fines & penalties for minor offences/crimes, for illegal stay in the host 
country where prima  facie  the  worker is not at fault and to enable release of 
Indian nationals from jail/detention center and their repatriation. The 
Committee are aware that there may be some section of the diaspora like 
labourers and domestic workers who could not afford the fees for lawyers and 
actually needed assistance while other sections could well afford legal fees for 
their court cases. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should 
differentiate between those who could afford fees for lawyers and those who 
could not, and ensure that priority is given to those who actually needed legal 
assistance under the ICWF.   
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 41) 
7.53    The Committee note that as per the law in Gulf countries, charges for 
the transportation of mortal remains is the responsibility of the 
employer/company and the sponsor. In cases where the employer could not be 
traced, the entire expenditure is borne by the ICWF. The Committee further 
note that there has been undue delay in dispatch of mortal remains back to 
India generally due to cumbersome procedures for completion of formalities in 
most of the Gulf countries. Transportation of mortal remains being a sensitive 
and humanitarian issue, the Committee urge the Ministry to take it up at the 
Highest level with the Gulf countries for easing of the cumbersome 
procedures. Indian Missions may also play a more proactive role in 
coordinating  with the local authorities for early completion of all the required 
formalities and timely dispatch of the mortal remains to India. 
                                                                                         (Recommendation No. 42) 

71 
 
7.54    The Committee note that the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas celebrations and 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards are special elements undertaken by the 
Ministry in its engagement with the diaspora in the Gulf countries. The Ministry 
has also made efforts to have a regional PBD element taking a theme related to 
the Gulf countries. The Committee desire that the focus of the PBD 
celebrations should be to ensure maximum participation of migrant workers in 
these celebrations and events, consider/discuss their issues and prepare the 
policies for improving the working and living conditions of such workers. The 
Committee further desire that PBD and regional PBD elements should serve as 
platforms for engagement of these workers with the policy makers in India.   
Regarding the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards given by the 
Government to recognize and honour exceptional achievements and 
contributions made by overseas Indians in various fields, the Committee urge 
the Government to ensure that at least one awardee is selected from each 
region and from each country. 
                                                    (Recommendation No. 43) 
7.55    The Committee note that Indian Missions are engaging with Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman Award winners at the local level and the Ministry is also 
proposing to engage with them in a more structured manner. A diaspora 
directory based on professions is being prepared. The Ministry is also 
proposing to organise an interactive session of PBS awardees with all the 
Ministries . Being aware of the benefits of deeper engagement with PBS 
Awardees with outstanding accomplishments in areas such as science, 
business, culture, education and public service and who have significantly 
contributed to the welfare of the Indian diaspora or to India itself, the 

72 
 
Committee urge the Ministry to create an alumni of all the PBS award winners 
within the shortest  time possible specifying their specialization and utilize 
their expertise in achieving our national priorities. 
 (Recommendation No.44) 
7.56    The Committee note that under the Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC), 150 scholarships are offered to pursue under-
graduate courses in India for specific professional and non-professional 
courses (except medical and related courses). A total of 131 scholarships were 
given to children of Indian workers in Gulf countries for the Academic Year 
2022-23. The Committee, however, observe that the fees charged to diaspora 
children for education in India are quite high. The Committee have also been 
informed that the MEA has always communicated the concerns about high 
fees to the Ministry of Education. The Committee are of the view that adequate 
educational support should be given to diaspora children to pursue their 
education in India and urge the MEA to make persistent efforts with the 
Ministry of Education to rationalize the fee structure for such children in Indian 
educational institutions. 
(Recommendation No. 45) 
7.57    The Committee observe that Indian diaspora are investing their money 
in Gulf countries including Dubai and Saudi Arabia. The Committee have been 
informed that there have been demolitions in old Jeddah area and other 
places. As conveyed by the Saudi authorities, some of the structures have 
become structurally weak and hence, demolition had to take place. The 
Committee further note that the Indian Embassy has taken up the cases where 
compensation to any Indian diaspora is to be made. To ensure that the Indian 

73 
 
diaspora who have invested their hard money do not suffer major losses, the 
Committee urge the Ministry and the Indian Embassy to identify the individuals 
entitled for compensation and pursue the competent authority in Saudi Arabia 
for payment of the said compensation at the earliest.  
(Recommendation No. 46) 
7.58    The Committee note that the MEA has always been flagging the issue of 
high price of flight tickets to the Gulf with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Indian 
Embassies have also been talking to two airlines. The Committee are aware 
that India has Bilateral Air Services Agreements with many countries and 
desire that such agreements should be reviewed frequently for assessing the 
capacities of air services at the ground level. Consistent efforts may be made 
to bring down the cost of air flights in coordination with the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. The Committee also desire that the Indian Embassies/Missions 
should hold regular discussion with airlines operating in the Gulf region to 
resolve the issue of high air fares. 
  (Recommendation No. 47) 
 
7.59    The Committee note that based on a review conducted by the Ministry, 
there are about 12 Passport Offices out of 36 where the appointment cycle for 
passports is quite high.  In Punjab sometimes the appointment cycle goes up 
to 60 days and beyond. It is informed that  TCS has already started an exercise 
to shift several PSKs in Punjab to buildings with better infrastructure to 
accommodate more appointment slots.  The Committee further note that 
migration from PSP version 1 to 2 would also enable the system to be in a 

74 
 
better position to cope up with enhanced demands for passports. The 
Committee are of the view that the issue of long appointment cycle for 
issuance of passports should be addressed urgently to facilitate aspiring 
migrants for getting employment abroad. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to complete the exercise of shifting the identified PSKs to the new 
locations and migration from PSP version 1 to 2 without further delay. 
(Recommendation No. 48) 

75 
 
 
 
7.60    The Committee note that in pursuance of a ban imposed by the 
Government on travel to Yemen, 422 passports of Indian truck drivers who 
have travelled to Yemen after the notification was issued and came back to 
India, have been seized. The Committee further note that passports of those 
people who found jobs elsewhere, have been released. So far, about 169 
passports have been released based on the appeals made on a case-by-case 
basis. The Committee view the causes of those people whose passports are 
still lying with the passport offices, sympathetically and desire that the 
Ministry/Passport Offices should take a lenient view of their cases and release 
their passports if their appeals have merit. 
 (Recommendation No. 49) 
  
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                          P.P. CHAUDHARY,                 
December, 2023                                                     Chairperson,                                
Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)          Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
  

76 
 
 
ANNEXURES I  
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 29 May, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1145 hrs. to 1310 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘3’, 
Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P. P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
3. Shri P. C. Mohan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
5. Shri K. C. Patel 
6.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
7. Shri Rebati Tripura 
8. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S. No Name Designation 
1. Dr. Ausuf Sayeed Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
[Leader of Delegation] 
2. Shri Anurag Bhusan Additional Secretary (EP & W) 
3. Shri T. Armstrong 
Changasan JS (PSP) & CPO 
4. Shri Vipul JS(Gulf) 

77 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director  
3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Maya Menon    - Under Secretary 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take briefing on the subject ‘India and Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) – Contours of Cooperation’. Outlining the issues to be discussed 
in his opening remarks, the Chairperson drew the attention of all the witnesses to 
provision regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee and 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. Then he requested the 
witnesses to introduce themselves before making submissions before the 
Committee.   
 
2.  Thereafter, Secretary (CPV & OIA) gave a briefing covering the following 
aspects namely, historical relationship between India and the GCC countries, 
trade and investment relationship, energy partnership specially in the field of 
green energy, cooperation in the area of Defence and Security between India and 
GCC particularly in maritime security and cyber security cooperation, DSW 
(Domestic Service Workers agreement) with many Gulf Countries, FTA 
negotiations between India and GCC  etc. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Members sought clarification on various issues which inter 
alia included the peace and political stability in the Gulf region; need of a clear 
policy for Diaspora community; trade deficit between India and GCC Countries; 
5. Shri Srikar Reddy JS (FT-WANA), Ministry of 
Commerce 
6. Shri Anil K. Rai JS (Parl. & Coord.) 
7.  Shri Devesh Uttam JS (CPV) 
8. Md. Noor Rehman Seikh JS (ED) 
9. Shri Brahma Kumar JS (OE&PGE) 

78 
 
movement of wealthy Indians to Gulf Countries; favourable ecosystem for Indian 
companies; status of FTA between India and GCC: Indian Community Welfare 
Fund; ongoing war in Yemen; happiness level of Indian Diaspora in Gulf 
Countries; status of skilled labour and skill mobility; hassle free issuance or 
renewal of Passport service, etc. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the 
concerns raised by the Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson 
directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
members of the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
____ 

79 
 
ANNEXURES II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 27 JULY, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1700 hrs. to 1840 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
                              Shri P.P. Chaudhary      –       Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri. Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4. Shri P. C. Mohan 
5.  Dr. K C Patel 
6. Shri N. K. Premchandran 
7.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
8. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
9. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
11. Shri Abdul Wahab  
12. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S. No Name Designation 
1. Dr. Ausuf Sayeed  Secretary(CPV &OIA) 
2. Ms. Manika Jain Additional Secretary (DE) 
3. Shri Vipul JS (Gulf) 
4. Shri Aseem R Mahajan JS (Gulf) 
5. Shri Anil K. Rai JS (Parl.  & Coord.) 
6. Shri Devesh Uttam JS (CPV) 

80 
 
 
MINISTRY COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director  
3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and officials from other 
Ministries/Departments to the Sitting of the Committee convened for having oral 
evidence on the subject ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Contours of 
Cooperation’. Outlining the issues to be discussed in his opening remarks, the 
Chairperson drew the attention of all the witnesses to the provision regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee and Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. Thereafter, he requested the witnesses to 
introduce themselves before making submissions before the Committee.   
 
2.  Secretary (CPV & OIA) gave an opening statement covering the following 
aspects namely, historical relationship between India and the GCC countries; 
upcoming G-20 Summit in September in India; Food Security Cooperation 
between the two sides, trade and investment relationship; energy partnership 
specially in the field of green energy; cooperation in the area of Defence and 
7. Shri Brahma Kumar JS (OE&PGE) 
8. Shri Siddharth Malik Director (ED) 
S. No Name Designation 
1. Ms. Priya Nair Economic Advisor (MoCI) 
S. No Name Designation 
1. Ms. Preeti Jain Director (DEA) - TBC 

81 
 
Security between India and GCC particularly in maritime security and cyber 
security cooperation; Domestic Service Workers agreement with many Gulf 
Countries; FTA negotiations between India and GCC,  etc. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Members sought clarifications on various issues which 
inter alia included, peace and political stability in the Gulf region; educational 
collaboration between universities in India and GCC countries; trade deficit 
between India and GCC countries; diversification of  energy partnership with the 
GCC; favourable ecosystem for Indian companies; Indian Community Welfare 
Fund; status of FTA between India and GCC; ongoing war in Yemen; happiness 
level of Indian diaspora in Gulf countries; status of skilled labour and skill mobility; 
hassle free issuance or renewal of Passport service, etc. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministries responded to the concerns raised by the 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses 
to furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee at 
the earliest. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
___ 

82 
 
ANNEXURES III 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2023-24) HELD ON 7 DECEMBER, 2023 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 7 December, 2023 from 1030 hrs. to 1045 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait 3.   Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4.   Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 5.   Smt. Poonam Mahajan  6.   Smt. Queen Oja 7.   Dr. K.C. Patel  
8.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 9.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 10. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
11. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
Rajya Sabha  
 
12.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
   

83 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject ‘India 
and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Contours of Cooperation’. 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. 
The Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 