 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
INDIA’S SOFT POWER AND CULTURAL DIPLOMACY: 
PROSPECTS & LIMITATIONS 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2022/ SRAVANA 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2021-22) 
 
                             SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
16
 

 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2021-22) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
INDIA’S SOFT POWER AND CULTURAL DIPLOMACY: 
PROSPECTS & LIMITATIONS 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on   5 September, 2022 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2022 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 December, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2022/ SRAVANA 1944 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COEA NO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(__________Edition) and Printed by  
 
 

 
 
                                                  CONTENTS                                                                             PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20)                      (i) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21)                      (ii)                
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22)                     (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                            (iv)  
  
CHAPTER 1 OVERVIEW 
I. Soft Power & Cultural Diplomacy: Conceptual Framework     
II. India’s Soft Power and Cultural resources 
III. Implications of Covid 19 Pandemic 
IV. Limitations & Challenges  
                      
 
1-4 
4-10 
10-14 
15-21 
CHAPTER 2  INSTRUMENTS OF INDIA’S SOFT POWER DIPLOMACY 
I. Role of Culture           
II. Role of Diaspora       
III. Role of Tourism       
IV. Role of Democracy 
V. Role of Yoga 
VI. Role of Ayurveda 
VII. Role of Sports and Youth Exchange 
VIII. Role of Media and Cinema 
IX. Role of Education/Knowledge Sharing 
 
 
22-32 
31-35 
35-39 
39-41 
41-43 
43-51 
51-53 
54-58 
58-64 
 
CHAPTER 3    INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR)
I. Structure, Mandate and Resources 
II. ICCR Activities 
III. ICCR Cultural Centres 
IV. ICCR Regional Centres 
 
 
 
 65-71 
 71-80 
 80-85 
 85-87 
 
CHAPTER 4 STAKEHOLDERS 
I. External and Publicity Division (XPD) 
II. Policy Planning & Research Division 
III. Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
IV. Research and Information System (RIS) 
V. Archaeological Survey of India 
 
88-93 
93-94 
94-96 
96-102 
103-104 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 20.12.2019    105-107  
II 
III.  
 
IV 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on 07.01.2020         108-110 
Minutes of the Twenty-Third Sitting of the Committee held on               111-113 
26.08.2020 
Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 28.10.2020        114-116 
 

V 
VI 
 
VII 
VIII 
Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 18.12.2020        117-119 
Minutes of the Twenty Fourth Sitting of the Committee held                   120-122 
on 30.06.2021 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held on 31.01.2022           123-125 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 8.08.2022    126-127 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
VII 
Key Cultural events on multilateral platform by Ministry of Culture             128-130 
Status Note on MoUs and Youth Exchange Programmes organized              131-133 
List of Countries with which India has EEP/MOC/JDI/LoI                            134-136 
SPARC- Country wise Data                                                                             137      
Internationalization of Education under NEP 2020                                         138-140 
Details of country-wise Scholarship  under ICCR Scholarship Programme   141-147 
State-wise list of cultural troups sent abroad                                                   148-149 
  
                                             
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) 
 
 1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
       Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
3.  Shri Margani Bharat   
4.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
5.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8.  Shri Pakauri Lal Kol   
9.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha   
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao  
16.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta   
17.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma  
18.  Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan  
19.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
21.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
  
        Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta  
27.  Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel  
28.  Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas$  
29.  Shri Sharad Pawar 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.  Shri Abdul Wahab  
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Shri Navneet Ravi Rana  
17.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
18.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Vacant$ 
21.  Vacant* 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta# 
28.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
29.  Shri Abdul Wahab@@  
30.  Shri Brij Lal 
31.  Vacant@ 
 
$ Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma passed away on 17 March, 2021. 
* Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi ceased to Member of the Committee on her appointment as Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021. 
# Shri Swapan Dasgupta resigned on 17.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. @@ Shri Abdul Wahab retired on 21.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@ Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee on his appointment as Cabinet Minister 
w.e.f. 07.07.2021. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.   Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
6.   Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
10.   Shri P. C. Mohan  
11.   Smt. Queen Oja 
12.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
13.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
15.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana  
16.   Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
17.   Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
18.   Shri Rebati Tripura 
19. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
20.   *Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
21.   Vacant 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.   Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.   Smt. Misha Bharti   
25. Shri Brijlal  
26.   Shri P. Chidambaram  
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
28.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
29. Shri Sanjay Raut 
30. Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.   Shri K. Somaprasad 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai        - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan    - Director 
3. Ms. Smita Singh        - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
*Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 07 
February, 2022 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
         I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs (2021-22) on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and Cultural 
Diplomacy: Prospects & Limitations’. 
 
2. The Committee had a briefing on the subject by the representatives of the Ministries 
of External Affairs on 20 December 2019. During the discussion the Committee felt the 
need to examine various stakeholders relating to the subject. The Committee, therefore 
heard the views of the representatives of the Ministries of Culture, Tourism, Education, 
AYUSH, Youth Affairs & Sports, Commerce & Industry, Information & Broadcasting, 
NITI Aayog on 7 January 2020, 26 August 2020, 28 October 2020, 18 December 2020, 
30 June 2021, 31 January 2022. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the officers of the above mentioned 
Ministries for placing before them the material and information that the Committee 
desired and also appearing before the Committee for placing their considered views 
before them in connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Fourteenth Sitting 
held on 8 August 2022. 
 
5. The Minutes of the eight Sittings of the Committee held on 20 December 2019, 7 
January 2020, 26 August 2020, 28 October 2020, 18 December 2020, 30 June 2021, 31 
January 2022 and 8 August 2022 are given in Appendices to the Report. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
8 August, 2022 
     17 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
P.P. CHAUDHARY 
Chairperson,    
Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER 1 
OVERVIEW 
 
Post-Cold war international order has ushered in a new era in the conduct of foreign 
policy and diplomacy. Power is a key concept in the conduct of relations between states and 
the international community and is broadly described as the ability to shape outcomes. In 
addition to economic and military power (hard power), the idea of ‘Soft Power’ has gained 
traction during the past three decades. The international impact of India’s soft power was 
felt long before the term found place in popular parlance in the 21st century. Indian arts, 
culture, yoga and spiritualism, culinary varieties, festivals, music and dance forms etc, have attracted people from all around the world for centuries. 
 
1.2 The Standing Committee on External Affairs (16th Lok Sabha) undertook a detailed 
examination of the subject “India’s Soft Power Diplomacy, including role of Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Indian Diaspora” and presented its Thirteenth Report on 
the subject in February 2016. The Report contained 13 recommendations for the 
Government to act upon. Based on the Action Taken Replies furnished by the MEA, the 
Committee presented Eighteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government. The Ministry 
of External Affairs had submitted its final responses in February 2019. In view of the 
assessment of the implementation status of the recommendations in their previous Reports, 
in 2019 the Committee on External Affairs selected the subject ‘India’s Soft Power 
Diplomacy: Prospects and Limitations’ for detailed examination.  
 
I. Soft Power & Cultural Diplomacy: Conceptual Framework 
1.3 The American political theorist Joseph Nye, who coined the term Soft power, 
defines it as ‘the ability to get what you want through attraction rather than coercion.’ In 
contrast to economic and military power, which is dependent on payoffs and coercion, soft 
power works through attraction and co-optation. The idea of soft power is not merely a 
theoretical notion but also a practical tool with tangible benefits to the respective states. As a 
starting point, the Ministry of External Affairs was asked to describe the key concepts of 
soft power, cultural diplomacy, public diplomacy and smart power.  
 

2 | P a g e 
 
1.4 The Ministry defined the term soft power as ability to influence others through 
appeal and attraction, using non-coercive means. The term originally coined by Prof. Joseph 
Nye pointed to three primary sources of soft power, culture, political values and foreign 
policy.  India has been exercising a range of soft power resources which have widespread 
global appeal. These include Indian arts, dances and literature, cuisine, yoga and traditional 
holistic medicine, Indian cinema and entertainment and sports, historical monuments, 
India’s democracy, its Constitution, its unity in diversity and its composite cultural ethos, 
traditional values, unique approaches to contemporary issues such as climate change and 
environmental preservation, scientific and technological accomplishments and socio-
economic innovation. In Ministry’s view, there is both need and scope to go beyond Nye’s 
original formulation of soft power. 
 
1.5 Smart Power, according to the Ministry of External Affairs, is the most 
representative of India’s current interaction with the world, where the emphasis is on 
building capacities to be able to choose right forms of power to employ in relations to a 
particular context. It involves the strategic use of diplomacy persuasion, capacity building, 
and the projection of power and influence in ways that are cost-effective and have political 
and social legitimacy. It is a judicious blend of soft power with other dimensions of hard 
power. MEA’s policies of “Neighborhood First”, Act East, Link West, SAGAR, cooperation 
with Pacific Island, Engagement with Overseas Indians, Enhanced engagement with North 
and South America, European nations, Eurasia and Africa are manifestations of how various 
facets of Soft Power(Public Diplomacy, Cultural Diplomacy and Smart Power) are reflected 
in formation and conceptualization of India’s Foreign Policy making. 
1.6 As regards the Ministry’s understanding of the term cultural diplomacy, it has been 
described as a crucial component of public diplomacy because it brings out the best of what 
our country has to offer to the world. It is a long term strategy, aiming at building a brand or 
image of India and conveying what India stands for. India has a rich culture and cultural 
diplomacy is its expression abroad to foreign audiences for long term international 
influence. 
1.7 The diplomatic tool to leverage soft as well as smart power is broadly called Public 
Diplomacy. When asked about the connotation of the term Public Diplomacy, the Ministry 

3 | P a g e 
 
stated that all the Government sponsored efforts aimed at communicating directly with 
foreign publics with a view to project soft power abroad are termed as public diplomacy. It 
includes all official efforts to convince targeted sectors of foreign opinion to support or 
tolerate a government’s strategic objectives. It is an effective tool to build a positive image 
amongst the public of other countries. These efforts aim at influencing foreign public 
opinion and attitudes that in turn may influence their government’s actions towards another 
nation. Public diplomacy activities include ‘nation-branding; Diaspora outreach, digital 
engagement, international broadcasting, international exchange programmes etc. Public 
diplomacy seeks to promote national interest and national security through understanding, 
informing and influencing foreign publics and broadening dialogue between citizens and 
institutions and their counterparts abroad”. 
 
1.8 When asked about the relationship between conventional diplomacy and soft power 
diplomacy, the Ministry of External Affairs responded that the former broadly consisted of 
method of influencing the decisions and behavior of foreign governments and people 
through dialogue, negotiation and other measures short of war or violence. It also includes 
summit meetings and international conferences, parliamentary exchanges, international 
activities of supranational and sub-national entities and the work of international civil 
servants.  In conduct of diplomacy comprehensive national power is applied in pursuit of 
national interest.  Soft power is a constituent of comprehensive national power. The 
conventional manifestations of "Culture" such as dance, arts, crafts, music, films and cuisine 
have deep relationship with other tools of soft power which  encompasses, inter alia: 
Philosophical thought and scholarship contained in the vast corpus of literature in many 
languages; ideas and values (democratic, pluralistic and secular) and India's institutional 
strengths of Constitution and democratic political systems including electoral machinery 
operating at the grassroots level; higher educational and training institutions, richness of 
historical tourist sites; sports; science and technology, fast growing and rapidly diversifying 
economy of India and tremendous interest in some of the flagship national initiatives, 
Hosting of high-level foreign leaders outside Delhi in places of historic and cultural 
significance and special cultural events during such VVIP visits, the other  significant 
elements of the Government's soft power.  

4 | P a g e 
 
1.9 Further, Conventional diplomacy and the soft power diplomacy are thus 
complementary in overall attainment of desired objectives. The essence of soft power is that 
its source lies outside the traditional format of government-to-government (g-to-g) 
interactions that have hitherto been the fountainhead of diplomatic relations, bilateral or 
multilateral. These valuable dimensions of India’s soft power capabilities have great 
relevance and potential in enhancing positive perceptions about India and in pursuit of our 
national interests. 
 
II India’s Soft Power resources 
1.10 India’s global influence has had a long and complex history, from the dissemination 
of Hindu and Buddhist ideas to Mathematics, Astronomy and other physical and 
metaphysical sciences, to the more recent export of human and intellectual capital to 
Western universities, transnational corporations and multilateral organizations. However, it 
has only been in the last two decades that India has begun to use, promote and enhance its 
soft power more effectively. 
1.11 Given its size, rich civilizational heritage, and diversity of the population, India 
represents a truly unique and sui generis case in study of soft-power and cultural diplomacy. 
Besides, the traditional manifestations of “Culture” such as dance, arts, crafts, music, films, 
cuisine, languages, etc. India’s cultural/soft power instruments encompass inter alia: 
 Its ancient yet timeless philosophical and spiritual ideas, the value systems 
epitomized by the moto of Vasudhev Kutumbhakam and Ekam Sad Viprah Bahudha 
Vadanti;  
 Unprecedented socio-economic transformation of the country in a vibrant 
democratic framework; 
 Remarkable achievements in science and technology;  
 Innovative, affordable and environmentally sustainable home-grown developmental 
solutions which are relevant for many other countries.  
 Worldwide network of Indian Diaspora also represents an additional instrument for 
promotion of India’s foreign policy interests abroad through soft power and cultural 
diplomacy.  

5 | P a g e 
 
 Soft power of India’s search & rescue and humanitarian & disaster relief operations 
has also added to India’s profile.  
 International conferences like the Raisina Dialogue, the Indian Ocean Conference 
and the Global Technology Conference hosted by MEA also become flagship 
events of considerable interest abroad.  
 Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas events also provide a useful instrument for promotion and 
projection of Indian culture and soft power.  
1.12 Over the issue of adopting new and evolving technology to update and innovate our 
soft power tools, the Ministry stated that in line with the demands of the continuously 
evolving and dynamic international situation and foreign policy priorities of the 
Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs, ICCR and other agencies involved in 
promotion of India’s soft power have been trying to update and innovate their programmes 
and methods, including adoption of new technological tools and new emerging promotional 
platforms, direct transfer of scholarship to bank accounts of ICCR students, use of UMANG 
app for DBT purposes, updation of ICCR website, effective use of social media platforms, 
ongoing efforts to create an India alumni platform are some of instances in this regard.   
1.13 In their Thirteenth Report on the Subject ‘India’s Soft Power Diplomacy’, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should formulate a comprehensive and well-
structured policy delineating India’s soft power resources and their articulation abroad. In its 
Action Taken Reply submitted to the Committee in 2016, the Ministry of External Affairs 
had agreed on the need for formulating a comprehensive and well-structured policy on 
India’s soft power projection and submitted that ICCR is working with the Ministry to draft 
a policy paper in this regard. In 2019, the Ministry in its further action taken reply had 
submitted that the consultations preparatory to exercise of drafting a well-structured policy 
to leverage soft power diplomacy has been initiated and exchange of views with various 
stake holders are being carried out to collate ideas on policy formulation, making the 
process most participatory. It has been added by the Government that it will be able to 
finalize a comprehensive policy on soft power promotion overseas once consultations with 
stakeholders are over. 

6 | P a g e 
 
1.14 On being asked about the objectives of India's soft power diplomacy and their 
articulation in any foreign policy paper/document, the Ministry stated that the Government’s 
foreign policy is premised on the following three important objectives: 
(i) To safeguard our sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity and promote our 
overall national development;  
(ii) “Neighbourhood First” – according the highest priority to our relations with 
immediate neighbours as well as countries in the extended region of the Indo-
Pacific in keeping with Government’s pursuit of Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikaas, 
Sabka Vishwas; and  
(iii) “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” – to seek peaceful, harmonious, friendly and 
mutually respectful relations with all countries in the world.  
1.15 Use of soft power and cultural diplomacy constitutes an integral part of the Ministry 
of External Affairs (MEA)’s overall strategy for achieving these key objectives of 
Government’s foreign policy and thus constitute an integral part of MEA’s overall strategy. 
Neighbouring countries, both in immediate and extended neighbourhood, are given highest 
priority by the Government in conduct of its foreign policy, including use of instruments of 
soft power and culture. Our developmental assistance including the infrastructure projects, 
and capacity building programmes such as ICCR scholarships and ITEC courses, have a 
special focus on the neighbouring countries. Regular high-level political contacts, including 
parliamentary exchanges and training courses offered by Indian institutions on various 
aspects of our democratic functioning, including legislative drafting, electoral processes, 
and local governance, etc. seek to enhance multi-dimensional engagement with our 
neighbourhood. 
1.16 On the Committee’s query whether any comparative study has been made to 
determine the ways in which different countries leverage their soft power, the Ministry 
stated that though Ministry/ICCR has not undertaken any formal study of the international 
best practices of different countries. MEA did gather the inputs as to what sorts of Soft 
power instruments the other countries use, what kind of activities they undertake. 
MEA/ICCR has studied the activities undertaken by countries and other Soft Power 
organizations of countries such as China, United Kingdom, Japan, U.S.A, Russia and 

7 | P a g e 
 
France. British Council, and Alliance Francaise use language as their soft power tool.  List 
of activities being undertaking by these organizations include language promotion, 
Education(giving scholarship) programme, leadership programme like Chevening or 
Fulbright scholarships taking leaders from foreign countries to their own countries, doing 
big shows in dance, music, art and culture.  Besides, many of these organizations conduct 
activities like painting Exhibitions, literary festivals and  use cinema as tool of soft power.   
Cuisine, wine and food promotion are also a big part of the activities other organizations 
undertake.   
1.17 While tendering evidence before the Committee on 30 June, 2021, the representative 
of the Ministry of External Affairs further highlighted:- 
“We actually did a study of the international best practices of different countries, like 
what sorts of soft power instruments they use, what kind of activities they do, etc. 
We came out with a list of activities that all of them do. The ICCR does a large 
amount of these activities, but many of them it does not do. If you permit me, I will 
just go through some of them. The main thing most of the soft power organisations 
do is language promotion. Most of them are single country languages. It is like, 
Chinese do Chinese language promotion, Japanese do Japanese, British Council does 
English, Alliance Francaise does French, etc. So, you have language promotion as 
the main one. Most of these soft power organisations do scholarships, scholarships 
of bringing students to do studies in the country. So, education is a very big part of 
the activities they do. Then, they do leadership programmes. They do leadership 
programmes like the Chevening scholarships or the Fulbright scholarships, in which 
they take leaders from across to their own countries to influence them and conduct 
activities. Then, you have the performance Arts promotions, like doing big shows in 
dance, music, arts, culture, etc. Then, you have visual arts and museum which is 
actually a massive part which we are not doing much of, which is basically painting 
exhibitions and participating in large international exhibitions across the world. 
Then, you have books and literacy. That is a major part. Today, literary festivals are 
becoming a big occasion for not just thought leadership but also to promote ideas 
Literary festival across the world is one of the things which countries do to promote 
themselves. Then, you have cinema which is a big thing across the world. In fact, 
some countries like China actually use access to their own countries as a soft power 
tool to control Hollywood and other organisations. Everybody does cinema. In 
addition, theatre is very big. If you look at Broadway, Westend, or the Opera in 
Germany, Austria and Russia, theatre is very big. Theatre is something we do in 
India also. But it is always small and not of some scale as the West. Cuisine, wine 
and food promotion is a big part of what many countries do.  These are the different 

8 | P a g e 
 
things they do. Then, you have the diaspora related activities, conferences and 
seminars. Sports diplomacy is another thing. In the Champions Trophy or the 
English League, there are countries which actually invite people to come and see 
them and also do interaction with other countries through sports diplomacies. You 
have religion, you have traditional medicine, you have youth exchanges, awards, 
science diplomacy, tourism, etc. We can go on and on. But we did a study of all this 
and we found that ICCR does a large amount of it. But there is an issue which is 
coordination. That is an issue because despite all the things which we have done in 
the past, Coordination is weak. So, what we have as an issue is, there are Ministries 
and Departments and agencies which do their own activities. ICCR in the last two 
years, if not for Covid, would have done more to coordinate activities. We have been 
trying to work with all these agencies to have an annual action plan so that there is 
less duplication of efforts and that we can all work together to maximise the 
resources because if everybody starts doing it individually then we are doing smaller 
events and we are not having a larger event together. So, we have been doing it and 
we have been successful in this. The other weakness in our system when you 
compare with others is resources. You cannot compare resources. China spends 
about Rs. 10,000 crore a year on just soft power promotion. Forget about their 
United Work Department which has 2.6 billion dollar Budget. But ICCR and other 
agencies put together get about Rs. 300 or Rs. 400 crore. Most of it goes in 
establishment and administration. The second issue is recruitment. Today’s soft 
power projection across the world needs a certain kind of people to do it. It cannot 
be done either by artists or by bureaucrats. It has to be done by cultural managers 
who are actually trained in this thing. But our recruitment system is such, to take 
such people into our soft power organisations is very difficult. Third issue is, as I 
told you, silos and the ability to coordinate our efforts. If we can work on all these 
three, it would be something wonderful which we can do. A lot of reforms have 
happened in the last one or two years and we will take it forward as it goes.” 
1.18   The Ministry further added that no firm figures are publically available, however, 
China is estimated to spend about  US$ 10 billion  a year just on its Confucius Institutes and 
soft power promotion whereas ICCR and other agencies put together spend around 300-400 
crores. Most of India’s expenditure goes in establishment and administration. In 2021-22, 
the British Council received. £179 million as grant –in-aid adding their income of £ 845.5 
million (mostly from English language training and testing), their total income was £ 1034.5 
million.  Goethe Institute’s budget is approx. 370 million Euros. 
1.19  The Committee are aware that India’s soft power projection predates the usage 
of the term in popular parlance in 21st century. Soft power is broadly described as the 

9 | P a g e 
 
ability to influence others through appeal and attraction using non-coercive means. In 
this sense, India possesses a vast repertoire of soft power resources with widespread 
global appeal. These include, its cultural heritage evident in arts, dances, literature, 
cuisine, yoga, traditional medicine, cinema and entertainment, sports, historical 
monuments, India’s democratic traditions, Constitution, unity in diversity and 
contributions in resolving contemporary environmental issues, scientific/technological 
accomplishments and socio-economic innovations.   
The Committee further note that ‘Smart Power’, which is reflected in judicious 
use of soft as well as hard power, is most representative of India’s engagement with the 
world. India’s extensive and diverse soft power capabilities represent a unique and sui 
generis case in study of soft power and cultural diplomacy. The Committee, however, 
are dismayed to note that despite the existence of a wide array of soft power resources 
and continued persuasion by the Committee, there have been deficiencies on part of 
MEA in projecting it effectively to achieve foreign policy goals particularly due to lack 
of coordination, absence of national policy, inadequate budget and human resource. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that MEA should conduct a thorough 
assessment of our soft power potential and devise strategies for optimum utilization of 
the same in achieving India’s foreign policy objectives on priority basis and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. The Committee also recommend that the MEA should 
capitalize in multilateral diplomacy channels and abundantly incorporate Track 2 and 
Track 3 diplomacy in India’s foreign policy strategies.  
 (Recommendation No. 1) 
 1.20  The Committee are aware that soft power capabilities have great relevance and 
potential in augmenting positive perceptions about a country and its national interests. 
India with its wide ranging instrument of soft power has a definite advantage in 
comparison to many other countries. However, in absence of formulation of a clear cut 
policy on our soft power projection this may not have been possible. The Committee is 
constrained to note that despite making specific recommendation by the Committee in 
this regard in their 13th Report of 16th Lok Sabha the policy is still at consultation 
stage. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the Ministry should prepare a 

10 | P a g e 
 
policy document on India’s soft power projections, delineating India’s soft power 
toolbox and manner in which it is being projected abroad along a vision statement for 
the future. The Committee also desire to be kept informed about the progress made in 
this regard within three months. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
1.21 The Committee note that the Ministry has only gathered inputs through 
analyzing the soft power activities of few countries and also not undertaken any formal 
study as yet on international best practices of the manner in which other countries 
have leveraged soft power instruments. On the basis of such informal observations of 
the Ministry, the Committee note that the soft power organization of countries such as 
China, United Kingdom, Japan, USA, Russia and France focuses on language 
promotion, leadership programme, cultural activities, and promotion of art forms. 
Though the Committee are aware that ICCR performs most of these activities, they 
feel that there is immense scope for improvement and expansion of such activities. The 
Committee are therefore, of the considered opinion that a formal study of 
international best practices of soft power projections should be done on priority basis 
and the learnings from such a study must be factored in while formulating India’s soft 
power projection and strategy. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
III. Implications of COVID-19 Pandemic 
1.22 Keeping in mind the prevailing COVID pandemic and resultant disruptions, the 
Committee desired to know its implications on the conduct of our soft power and cultural 
diplomacy. In a written reply, the Ministry stated that Covid-19 Pandemic has affected 
every component of soft power projection-be it scholarship, exchange of visits, visits of 
cultural delegations every activity has been affected.  Despite these challenges, ICCR has 
adapted to the new normal and switched most of its activities on virtual mode.  The biggest 
challenge was to look after 6000 international students, facilitating them to go back to their 
countries, updating on daily basis admission status of new applicants.  Despite all the odds, 
ICCR staff attended to the needs of international students to the best of their capabilities and 
even attended office during lock-downs after obtaining necessary permissions.  In 2020-21, 

11 | P a g e 
 
2380 students accepted the scholarship, ICCR also had to assist in evacuation of about 500 
students by the special flights.  Rising to the occasion, necessary reforms in the guidelines 
are made to help students overcome the COVID-19 induced difficulties.  
 
1.23 The Ministry of External Affairs further stated that the ICCR carried out the 
following reforms to better manage the scholarship programme:  
i) Direct interface of ICCR’s A2A portal with Universities: The A2A Portal is 
currently linked to foreign applicants Mission/Post and ICCR. Going by the lessons 
of the past, ICCR has linked Universities on the A2A Portal by integrating 
information of each University/Institute so that the foreign students can apply 
directly for admission to the University. A dialogue box for communication between 
all the stakeholders has also been incorporated. This feature will be user friendly 
with easy and transparent access so that all communications are through the portal in 
digital mode instead of manual handling. While option to choose the University and 
the course remains with the students, the current limit of restricting the number of 
universities has been increased to five universities from the present three choices. 
ii) Introduction of Health Insurance Policy: ICCR provides medical reimbursement as 
per the CGHS norms though students are not provided CGHS cards. This requires a 
great deal of handholding from the stage a student is admitted in a hospital for 
treatment at CGHS rates till process of medical claims. Even after all these efforts, 
the amount of money spent by the student is not fully reimbursed. Moreover, ICCR 
has to do a lot of unnecessary processing resulting in a long delay in handling 
individual cases. It has, therefore, been decided that from 2020-21 students would 
have to mandatorily obtain health insurance on their own before their arrival out of 
their stipends. To facilitate with the best rates of insurance premium, ICCR has 
finalized a panel of health insurance companies from which students may decided to 
choose. However, this list will only be a suggestive one. Students will be at liberty to 
choose any other insurance provider of his / her choice. 
iii) Introduction of PFMS for direct transfer of scholarship dues to students accounts: As 
part of Direct Benefit Transfer, all the student dues would be transferred from ICCR 

12 | P a g e 
 
to the individual students’ bank accounts under PFMS. Since February 2021, all the 
payable dues of students are released through PFMS.   
 Likewise for other activities including sending cultural delegations abroad, ICCR 
has adopted virtual mode.  During 2020-21, ICCR sent four groups in physical  and 
managed to arrange 11 online /recordings.  For 2021-22 till date 10 groups in physical and 
05 recordings have been arranged for performing abroad. Similar modes for other activities 
are being included to carry forward the day-to-day functioning 
1.24    While tendering evidence before the Committee on 26 August, 2020, the 
representatives of MEA added that:- 
“I would like to bring out unexpected fallout of COVID-19 pandemic that has 
engulfed the entire world after our last meeting.  This pandemic has proven to be at 
least one boon in disguise as far as India’s soft power is concerned.  Be it is 
President Trump, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe or German Chancellor Angela Merkel 
or French President Macron, the traditional Indian form of greeting, Namaste, has 
been accepted worldwide as the cleanest and safest form of greeting. We would not 
have achieved this strength of India’s soft power in decades what has now been 
accepted due to this pandemic.  Of course, this has nothing to do with MEA, but I 
wanted to bring this out as the new element of India’s soft power. The world has 
also come to realize once again that India formally believes in her ancient dictums 
when we evacuated foreign nationals along with our own nationals from Wuhan 
during the height of pandemic crisis there.  Gifts of medicines and other equipment 
to many countries in the world even though India has herself lacked sufficient 
numbers was another example presented to the world. COVID-19 has changed the 
entire world.  Post COVID-19, world is going to be different even for India’s soft 
power. The emphasis on technology that has come to the fore during this pandemic 
times is only going to be strengthened in the coming days. MEA and ICCR have 
already started working on the relevant technological platform to mould themselves 
to the new realities.” 
1.25 When asked about the impact of Covid-19 pandemic on our cultural engagement 
with foreign countries, the Ministry of Culture stated that Covid-19 pandemic and 
subsequent disruptions, especially of international travel, has had significant effect on 
international cultural engagements and people to people contacts. However, After initial halt 
of activities, Ministry of Culture has tried to use digital internet technologies to the extent 
possible to carry on international engagements and negotiations during this time. 

13 | P a g e 
 
 In May 2020, after the initial phase of covid, HCM had virtual interaction with UAE 
Cultural Minister on cultural aspect during covid. The cultural interaction shifted to 
online mode all over the world.  
 The meetings of cultural stream on BRICS, SCO and G20 platforms were hosted the 
respective chairs of those organizations and were well participated by Indian side.  
 Indian participation was also made in BRICS cultural festival and SCO cultural 
festival in 2020.  
 Ministry of Culture participated in the International Marathon of Cultures organized 
by Russian side in online format. Video material on India's Culture and Heritage has 
been included in the compiled movie of marathon which will be broadcasted through 
designated website in Russia and other participant countries. 
 Hon'ble Culture Minister had a meeting through VC with Hon’ble Culture Minister 
of Mongolia to discuss on promoting bilateral cultural and spiritual ties, and ways to 
implement Cultural Exchange Programme signed between the two countries. 
 Recently Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi, Hon’ble MOS(Culture) had a virtual meeting with 
her Thailand counterpart to discuss cultural cooperation issues. 
 National Museum developed and curated the first-ever online exhibition on Shared 
Buddhist Heritage, attended by all member countries of SCO. The online exhibition 
(nmvirtual.in) was launched by the Hon'ble Vice President of India on 30.11.2020.  
About 20 Objects of the Indian Museum were also part of the Indian Buddhist 
Gallery in the SCO Online Exhibition.  
 Sahitya Akademi translated and published 10 titles of modern Indian literature from 
10 Indian languages into English, Russian and Chinese in follow up to the 
announcement made by Hon’ble P.M during his speech in SCO Summit 2019. The 
translations were released during the SCO virtual summit in November 2020. 
 Cultural exchange programmes were signed in 2021-22 with Serbia, Uzbekistan and 
the Russian Federation. 
 In a nutshell India tried to avail all opportunities to showcase its cultural heritage.  
[Replies to LOPs, Ministry of Culture, Point No.3, Pg.3] 

14 | P a g e 
 
1.26 The Committee understand that Covid-19 pandemic has been a disruptive 
factor in conduct of foreign policy and diplomacy at the global scale. The Committee 
also observe that every component of India’s soft power diplomacy - scholarships, 
exchange of visits, cultural delegations, etc, have been impacted adversely due to the 
pandemic. Despite such challenges, the Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
have been able to cater to the needs of international students and initiated reforms for 
better management of scholarship programme. The Committee are also pleased to note 
that the traditional Indian form of greeting – Namaste acquired greater recognition as 
a global form of greeting during the pandemic. The Committee further note with 
satisfaction that the Ministries of External Affairs and Culture have embraced digital 
and virtual mode to carry forward India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy. 
However, realizing that the post-Covid world will be more technology driven, the 
Committee would exhort the Ministry to adopt innovative ICT technologies to make 
India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy more effective and relevant. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
IV. Impact study of India’s Soft Power 
1.27  The working of soft power makes its impacts extremely difficult to measure – not 
only are soft power resources intangible, their impacts are also intangible in addition to 
being diffuse and long-term in nature. In its Thirteenth and Sixteenth Reports, the 
Committee had underscored the imperative of developing a soft power matrix for measuring 
the effectiveness of India’s soft power. In its final Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of 
External Affairs had stated that Esteemed Committee is informed that, ICCR has already 
initiated the process for developing the “Soft Power Matrix”. Delay in developing the 
Matrix is owing to the following reasons: 
a) Challenge in measuring the outcomes of soft power related activities as the outcomes 
are not always tangible. 
b) Shortage of expertise available in India for developing such a Matrix. 
1.28 On the Committee’s specific query regarding development of a "soft power matrix" 
to measure the effectiveness of the country's soft power outreach, the Ministry submitted 

15 | P a g e 
 
that the Expert has submitted the report which is under consideration by the ICCR in 
consultation with other think tanks such as RIS which have expertise in this area. 
1.29 Adding further on the issue of developing a soft power matrix, the representatives of 
the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under on 31 January, 2022: - 
“With regard to putting in place a soft power matrix to measure the effectiveness of 
our policies, ICCR has conducted an initial exercise, and the report of which has been 
submitted last July and it is being consulted with stakeholders.” 
 
1.30 The Committee are cognizant that the intangible elements of soft power are 
difficult to quantify. The Ministry has submitted that two factors have delayed the 
process for developing the matrix, namely challenge in measuring outcomes of soft 
power related activities and shortage of expertise. Currently, the Report by Expert 
Committee is under consideration by the ICCR and other think tanks. 
 The Committee, however, feel that a study could establish the linkages between 
our soft power and tangible outcomes in the field of diplomacy and hence they fail to 
comprehend the glaring delay in developing India’s Soft Power Matrix. There are 
various global institutions and organizations that have developed indices for 
measuring soft power. The Ministry should take cues from such available data and use 
it as a foundation for developing the matrix. The Committee reiterate their stance and 
strongly recommend that the Ministry should have objective metrics for evaluating 
soft power outcomes through a ‘Soft Power Matrix’ at the earliest.  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
IV. LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES  
1.31 In their Background Notes and on during testimony before the Committee, the 
Ministry of External Affairs had highlighted the following four key issues inhibiting 
effective conduct of soft power and cultural diplomacy :- 
(i)  Timely, adequate budget allocation. 
(ii) Need for greater coordination and consultation among multiple institutions, both in 
the government and private sector, engaged in conduct of cultural and soft power 

16 | P a g e 
 
projection. Currently, there is duplication of efforts and resources due to overlapping 
mandates of several ministries and agencies.  
(iii) Shortage of skilled, motivated manpower in the Headquarters as well as in Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad who have the requisite enthusiasm and interest in cultural 
work.  
(iv) Lack of clarity about the mandate of ICCR and the scope of “culture” and absence of 
a national policy on projection of cultural soft strengths overseas often results in ad 
hoc, unsustainable measures.  
1.32 MEA/ICCR have been working together closely with various GoI 
Ministries/agencies for execution of specific programmes/activities. Details of major 
institutionalized coordination arrangements with Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Ministry of AYUSH, Ministry of Science and Technology and Department of Space are 
given below: 
Ministry of 
Culture 
 
ICCR and Ministry of Culture signed an MOU in 2016 to jointly execute the 
Festivals of India overseas. We have been consulting each other on grants to 
India-Foreign Friendship Societies in other countries, exhibitions abroad, 
presence of each others’ representatives on the governing bodies of ICCR and 
organizations under Ministry of Culture.  
Ministry of 
Youth and 
Sports Affairs
 
With the changing understanding of the term “Culture,” MEA and ICCR have 
broadened its horizon of projecting broader spectrum of Indian Culture for soft 
power. One such area is sports, and cricket in particular. These are coordinated 
with the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports at various levels. 
Mutual visits by youth are another dimension of soft power that we are focusing 
upon. India has an MoU to annually exchange 200 youth between India and 
China and we are exploring a similar arrangement with Japan. In 2019-20 we 
facilitated inbound youth delegations from Vietnam, Tajikistan and Portugal and 
organized the Youth Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas in Varanasi in January 2019.  
Department of 
Space:  
 
India’s offer of the use of the South Asia satellite free of cost to all our 
neighbours, also puts outer space as an area of soft power that we are beginning 
to make inroads into. India offers training slots in space technology to many 
countries, and is committed to working with Bhutan on the development of their 
first satellite.  MEA coordinates these matters closely with the Department of 
Space/ISRO and other participating countries. In September 2019, Prime 
Minister invited a group of young Bhutanese to ISRO in Bengaluru to witness the 
landing of the moon rover, Vikram.   
Ministry of ICCR is an implementing agency for three of Ministry of AYUSH’s scholarship 

17 | P a g e 
 
AYUSH 
 
programmes. The scholarships offered by MEA under its ITEC programme and 
also by the Ministry of AYUSH also play a very important role in our cultural 
diplomacy. First Yoga College in China – the India-China Yoga College in 
Kunming province of China, and deployment of Yoga Chairs therein was 
implemented jointly by ICCR and the Ministry of AYUSH. Ministry of AYUSH 
has signed following documents and established AYUSH information cells with 
the assistance of Missions and Posts overseas: 
Country to Country MoUs 22 
Undertaking collaborative research 21 
Setting up of AYUSH Chairs 13 
Establishment of AYUSH Information Cells 32 in 29 countries 
AYUSH center of excellence 01 
 
Each year since 2015 the ICCR and MEA in coordination with the Ministry of 
AYUSH has successfully organized the International Yoga Day in all Member 
States of the United Nations, as well as in the UN premises. We receive support 
from AYUSH. This year events were organized in about 150 countries at around 
800 locations with the participation of hundred and thousands of people. 
Locations such as the Eiffel Tower in Paris, the Opera House in Sydney, the 
Shaolin temple in China, the base of Mount Everest in Nepal, the Brandenburg 
Gate in Berlin and the Cathedral in Brasilia are some of the iconic sites for the 
annual yoga event. 
Ministry of 
Science and 
Technology 
 
As was mentioned in the opening statement of Foreign Secretary in sitting dated 
20 December 2019, Research and Information System for Developing Countries 
(RIS) is currently beginning an important new multi-year research programme on 
Science Diplomacy with the Department of Science & Technology, which is 
expected to add another dimension to our modern soft power projection efforts. 
We expect RIS to play an important role in showcasing India’s emerging 
scientific and technological capabilities in bio-technology, space, Artificial 
Intelligence, traditional medicines and genetics. Further, through the 
development projects MEA is assisting various development countries in various 
sectors such as meteorology, remote sensing, agriculture etc.  
 
1.33 On being asked about the challenges faced in coordination and collaboration efforts, 
Ministry stated that overlapping mandates between MEA and other Government 
Departments in the projection of India's soft power, while not a constraint per se, requires 

18 | P a g e 
 
greater coordination between MEA and others. MEA/ICCR are working on this with key 
departments looking after Culture, Education, Sports & Youth Affairs and AYUSH. It is 
also hoped to enhance cooperation with the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats to 
project democracy, constitutional values, electoral practices, good governance and other 
aspects of soft power, in a more sustained manner to foreign Parliamentarians, legislature 
staff and media. ICCR closely works with the Ministry of Culture (MOC) in implementation 
of Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEPs) for which (MOC) is the nodal Ministry. This is 
being done abroad through its Cultural Centres and Ministry’s network of Missions. The 
Standing Committee for planning and coordinating Festivals of India abroad is chaired by 
Secretary (Culture) where DG, ICCR is also a member. The Governing Body of ICCR 
includes members from Ministry of Culture as well as all major principle organizations 
working the area of cultural and soft power projection. 
1.34 The Ministry of External Affairs has cited lack of coordination and overlapping 
mandate amongst line Ministries as a limiting factor in pursuit of India's soft power and 
cultural diplomacy. When asked about the efforts that are being made to tide this challenge, 
the Ministry stated that the stake holders have internally deliberated on the issues and 
considered various available options including establishing a separate Department. 
However, finally, it is felt that with MEA as Empowered Execution Agency of the 
Government in the lead, all other tools of soft power must supplement the efforts of MEA to 
carry forward the mandate of soft power as per country specific soft power demand prepared 
in consultation with Indian Mission of that specific country. The systems and institutional 
mechanisms are in place, in MEA and Indian Embassies, as well as in ICCR, for effective 
and impactful soft power projection. 
1.35 The Committee enquired whether there exists any mechanism for coordination 
between the multiple agencies engaged in conduct of cultural and soft power projection.  In 
a written reply, the Ministry stated that the Hon’ble Committee members have earlier been 
emphasizing on the aspects of coordination amongst different Departments of the 
Government. It is felt that with MEA as Empowered execution agency of the Government in 
the lead, all other organizations and tools of soft power must supplement the efforts of MEA 
to carry forward the mandate of soft power as per country specific soft power demand 

19 | P a g e 
 
prepared in consultation with Indian Mission of that specific country. ICCR as part of its 
activities already include Education and Culture- the foci of soft power. It has a network of 
37 Indian Cultural Centres, Chairs to capture the mood of young audience and on culture it 
has gamut of activities like cultural delegations for promotion of dance and music, visitors 
exchange programme, conferences & seminars. MEA, Missions and ICCR are already tied 
institutionally and can and have been working in tandem with one another. For coordination 
with other organizations and agencies of Soft Power a monitoring Committee under MEA’s 
lead is proposed to be constituted. 
1.36 In their Thirteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'India's Soft Power Diplomacy, 
including the role of Indian Council of Cultural Relations and Indian Diaspora', the 
Committee had urged the Ministry to establish an institutionalized coordination mechanism 
between MEA/ICCR and other line Ministries. However, it is evident that no substantive 
steps have been taken in this direction and gaps in coordination persist. Justifying the tardy 
progress on this issue, the Ministry submitted that there has been emphasis by the Hon’ble 
Committee members on the Coordination amongst the line Ministries and other tools of Soft 
Power. The stake holders have internally deliberated on the issues and considered various 
available options including establishing a separate Department. However, finally, it is 
believed that with MEA as Empowered Execution Agency of the Government in the lead, 
all other tools of soft power must supplement the efforts of MEA to carry forward the 
mandate of soft power as per country specific soft power demand prepared in consultation 
with Indian Mission of that specific country. ICCR as part of its activities already include 
Education and Culture- the foci of soft power. It has a network of 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres, Chairs to capture the mood of young audience and on culture it has gamut of 
activities like cultural delegations for promotion of dance and music, visitors exchange 
programme, conferences & seminars. MEA, Missions and ICCR are already tied 
institutionally and can and have been working in tandem with one another. For coordination 
among other tools of Soft Power a monitoring Committee under MEA’s lead is proposed to 
be constituted. 
1. 37 Considering the importance of the soft power of the nation in building up the 
international relations, NITI Aayog organized three brain storming sessions on the centrality 

20 | P a g e 
 
of the cultural relationship for greater vibrancy in diplomatic, economic and strategic 
relations of India. These sessions were designed precisely to address the issue as to how we 
synergize soft power and to what extend we can exercise hard power. The three brain 
storming sessions were held on 23 May 2018, 29 November 2018 and 9 October, 2019 
under the chairmanship of the Vice-Chairman, NITI Aayog. In these sessions, it was 
recognized that there is a need of better coordination among the different departments and 
ministries which are promoting Indian culture in overseas market. It was agreed upon that 
there should be a collective, coordinated, targeted & synergistic approach to promote Indian 
culture in the external sphere. As a result, NITI Aayog constituted a Coordination 
Committee consisting of representatives from all concerned ministries that will oversee 
progress in developing our soft power in coordinated and integrated way.  
 
1.38 The Ministry of External Affairs has highlighted four key factors inhibiting 
effective conduct of India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy – inadequate budgetary 
allocation, lack of coordination among multiple institutions, shortage of skilled 
manpower and lack of clarity about the mandate of ICCR. The Committee note that 
informal arrangement have been made by MEA with various GOI Ministries and 
agencies such as Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs, Ministry 
of AYUSH, Ministry of Science & Technology, etc. The Committee also observe that 
NITI Aayog had held three brain storming sessions to address the issue of lack of 
coordination and suggested the constitution of a Coordination Committee consisting of 
representatives from all the concerned Ministries. In pursuance of the Committee’s 
recommendation on establishing a coordinated mechanism between MEA and other 
line Ministries involved in soft power projection, the Committee note that the 
Monitoring Committee under MEA’s lead is under proposal. In view of the urgent 
need for greater synergy and coordination among the various Ministries/ Departments 
/agencies involved in India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy, the Committee 
recommend that the Coordination Committee may be constituted at the earliest.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
1.39 Non-availability of adequate finances is one of the factors derailing the effective 
facilitation of India’s soft power projection. Soft power capabilities require capital, 

21 | P a g e 
 
both human as well as financial to be effective. A cursory glance at the budgetary 
allocation to India’s ICCR and Confucius Institutes of China or UKS’s British Council 
or Germany’s Goethe Institute is testimony to the hurdles in our institutional efficacy. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should increase ICCR’s 
budgetary allocation by at least 20 % than what is being provisioned as of now.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
1.40 India is uniquely positioned for its rich culture. As compared to other countries 
India’s potential for developing International Relations on the count of culture is 
simply great. Therefore, in order to give further impetus to our efforts aimed at 
strengthening aimed at strengthening India’s cultural relations with major countries 
all over the world, it is necessary to strengthen our Cultural Relationship Development 
or soft power arm- Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), it is necessary to 
evolve and adopt a well thought out Cultural Relationship Policy of India at the 
earliest. In the absence of such a policy, our efforts to accomplish our Mission of 
development of cultural relationship re likely to remain half hearted and less result 
oriented. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry should take urgent 
steps firstly to evolve and later adopt National Policy on Cultural Relationship 
Development across the countries or National Soft Power Policy. 
(Recommendation No.8) 
1.41 While ICCR was established some 71 years ago, global situation has witnessed 
several drastic changes thereafter. Hence, an institutional device conceived some seven 
decades back needs a relook in the context of its organizational set functionality and 
efficacy. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should appoint a Study Group 
firstly to assess the working of ICCR in comparison to British Council, the American 
Centre and the Confucius Institute etc and later suggest ways to further strengthen 
ICCR. 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
 
 
 

22 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER 2 
INSTRUMENTS OF INDIA’S SOFT POWER DIPLOMACY 
India has a wide array of soft power resources ranging from sports, music, art, film, 
literature, to democratic institutions, independent press and judiciary, vibrant civil society, 
multi-ethnic polity, secularism, pluralism, skilled English-speaking professionals, food, 
handicrafts, yoga. In view of such expansive soft power assets and the oversight mandate of 
the Committee on External Affairs, the Report will only delve upon the following major 
instruments of soft power and cultural diplomacy in which the Ministry of External Affairs 
has a significant role to play :- 
(i) Culture 
(ii) Diaspora 
(iii) Democracy 
(iv) Tourism  
(v) Yoga 
(vi) Ayurveda 
(vii) Sports and Youth Exchange Programmes 
(viii) Media and Cinema 
(ix) Education 
Consequently, the Committee undertook a detailed examination of the subject for two year 
and took oral evidence of the Ministries of External Affairs, Culture, Education, AYUSH, 
Tourism, Sports & Youth Affairs, Commerce & Industry, Information & Broadcasting and 
Niti Aayog.  
I. Role of Culture 
2.2 UNESCO defines culture as ‘the set of distinctive spiritual, material, intellectual and 
emotional features of society or a social group, that encompasses, not only art and literature, 
but lifestyles, ways of living together, value systems, traditions and beliefs.’ India has a rich 
culture and cultural diplomacy is its expression abroad to foreign audiences in order to 
facilitate/create long term international influence. 

23 | P a g e 
 
2.3 Explaining the distinction in mandate of ICCR and the Ministry of Culture, the 
Foreign Secretary stated on 20.12.2019 as under: 
“Sir, I believe there is a distinction between the two. ICCR is only meant for 
projection of Indian culture abroad. The Ministry of Culture makes all policy and 
evolves all projects for the general propagation of culture both within the country 
and in terms of the focus abroad. But the executing arm is the ICCR and this is done 
either with the Ministry of Culture, as in the case of festivals of India or by major 
exhibitions travel from the Indian Museum, Kolkata or from the other museums in 
India or we do it under own resources.” 
2.4 In view of the overlapping mandate between ICCR in certain areas, the Ministry of 
Culture was asked in particular whether, there is a need for redefinition/ strict demarcation 
of their mandate in cultural diplomacy. In a written reply, the Ministry submitted that there 
is complimentary mandate of Ministry of Culture and ICCR in projecting India’s soft power. 
While it is only the Government, i.e. Ministry of Culture, which can initiate cultural 
agreements and cultural exchange programmes, it is on the basis of these agreement and 
exchange programmes that various organisations, including ICCR, organise international 
programmes.  
2.5 The Committee wanted to know about ICCR’s understanding of culture of India and 
the vehicles it has chosen to project this diversity to the external world. In a written reply, 
ICCR submitted that it has been projecting the richness and diversity of Indian culture 
abroad through a number of ongoing programmes. The activities include its robust 
scholarship programme for foreign students to study in India; active exchange of 
intellectuals, academicians, experts, authors, scholars and artists throughout the year, 
organizing seminars and conferences and bringing out publications and promotional 
material. Going beyond the traditional promotion of Indian performing arts, dance & music 
and visual & fine arts, ICCR, within its limited means and resources, has made attempts to 
have new elements such as Ayurveda, Khadi, Yoga embedded in the projection of India’s 
rich cultural heritage. ICCR implements these programmes directly through 39 Indian 
Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad and 19 Regional Offices in India, as well as through close 
cooperation with the Indian Missions/Posts abroad.  

24 | P a g e 
 
2.6 The overall and detailed functioning of ICCR along with aspects related to its 
activities of ICCR will be examined in Chapter 4. Hence, this section will focus more on the 
role played by the Ministry of Culture in projecting India’s soft power abroad. The mandate 
of Ministry of Culture (MoC) is preservation and conservation of cultural heritage and 
promotion of tangible and intangible art and culture within India as well as abroad. Ministry 
is also responsible for implementation of various UNESCO conventions in the field of 
culture and world heritage sites. 
2.7 The Committee wanted to know about the Ministry of Culture’s vision about 
showcasing Indian culture to the world in a manner which reinforces India’s rising stature 
among the comity of nations. In a written reply, the Ministry stated that as a part of its 
visioning exercise for India@2047, Ministry of Culture aims to use India’s rich, ancient and 
diverse cultural heritage, which has significant historical global outreach & influence, to 
engage Indian & its people with the world, foster greater & deeper cultural cooperation, 
exchange & understanding and to foster friendly relations with other countries across the 
globe which can have significant effects on other spheres of cooperation and diplomacy.  
2.8 On being asked whether a study on international best practices of using culture as an 
instrument of soft power has been carried out, the Ministry of Culture stated that it has not 
made any assessment of international best practices of using culture as an instrument of soft 
power. It is very difficult to quantify the tangible foreign policy outcomes emanating out of 
culture diplomacy of a country. 
2.9 Cultural Activities undertaken by the Ministry of Culture to project India’s soft 
power and cultural diplomacy are as follows: 
(i) Bilateral Cultural Relations: 
2.10 In order to disseminate Indian art and culture in new territories and develop bilateral 
cultural relations between India and other countries, the Ministry signs bilateral Cultural 
Agreement (CAs) and Cultural Exchange Programme (CEPs). Till 2021, the Ministry of 
Culture has signed 109 Cultural Agreements (CAs) and 74 Cultural Exchange Programmes 
(CEPs).  

25 | P a g e 
 
2.11 Provisions in the CEP, inter-alia, provide cooperation in the fields of music & 
dance, theatre, archives, archaeology, libraries, museums, literature, anthropology, festivals 
etc. The implementation of the provisions of the CEPs is undertaken by the 
attached/subordinate offices and autonomous bodies and other concerned Ministries/Deptts. 
During 2019-2020, CEPs were signed with 16 countries. CEPs with 3 countries are ready 
for signing (Singapore, Israel, Sri Lanka). CEPs are expected to be signed with 6 countries 
(Russia, Thailand, Egypt, Suriname, New Zealand & Argentina). 
 (ii) Multilateral Cultural Relations 
2.12 India is a member of various multilateral organizations viz. BRICS, SAARC, SCO, 
BIMSTEC, ASEM, UNESCO and actively participates in multilateral cultural activities 
such as exhibitions, events of performing arts, literary events etc. Ministerial level meetings 
for enhancing cultural cooperation amongst member nations of these organizations are also 
attended at Minister Level. Some of the events on multilateral platform in the recent past are 
appended in Annexure I. 
 (iii) Scheme for Promotion of International Cultural Relations 
2.13 The Ministry of Culture implements a scheme titled “Scheme for Promotion of 
International Cultural Relations” to showcase India’s rich cultural heritage. This scheme has 
two components : 
(i) Festivals of India. 
(ii) Grant-in-aid to Indo- Foreign Friendship Cultural Societies. 
 (a) Festivals of India abroad: 
2.14  The Ministry of Culture organizes Festivals of India (FOI) abroad to promote India’s 
rich cultural heritage and enhance India’s image in the global arena in a concerted manner.  
The FOIs are organized with the aim of having a lasting impact on the people of the host 
country.  Thus, FOIs are tools of cultural diplomacy that project the soft power of India. 
This soft approach is expected to benefit India in the fields of tourism, health, education, 
commerce etc. and provide strategic depth to the growing influence of India.  The events 
generally included in FOIs are Music, Dance, Theatre, Film Festival, Food Festival, Literary 

26 | P a g e 
 
Festival, Folk Arts such as mehandi artistry, exhibitions of various disciplines, Lecture 
demonstrations and Workshops etc.   
2.15 The main focus of FOI is to connect and enhance the perception of India in the 
minds of locals which should ultimately lead to more tangible results interms of trade and 
commerce, tourism, medical tourism.  Broadly, Festivals of India are conducted abroad with 
the objectives to: 
 Promote Indian culture 
 Strengthen bonds of foreign countries with India 
 Promote bilateral cultural contracts; and 
 Promote inbound tourism 
During last five years, Ministry of Culture has organized Festivals of India in 58 countries. 
Besides FOIs, 70 years of India’s Independence was celebrated abroad through Indian 
Missions by organizing cultural activities in 55 countries across all continents during 2017-
2018.  
 (b)  Indo-Foreign Friendship Cultural Societies 
2.16 Indian culture is also promoted and strengthened in foreign countries by giving 
grants to societies which carry out cultural activities connected with India abroad. This grant 
aims to promote Indian culture abroad, fostering closer friendship and cultural contacts 
between India and the concerned foreign country. The grant supports Indo-Foreign 
Friendship Societies for holding programmes and activities such as dance (classical, folk 
and workshops); music (vocal, instrumental, sufi, classical, semi-classical, carnatic, 
contemporary, workshops etc.); photo exhibitions on culture related topics; exhibitions on 
books and other culture related topics/material; publication of books/journals on culture; 
theatre: - drama, skit, mime, mimicry and workshops; activities to promote folk arts viz 
mehendi, puppetry and rangoli; classes/courses in yoga etc. The grant is released on the 
recommendations of the Indian Mission abroad.  
2.17 The quantum of grant sanctioned to a society is upto Rs.10 lakhs per annum and in 
special case grant to a society may be given up to Rs.25 lakhs. During 2019-20, 359 
societies have been sanctioned grant through 56 Missions abroad.  During 2020-21, 26 
societies have been sanctioned grant through 6 Missions abroad till date.  

27 | P a g e 
 
 (iv) Assistance in rebuilding historical monuments 
2.18 Assisting countries in our neighbourhood and in extended neighbourhood to restore 
refurbish or re-built historical monuments that display an Indian influence is an important 
facilitation of our cultural diplomacy. The details of ongoing endeavours to restore historical 
buildings are as follows:- 
 (a)  Project Mausam is a project of the Ministry of Culture launched by India at the 
38th Session of the World Heritage Committee held in Doha, Qatar. 39 
countries in the Indian Ocean region have been identified under Project 
Mausam. The objectives include Achieving Transnational Nomination on 
‘Indian Ocean Maritime Routes’ under World Heritage List of UNESCO. 
(b)  The conservation work of Ta Prohm temple in Cambodia, Vat Phou temple in 
Lao PDR, Ananda Temple, dedicated to Lord Buddha, at Bagan in Myanmar, 
Cham monuments in Vietnam, Friday Mosque at Male, Maldives  etc. are being 
executed by the Archaeological Survey of India. 
2.19 Stressing on this aspect of our cultural diplomacy, the representatives of the Ministry of 
External Affairs during the course of evidence on 20 December, 2019 stated: 
“An important and some time under-estimated element of cultural diplomacy is our 
increasing focus on assisting countries in our neighbourhood and in the extended 
neighbour is to restore, refurbish or re-built historical monuments that display an 
Indian influence. Beginning in the early 1980s, the Ministry along with the 
Archaeological Survey of India has been restoring different temples in Angkor Wat 
in Cambodia. Since that time, we have undertaken similar works in Afghanistan, the 
Store Palace and Bagh-e Babur, in Cambodia the Preah Vihar Temple, in Laos the 
Vat Phou Temple, in Myanmar the Ananda Temple at Bagan, in Vietnam the Charm 
Monuments at Nissan; in Bhutan the Tashichho Dzong; in Sri Lanka the 
Trikuteshwara Temple and Jaffna Cultural Centre and in China the Buddhist Temple 
in Luoyang.  This is just to give you a few examples. We have commenced work 
now on renovating the Friday Mosque in Male in Maldives, the Wangdue Phodrang 
Dzong in Bhutan and Guru Dev Tagore’s ancestral home in Bangladesh. We will 
shortly restoration of Buddhist Pagodas in Bagan, Myanmar as well as in the Harihar 
Bhawan and Valmiki Complexes damaged in the earthquake in Nepal. During the 
Chinese President’s visit it was decided that both sides will jointly research on 
historical trading ties between Tamil Nadu and Fujian Province of China and revive 
these ties through establishment of sister-State relations.  

28 | P a g e 
 
Our contribution in building or re-building monuments with Indian influence 
is widely appreciated through the entire region. In view of the growing importance 
of this aspect of our cultural diplomacy, the Ministry is in the process of establishing 
a new and separate division to handle projects abroad with assistance from the 
Ministry of Culture and the Archaeological Survey of India. The severe shortage of 
trained man power with the Archaeological Survey of India and the application of 
General Financial Rules and procedures for one of the kind monuments which 
require special skills that cannot ordinarily be tendered for in the same manner of 
ordinary projects, funding is also a limiting factor in the selection of projects. The 
scholarships offered by the MEA under its hi tech programme quite distinct from 
ICCR also plays an important role in cultural diplomacy. Hitech now has footprints 
in 161 countries including some of the smallest Island States of the Pacific and the 
Caribbean.  Those who come to India to study are introduced to the strengths of our 
democratically vibrant, economically emerging and technologically advancing 
nation. The number of such scholarships has risen from roughly 9,000 in 2014-15 to 
11,500 this year. This covers good governance, parliamentary practices, election 
management, journalism, culture, sports and IT besides the standard disciplines.”  
 (v) National Mission on Cultural Mapping (NMCM) 
2.20 National Mission on Cultural Mapping (NMCM) is a scheme administered by the 
Ministry of Culture conceptualized for the purpose of developing a comprehensive data base 
of artists, art forms and other resources gathered from cultural organizations in the Ministry 
of Culture, other Ministries and also States. Relevant data in respect of 14.53 lakh artists / 
artisans has been collected from various sources  viz. Ministry of Textiles, Sangeet Natak 
Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, National School of Drama, Centre for 
Cultural Resources and Training, Zonal Cultural Centres, Kalakshetra Foundation etc. 
Ministry of Culture is doing a cultural mapping survey involving Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for Arts (IGNCA) and CSC eGovernance Service India Limited (CSC SPV) for all 
the villages.   
 
2.21 The culture mapping exercise is being carried out using a mobile application and the 
data collection of villages will be used to create a database for Mera Gaon Meri Dharohar as 
part of cultural mapping.  All the villages of the country as per Local Government Directory 
will be covered for data collection under Mera Gaon Meri Dharohar and cultural mapping.  
Presently, data of 10712 villages have been collected.   
 

29 | P a g e 
 
2.22 The Committee note that the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of External 
Affairs are directly engaged in the task of promotion of India’s cultural diplomacy. 
While on one hand the Ministry of Culture formulates policy and evolves all projects 
for propagation of culture on the other hand, ICCR is the executing arm in the 
external domain which includes preservation and conservation of cultural heritage and 
promotion of tangible and intangible art and culture within and outside India. Within 
through its 39 Indian Cultural Centres abroad and 19 Regional Offices in India 
undertakes activities such as academic and cultural exchanges, scholarship 
programmes, organization of seminars, bringing out publications, etc. While noting the 
complementary role of ICCR and Ministry of Culture in cultural diplomacy, the 
Committee desire that a Working Group of both the Ministries may be formed to have 
coordinated and focussed approach in chalking out our cultural diplomatic activities. 
The Committee also feel that there is a need to have a consolidated database of 
information about cultural assets and resources i.e. cultural inventory at one place for 
essential planning and effective utilization of our resources for the benefit of our 
country. 
(Recommendation No.10) 
2.23  With the objective of dissemination of Indian art and culture, the Ministry of 
Culture has signed 109 bilateral cultural agreements and 74 Cultural Exchange 
Programmes. As a member of various multilateral organizations such as Brazil Russia 
India China and South Africa (BRICS), Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), 
Bay of Bengal Initiative of Multi-sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(BIMSTEC), Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM), United Nations Education Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), India actively participates in multilateral cultural 
activities. While acknowledging the plethora of activities undertaken by ICCR to 
utilize India’s rich, ancient and diverse culture in fostering  bilateral and multilateral 
cultural relations, the Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Culture should  proactively communicate these initiatives to the domestic as well as 
global audience through all media platforms.  
(Recommendation No.11) 

30 | P a g e 
 
2.24 Assisting countries in our neighbourhood and in extended neighbourhood to 
restore, refurbish or re-built historical monuments that display an Indian influence is 
an important form of our cultural diplomacy. The Ministry of External Affairs along 
with the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) have restored historical monuments in 
Angkor Wat Temple (Cambodia), Bagh E Babur (Afghanistan), Preah Vihar Temple), 
Vat Phou Temple (Laos), Ananda Temple (Myanmar), Charm Monuments 
(Vietnamm), Tashichho Dzong (Bhutan), Trikuteshwara Temple and Jaffna Cultural 
Centre (Sri Lanka) and so on.  Currently, conservation work of Friday Mosque 
(Maldives), Wangdue Phodrang Dzong (Bhutan) and Guru Dev Tagore’s ancestral 
home in Bangladesh are being executed by ASI. 
  MEA has informed that a new and separate division to handle projects abroad 
with assistance from the Ministry of Culture and the Archaeological Survey of India is 
being established. The Committee are pleased to learn that our contribution in 
building or re-building monuments with Indian influence is widely appreciated 
through the entire region. The Committee desire to be apprised about the progress 
made with regard to creation of the new Division along with details of budgetary 
allocation and proposed human capital in terms of organizational structure and 
outcomes of this initiative. 
(Recommendation No.12) 
2.25 Under the National Mission on Cultural Mapping (NMCM), Ministry of 
Culture is developing a comprehensive data base of artists, art forms and other 
resources gathered from the Ministry of Textiles, Sangeet Natak Akademi, Lalit Kala 
Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, National School of Drama, Centre for Cultural Resources 
and Training, Zonal Cultural Centres, Kalakshetra Foundation, etc. The Committee 
observe that the cultural Mapping exercise is being carried out through a robust IT-
enabled platform and the data will be used to create a database for ‘Mera Gaon Meri 
Dharohar’. As per the Ministry of Culture data of 10712 villages have been collected so 
far. In this context, the Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
ensure that this database is used strategically to showcase our multifaceted and diverse 

31 | P a g e 
 
approach. The database may also be shared on the website of the Ministry and be 
made a part of our soft power diplomatic tool.  
(Recommendation No.13) 
II. Role of Diaspora 
2.26 India has a large Diaspora in the world with over 31 million including over 13 
million NRIs and 18 million PIOs spread across the globe. Depending on their economic 
and political influence within the centers of global power, Diasporas can be a vital strategic 
instrument and channel of communication to further India’s foreign policy goals and 
gains. The Fifteenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject ‘Welfare of 
Indian Diaspora: Policies and Schemes’ contain detail analysis of the subject. Therefore, this 
Report will focus merely on the role of Diaspora as a soft power asset.  
2.27 Indian Diaspora has in fact played a very active role in the development of India. 
The remittances received by India from its Diaspora and the developmental and 
philanthropic works undertaken by the Diaspora have been quite noteworthy for India’s 
growth. Indian economy has been enriched by the investment of the entrepreneurs from 
Indian Diaspora. Politically, Indian Diaspora has emerged as a soft power influencing and 
enriching India’s relationship with their host countries. Diaspora group works as a soft 
power in building, influencing and strengthening the relationship between the home and 
host country. 
2.28 Enumerating the steps taken to engage the extensive network of Indian Diaspora in 
furthering India's foreign policy and long term interests, the Ministry stated that it runs 
various programmes and has taken several steps from time to time to engage with Indian 
Diaspora. Among the major Programmes / Schemes handled by the Division are Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas Convention, Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conferences, Regional Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas, Know India Programme, Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children, 
Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz, Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora, grievances pertaining to 
diaspora. Brief description of these programmes is as follows:- 
Know India Programme (KIP) : Know India Programme was launched in 2003 for the 

32 | P a g e 
 
Indian Diaspora between the age group of 18-30 years. The purpose of the KIP is to 
familiarize the PIO youths (People of Indian Origin) with their roots and contemporary 
India, through a three week orientation programme and provide them an exposure to the 
country of their origin. It also aims to promote awareness on different facets of life in India 
and the progress made by the country in various fields e.g. economic, industrial, education, 
science & technology, communication and information technology and culture.  
Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana (PTDY): Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana was started in 
2018-19 in association with Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) for 
the PIOs in the age group of 45-60 years to connect them to the spiritual and religious 
aspects of India. This programme is aimed towards middle-aged PIOs and helps them to 
visit India on an organized pilgrimage, paid for by the Government of India, and have an all 
round exposure to various faiths in India.    
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC): The Scholarship Programme for 
Diaspora Children (SPDC) was launched in 2006-2007 for the children of overseas Indians 
(PIOs/NRIs) with the objective to make higher education in Indian Universities/Institutions 
accessible to diaspora children and promote India as a centre for higher studies. Scholarship 
is offered for pursuing Under Graduate courses in Central Universities of India, Institutions 
accredited "A” Grade by NAAC (National Assessment and Accreditation Council) and 
recognized by University Grant Commission (UGC) and other Institutions covered under 
DASA (Direct Admission of Students Abroad) Scheme, National Institutes of Technology 
(NITs), Schools of Planning and Architecture (SPAs), Indian Institutes of Information 
Technology (IIITs) etc. 
Ministry offers 150 scholarships every year to the children of NRIs and PIOs/OCI 
living in 69 select countries and provides financial assistance up to US$ 4000 per annum 
towards tuition fee, admission fee and post admission services for specified undergraduate 
courses in Professional and Non-Professional courses.  
Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz (BKJ): In pursuance of an announcement made by Prime Minister 
at the 13th  PBD Convention on 08 January, 2015 in Gandhinagar, as part of efforts to 
strengthen engagement with young overseas Indians and encourage them to know more 

33 | P a g e 
 
about their country of origin, an online "Bharat ko Janiye” Quiz was organized for young 
overseas Indians (two categories i.e. PIOs and NRIs) of 18-35 years of age in 2015-16.  15 
winners (5 in each category) are invited to India tour.  
Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD): Ministry of External Affairs supports 
the diaspora to organise cultural events under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora 
(PCTD) scheme with an aim to showcase Indian culture and new initiatives & developments 
of modern India. The scheme aims to nourish and strengthen the cultural bonds between 
India and its diaspora. The projected outcome of the scheme is to reinforce the cultural 
identity of the persons of Indian origin. Under this scheme, the Ministry releases a grant to 
the Indian Mission abroad which then works together with Diaspora Associations in 
organising India-specific events aimed at strengthening the bonds of the Diaspora with 
India. 
State Outreach Programme – Videsh Sampark: The Videsh Sampark Program was 
initiated in the year 2017 which is an in depth dialogue between Ministry of External Affairs 
and the State Governments with the objective of welfare and protection of the Overseas 
Indian Community and strengthening our engagement with the Indian Diaspora.  
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD): Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is the flagship event of 
the government and is celebrated on 9th January every two years to mark the contribution of 
Overseas Indian community in the development of India. January 9 was chosen as the day to 
celebrate this occasion since it was on this day in 1915 that Mahatma Gandhi, the greatest 
Pravasi, returned to India from South Africa, led India’s freedom struggle and changed the 
lives of Indians forever.  
 Theme-based PBD Conferences are also held during the intervening period with 
participation from overseas diaspora experts, policy makers and stakeholders. These 
conventions provide a platform to the overseas Indian community to engage with the 
government and people of the land of their ancestors for mutually beneficial activities. 
These conventions are also very useful in networking among the overseas Indian community 
residing in various parts of the world and enable them to share their experiences in various 
fields.  

34 | P a g e 
 
 Ministry has also been organizing Regional Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (RPBD) to 
reach out to a vast majority of our diaspora, whom for various reasons, are unable to attend 
the main biennial event in India and benefit from its deliberations. This is in response to a 
strong and persistent demand for holding such events regionally. This has elicited 
enthusiastic support from the India Diaspora and the local Governments and have been 
highly successful.  
Global Pravasi Rista Portal: Global Pravasi Rishta portal is an online digital portal for 
connecting Diaspora (NRI, PIO and OCI) with Government of India through Embassies and 
Consulates.  It is a two way communication channel between the Government of India and 
Indian Diaspora abroad, dissemination of information, government programme to Indian 
Diaspora abroad.  RISHTA Portal has been developed by EG&IT Division. The Portal & 
Mobile App have been launched by the Hon’ble MoS (VM) on 30th December, 2020.  
Media Campaign: Ministry of External Affairs runs a media awareness campaign with the 
objective of creating wider awareness among the general public about the processes of legal 
migration, cautioning people against the illegal processes followed by fraudulent 
recruitment agencies and to provide information to emigrants/ potential emigrants to ensure 
legal, safe and orderly migration.  
2.29 Underlying the important role of Diaspora in our Soft Power and Cultural 
diplomacy, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs made the following 
submission on 20 December 2019:- 
“Indian Diaspora has been and will remain an important resource for India’s soft 
power projections and has played an important role in facilitating Indian culture and 
values abroad. In this context, the merging of the Ministry of Overseas Indians 
Affairs with the Ministry of External Affairs has allowed us to synergise such efforts 
through flagship events like the biennial Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas which has a strong 
cultural element. The Overseas Indians Affairs Division is responsible for organising 
the Know India Programme which introduces new India to young persons of Indian 
origin who have never seen their ancestral homeland. 51 such editions have been 
organised with the participation of about 2000 diaspora. We help PIOs in tracing 
their roots and knowing more about the culture they came from and we support 
commemorative monuments of plaques in countries which have sizeable population 
of PIOs, such as Mauritius, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago.   

35 | P a g e 
 
The Ministry has also built Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra in New Delhi in 2016 
to provide a permanent venue for events that allow us to showcase our culture 
through the medium of the NRI and the PIO worldwide.  
 The Diaspora assists in submission of posts in multiple ways including 
through their support for our cultural troops by organising events or festivals in 
conjunction with our Missions in foreign countries and acting as goodwill 
Ambassadors to build better understanding of Indian civilization worldwide. We 
attach great importance to the services that our diaspora renders as partner of MEA 
in promoting cultural diplomacy.”     
2.30 The presence of an extensive and vibrant Indian Diaspora abroad with their 
growing political and economic profile has emerged as a unique soft power asset of the 
country. The Indian Diaspora has emerged as a major partner in promotion of 
cultural diplomacy in their respective countries. While noting the recognition gained 
by our diasporic communities in recent years, the Committee feel that there is a strong 
need for their strategic engagement in advancing a positive narrative about India and 
her global image. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should put in place a mechanism for proactive interaction with Indian Diaspora in the 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad and through designated events solicit their feedback and 
suggestions for better engagement with the host country on regular basis.  
(Recommendation No. 14) 
III.  Role of Tourism 
2.31 Appreciating the role that tourism plays in developing people to people connect, the 
Ministry of Tourism engages in global print, electronic (including Incredible India website) 
and social media and online media campaigns in important and potential markets overseas, 
under the “Incredible India” brand, to promote various tourism destinations and products of 
the country. 
2.32 The promotional activities include outdoor advertising, participation in travel fairs 
and exhibitions; organizing road shows, Know India seminars & workshops; organizing and 
supporting Indian food and cultural festivals; publication of brochures; offering joint 
advertising and brochure support and inviting media personalities, tour operators and 
opinion makers to visit the country under the Hospitality Programme of the Ministry. The 
theme around these keeps changing to showcase the different products of India. 

36 | P a g e 
 
2.33 Furthermore, India Tourism offices in the overseas markets regularly participate in a 
number of travel & tourism fairs / exhibitions / expos wherein amongst other tourist 
attractions, India’s Buddhist sites are promoted to the visitors. The Ministry during the year 2018-2019 also organised Incredible India Road shows in various countries to promote tourism to India’s Buddhist Circuits viz Myanmar, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand, South Korea, China, 
Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand. 
2.34 The Ministry of tourism also enters into Agreements/ Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoUs) with various countries as an ongoing process in the field of tourism 
cooperation. The main objective of such Agreements / MoUs signed by the Ministry of 
Tourism is primarily to promote tourism between both sides. The important components of 
the Agreements / MoUs include exchange of information and data related to tourism, 
cooperation between tourism stakeholders including hotels& Tour operators, exchange of 
visits of Tour Operators/Media/Opinion Makers for promotion of two way tourism, exchange programmes for cooperation in Human Resource Development, exchange of experience in the areas of promotion, marketing, destination development and management, participation in 
travel fairs/exhibitions in each other's country etc. 
2.35 The Ministry of Tourism has identified Wellness and Medical Tourism as a niche 
tourism product. Medical tourism is becoming a popular option for tourists across the globe. 
Medical tourism is an attempt to attract medical tourists by deliberately promoting its 
medical and healthcare facilities. India is emerging as a preferred country for medical 
treatments due to advanced quality healthcare, affordable costs, lesser waiting time & easy 
medical visa process. India's medical& wellness tourism potential is  also  showcased  
during  the  Road Shows. Accordingly, Yoga & Ayurveda is actively promoted by the 
overseas India. 
2.36 The Ministry of Tourism, with the view to create awareness about India’s 
Buddhist Circuit /Pilgrimage and to enhance foreign tourist traffic to Buddhist sites in India, 
regularly undertakes promotional activities in potential overseas markets. The Ministry 
regularly organises the International Buddhist Conclave (IBC). The 6th International 
Buddhist Conclave (IBC) was held from September 23-26, 2018 in Delhi and Ajanta with site visit to Bodhgaya, Rajgir and Nalada in Bihar and Sarnath in Uttar Pradesh. Over 200 

37 | P a g e 
 
Buddhist Scholars, opinion makers, Buddhist Tour Operators, etc. from overseas participated in the event. Japan was the Partner country at the 6
th
 IBC. The 7th International Buddhist 
Conclave is scheduled to be organized in the last quarter of 2020. Dates and venue for the 
same is being finalized. As per the announcement made by Hon'ble PM of India at 4th 
BIMSTEC Summit in August 2018, countries in the BIMSTEC grouping will be the focus 
countries in the 7th IBC. 
2.37 Short film on Lord Buddha are screened during the travel shows and the same is 
screened during Road shows, Know India Seminars and other India promotional events organized by India Tourism offices in association with the Indian Missions. Know India 
Seminars were organized by India Tourism Offices in Singapore and Japan in various cities for promotion Buddhist sites in India in South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, China, Malaysia & 
Vietnam. Buddhist sites creatives are being used as part of Incredible India2.0 campaign in 
the Buddhist source markets such as China, Japan, Korea etc. 
 
2.38 Under the Champion Sector Scheme, Marketing & Promotion for Buddhist 
circuits in overseas markets shall be taken up through dedicated media campaigns to promote 
the Buddhist Heritage of India in the leading source markets for the Buddhist sector which 
are China, Thailand, Myanmar, Japan, Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, S.Korea, Taiwan, 
Malaysia, Singapore, Laos, Taiwan. 
 
2.39 Highlighting the instrumental role of tourism in projecting India’s soft power abroad, 
the representatives of the Ministry of Tourism on 7 January, 2020 stated: 
“Sir, there has been focused attention to the tourism sector by the Government with 
focus on creating excellent infrastructure in tourist places and promoting it across the 
world. Incredible India logo which had been started in 2002 was relaunched as 
Incredible India II in 2017. We took various steps of deepening our website, coming 
on the social media and online platforms to promote the tourism opportunities of the 
country. 
The major area of focus of tourism is on tourist related spaces of cultural 
heritage, natural diversity, historical knowledge and practices in the field of yoga, 
Ayurveda as also the luxury experiential opportunities. The details will come in the 
presentation. So, I will not repeat it. But I would like to mention that we have eight 

38 | P a g e 
 
offices in foreign countries which work in close cooperation with Indian Missions 
abroad.” 
2.40 The Committee are aware that tourism is a key indicator of a country’s soft 
power capital. They are given to understand that the Ministry of Tourism with eight 
offices worldwide has been collaborating with MEA and other Line Ministries for 
showcasing tourist destination and products of the country. To promote tourism, 
various efforts have also been made viz, launching of the ‘Incredible India’ campaign, 
participation in tourism fairs/exhibitions/expos/road shows, signing of 
Agreements/Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with countries, identifying 
wellness and medical tourism areas, spreading awareness about Buddhist 
Circuit/Pilgrimage, and so on. India’s age old Indian philosophy of ‘Atithidevo Bhava’ 
clubbed with immense potential in tourism sector, the Committee are confident that 
India’s global outreach is bound to escalate. The Committee are also elated to note that 
the Incredible India campaign has been effective in promoting Brand India and there 
have been regular informative posts and updates on the official social media platforms. 
The Committee feel that there is still a need to increase the number of tourism offices 
abroad and adopt country-specific approach for promotional activities. The 
Committee therefore urge the Government to come up with proposals incorporating 
feedback from all types of travelers starting from backpackers to high end tourists in 
evolving country specific approach.  
(Recommendation No. 15) 
2.41 The Committee find that in our country the differential pricing exists for entry 
tickets to historical monuments in the country. While understanding that the earnings 
from foreign tourists is a major source of revenue for the Government, they are of the 
view that such differential pricing leads to a loss of large segment of foreign travelers. 
Moreover, in a globalized world the differential pricing for citizens and foreigners is 
unnecessary and hence the Committee desire that the pricing system may be re-visited. 
The Committee also desire that adequate infrastructure and public transportation be 
created around tourist hubs and heritage sites and creation of a common tourist passes 
for entry to multiple heritage sites, as prevalent in most European countries, may be 
explored to streamline the process and avoid long queues at sites. 

39 | P a g e 
 
 (Recommendation No. 16) 
2.42 The Committee observe that religious tourism and medical tourism have 
emerged as areas with immense tourism potential. As an ancient civilization and a land 
of many religions, India has been cashing on this potential. The Committee have been 
informed that to create awareness about India’s Buddhist Circuit/ Pilgrimage and 
attract foreign tourist to Buddhist sites in India, the International Buddhist Conclave 
(IBC) is being organized regularly by the Government. The Committee also note that 
under the Champion Sector Scheme, marketing & promotion for Buddhist circuits in overseas markets is also taken up through dedicated media campaign. The Committee are also pleased to observe that India is emerging as a preferred country for medical 
treatments due to its advanced quality healthcare, affordable costs, lesser waiting time 
& easy medical visa process. The Committee feel that there should be a consistent and 
comprehensive focus on these emerging and promising arenas of tourism in India. 
They, therefore, recommend that Government should adopt a multi-pronged approach 
to capitalize on India’s potential as a hub for religious and medical tourism by building 
requisite infrastructure and skilled expertise. The Ministry of Tourism may be 
directed to issue written and online material/brochures on medical tourism and 
religious tourism in all the Missions/Posts abroad for enhanced promotional activities 
in these areas.  
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
IV. Role of Parliamentary Democracy 
2.43 India’s vibrant parliamentary democracy, multi-party-political system and orderly 
change of Government through regular peaceful elections have significantly enhanced 
India’s standing and profile globally. India is held in great esteem worldwide as the world’s 
largest democracy. 
2.44 On being asked about the manner in which our Parliamentary Democracy has helped 
in enhancing India’s standing and image on global platform, the Ministry stated that our 
vibrant parliamentary democracy, multi-party political system and orderly change of 
government through regular peaceful elections have significantly enhanced India’s standing 

40 | P a g e 
 
and profile globally. India is held in great esteem worldwide as the world’s largest 
democracy. ITEC scholarships cover good governance, parliamentary practices and election 
management.  In this direction, MEA is working closely with Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha 
Secretariats and the Election Commission in terms of promoting democracy as India’s 
strength. The training programmes hosted by the Parliamentary Research and Training 
Institutes for Democracies (formerly known as Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and 
Training) of Lok Sabha Secretariat are extremely useful instruments. The Ministry also 
actively supports and facilitates regular goodwill exchange of visits by parliamentarians. 
ICCR’s Distinguished and Academic Visitors Programmes are also designed to expose high 
profile foreign dignitaries to, inter alia, the vibrant functioning of India’s democracy at the 
grassroots level.  
 
2.45 On being asked about the democracy as a soft power tool, the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs on 26 August 2021 submitted: 
“On vibrant democracy, the democratic credentials of ours is one of our strongest 
characteristics.  In fact, one of the few reasons why people look up to us is the fact 
that we are a thriving democracy despite the challenging conditions that we have 
gone through.  We have been able to build on it.  We did last year and we are 
continuing to do series of lectures in different places on democracy issues.  We have 
been talking to Parliament to do more friendship society actions.  We are talking to 
Members of Parliament and others.  I know the Members of Parliament who have 
gone to deliver democracy lectures in different places.  We need to build it up much 
more.  There is a UN Democracy Fund.  There are democracy institutions across the 
world.  We need to interact with them.  We are putting in place our policy to actually 
do much more on this front.  Currently, what is happening in our borders makes it 
imperative that we use this democracy aspect of our soft power in a much more 
comprehensive way. 
 
2.46 With regard to initiative of Democracy Network programme, the representative of 
the Ministry of External Affairs testified on 31 January 2022 and stated: 
“ICCR has taken new initiatives. The next generation Democracy Network 
Programme has brought and continues to bring young leaders to expose them to the 
Indian democratic system, its rich heritage, and new policies of India on Education 
and International Relations including visits to Parliament and State Assemblies are 
being facilitated. ICCR has hosted first inaugural batch of young leaders consisting 

41 | P a g e 
 
delegates from eight countries, namely, Bhutan, Jamaica, Poland, Malaysia, Sweden, 
Sri Lanka, Tanzania, and Uzbekistan who visited India in the month of November 
and interacted with our Parliamentarians as well as visited the tourist places such as 
Delhi, Agra and Gujarat.” 
 
2.47 India’s branding as the ‘world’s largest democracy’ has immense global appeal. 
As a vibrant parliamentary democracy with multi-party-political system ensuring 
smooth transfer of power through regular peaceful elections, India has been held in 
great esteem across the globe. The Committee note that MEA is working closely with 
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats and the Election Commission in the task of 
promoting democracy as India’s strength. The Ministry also actively supports and 
facilitates regular goodwill exchange visits by Parliamentarians. ICCR’s Next 
Generation Democracy Network Programme is another avenue that helps young 
leaders to witness India’s democratic system and its rich heritage. The Committee, 
however, feel that there is tremendous scope to further leverage our democratic 
credential as a soft power tool and hence, the Ministry should work closely with the 
Parliament Secretariat and Election Commission towards this end and make them an 
inclusive part of goodwill, exchange visits and interactions.  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
V. Role of Yoga 
2.48 Yoga has gained admiration and captured peoples’ imagination across the world, and 
thus has become a source of India’s soft power. When asked about the initiatives taken to 
promote yoga as an instrument of India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy, the Ministry 
stated that in order to institutionalize the teaching of Yoga overseas, ICCR established the 
Indo-Turkmenistan Centre for Yoga and Traditional Medicine in Ashgabat in July 2015 and 
the India-China Yoga College at Yunnan Minzu University, Kunming, China in November 
2015. It has deployed Yoga teachers in most of the Indian Missions and Posts. In year 2018, 
ICCR initiated promotion of intellectual and academic aspects of Yoga practices through its 
flagship annual International Conference on Yoga. The first Yoga Conference was 
organized in New York and the second in London in June 2018 and 2019 respectively. 
Ministry of AYUSH have signed 25 Country to Country MOUs, 14 MoUs have been signed 

42 | P a g e 
 
for collaborative research with Universities and 37 AYUSH Information Cells in different 
countries have been established. 
 
2.49 At the behest of PM Narendra Modi, the United Nations General Assembly declared 
June 21st as the International Day of Yoga in 2014. The Ministry of AYUSH is the nodal 
Ministry for celebration of International Day of Yoga and has been celebrating IDY since 
last five years at national as well as at international level for promotion of Yoga. IDY is 
celebrated with special separate theme in each year, like Yoga for Peace, Yoga for Heart. 
Indian embassies at various countries are encouraged to celebrate the IDY in respective 
counties and necessary technical support in the form of Yoga expert, yoga material is 
provided by Ministry. Ministry of AYUSH arranges a Yoga conference in collaboration 
with College of Medicine (UK) every year. 
2.50 During the course of oral evidence on 26 August 2020, the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs clarified on the issue of certification of yoga institutes and 
teachers as under:  
“Right now, we are working with the Ministry of AYUSH to have a yoga 
certification essentially to look at the world and to make sure that organisations 
which are teaching yoga and people who are teaching yoga are certified that they are 
teaching authentic Indian yoga. This yoga certification is the best way to get your 
soft power across because like others do – Italian cuisine you have a soft power, 
certificate saying that this is authentic Italian cuisine – or if there are branding done, 
the branding needs to be done to ensure that the yoga that is spread across the world, 
people know that it is authentic Indian yoga. So, a certification process is being put 
in place. I am hopeful that in the next one or two months we will launch it; it has 
been done in a soft way in Japan and in one or two countries. But we will have 
certification agencies across the world certified through the Yoga Certification 
Board that the person who is teaching yoga is a trained yoga teacher and the institute 
which is teaching yoga can actually teach authentic Indian yoga. For that, we are 
putting this certification process in place.” 
 
2.51 Yoga is the ancient Indian practice of physical and mental well being. The 
Committee are pleased to note that The United Nations General Assembly declared 
21st June as the International Day of Yoga (IDY). This global recognition underscores 
the immense popularity of Yoga and manifests its effectiveness as a soft power tool. 

43 | P a g e 
 
The Ministry of AYUSH is the nodal Ministry for International Day of Yoga 
celebrations and has been celebrating IDY since last five years at national as well as at 
international level. The Committee note that in order to institutionalize the teaching of 
Yoga overseas, ICCR has established the Indo-Turkmenistan Centre for Yoga and 
Traditional Medicine in Ashgabat and the India-China Yoga College at Yunnan Minzu 
University, China. In view of the surge in yoga teaching and centres across the globe, 
the Committee would recommend that the Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with 
MEA constitute a Yoga Certification Board for certifying Indian yogic practices and 
therapies. Collaboration with the Indian Diaspora should also be encouraged to 
disseminate yoga training abroad, in regions where it is not yet popular. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
VI. Role of Ayurveda and Traditional Medicine 
2.52 The Ministry of AYUSH undertakes various activities and measures at international 
level with the mandate to promote/ popularize AYUSH systems (Ayurveda, Yoga, 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homeopathy) of medicine across the globe. 
These include: 
(i) International Collaborations 
Country to Country MoUs 22 
Undertaking collaborative research  21 
Setting up of AYUSH Chairs 13 
Establishment of AYUSH Information Cells32 in 29 countries
AYUSH center of excellence 01 
 
a) Country to Country MoUs — As of now, Ministry of AYUSH has signed 22 Country to 
Country MoUs for Cooperation in field of Traditional Medicine and Homoeopathy with 
Nepal, Bangladesh. Hungary, Trinidad & Tobago, Malaysia, WHO. Mauritius, Mongolia, 
Turkmenistan. Myanmar, Germany (Joint declaration). Iran, Sao Tome & Principe, 
Equatorial Guinea, Cuba, Colombia, Japan (MoC). Bolivia, Gambia, Republic of Guinea, 
China and St. Vincent and Grenadines 
 
 

44 | P a g e 
 
b) Collaboration with WHO (World Health Organization): 
 A Project Collaboration Agreement (PCA) was signed between WHO and Ministry 
of AYUSH on 13 May, 2016 for cooperation on promoting the quality, safety and 
effectiveness of service provision in traditional and complementary medicine 
between WHO and Ministry of AYUSH. Under the above mentioned umbrella MoU 
of WHO was signed between WHO and Ministry of AYUSH on 27.12.2017 on 
Cooperation on integration of traditional and complementary medicine into health 
care system for development of WHO terminology in Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and 
WHO publication on standard terminology in Ayurveda, Unani, and Siddha. 
  Ministry of AYUSH has signed a Donor Agreement with WHO on 05.07.2019 to 
develop android based application on m-Yoga to demonstrate Common Yoga 
Protocol (CYP) and for global use for correct practices of yoga under Be Healthy, 
BeMobile initiative of the WHO and the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU). 
 A Donor Agreement between the World Health Organization (WHO) and The 
Ministry Of AYUSH to a financial contribution to WHO towards Project 
'Development a Second Module in the Traditional Medicine (TM) Chapter of the 
International Classification of Diseases -11 Revision (lCD-Il)' is finalized and is 
proposed to he signed in January 2020 at Geneva, Switzerland. 
c)  Undertaking collaborative research :As of now, 21 MoUs for undertaking 
collaborative research in AYUSH systems of medicine have been signed with various 
foreign universities/ institutes in countries such as Germany, United Kingdom, Canada, 
WHO, Geneva, United States, Argentina, Israel, Canada, Brazil, Australia, Austria and 
Tajikistan. 
d)  Setting up of AYUSH Chairs: Thirteen (13) MoUs have been signed for setting up 
of AYUSH Chairs with reputed foreign institutions/ universities in Hungary, Trinidad & 
Tobago, South Africa, Thailand, Russia Indonesia Slovenia, Armenia, Latvia, Argentina., 
Malaysia, Bangladesh and Mauritius. 

45 | P a g e 
 
e)   Establishment of AYUSH Information Cells: Ministry of AYIJSH has established 
32 AYUSH Information Cells in 29 countries in foreign countries under the aegis of Indian 
Embassies! Missions and Cultural Centers set up by ICCR or at a venue suggested by the 
Indian Mission to take up awareness building and disseminating authentic information about 
AYUSIH systems of medicine. 
 
 (ii) Central Sector Scheme for promotion of International Cooperation  
2.53 The Ministry developed a Central Sector Scheme for promotion of International 
Cooperation with the mandate to promote and strengthen awareness about AYUSH Systems 
of Medicine; to facilitate international promotion, development and recognition of AYUSH 
Systems in foreign countries; to establish AYUSH centres in foreign countries; to support 
international exchange of experts and information; to give boost to AYUSH products in 
International market and to establish AYUSH Academic Chairs in foreign countries etc. 
 
2.54 Under this scheme Ministry of AYUSH, undertakes various measures to promote/ 
popularize AYUSH systems of medicine across the globe. Some of the components of the 
scheme are as below: 
 Ministry of AYUSH deputes of experts and officersto foreign countries for 
participation in regional or international meetings, conferences, training 
programmes, seminars and also to meet specific requirement for deputing experts on 
special assignment of the Government of India for promotion & propagation of 
AYUSI-I Systems. 
 Financial support is provided to AYVSH experts for presentation of AYUSH related 
scientific research papers in international conferences, workshops. Seminar etc. 
 Incentive is provided to AYUSH drug manufacturers, entrepreneurs, AYUSH 
institutions etc. for participation in international exhibitions, trade fairs, road shows 
etc. 
 Incentives are provided to AYUSH drug manufacturers for Market Authorization/ 
registration of AYUSH products with USFDA/ EMEA/ UKEA/ MHRA/ NHPD 
(Canada)/ IGA and other international regulatory agencies. etc. abroad. So far 33 

46 | P a g e 
 
products (Unani and Ayurveda) have been registered in 05 countries namely Kenya, 
USA, Russia, Latvia and Canada. 
 Incentives are provided for participation/ organization of International exhibitions/ 
conferences/ Workshops/ Seminars/ road shows/ trade fairs. etc. in India and abroad 
by the Ministry of AYUSFI through Indian Mission/ CII/ FICCI/ ITPO/ 
ASSOCHAM/ Pharmexcil, etc.  
 There is a provision of providing financial support for organization of International 
conferences/ workshops/ seminars, etc. in India on AYUSH Systems by State 
Governments/ Universities/ eminent institutions or organizations etc. 
 There is a provision of financial support for strengthening of Health Centre(s)/ 
Institution(s) in the foreign host country. 
  Ministry of AYUSH under its Fellowship Scheme extends financial support to the 
eligible foreign nationals for undertaking Undergraduate (UG), Post graduate (PG) 
and Ph.D. courses in premier Institutes in India. 104 scholarships are offered every 
year to the eligible foreign nationals from 98 countries. Students from countries like 
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Russia, Iran, Croatia, Malaysia, USA, Japan, etc. get 
admission in various institutes offering courses in AYUSH systems in India. 
 
2.55 Other International Activities undertaken by Ministry of AYUSH are as follows: 
 Deputation of AYUSH experts in Malaysia under ITEC scheme- 
  Establishment of A Panchakarma Centre in Cuba  
 Organization of Symposium/Conference on "Healthy Ageing through Ayurveda & 
Yoga" in Japan in 2019. 
 Organization of  a "Workshop on Traditional and Complementary Medicine" for the 
participants from Mekong-Ganga countries at All India Institute of Ayurveda 
(AIIA), New Delhi and National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur, Rajasthan from 
22 October 2019 to 25 October, 2019 
  Ministry of AYUSH has been providing technical support to Indian Missions abroad 
for celebration of 21 June as International day of Yoga across the globe. 
 Ministry of AYUSI-I has proposed to establish a BIMSTEC Ayurveda and 
Traditional Medicine University (BATMU) in the near future to act as a model 

47 | P a g e 
 
institution in the region and help the Member States to develop their own Ayurveda 
and Traditional Medicine Colleges with affiliation to the above University for a 
sustainable capacity development in Traditional Medicine among the Member 
States.  
 Setting up of center of excellence for Ayurveda& Yoga in UK:  
 Ministry of AYUSH is interacting and collaborating with various International fora 
like BRICS. SAARC, SCO. BIMSTEC. WIPO, IBSA etc to promote AYUSH 
education, practices of AYUSH systems and trade of AYUSH products. 
2.56 India exports AYUSH and herbal products worldwide to about 100 countries and 
majority of our exports are in the form of value-added extracts of medicinal plants (herbal 
products) and in the form of dietary supplements and nutraceuticals. However, Ayurvedic 
products are still not recognized in foreign countries. On being asked about the steps we are 
taking to tackle this issue, the Ministry of AYUSH stated that under Central Sector Scheme 
for promotion of International cooperation, incentives are provided to AYUSH drug 
manufacturers for Market Authorization/ registration of AYUSH products with USFDA/ 
EMEA/ UK-MHRA/ NHPD (Canada)/ TGA and other international regulatory agencies, 
etc. abroad. As per the updated information, so far more than 50 products (Unani and 
Ayurveda) have been registered in 08 countries namely Kenya, USA, Russia, Latvia, 
Canada, Oman, Tajikistan and Sri Lanka under the scheme of the Ministry. 
2.57 To enhance the trade of AYUSH product, efforts are being made for mutual 
recognition of 
pharmacopoeias and formularies with other countries. Recognition of 
Pharmacopeia will facilitate trade of AYUSH products as medicines which are currently 
being exported as dietary supplements and nutraceuticals etc.  
2.58 The system wise exports data of AYUSH products (Pharmexcil basket) during the 
last three years (as provided by Pharmexcil) is as below: 
India’s Export of AYUSH Products during last three years (sorted by values) 
  2016-17 2017-18 201819  
M CodePRODUCT DESCRIPTION USD MnINR CrUSD 
Mn 
INR  
Cr 
USD Mn 
INR Cr 

48 | P a g e 
 
30049011Medicaments  of Ayurvedic 
system 
105.60 708,20 126.52 815.62 128.84 901.54 
30039011Medicaments  of Ayurvedic 
system 
15.68 105.11 14.24 91.79 14.26 99.55 
35079071Papain, pure (pharmaceutical 
grade) 
0.64 4.29 1.07 6,87 1.50 10.47 
30049014Homeopathic Medicine 1,01 6.79 1.38 8.93 1.32 9.16 
30049012Medicaments of Unani system 0.29 1.94 0,35 2.26 0.55 3.88 
30049013Medicants of Siddha system 0.13 0.85 0.33 2.11 0.37 2.S6 
30039014Homeopathic Medicine 0.28 1.89 0.38 2.47 0.30 2.04 
30039012Medicaments of Unani system 0.01 0.07 0.09 0.61 0.06 0.40 
30039013Medicants of Siddha system 0.02 0.16 0.02 0.12 0.02 0.13 
 Grand Total 123.67  829.30 144.38 930.77 147.22 1029.73
 
AYUSH products are exported to 100 plus countries and these products are exported as 
AYUSH medicines to countries where it is recognised as system of medicine in the 
importing country to name a few, Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Malaysia etc. 
Wherever it is not recognised, these AYUSH products are suitably modified and exported as 
per the requirements and classification of the importing country. While some countries have 
classified these products as Dietary supplements and some as Nutraceuticals and herbal 
products. Currently, these products are being exported based on the importing country 
classification and sometimes under the chapter 30, and 21 alternatively, and Dietary 
supplements, Nutraceuticals, health supplements are not defined or given separate HS 
codes/sub classification for providing the comparative data. 
2.59 The total expenditure incurred for AYUSH promotional activities at international 
level during last three years and current year is as under: 
                                        (Amount in lakhs) 
Financial 
Year 
AllocationExpenditure
2016-17 1400 1394 

49 | P a g e 
 
2017-18 1634 1617 
2018-19 1581 1568 
         2019-201600 1447 
 
2.60 On the Committee’s query, the Ministry of AYUSH furnished the List of countries 
where Ayurveda is recognized as a system. Ayurveda is recognized in Nepal, Bangladesh, 
Pakistan, Sri-Lanka, UAE, Colombia, Malaysia, Switzerland, South Africa, Cuba, 
Tanzania. Romania, Hungary, Latvia, Serbia and Slovenia are 5 countries of EU, where 
Ayurvedic treatment is regulated, however, profession is not regulated. 
2.61 During the course of evidence on 20 December 2019,the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs underscored the issue of pharmacopeia, the stated : 
“I completely agree with your second suggestion, Madam. In fact, that is something 
which we have lost out on. At the moment, we are working very closely with 
AYUSH to push the AYUSH centres abroad. The main issue is pharmacopeia. 
Unfortunately, Indian traditional medicine, unlike Chinese medicine, does not have a 
recognized pharmacopeia which allows western medical regulatory authorities to 
judge them as medicines. Without that happening, they would not let import of 
ayurvedic formulations or drugs or whatever you wish to call it into their country. I 
think, AYUSH Ministry and Department of Biotechnology and others are working 
hard to get that pharmacopoeia. Once that pharmacopoeia is available, I am quite 
convinced that we would follow the same path as the Chinese in terms of 
acceptability because there is acceptability in the West for alternative medicines. The 
problem lies in the fact these formulations cannot be imported because they are 
going on the allopathic path and judge all formulations on that basis; and we do not 
have a scientific basis for this. This is something that is very much uppermost in our 
minds. We are working with the Ministry of AYUSH in this regard.” 
2.62 On the Committee’s specific query about any plan or legislations pending with 
foreign countries for having a recognized pharmacopeia for traditional Indian medicines 
which allows western medical regulatory authorities to judge these as medicines, the 
Ministry of External Affairs stated that setting up of AYUSH centres overseas is within the 
mandate of the Ministry of AYUSH. MEA facilitates establishing these centres or 
negotiations on various legislations with regard to promotion of Indian traditional medicines 
overseas through its Missions and Posts. Ministry of AYUSH has informed that presently 32 

50 | P a g e 
 
AYUSH Information Cells are functional in 29 countries and the following are the new 
initiatives: 
• MoU was signed between All Indian Institute of Ayurveda, M/o AYUSH and 
College of Medicine (UK) in April 2018 for establishing of a Center of Excellence in 
London for providing Ayurveda treatment and diet management through Ayurveda 
& Yoga etc.  
• Ministry of AYUSH targets to open two more Centres of Excellence in Mauritius 
and Morocco in near future. 
• Ministry of AYUSH is in negotiations with different countries for recognition of 
Ayurveda as a system of medicine and adopting Ayurvedic pharmacopeia of India. 
2.63 The Committee note that the Ministry of AYUSH undertakes various activities 
and measures at international level with the mandate to promote/ popularize AYUSH 
systems (Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homeopathy) 
of medicine across the globe. These include signing of country to country MoUs, 
collaboration with World Health Organization, undertaking collaborative research, 
setting up of AYUSH chairs, establishment of AYUSH information Cells, Central 
Sector Scheme for promotion of international cooperation and so on. The Committee 
are of the firm view that Ayurveda, considering the popularity it has already gained 
has the power to become a prominent tool of soft power across the world. Taking cues 
from Yoga, the Committee desire that the Government should give diplomatic push to 
Ayurveda in getting global recognition. The Ministry should facilitate to open more 
and more AYUSH centres overseas in a strategic and planned manner. 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
2.64 The Committee note that India exports AYUSH and herbal products worldwide 
to about 100 countries and majority of our exports are in the form of value-added 
extracts of medicinal plants (herbal products) and in the form of dietary supplements 
and nutraceuticals. However, Ayurvedic products are still not recognized in foreign 
countries. The Ministry has informed that Ayurveda is recognized in eleven countries, 
namely, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri-Lanka, UAE, Colombia, Malaysia, 
Switzerland, South Africa, Cuba, Tanzania. In five European Union countries- 

51 | P a g e 
 
Romania, Hungary, Latvia, Serbia and Slovenia Ayurvedic treatment is regulated. The 
Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of External Affairs that Ayurveda does 
not have a recognized pharmacopeia and therefore it is being exported as dietary 
supplements and nutraceuticals, etc. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Government should make concerted efforts to get recognition of Ayurveda as a system 
of medicine and adopting pharmacopeia of India so that it can be exported as 
medicine. The Committee would like to be kept informed about the progress made in 
this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
VII. Role of Sports and Youth Exchange Programmes 
2.65 With the changing understanding of the term “Culture” MEA and ICCR have 
broadened the horizon of projecting broader spectrum of Indian Culture for soft power. One 
such area is sports, and cricket in particular. These are coordinated with the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports at various levels. Mutual visits by youth are another dimension of 
soft power that Government is focusing upon. India has an MoU to annually exchange 200 
youth between India and China In 2019-20 MEA/ICCR facilitated inbound youth 
delegations from Vietnam, Tajikistan and Portugal and organized the Youth Pravasi 
Bharatiya Diwas in Varanasi in January 2019. 
 
2.66 An objective of the National Youth Policy, 2014 is to create an International 
perspective in the youth and to involve them in promoting peace and understanding. To 
achieve this objective, a program for the International Exchange of Youth Delegations has 
been conceived by the Department of Youth Affairs. Under this programme, exchange of 
Youth Delegations with friendly countries is taken up on reciprocal basis for promoting 
exchange of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of different countries and also to 
provide exposure and promote international perspective. The Department has signed 19 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with different countries on Youth Exchange. Of 
these, regular exchange programmes are being organized with 13 countries namely China, 
Bahrain, Kyrgyzstan, Maldives, Nepal, Palestine, Portugal, Russia, South Korea, Sri Lanka, 
Tajikistan, Tunisia and Vietnam. The list of MoUs signed and the status of their 

52 | P a g e 
 
implementation is at Annexure-II. 
 
2.67 Apart from the above the following Youth Exchange programmes are also been 
organized by Department of Youth Affairs:- 
(a)  Exchange of 100-member Youth Delegations with China has been continuing 
since 2006 on the strength of Joint Statement during the visit of Chinese President in 
2006 (with exception that during 2011, 500-member delegations were exchanged). 
In the Joint Statement issued on 19.09.2014 on the occasion of visit of Chinese 
President, it has been decided to exchange 200- member youth delegations from 
2015 to 2019. On the occasion of the 70thanniversary of bilateral Diplomatic 
relations with China, it has been decided in consultation with the Ministry of 
External Affairs that during the year 2020, a 500-Youth delegation will be 
exchanged from each side.  
(b)  A 100-member youth delegation from Bangladesh has been visiting India since 
2012. No youth delegation from Indian side is sent to Bangladesh. This is a joint 
programme of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Ministry of External Affairs; 
(c)  Youth Exchange Programme with Maldives are also continuing with Maldives 
since 2016 on the basis of MoU signed by Department of Sports;  
(d)  On the recommendation of MEA and in pursuance of the meeting held by a 
delegation with Hon’bleMoS(IC), YAS in 2017, a 22-member Youth delegation 
from Uzbekistan visited India from 12-20 December 2017. Reciprocal visit of the 
Indian Youth delegation is expected in 2019.  
(e)  Delegations are also sent to participate in “the Ship for World Youth Leaders 
Programme” organized by the Government of Japan as and when invitations are 
received. 
2.68 Highlighting the importance of Sports, the representative of the Ministry of External 
Affairs submitted as under on 20 December 2019: 
“One of the new areas of soft power projection is sports, cricket in particular. Here 
too, the MEA is playing its role abroad. During the Prime Minister’s visit to 
Maldives, we agreed to the request to train their cricketers through the BCCI and to 
build a new cricket stadium in Male. We have also trained cricketers from 

53 | P a g e 
 
Afghanistan and built stadiums in Logar, Kandahar, and Balkh provinces which have 
earned immense goodwill for India among the local populations and we have 
completed two major sports complexes in different parts of Bhutan.” 
2.69  The representative of the Ministry further added: 
“Basically, world-over sports are done through the National Sports Federations and 
the International Sports Organizations. The Government only provides financial 
support and diplomatic support in terms of linkages with our diplomatic Missions 
outside India. Now, the focus is on organizing more and more events in India. The 
Ministry of External Affairs received some requests from Maldives, Bhutan and 
some other countries for arranging training of athletes in India. The Ministry of 
External Affairs is working on it, and whatever request comes, we are 
accommodating them in our training facilities. The expenditure on receiving them 
presently is very small. So, the Sports Authority of India, from its available budget, 
has been able to arrange for it. But if the activity is to increase, then we need to look 
for more resources.” 
2.70 The Committee note that Sports and Youth Exchange is another dimension of 
soft power that requires focused attention. As informed, National Sports Federations 
and the International Sports Organizations organize sport events and the Government 
only provides financial support and diplomatic support in terms of linkages with our 
diplomatic Missions outside India. Further, the Ministry of External Affairs through 
Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) has trained athletes from Afghanistan, 
Maldives and Bhutan. As regards, projection of soft power through the Youth 
Exchanges, the Committee have been informed that in accordance with the National 
Youth Policy, 2014 the Department of Youth Affairs exchange of Youth Delegations 
with friendly countries is taken up on reciprocal basis for promoting exchange of ideas, 
values and culture amongst the youth of different countries. 
The Committee are happy to note that India is expanding its utilization of soft 
power assets by according focus on sports and youth affairs. As a country with 
enormous youth population, these two arenas look promising. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Government should appoint Youth Ambassadors to 
communicate and market Brand India across the globe. The Ministry of External 
Affairs is also exhorted to explore various options to train athletes and sportspersons 
from our neighbourhing countries as a component of our Neighbourhood First Policy. 

54 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
VIII. Role of Media and Cinema 
2.71 Indian films, with a diversity of landscape and locations have a special appeal to the 
audience across the globe. It projects India as an appealing destination for production of 
both international and domestic films. With a diverse range of production and post 
production facilities, the country offers multiple well-equipped film production hubs. India 
also has a talent pool of actors, producers, directors, writers and experienced crew including 
competent line producers across the many regional film industries. Low production and 
post-production cost and favourable Dollar-Rupee exchange rate add to the attraction.  
2.72 The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has taken the following to promote 
India’s soft power and cultural Diplomacy: 
1. Prasar Bharati has re-oriented its “DD India” channel as the English News 
Channel for the global outreach. Prasar Bharati is also proposing tie-ups with the 
international news agencies for gathering the international news for DD India. The 
efforts are on to enhance the footprint of this channel across the globe so that this 
channel is available to the intended viewers. This channel has been made available in 
South Korea on OTT platform, and in Bangladesh on DTH as per the bi-lateral 
arrangements. Prasar Bharati has made this channel available on “YouTube”, and on 
“NewsOnAir” mobile application on “Android” and “iOS” mobile platform at 
present. Prasar Bharati special correspondents in various countries cover project 
India’s soft power through their stories and ground coverage. Prasar Bharati is in the 
process of developing a global roadmap to increase the footprint of its International 
Services. 
Prasar Bharati has signed Memorandum of Understanding with Foreign 
Broadcasters that aim at enhancing the cooperation/collaboration in the broadcasting 
and related fields between the two entities. These are primarily targeted at the 
exchange of content/ programmes of mutual interest depicting culture, history, 
architecture, tourism, education, science &technology, etc. of both countries. At 
present, there are as many as 31 MoUs of co-operation and collaboration between 
Prasar Bharati and Foreign Broadcasters of other countries/agencies.  

55 | P a g e 
 
2. External Services Division of All India Radio ranks high among the external 
radio networks of the world both in reach and range covering about 100 countries in 
27 languages. External Services Division follows a composite pattern that generally 
comprise of News Bulletins, Commentaries, Currents Events and Review of the 
Indian Press. Besides Newsreel, Magazine Programmes on sports and literature, 
talks and discussions on social economic, political historical, scientific and cultural 
subjects, features on developmental activities, important events and institutions, 
classical, folk and modern music of India’s diverse regions, form a major part of 
total programme output.  
 
3. The Film Facilitation Office (FFO) acts as a single-window facilitation 
(https://ffo.gov.in/en) point for the foreign film producers as well as domestic film 
producers in assisting them to get requisite permissions to shoot in India; 
disseminates information on shooting locations and facilities available for 
production and post-production. In 2019-20, 30 foreign film shooting permissions 
have been facilitated. An ecosystem of Nodal Officers has been created across 
various State Governments in India and within key stakeholder central government 
ministries / departments to enable faster processing of permissions. 
4. The Inter-Governmental audio-visual Co-production Agreements are usually 
umbrella agreements, under which private, quasi-government or governmental 
agencies of the two countries enter into contracts to produce films together.  Such 
films are treated as national films in both countries. Co-production provides an 
opportunity to create and showcase soft power, generate employment, and, add to 
the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of both the countries. The Government of India 
has entered into Audio Visuals Co-production Treaties with 16 countries. During 
2019-20, four Audio Video projects have been granted official co-production status. 
5. A Global Media & Entertainment Summit is contemplated in 2021 so that the 
international and Indian leaders from the Film Industry, who shape the agendas 
critical to the growth and development of the Film Industry, can participate and 
collaborate, which will further consolidate India’s soft power  This summit will 

56 | P a g e 
 
feature a line-up of internationally focused discussions centred around the soft power 
of India cinema, contemporary issues that face the industry in terms of piracy, 
technological advancements and the continuing changes in audience profiles and 
consumption of cinema, backed by high-profile speakers drawn from both the 
business and creative side of the industry.  
6. India participates in prominent international film festivals, inter-alia Cannes, 
Toronto and Berlin to promote Indian films across linguistic cultural and regional 
diversity so as to forge international partnerships in the realms of distribution, 
production, filming in India, script development and technology, in order to 
accelerate the growth of film sector in India. An India Pavilion is also set-up at the 
Festivals to act as a platform to popularize Indian Cinema in overseas market and 
facilitate new business opportunities. To take advantage of availability of technicians 
and skilled professionals, international film makers are invited in India for post-
production activities and encouraged to promote collaborations for films with Indian 
production houses. 
2.73 The Publication and Print Media has taken the following initiatives:- 
(a) Mahatma Gandhi is globally recognised as an icon. Gandhiji’s 150th birth 
anniversary is being celebrated across the world through commemorative stamps, 
medallions, digital translation of his works and a musical tribute. Various events 
held across the globe were covered in collaboration with Ministry of External Affairs 
(MEA) through DD News. Publications Division’s pavilions in recent international 
book fairs have been themed on Gandhi@150: 
 Frankfurt International Book Fair 2019: Publications Division exhibited 
books on Gandhi Ji alone with other important titles. A/V display was also 
arranged. On the side-lines of India Pavilion, the young students performed 
DandiYatra to commemorate the 150th Birth Anniversary of Gandhi Ji.  
 London Book Fair 2019: Pavilion was focused on Gandhi@150 and Virtual 
Exhibition was arranged on LCD. Seminar on Making if the Collective Works of 
Mahatma Gandhi print & electronic version, was organised.  

57 | P a g e 
 
 Book Expo and New York Rights Fair 2019, held from 29-31 May 2019 at 
New York. 
(b) Facilitation of foreign journalists is an important component of influencing 
the international reportage about India. The Press Information Bureau under the 
Ministry coordinates with Ministry of External affairs and other Ministries under the 
Government of India and the State Governments to enable coverage of various 
cultural and other events by foreign journalists. 
 
2.74 The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
through Prasar Bharati, External Services Division of All India Radio, Film 
Facilitation Office, etc have been playing a prominent role in the projection of India’s 
soft power and cultural diplomacy. Positive narrative and agenda setting is one of the 
key goals of soft power diplomacy. Media can play a critical role in countering 
negative perceptions about India. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should 
spell out a Public Relations strategy to tell the Indian story in an effective and 
powerful manner. 
(Recommendation No. 23) 
2.75 The Committee note that Prasar Bharati, India’s public service 
broadcaster, in the process of developing a global outreach to increase the footprint of 
its International Services has re-oriented ‘DD India’ channel as the English news 
channel and signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with foreign broadcasters 
of other countries. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need of reorienting DD 
India further so as to make it globally relevant and influential. The Government is 
urged to come up with a plan for revamping the focus, structure and functioning of DD 
India to further enhance its global outreach and inform the Committee about the 
follow up action.  
(Recommendation No. 24) 

58 | P a g e 
 
2.76 While Indian television news may not yet have made any impact globally, the 
Hindi film industry, popularly known as Bollywood, has emerged as one of the most 
notable examples of global entertainment emanating from outside the Western world. 
The Committee are of the strong view that added emphasis needs to be given to the 
global imprint of our Cinema as an instrument of soft power while taking effective 
steps to celebrate and popularize our movies abroad, including regional cinema. The 
Film Facilitation Office may also promote our historical sites, scenic locations for 
purpose of shooting and also set up a portal about such locations national as well as 
international films. They may also give wide publicity to the single window facilitation 
for the foreign producers through our Missions/Posts abroad. 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
IX.  Education and Knowledge Sharing 
2.77 In the context of increased globalization, Knowledge sharing and education has 
emerged as a major instrument of soft power projection. The Ministry of Education is 
actively engaged in strengthening relations with other countries through educational 
cooperation and collaboration in the following ways: 
1. Bilateral Agreements: India has signed Educational Exchange Prog/ Memorandum 
Of Cooperation / Joint Declaration of Intent /Letter of Interest  with countries for 
cooperation in the field of education. Currently there are agreements with 55 
countries (Annexure II).  
2. Joint Programmes Signed Under Bilateral Agreements: These are specific 
programmes signed under the various bilateral agreements. Some  examples include 
: 
 India –Japan -The FRIENDSHIP (Future Researchers at Indian Institute of 
Technology Hyderabad to Enhance Network Development with Scholarship) 
promotes mobility of students and faculty between IITH and well reputed Japanese 
Universities. “The Project was initiated from January 2011 for a period of 8 years till 
31st March 2020. Under this program, IITH has signed MoU with more than 20 
Japanese universities and identified several thrust areas for mutual collaboration. 
IITH has three very large projects with the leading Japanese universities and industry 

59 | P a g e 
 
in ICT for disaster management, multimodal transportation and data science for 
agriculture. 
 India-US – This includes Indo-US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative  that 
started in 2009, for joint research in Energy , Sustainable Development, Climate 
Change, Environment, Education and Community Development; an annual India-US 
Higher Education Dialogue, the Raman Fellowships for Post-Doctoral Research in 
USA awarded by the University Grants Commission 
 India-Norway(INCP)- Indo-Norwegian Cooperation Programme in Higher 
Education and Research (INCP) 
 India-Germany (IGP)- The “Indo-German Partnerships in Higher 
Education” (IGP), a joint programme by the University Grants Commission (UGC) 
and the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD), to further strengthen the 
bilateral cooperation in the field of higher education between India and Germany. 
 India-Israel Joint Research Programme- ISF-UGC Joint Scientific 
Research Program aims to encourage research cooperation between Israeli and 
Indian scientists. 
 India-UK(UKIERI)- UK-India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI) 
started in April 2006 with the aim of enhancing educational linkages between India 
and the UK. 
 
2.78  The Schemes / Programmes run by the Education Ministry are as follows: 
 Study in India – Merit based admission of students from 42 African and Asian 
countries to top select Indian higher education institutions. Running since 2018. 
Nearly 4000 students have got admission to Indian institutions so far.  
 Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research Collaboration (SPARC) – 
Programme for joint research between students from higher education institutions in 
India and 28 countries with strong research culture (Annexure III). 
 Duo-India Fellowship Programme – Balanced Mobility between India and 14 
European countries to pursue joint research.  
 Global Initiative for Academic Network (GIAN) – Foreign faculty from top 
institutions come to teach at Indian universities.  

60 | P a g e 
 
 ASEAN PhD Fellowships in IITs: Under this programme, 1000 fellowships are 
awarded for ASEAN citizens to pursue the PhD programme at an IIT of their choice. 
The programme is exclusively for aspirants from ASEAN countries and in 
commemoration of the 25th anniversary of the warm and friendly ties between India 
and ASEAN. 
2.79 The higher education institutions in India sign agreements with higher education 
institutions of other countries for academic and research collaborations in various fields.  
Sl NoName of InstitutionTotal 
1 IITs 1373 
2 CUs 462 
3 NITs 119 
4 IISC Bangalore 96 
5 IISERs 90 
7 IIEST 9 
  Grand Total 2149 
 
2.80 Other Joint Initiatives include the following: 
 India-Hungary Scholarship Programme run by UGC under which scholarship is 
given to Hungarian students to study in India  
 Newton-Bhabha Programme between India and UK, for  Joint research activity. 
Sciences part of the programme is run by DST, Humanities is to be taken up by 
Ministry of Education.  
 C V Raman Fellowhip – India-US Post Doctoral Fellowship was being run by UGC 
but is  over now  
 Establishment of Guru Nanak DevJi Chairs in UK and Canada 
 Mahamana Madan Mohan Malaviya's Commonwealth Cross Border Teachers 
Chair at Banaras Hindu University 
 Support to e-Vidyabharti project (earlier known as Pan African e-network Project) 
which provides access for African students to over 500 courses in various disciplines 
including engineering and technology, education, mathematics and sciences, 
education, humanities and arts and teacher training.  

61 | P a g e 
 
 The India-Africa Institute of Educational Planning and Administration 
(IAIEPA) is a pan-African institute being established within the framework of the 
Plan of Action formulated to implement the outcomes of the First India-Africa 
Forum Summit. The Institute is being set up in Bujumbura, the capital city of the 
Republic of Burundi by National Institute of Educational Planning and 
Administration (NIEPA).  
2.81 Cooperation Through Multilateral Platforms include: 
 BRICS – BRICS Network University –A network of 60 universities, 12 from each 
BRICS member state for academic collaboration 
 G-20 – Participation in the Education Stream engagements 
 ASEAN  
 Russia India Network Universities  
 Agreement on Cooperation in Education between the Governments of the 
Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
2.82 The Scholarships offered by other countries / multilateral organizations for studying 
abroad are: 
 Commonwealth Scholarships by United Kingdom and New Zealand and some 
other commonwealth countries .  
 Scholarships offered by China, South Korea, Israel, Japan, Italy, Mexico, and Sri 
Lanka –MOE selects. 
 USIEF – Fullbright-Nehru Fellowship – Indian students go to study in  US and US 
students come to India under this  cofounded, match funding programme run by  
MEA, where MOE is involved in selection process. 
 
2.83 Externally Aided Projects/International Collaboration includes:- 
 Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme (TEQIP) 
 Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Bangkok 
 Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute (SICI)-This  is a binational organization that 
promotes understanding between India and Canada through academic activities and 
exchanges 

62 | P a g e 
 
 United States – India Educational Foundation (USIEF)- The United States – India 
Educational Foundation (USIEF) promotes mutual understanding between the 
nationals of India and the U.S. through the educational exchange of outstanding 
scholars, professionals and students. 
 Commonwealth of Learning (CoL) 
Furthermore, there has been internationalization of education under National Education Plan 
and the details are provided in Annexure IV. 
2.84 With regard to education, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs made 
the following testimony on 26 August 2020: 
“I will just mention three points about education as it has already been covered. One 
is common admission portal. We are working out with ICCR that all admission to 
foreign students in India could be through a portal. Either ICCR portal can be 
expanded or that of the Ministry of Education. Both can also be merged and there 
will be one common portal.  
 Secondly, the very important thing we are lacking in education and we have 
planned to have in this year (2020-21), that in top 20 universities attracting foreign 
students will have a foreign students office. Otherwise, people complain to us that 
they have to go to police station for registering; then they have to look for 
accommodation, they have to go for visa renewal etc. So, one foreign student office 
will take care of all these things for foreign students.    
 Thirdly the most important things which we are now doing with ICCR is to 
have alumni connect because many of the ambassadors, Prime Ministers of the 
neighbouring countries have studied in BHU. If we connect with them well, it could 
be an important input for our strategic relations with those countries. For example, In 
Bhutan, everybody has studied in India. On the military side, they do have a connect 
through NDA and IMA. They have a connect with the military leadership in 
countries who come for training.” 
 
2.85 Providing update about the common admission portal, the Ministry of External 
Affairs stated that it worked closely with Ministry of Education to establish a common 
admission portal for foreign students called the EducationINdia Portal. Update on 
EducationINdia Portal is as follows:- 
Genesis and objective: There was a need for a common portal through which 
information of all foreign students can be accessed at one place. The EducationINdia 

63 | P a g e 
 
portal will showcase the strength of Indian education system to attract foreign 
students. By this portal, all Indian institutions that are admitting foreign students will 
get a great common platform to showcase their strengths. It will also provide, in one 
place, a reliable number of foreign students along with their nationalities. 
Collaborations: Various meeting have been done in both online and offline mode 
with various bodies/ ministries of GoI i.e. AICTE, AISHE, ICCR, SII, UGC, NAAC, 
NBA etc. All agreed to support and share the required information with this 
EducationINdia portal.  
Process: Process for educationindia.gov.in portal is as follows:  
 Data of Indian institutions admitting foreign students is already available on 
various platforms and submitted by the institutes. This portal will collect 
such data, through API or any other way, from various Bodies/ Ministries i.e. 
AICTE, AISHE, ICCR, SII, UGC, NAAC, NBA etc. and register all these 
institutions on this portal. Data from AICTE, AISHE, ICCR, SII is already 
being collected and registration is being done in the portal from backend. 
 After registration of Indian institutions their login credentials will be shared 
with them to update their data or provide more information. 
 It will be mandatory for Indian institutions to fill details of all foreign 
students admitted by them on this portal in their login and verify/ update 
these details as and when required. 
 It will be mandatory for foreign student to register on this portal for issuance 
of visa. 
 After registering on this portal foreign student will be allotted a Unique 
EducationINdia portal ID (EI-ID). 
 This EI-ID will be asked by MEA/ FRRO/ Visa authorities while applying 
for Visa or and immigration related functions. This EI-ID will be verified 
through separate login before issuance of Visa. 
 Login credentials to verify/ get details of EI-ID will be given to various 
Bodies/ Ministries for authentication purpose. 

64 | P a g e 
 
 Various schemes like ICCR, SII etc. will be integrated with this portal and 
necessary data will be exchanged through API. 
 This portal will not interfere in admission process of foreign students the 
admission will be carried out by concerned institution/ organisation as per 
their prevailing norms. 
 
2.86 The perception of India across the world as a country of knowledge and wisdom 
has ancient roots. The Committee discern that the Ministry of Education is actively 
engaged in strengthening relations with other countries through educational 
cooperation and collaboration through bilateral agreements, joint programmes, 
scholarship programmes and so on. The Committee are pleased to learn that MEA is 
working closely with the Ministry of Education to establish a common admission 
portal for foreign students called the Education India. While Indian Diaspora and 
students have been recognized in fields of arts, sciences, engineering, technology and 
humanities, Indian educational institutions do not fare well in world rankings. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to make concerted efforts to improve the 
standard of our Universities, Institutes and learning centres at par with international 
norms so that India can emerge as a sought after destination for education.  
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER 3 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF CULTURAL RELATIONS 
 
Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) is the pre-eminent organization of the 
Government to project India’s soft power abroad. Recognizing the importance of culture as 
an instrument of promotion of India's national interests, the Government of India established 
soon after Independence, the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) in 1950, with the 
first Education Minister Maulana Abul Kalam Azad as the Founder President. It is now an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of External Affairs, with a mandate to actively 
participate in the formulation and implementation of policies and programmes pertaining to 
India’s external cultural relations, to foster and strengthen cultural relations and mutual 
understanding between India and other countries and to promote cultural exchanges with 
other countries and peoples.  
 
I.  Structure, Mandate and Resources 
3.2 On being asked about objectives behind bringing ICCR under the Ministry of 
External Affairs, the Ministry stated that as ICCR’s primary role is in the field of India’s 
“external cultural relations” and “fostering and strengthening cultural relations and mutual 
understanding with other countries”, the transfer of administrative control of the Council to 
MEA has facilitated effective integration of ICCR’s work in the overall foreign policy 
priorities. 
 
3.3 When asked about the manner in which ICCR has aligned our soft power strategy 
with Indian foreign policy, the Ministry of External Affairs responded that in line with the 
demands of the continuously evolving and dynamic international situation and foreign 
policy priorities of the Government of India, ICCR and other agencies involved in the 
promotion of India’s soft power have been trying to update and innovate their programmes 
and methods, including adoption of new technological tools and new and emerging 
promotional platforms. While ICCR is an important instrument of the Government of India 
to project India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy abroad, several GoI Ministries/agencies 

66 | P a g e 
 
are engaged in areas, which are important elements in propagation of soft power and culture 
abroad. 
3.4 During the briefing meeting on 21.12.2019, the representative of the Ministry of 
External Affairs outlined the broad mandate and activities of ICCR as under:- 
 “The ICCR, as Mr. Chairman, you mentioned, is mandated to foster, strengthen and 
promote cultural relations between India and other countries and to this end, it is an 
implementing agency for cultural agreements or cultural exchange programmes that 
we have signed with 120 countries. It supplements efforts by the Ministry of Culture 
to promote festivals of India abroad. It offers capacity building in terms of roughly 
3,500 scholarships annually in the arts, culture, philosophy, holistic medicine and 
other areas for foreign students who desire to study in India. It promotes cultural and 
intellectual exchanges between India and other countries in different ways, including 
the promotion of performing arts, visual arts, crafts, knowledge, education, literature, 
language and yoga, etc., in their classical folk and contemporary forms. The ICCR 
implements these programmes through its regional centres abroad and 19 regional 
offices within India as well as in closest cooperation with Indian Missions and 
Posts.” 
3.5 While tendering evidence before the Committee on 20.12.2019, the Foreign 
Secretary had submitted that re-structuring of ICCR (including re-drafting of the 
Constitution and Mission Statement) is under process. Updating the Committee about the 
same, the Ministry stated that a Committee was formed under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
Sunaina Singh, Vice President, ICCR for revision of ICCR’s current constitution.  First 
meeting of the committee was held on 5 July 2018.  Suggested points for addition in the 
existing constitution based on the discussions with the Chair of Committee on Revision of 
Constitution were sent to Prof. Sunaina Singh in July 2019.  Due to the COVID-19 
Pandemic, it could not be processed further for some time. This process has again been 
started and General Assembly of ICCR has authorized formation of a committee to take this 
process forward. 
3.6 The details of budgetary allocations sought and actual allocations made to ICCR 
during last three financial years are as follows: 
 
(Figure in crores) 

67 | P a g e 
 
S.No. Financial Year BE RE Projected by 
ICCR 
RE Allotted 
1. 2018-19 255.00 286.18 235.00 
2. 2019-20 250.00 310.82 250.00 
3. 2020-21 290.00 278.27 255.00 
4. 2021-22 300.00 239.74 239.74 
 
3.7 On the Committee’s specific query whether the allocated amount is sufficient to 
meet the expanding activities of ICCR, the Ministry replied thatfor the financial year 2021-
22, BE of 300 crores has been allocated to ICCR by MEA. Given the prevailing global 
situation in light of COVID-19 pandemic and occurrence of its second wave during 
April/May 2021, the allocation is justified. Otherwise it is insufficient to run the activities of 
ICCR.  
3.8 Regarding the problem of the budgetary constraints, the Ministry stated that 
budgetary constraints are a key limiting factor. The gap between requirement and budget 
finally received is huge. ICCR would require budget to the tune of Rs. 500 Crores to 
accommodate even the current level of demands of our Embassies and Cultural Centres 
abroad. The Revised Estimate for 2019-20 is just Rs. 250 crore against the requested budget 
of Rs. 310 crore (which would also have barely covered the activities already committed by 
the Council).  While the cultural outreach of ICCR has increased, the budgetary allocations 
have not grown proportionately due to serious shortfall in Ministry’s own overall budget.  
3.9 During the course of oral evidence on 20.12.2019, the Foreign Secretary underscored 
the budgetary constraints being faced by ICCR when he made the following submission: 
“Budget constraints are obviously one limiting factor.  While the cultural outreach of 
ICCR has increased manifold, the budgetary allocation remains more or less stagnant 
because, as I explained even during the Budget discussions before the hon. 
Committee Members, that Budget increase over the past five years of External 
Affairs Ministry has not been commensurate with the activities that MEA has been 
called upon to do, whether it is in the field of culture, in the field of development or 
in the field of security. The fact remains that it is compared with current outlay of 
about Rs.250 crore, ICCR requires about Rs.310 crore annually, if it is to finance all 
external and internal cultural centres properly and expand the scope of its activities.”  
  

68 | P a g e 
 
3.10  Reiterating this constraining factor again on 26 August 2020, the representatives of 
the Ministry of External Affairs further stated: 
“The main limiting factor in our soft power efforts remains the issues of budgetary 
constraints and manpower deficiency.  While the cultural outreach of ICCR has 
increased manifold, the budgetary allocations remain more or less stagnant because 
the Ministry’s own overall budget has not increased over the last five years.  
ICCR or MEA has one of the smallest soft power budgets in the world not 
commensurate with the large number of activities that is expected from it.  MEA has 
been exploring other innovative financing models including PPP models but, in the 
end, adequate budgetary allocations for soft power projection can only come from 
the Government.” 
3.11 When asked about availability of extra budgetary resources are available with lCCR, 
the Ministry stated that ICCR is fully funded by MEA through Grants-in Aid. Except receipt 
from ICCs abroad on account of fee from local students, which is insignificant amount, 
ICCR has no further source of funding to run its activities. 
 
3.12 The Committee further enquired about the efforts that are being made by ICCR to 
generate additional resources. In a written reply, the Ministry submitted that ICCR has 
smaller soft power budget and is not commensurate with the large number of activities 
expected from it. ICCR has been exploring other innovative financing models including PPP 
models, but ultimately the adequate budgetary allocations for soft power projection will 
have to come from the Government. 
3.13 While tendering oral evidence before the Committee on 7 January 2020, the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs also alluded to extra budgetary way of 
tackling the budget constraint by stating: 
“ICCR, however, has adopted some innovative modalities for projection of 
Indian culture overseas such as establishment of a cultural centre in Valladolid in 
Spain where it works with the local university, the City Centre as well as the local 
organisation such as Casa De La India to use as a platform for cultural activities. 
Similarly, in Busan it has entered into a public private partnership which has resulted 
in cost sharing arrangement.  
Similarly, with some State Governments, ICCR has cost sharing 
arrangements to host incoming foreign cultural troops. Our Missions abroad also 
have been working and availing of partnerships with local organisations for 

69 | P a g e 
 
organising Indian cultural programmes, seminars and conferences. So, these efforts 
have been made to see how we can have more partners as we work in projecting 
India’s soft power.” 
 
3.14 Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR), an autonomous body under the 
Ministry of External Affairs, is the nodal organization entrusted with the task of 
projection of India’s soft power abroad. The Committee are aware that the primary 
mandate of ICCR is maintenance of external cultural relations and fostering as well as 
strengthening cultural relations and mutual understanding with other countries. The 
Committee have been informed by the Ministry of External Affairs that under the 
Chairmanship of Vice President of ICCR, a Committee was formed to restructure the 
constitution as well as mandate of ICCR. However, the Covid-19 pandemic had halted 
the process. In the considered opinion of the Committee, there is an urgent need for a 
complete overhaul of the structure, mandate and functioning of the ICCR so that it is 
able to project Indian culture in a comprehensive, cohesive, transparent and inclusive 
manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that 
the process of restructuring of ICCR is finalized and the blueprint of the same may be 
submitted to them within three months. 
(Recommendation No 27) 
3.15 Over the years, the Committee have been flagging the issue of inadequate 
budgetary and manpower resources within ICCR as key factors impeding the effective 
realization of India’s soft power diplomacy. The Committee observe that MEA has one 
of the smallest soft power budgets in the world, which is incommensurate with the 
expanding mandate and activities of ICCR. MEA on several occasions have admitted 
to the Committee about the adverse impact of budgetary allocation on its overall 
functioning. While analyzing the budgetary allocation made to ICCR during the past 
five years, the Committee discerned that while on one hand the ICCR has been 
pointing out to the shortage of funds, the projected budgetary allocation by MEA is 
itself small. The Committee therefore recommend that ICCR should make an objective 
assessment of its financial requirements and accordingly seek higher budget in the next 
financial year. The Committee also desire that ICCR compile data of financial 

70 | P a g e 
 
resources and outreach activities of soft power organizations of other countries to 
make a compelling case for increased budgetary allocation. The Committee would 
strongly recommend that the Government should provision enhanced budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 500 crore to ICCR for conducting India’s soft power and cultural 
diplomacy in a robust and extensive manner.  
(Recommendation No. 28) 
3.16 In order to overcome the limited budgetary resources available with the ICCR 
for carrying out its expanding activities, the Committee have been suggesting the 
Ministry to explore avenues for extra-budgetary resources. It is satisfying to know that 
MEA has adopted innovative modalities for projection of Indian culture abroad 
through cost sharing arrangements with host organizations abroad and with State 
Governments for hosting incoming cultural troops.  The Committee exhort the ICCR 
to continue exploring other innovative financing models, particularly, Public Private 
Partnership to supplement the grants in aid received from MEA.  
(Recommendation No. 29) 
3.17 The Committee recommend that in view of factors like changing global 
scenario, need for competing with countries that are opening Centres for country 
studies and limitations on front of resources, ICCR should undertake some zoning of 
its cultural Centres and evolve a mechanism to share human resources to the fullest. 
They also recommend that ICCR should try and provide more capable and 
experienced persons to provide leadership to the ICCs over the world.  
(Recommendation No. 30) 
3.18 In view of the fact that ICCR has a considerably high number of employees 
employed on either ad hoc or temporary basis, the Committee recommend that ICCR 
should evolve a fresh Human Resource Policy to have better result orientation. ICCR 
should also think of sizing its Regional Offices at various places in the country and 
utilize the saved resources on a more productive cause.  
(Recommendation No. 31) 

71 | P a g e 
 
3.19 Considering the need to have right kind of institutional leadership for ICCR, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should appoint persons with keen 
interest in soft power projection. Persons passionate about the cause of cultural 
relationship promotion only can provide right kind of relationship.  
(Recommendation No. 32) 
3.20 ICCR was established when the term Soft power was yet to evolve. In view of 
the emerging issues in the domain of international cultural relationship and the fact 
that culture is the most effective distinguishing feature of India as a nation, ICCR 
should adopt a suitable Motto and also have a well defined vision and mission 
statement.  
(Recommendation No. 33) 
II. ICCR Activities 
3.21 Currently, ICCR employs a variety of instruments of Cultural Diplomacy or Soft-
Power Diplomacy at the global level under the overall guidance of the Ministry of External 
Affairs. The programmes/ activities of ICCR can broadly be divided into two main 
categories - Academic and Cultural. Brief introduction to important programmes is given in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
1.  Scholarship Programme 
3.22 The scholarship programme of the Council is an important component of ICCR’s 
activities. The Council offers scholarship to nationals of different countries mainly from 
neighbouring, African and Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries. ICCR 
administers a total of 26 scholarship schemes for foreign students to study in India. Of these 
26 scholarship schemes, it is executing 16 schemes for various Divisions of MEA and 03 
schemes for Ministry of AYUSH. Under these schemes, ICCR offers approximately 3500 
scholarship slots annually to foreign students to study in India at UG, PG or Ph.D. level in 
almost all mainstream disciplines, except medicine. At present, there are around 7000 
current students from 180 countries studying on ICCR scholarships in different 
Central/State Universities across India.  
 

72 | P a g e 
 
3.23 To ensure effective implementation of the scholarship scheme and welfare of foreign 
students, ICCR uses various tools like Annual Vice Chancellors and stake holders’ 
conference and winter and summer camps for students responsibility. Scholarship 
programme has been one of the important programmes and has paid positive results in case 
of some countries, such as Afghanistan.  
3.24 The details of scholarship country wise are provided at Annexure -VI. 
3.25 Providing an overview of the scholarship programme, the representative of the 
Ministry of External Affairs testified before the Committee on 20 December, 2019 as under: 
“The ICCR’s scholarships are a key element of our soft power diplomacy and we 
offer scholarships at all levels, under-graduate, post-graduate and Ph.D., in all 
mainstream disciplines, except, obviously, medicine, and about 30,000 foreigners 
have availed this opportunity in the past 15 years. They are exposed to different 
regions and culture. In 2018-19, the ICCR has launched the admission to alumnae 
scholarship digital portal. This digitizes the admission process online for the roughly 
3,900 scholarship slots in this academic year. It has also intended to keep track of the 
ICCR’s alumnae once they return to their homelands. 
At present, we have around 7,000 students from 180 countries studying under 
ICCR scholarship schemes. Sir, it is a matter of pride that several ICCR alumni are 
highly placed in various vocations in their respective countries. To recognize such 
people, the ICCR instituted the Distinguished Alumni Award in 2015 and since then 
has awarded 18 distinguished ICCR alumni for their achievements and contributions 
in their own countries.” 
 
3.26 In the past, there have been several complaints about corrupt practices in the award 
of scholarships to foreign students. On being asked about the nature of complaints received 
by ICCR regarding scholarships, the Ministry submitted that the complaints in general 
include non-award of scholarship, scholarship given for subject different than applied for, 
non-disbursement of scholarships on time, difficulties in obtaining reimbursement of 
medical expenditure on time, etc.  
3.27 The following measures have adopted to minimize the complaints or grievances of 
students:  

73 | P a g e 
 
i) Direct interface of ICCR’s A2A portal with Universities: The Admission to 
Alumni (A2A) Portal is currently linked to foreign applicants, Mission/Post and 
ICCR. Going by the lessons of the past, ICCR has linked Universities on the A2A 
Portal by integrating information of each University/Institute so that the foreign 
students can apply directly for admission to the University. A dialogue box for 
communication between all the stakeholders has also been incorporated. This feature 
will be user friendly, easy and transparent access so that all communications are 
through the portal in digital mode instead of manual handling. While option to 
choose the University and the course remains with the students, the current limit of 
restricting the number of universities has been increased to five universities from the 
present three choices. 
ii) Introduction of Health Insurance Policy: ICCR provides medical reimbursement 
as per the CGHS norms though students are not provided CGHS cards. This requires 
a great deal of handholding from the stage a student is admitted in a hospital for 
treatment at CGHS rates till process of medical claims. Even after all these efforts, 
the amount of money spent by the student is not fully reimbursed. Moreover, ICCR 
has to do a lot of unnecessary processing resulting in a long delay in handling 
individual cases. It has, therefore, been decided that from 2020-21 students would 
have to mandatorily obtain health insurance on their own before their arrival out of 
their stipends. To facilitate with the best rates of insurance premium, ICCR has 
finalized a panel of health insurance companies from which students may decide to 
choose. However, this list will only be suggestive ones. Students will be at liberty to 
choose any other insurance provider of his / her choice. 
iii) Introduction of PFMS for direct transfer of scholarship dues to students 
accounts: As part of Direct Benefit Transfer, all the student dues would be 
transferred from ICCR to the individual students’ bank accounts under PFMS.   
Since February 2021, all the payable dues of students are released through PFMS.   
iv) Field visits by Teams from ICCR Headquarters to Regional Offices: As part of 
welfare measures, ICCR has deputed internal teams from ICCR headquarters to all 
the Regional Offices to know about the well being of international students after the 
COVID-19. The teams were also mandated to carry out physical verification of 

74 | P a g e 
 
students; check bank accounts and ensure that funds are transferred to genuine 
students. The suggestions given by the Teams have been have been incorporated in 
the new guidelines. 
2. Conferences and Seminars 
3.28 ICCR regularly organises or supports various conferences and seminars as an 
important platform for exchange of ideas and views between the scholars and thinkers of 
India and other countries. ICCR has its flagship annual conferences on Indology, Yoga and 
Delivering Democracy. ICCR also provides travel grants to academicians to attend other 
relevant conferences and seminars abroad. 
 
3. Visitors’ Programme 
3.29 ICCR implements two important programmes for Distinguished Visitors‟ 
Programme (DVP) and Academic Visitors Programme (AVP). Under DVP we invite senior 
government functionaries from other countries such as former PMs, former Presidents, 
Members of Parliament, etc. while under AVP we invite mostly Vice Chancellors of foreign 
universities. These visitors are invited to experience India on a full hospitality, including 
airfare, boarding & lodging, local transport, etc. Drawing from the vision of the Hon'ble 
Prime Minister, ICCR invited 186 delegates from 184 countries for darshan of Kumbh Mela 
2019 to mark global participation.  
3.30 ICCR has also started a new Gen-Next Democracy Network Programme under 
which young rising stars of the country’s political parties (Ruling Party, Principal 
Opposition Party and from other parties, regional leaders, Mayors etc.) including rising 
figures / influencers in business / start-ups, media, etc are invited to India.    
 
5. Chairs programme 
3.31 Under the Chairs programme, ICCR established chairs in universities of various 
countries. Chairs were also established under CEP and EEP and administered by ICCR. 
Numbers and subjects varied from time to time depending on the priority and focus of the 

75 | P a g e 
 
time. At present there are 66 Chairs in various foreign countries, mostly for teaching Hindi 
language and Indian studies.  
6. ICCR Awards 
3.32 ICCR has constituted three new awards in 2015  
(i) Distinguished Indologist Award,  
(ii) World Sanskrit Award and  
(iii) ICCR's Distinguished Alumni Award.  
7. Outgoing Cultural Delegations (OCD) 
3.33 ICCR sends around 150 performing artists and groups regularly overseas to 
participate in various cultural events. The artists are selected from our panel of 4000 artists. 
We also work closely with the Ministry of Culture to jointly execute large-scale cultural 
festivals overseas.  
3.34 When asked about the existing policy for empanelment of artistes that has been 
adopted by the ICCR, the Ministry stated that as part of its mandate ICCR sponsors cultural 
troupes abroad in various disciplines. For this purpose, the Council forms a panel of artistes 
in various art forms such as  
 (1) Theatre & Puppetry 
(2) Carnatic (Vocal & Instrumental) 
 (3) Hindustani (Vocal & Instrumental) 
 (4) Dance-I (Chhau, Kathak, Odissi, Manipuri and Sattriya);  
(5) Dance-II (Bharatnatyam, Kathakali, Kuchipudi&Mohiniattam);  
(6) Folk and other traditional of dance, & music;  
(7) Modern Experimental work of Dance & Music including Light and Popular Music. 
Any artiste who wishes to be empanelled need to fill an application form available at 
Council’s offices in India and at ICCR’s website: http://iccr.gov.in/and submit with 
VCD/DVD of the artiste’s latest performance, recent press reviews of performances 
action photographs, recommendation letter from Guru’s / head of Institutions, 
experience of stage performance, proof of residence, individual bio-data along with 
passport size photograph, AIR grading and Awards, if any.  

76 | P a g e 
 
3.35 The empanelment is an ongoing process and there is no fixed date for submission of 
applications forms. These applications are considered by the genre wise Expert Sub-
Committee constituted by ICCR.  Members of the Expert Sub- Committee have to be 
experts in their respective field. The recommendations of the Sub-Committee are considered 
by the Empanelment Advisory Committee (EAC) which after due deliberations recommends 
the final list of empanelled Artistes to President, ICCR for his approval. The artistes are 
placed in different categories on the basis of recommendations of Expert-Sub Committees 
for each genre. The recommendations of the experts in the Sub-Committee are based on the  
assessment by viewing the DVD/Youtube links, bio-data, Guru’s certificates, press 
clippings, performance photographs, attached certificates and AIR/TV grading, awards of 
the artistes and other material with the form received from the artistes. AIR /TV grading. 
3.36 Further, Padma Awardees and S.N.A. Awardees are automatically slotted in 
Outstanding Category, when he/she applies for empanelment for Music categories only. In 
other cases, the Committees recommend artist/group for empanelment in different 
categories such as Proficient/Established and Outstanding keeping in view the artists 
expertise in the field, The upgradations of Established Category of artist/group is 
recommended on the basis of the artist’s/group’s level of experience. 
3.37 Year wise and state wise number of Cultural Groups sponsored by ICCR for the 
years 2020-21 is appended at Annexure-VII. 
3.38 Over the issue of empanelment of artists, the representative of MEA during the 
Sitting of the Committee on 31 January 2022 submitted as under: 
“There was a question about empanelment of artists.  Of course, ICCR has its own 
panel.  There is a very elaborate procedure for any artist to get empanelled starting 
with small Expert Sub Committees where we have experts in different genres and 
different art forms.  They interview those persons.  Thereafter, they recommend 
those artists for our Empanelment Committee and then they get empanelled.  What 
we found out is that even though initially we had about 4000 plus artists on our 
panel, but last year we started to go down that list and also to find out how many of 
them are active. 
We came to know that about 1,300 people are actually active at the moment.  
The current active list has been placed on the ICCR website.  There is also a separate 
list being used by the Ministry of Culture primarily for festivals of India.  With 

77 | P a g e 
 
regard to festivals of India, we have a mechanism to coordinate with the Ministry of 
Culture.  The Ministry of Culture is in the lead.  Whenever the Coordination 
Committee meets, DG ICCR normally attends that meeting.  In meetings involving 
other activities, like assistance/grant given to Indo-foreign Friendship societies, a 
representative from ICCR participates.  There is also a petition on our statutory 
bodies of the Ministry of Culture and vice-versa.” 
8. Incoming Cultural Delegations 
3.39  ICCR also organizes inbound cultural festivals from time to time. It began with a 
festival of Asiad Performing Arts organized in 1980-81 when 16 Asian countries 
participating in the Asian games participated in this festival. Several such festivals have 
since been organized to showcase culture of other countries in India. Now International 
Ramayana Festival, Africa Dance & Music Festival, International Folk Festival, 
International Jazz Festival are some important cultural events being annually organised by 
ICCR in India.  
9. Horizon Series Programmes 
3.40 ICCR has started the Horizon Series mainly to provide exposure to foreign students 
to Indian culture as well as to provide a platform for the young and upcoming regional 
artists in different corners of the country. Our Regional Offices have been organizing these 
programmes on regular basis (mostly monthly). This programme is an important tool to 
engage with upcoming artists and encourage them to nurture India's rich and diverse culture 
for further projection at global stage.  
10 Exhibitions 
3.41 ICCR promotes visual art by sending exhibitions for display abroad. It also hosts 
such exhibition in India by foreign artists. Exchange of visual art exhibitions is done on the 
recommendations of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad. ICCR also support Indian artists by 
way of providing travel grants for participation in art fairs, residencies and workshop 
usually form part of larger cultural festivals.  
11. Busts and Statues 
3.42 ICCR’s bust and statues programme has been primarily a goodwill programme of 
offering statues and busts of eminent Indian icons for installation at prominent locations 

78 | P a g e 
 
abroad. As a special project, ICCR gifted Buddha statue to the Gandan Monastery in 
Ulaanbataar, Mongolia. We have also commissioned around 60 busts/statues of Mahatma 
Gandhi to mark Gandhi@150.  
12. Promotion of Yoga and International Day of Yoga 
3.43 In 2015, with the announcement of International Day of Yoga (IDY) to be celebrated 
on 21 June every year, ICCR facilitated organizing of mega-scale IDY celebrations all over 
the world. ICCR has been deploying yoga teachers from India to its cultural centres since 
the time they were established. However with the success of IDY, ICCR started sending 
teachers to Missions and Posts as well. Currently, there are 89 teachers posted in ICCs, 
Missions and Posts for imparting teachings and training on Yoga, Veda and Sanskrit. 
3.44 In pursuance of its objectives, ICCR carries out a range of academic and 
cultural activities. These include scholarship programmes, Visitors Programme, 
organizing Conferences/Seminars, Chairs Programme, Horizon Series Programme, 
promotion of yoga, conducting exhibitions, sending and receiving culture troupes of 
dance, etc. The Committee feel that there is a dire need for dissemination of 
information about the various activities that are being undertaken by ICCR for 
deepening India’s soft power and cultural outreach. The Ministry should also 
incorporate accomplishments of successful soft power organizations of UK, Germany, 
China and include language promotion of various Indian languages and art forms 
within the ambit of ICCR activities.  
(Recommendation No. 34) 
3.45 The Committee note that scholarship programme is an important component of 
ICCR’s activities. The Council offers scholarship at all levels (under-graduate, post-
graduate and Ph.D) in all mainstream disciplines, except medicine to the nationals of 
different countries mainly from neighbouring, African and Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS) countries. The Ministry has informed that around 7,000 
students from 180 countries are studying under ICCR scholarship schemes and several 
ICCR alumni are highly placed in various vocations in their respective countries. In 
the past, there have been several complaints about ICCR scholarships which, inter alia, 
included non-award of scholarship, scholarship given for subject different than 

79 | P a g e 
 
applied for, non-disbursement of scholarships on time, difficulties in obtaining 
reimbursement of medical expenditure on time, etc. The Ministry has informed that 
steps such as direct interface of ICCR Admission to Alumni (A2A) portal with 
universities, health insurance policy, introduction of PFMS for direct transfer of 
scholarship dues to students account, field visits by team from OCCR headquarters to 
Regional offices have been taken to minimize the complaints/grievances of students. As 
a major part of ICCR activities, scholarship is tied to our global image and prestige. 
The Committee therefore, urge that the Ministry should ensure that there is regular 
interface between the foreign students getting scholarships and ICCR. Further, all the 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad should be reached out for wider dissemination about the 
scholarships offered through ICCR.  
(Recommendation No. 35) 
3.46 Sending Indian Cultural troupes outside the country is an important part of the 
activities of the ICCR. These troupes perform in countries across the world and such 
performances play a significant role in projecting our soft power. The Ministry has 
informed that there exists a panel of artistes in various art forms such as theatre & 
puppetry, Carnatic, Hindustani, dance including folk and modern experimental. 
Empanelment of artist takes place on the basis of recommendation of the Expert Sub 
Committee constituted by ICCR. While the lists of empanelled artists are available on 
ICCR website, the Committee did not find the names of members of the Expert 
Committees. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure greater 
transparency in the process for empanelment of artists by displaying the details about 
the empanelment process including lists of Experts/ Sub-Committees on the official 
website of ICCR. ICCR is also directed to ensure that adequate regional 
representation is provided to artists while sending them abroad. 
 (Recommendation No.36) 
3.47 ICCR is mandated to create a sound understanding of Indian culture abroad 
and towards this end, it routinely sends cultural troupes, including dance and musical 
performers. However, on various occasions cultural troupes from some border states 
or states with a huge population of tribal communities are provided inadequate 

80 | P a g e 
 
opportunities to go abroad and present their art. This happens as Ambassador and 
High Commissioners of India abroad prefer certain group of artists and ICCR in a 
way remains constrained to send cultural troupes for which there is an expressed 
demand. The Committee, therefore, recommend that ICCR reformulates certain rules 
and regulations to ensure that artistes from all regions and States get an opportunity to 
showcase their talent abroad in an equitable manner.  
(Recommendation No.37) 
III. ICCR Cultural Centres (ICCs)  
3.48 In order to promote awareness of India's rich cultural heritage abroad, ICCR 
implements its programmes through 37 Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) and 19 Regional 
Offices in India. Currently there are following 37 operational ICCR Centres:  
1. SVCC Tehran, Iran 
2. IGCIC Port Louis, Mauritius 
3. LBSCIC Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
4. SVCC Dushanbe, Tajikistan 
5. SVCC Male, Maldives 
6. SVCC Colombo, Sri Lanka 
7. SVCC Kathmandu, Nepal 
8. SVCC Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan 
9. IGCC Dhaka, Bangladesh 
10. NWCC Thimphu, Bhutan 
11. SVCC Yangon, Myanmar 
12. SVCC Kabul, Afghanistan 
13. JNICC Jakarta, Indonesia 
14. SVCC Bangkok, Thailand 
15. SVCC Hanoi, Vietnam 
16. SVCC Sub-Centre, Bali, Indonesia 
17. SVCC Beijing, China 
18. NSCBICC Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
19. SVCC Seoul, South Korea 

81 | P a g e 
 
20. VCC Tokyo, Japan 
21. SVCC Sydney, Australia 
22. SVCC Suva, Fiji 
23. TNC London, U.K. 
24. SVCC Budapest, Hungary 
25. SVCC Prague, Czech Republic 
26. TGC The Hague, Netherlands 
27. TTC Berlin, Germany 
28. ICC Tel Aviv, Israel 
29. MACIC Cairo, Egypt 
30. SVCC Durban, South Africa 
31. JNCC Moscow, Russia 
32. SVCC Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania 
33. SVCC Paramaribo, Suriname 
34. SVCC Sao Paulo, Brazil 
35. SVCC Georgetown, Guyana 
36. MGICC Port of Spain, Trinidad & Tobago 
37. GTICC Mexico City, Mexico 
3.49 Elaborating on the significance of ICCR Cultural Centres, the Ministry stated that 
Indian Cultural Centres are ICCR and MEA’s extension offices overseas. The 39 Indian 
Cultural Centres abroad, including two run in PPP model are instrumental in fulfilling 
mandate of ICCR and MEA by promoting and propagating the country’s cultural strengths 
worldwide. Constraints being faced by the Government in opening of new Indian Cultural 
Centres abroad are chiefly:  
 (i) Lack of finances,  
(ii) Challenges in identifying affordable yet prominently located suitable space in the 
host country and  
(iii) Policies adopted by some countries with regard to opening of cultural centres. 
3.50 On being asked the Ministry enumerated the progress made in regard to increasing 
the number of ICCs abroad in respect with, status of their construction, capacity 

82 | P a g e 
 
augmentation and the blueprint for enriching their Academic and Cultural 
programmes/activities. Since the opening of the first ICC in Georgetown, Guyana in 1972, 
the number of cultural centres abroad has increased to 39 (including two in PPP mode).  
Three additional Centres are proposed to be set up in Paris, Washington and Tel Aviv. 
Decision on opening of new cultural centres abroad is guided by the overall context of the 
existing state and emerging trajectory of overall bilateral relations. Budget constraints are 
also a major factor in this.   
3.51 When asked to furnish details about the new ICCs being targeted to be opened, the 
Ministry stated that three new ICCs in (i) Tel Aviv, (ii) Washington and (iii) Paris are likely 
to be made operational in 2020-21. Additional financial allocation of Rs. 18 crores has been 
sought for operationalising these Centres from the Ministry. 
3.52 As regards the status of establishing ICCs in Paris and Washington, the Ministry 
stated the following:  
Paris: For establishment of ICC Paris, Govt. of India has already purchased a property from 
the Govt. of France in a heritage Area of Paris. The building is presently under process of 
renovation and expected to be completed during the current financial year. The Council has 
sent a comprehensive proposal to MEA indicating various functional requirements & 
number of personnel / India based teachers and local staff required at ICC, Paris.  
Washington: In response to the Mission’s proposal for the hiring of a multi- purpose hall 
for undertaking cultural activities till the regular cultural centre becomes operational, the 
Global Estate Management Division of MEA directed that the Mission should make serious 
and earliest efforts to remodel the V-Street property, which was purchased several years ago 
for this purpose and make it functional as soon as possible. 
It may be mentioned that all Embassies and Consulates abroad attach high priority to 
soft power and cultural diplomacy. Even in countries where there is no ICC, Missions/Posts 
have dedicated officers overseeing cultural work under supervision of the Head of 
Mission/Post.  
3.53 On further probing regarding availability of adequate staff and funds in ICCs, the 
Ministry stated that funding constraint of ICCR and MEA itself remains one of the major 
issues for the ICCs abroad. Budgetary constraints also affect deployment of manpower 

83 | P a g e 
 
resources in ICCs abroad. ICCR has adopted some innovative modalities for cultural 
projection abroad, such as establishment of cultural centres in public-private-partnership 
model and cost sharing arrangements with various State Governments to host incoming 
foreign cultural troupes. Our Missions/Posts abroad have also been availing of partnership 
with local organizations for organizing Indian cultural programmes, seminars, conferences, 
etc.  
3.54 Over the issue of income generation measures that are being undertaken by the 
various ICCs already operational to make these centres self-dependent, the Ministry stated 
that so far, promotion of soft power and cultural diplomacy was based on no-profit policy, 
hence ICCR largely depended on the Government (MEA) funding. Further, in some 
countries local rules & regulations do not allow Culture Centres to engage in revenue 
generation/commercial activities. In a new initiative, ICCR has established two centres in 
Public-Private-Partnership mode in Valladolid and Busan. Considering the soft power and 
cultural diplomatic activities by other countries, it appears that substantial Government 
funding will continue to be required for a pro-active and effective conduct of our own soft 
power and cultural promotion.  
3.55 A Committee under Ambassador Veena Sikri, was constituted by ICCR to review 
the functioning of its cultural centres abroad. The Committee enquired about the major 
recommendations made by the Committee along with follow up action taken by ICCR. In a 
written reply, the Ministry stated that in 2016 ICCR set up a Committee under Ambassador 
Veena Sikri, to conduct performance audit of Indian Cultural Centres. The report is being 
considered for implementation to the extent possible. The recommendations of the 
Committee are:  
i. Enhanced Coordination between ICC and Embassy: The task of soft power 
projection assigned to the ICCs need to be supplemented with more coordination 
between the Mission and ICCR. The entire sector of education, where ICCR plays 
the leading role, should be covered by the ICCs. This will be more efficient and  
effective and the foreign visitor to the ICC will get the information at one point 
instead of visiting ICC and Mission. 

84 | P a g e 
 
ii. Selection of suitable Directors of the ICCs: Directors of ICCs are the ones who can 
successfully fulfill their task promoting India’s soft power. Therefore selection of 
Directors capable, efficient and culturally rich should be a matter of high priority for 
the stakeholders. 
iii. Re-devising of the soft power projection process:  The soft power projection planned 
by ICCR through the ICCs should be flexible enough to take on board any specific 
interests expressed by the country where the ICC is based. ICCR and the ICCs 
should show sensitivity in responding to and accommodating the special interests in 
Indian education and culture expressed by credible institutions across the world. 
iv. Reorganizing of ICCs: Coordination among three stakeholders(MEA, Embassies and 
ICCs) need to be strengthened. Education and Culture the focii of soft power are 
with ICCR. Therefore, the Education work which is being carried by many of the 
Missions should be assigned to the ICCs.  ICCs should be one source of information 
for all the queries of the locals. 
v. Incorporating soft power projection among the goals and objectives of India’s 
foreign policy: MEA need to incorporate fully integrated effective soft power 
projection into India’s foreign policy goals and objectives. This will help Embassies 
assign the appropriate priority to soft power projection. 
 The recommendations of the Committee are under consideration of the 
Government/ICCR. 
 
3.56 The Committee are aware that currently 37 Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) are 
functional overseas and three are proposed to be set up in Paris, Washington and Tel 
Aviv. As principal instrument of India’s institutional cultural outreach abroad, Indian 
Cultural Centres are located in countries with significant strategic, economic, political 
and cultural interests. The Committee are surprised to note that despite these 
parameters in place, the Ministry does not have a Indian Cultural Centre in the entire 
Gulf Region. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a Cultural Centre should be 
opened in the Gulf also in view of the large Diaspora and India’s strong and sustained 
strategic and cultural ties with the region. The Committee also recommend that the 

85 | P a g e 
 
much delayed centres in Washington, Paris and Tel Aviv should also be opened by the 
end of this year.  
(Recommendation No.38) 
3.57 The Ministry has enlisted lack of finances, difficulty in identification of space 
and policies of host countries as constraining factors in opening of new Cultural 
Centres abroad. The Committee note that in 2016, ICCR had constituted a Committee 
under Ambassador Veena Sikri to conduct performance audit of Indian Cultural 
Centres. It has been informed that the said Committee has submitted its Report and 
the recommendations are being considered for implementation. In this backdrop, the 
Parliamentary Committee desire to have a detailed status note on the implementation 
status of the recommendations and implementation schedule made within three 
months. 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
IV.  ICCR Regional Centres 
3.58 The Council has 19 Regional Offices (ROs) across different States of India. These 
ROs undertake outreach activities at the State level for both cultural and academic work. 
The role of ICCR’s Regional Offices in various States is to facilitate ICCR’s programmes in 
the region, especially smooth implementation of ICCR’s scholarship programme for the 
foreign students including admissions, monitoring of their studies, disbursement of stipend 
to foreign students and payment of fee to Indian Universities. ROs also coordinate with 
local Universities regarding various day-to-day issues related to foreign students throughout 
the year. Regional Offices play a significant role in organizing inbound cultural 
programmes, exhibitions, conferences, seminars, visits and lectures. They also liaise with 
State Governments , cultural Institutions, local artists and scholars. They also engage local 
Indian artists, inter alia, through Horizon/Kala vishwa series performances. 
3.59   With regard to overlapping mandate between ICCR Regional Centre and Regional 
Centres of the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that idea behind 
establishing ICCR’s Regional Offices (ROs) in various states was to facilitate ICCR’s 
programmes in the region, especially smooth implementation of ICCR’s scholarship 
programme for the foreign students including admissions, monitoring of their studies and 

86 | P a g e 
 
disbursement of stipend to foreign students and payments to Indian universities.  The ROs 
also coordinate with local universities various day to day issues of foreign students 
throughout the year.  However, the role of ROs has expanded to also cover various aspects 
of ICCR’s activities in their respective regions, including hosting foreign cultural groups, 
facilitating programmes of ICCR’s Distinguished and Academic visitors. They also engage 
local Indian artists, inter alia, through Horizon Series performances. Mandate of ICCR’s 
Regional Offices is very clear and in no way conflicts with the mandate of offices of 
Ministry of Culture or Department of Culture of the State Governments. 
3.60 Clarifying the exact role of ICCR Regional Centre, the Foreign Secretary during 
evidence on 20 December 2019 stated: 
“As I said in my witness testimony, the reason for regional centres are threefold: 
first, they look after foreign students of ICCR scholarships in those States which is 
not the responsibility of the Ministry of Culture; secondly, they are there to identify 
individuals and cultural groups whom we sponsor for ICCR troupes abroad which 
again is the responsibility of the ICCR.” 
3.61  On the Committee’s further query about existence of ICCR Regional Centre and 
Ministry of Culture’s Regional Zonal Centres during the Sitting on 26 August 2020, the 
representative of MEA further submitted:  
Now, the Ministry of Culture has Regional Zonal Centres in every State.  Our whole 
idea of coordination is, wherever ICCR does not need to be present, we hand over 
ICCR activities to Regional Cultural Centres. That is number one.  Number two, the 
Ministry of External Affairs is in the process of putting in place a series of Videsh 
Bhavans in all the States to coordinate the foreign policy aspects of each State with 
the Ministry.  We are going to give the activities of the ICCR of that State to the 
Regional Videsh Bhavans and the head of the Videsh Bhavans to handle it.  So, it is 
not that we are closing them.  When we say that we are merging, we are having hubs 
which can look after this; and in each place either the Videsh Bhavan or the Zonal 
Cultural Centre will take it over.  We need to do this because a lot of activities that 
we have done in the past are not being done anymore.  Many of these have become 
slightly outdated in a way.  We have done a complete study of it.  We will be cutting 
it down, but we will not be cutting down the activities.  The Centres may go down 
but the activities will continue.” 
 
3.62 The Committee note that ICCR has 19 Regional Offices across different States 
of India that undertake outreach activities at the State level for both cultural and 

87 | P a g e 
 
academic work. The three major responsibilities of the Regional Offices are looking 
after foreign students of ICCR scholarships, hosting incoming cultural troupes, and 
engaging local artists. Over the issue of overlapping mandate between ICCR Regional 
Centre and Ministry of Culture’s Regional Zonal Centres, the Committee have been 
apprised that the process of putting in place a series of Videsh Bhavans in all the States 
to coordinate the foreign policy aspects of each State with the Ministry is underway 
and the role of Regional Offices is proposed to be subsumed under the Regional Videsh 
Bhawans. Welcoming the decision of the Ministry on establishment of Videsh 
Bhawans, the Committee recommend that such Bhawans should be opened in each 
State capital for better coordination with State Governments The Ministry should 
submit a roadmap for setting up the Videsh Bhawans along with timeline and 
budgetary requirements to this Committee within three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
(Recommendation No.40) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 | P a g e 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
Other Stakeholders 
 
Soft power projection as well as promotion of Indian culture is a Government of 
India approach and involves various Ministries/Departments and agencies. Various 
Ministries/Departments are engaged in the task of promoting India's soft power and cultural 
diplomacy.  The Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Culture play the lead roles 
in projection and promotion of soft power and cultural diplomacy. ICCR is an important 
instrument within the Ministry of External Affairs and Chapter 4 contains detailed 
examination of its organization, function and activities. 
4.2 Apart from ICCR, External and Publicity Division (XPD), Planning and Research 
Division (PP&R), Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) and 
various Indian Missions/Posts abroad are actively involved in conduct of India’s soft power 
diplomacy. Similarly, the Archaeological Survey of India, the National School of Drama, 
the Sahitya Kala Akademi and Lalit Kala Akademi within the Ministry of Culture play a 
pioneering role in cultural diplomacy. In this chapter, these Divisions within their concerned 
Ministries will be briefly examined in relation to their role in India’s soft power and cultural 
diplomacy. 
 
I. External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division (XPD) 
4.3 Elucidating upon the exact role of External and Publicity Division (XPD) in 
facilitating soft power diplomacy, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that theXPD 
Division provides publicity material and other inputs to the different Divisions of the 
Ministry and the Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad to facilitate their engagement, 
partnership and dialogue with the relevant stakeholders for India’s soft power promotion. 
Apart from XPD Division, Ministry’s different Division also closely coordinate with Indian 

89 | P a g e 
 
Missions and Consulates abroad to implement various Public Diplomacy related initiatives 
on cross cutting themes.  
4.4 XPD Division has swiftly adapted to India’s rising global profile and rapidly 
evolving communications environment through responsive and focused outreach to both the 
domestic and global audience. This has been achieved by expanding India’s public 
diplomacy footprint both at home and abroad and leveraging social media and other modern 
tools to maximize the outcome.  
4.5 XPD Division commissions short films, documentaries, audio-visual clips for social 
media promotion, and shares it with Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad for publicity 
purpose. In addition, rights of commercial Hindi and regional films are procured for 
screening abroad on not-for-profit basis. These films are also subtitled and dubbed in 
different foreign languages for wider reach. To promote Indian music and songs, special 
music collections of classical and popular songs are curated for gifting purpose abroad.   
4.6 XPD Division also publishes e-books, coffee table books and procures books for 
supplying to Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad. XPD Division also supplies books to 
Indian Embassies and Consulates for setting up ‘India corners’ in university and public 
libraries abroad. Under 'Bharat Ek Parichay' initiative of XPD Division, more than 650 India 
corners have been set up around the world.  
4.7 In the domestic front, the Distinguished Lecture Series where retired ambassadors 
interact with university students on the topics of foreign policy has been expanded to 
include universities in Tier II and Tier III towns. Another initiative called ‘SAMEEP - 
Student and MEA Engagement Programme’, where an officer of MEA interacts with 
students from his alma mater, has been further intensified.   XPD division also publishes 
'India Perspectives', a bi-monthly digital magazine in 14 foreign languages, besides in 
English and Hindi. The content of the publication is widely used by Indian Embassies and 
Consulates for local publicity purpose across various digital platforms. 
 
4.8 Spelling out the function performed by the XPD Division, the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs on 20 December 2019 submitted: 

90 | P a g e 
 
“The External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division is a key facilitator in our 
cultural diplomacy within the Ministry of External Affairs.  This division has 
regularly commissioned articles and documentary films on a variety of subjects 
related to our culture since 1981. In addition, suitable Indian feature films are 
regularly procured with non-commercial screening rights in order to promote Indian 
cinema abroad. Special documentaries have been commissioned in the last two 
years, such as those on Dr. Ambedkar called Mook Nayak and on the Kailash 
Mansarovar Yatra; and three special short films on the Indian general elections, 
Gandhiji and Guru Nanak Devji since these are all major events in 2019 which have 
been done by the Government of India to commemorate these important events 
abroad.  
The XPD Division has led the Ministry’s efforts to celebrate lives and 
achievements of Gandhiji and Guru Nanak Devji worldwide from 2018 to 2020. 
Artistes from 150 countries rendered Gandhiji’s favourite bhajan ‘Vaishnav Jan To’ 
in the Gujarati language and the compilation has been universally appreciated 
throughout the world. We have a book published – we would certainly be happy to 
give it to everybody – which is a compilation of all 150 countries. It has a pen drive 
and CDs as well. We would hope that the Members of the Committee would see this. 
It is indeed something which has been very highly appreciated.” 
4.9 Explicating the rationale behind the merger of External Publicity and Public 
Diplomacy Division, the Ministry submitted that the Publicity Division in MEA was set up 
in 1949 as one of the pioneering Divisions in MEA which later came to be known as 
External Publicity (XP) Division. Public Diplomacy activities were very much part and 
parcel of External Publicity Division. In 2006, a separate Public Diplomacy (PD) Division 
was created in line with international practices as public diplomacy was acquiring higher 
profile. PD Division provided a framework to public diplomacy activities carried out by the 
Ministry and our Missions abroad while XP Division was mandated to take care of media 
engagement both in India and abroad. However, it was felt that there was a lack of synergy 
and overlapping mandates since both the Divisions were engaged in the business of 
promoting “Brand India”. Further our Missions abroad would often not be clear as to which 
of the two Divisions they approach in the Ministry for their outreach activities in the 
changed system. In order to address these problems, the Ministry decided to merge XP and 
PD Divisions into a single division- External Publicity and Public Diplomacy (XPD) 
Division in January 2014. Hence forth, the External Publicity & Public Diplomacy Division 
(XPD) of the Ministry of External Affairs continued its mandated task of effectively 

91 | P a g e 
 
articulating the position of the Government of India on various foreign policy issues to the 
national and international media, as well as engaging with domestic and global audiences to 
explain India, its foreign policy and various aspects of India’s engagement with the 
world.  Alongside an active engagement with the electronic and print media, the Ministry 
has simultaneously increased its public diplomacy initiatives, especially of the digital 
variety, resulting in a magnified impact in shaping public opinion and reaching out to a 
wider audience. 
 
4.10 When asked about the manner in which the merger has enhanced efficiency in 
propagation of India’s soft power, the Ministry stated that the merger has led to a synergy in 
the media outreach activities and public diplomacy initiatives. It has resulted in three 
significant advantages:- 
• A Holistic Communication Strategy:  The merger has helped to shape a holistic 
perspective of India’s soft power projection and foreign policy narrative that is 
directed towards either media or our missions and posts abroad. The move has 
ensured that an officer in charge of Public Diplomacy is also aware of the media 
perspective and therefore, this enhances his capability to address any situation. It has 
helped fine-tune our communication strategy, in all outreach areas (Soft power 
projection, Public diplomacy initiatives, media communication, etc.). This 
integration has helped to leverage the power of digital diplomacy for setting the right 
narrative and putting things in the right perspective for all concerned. 
• A Single Point of Contact for Missions: The merging of the two divisions has also 
streamlined communication between the Division and missions/posts on any 
media/public diplomacy/soft power projection. It has ensured that the Division has 
become the single point of contact for our missions/posts with respect to any outside 
communication. The media implications of any communication/soft power 
projection are relayed to the Mission through the Division, ensuring that there is no 
room for confusion as far as communication strategies for the missions are 
concerned. 
• Efficiency in Human Resource Deployment: The merger has also helped in 
optimizing human resource deployment. Following the merger, a total of 14 posts 

92 | P a g e 
 
were surrendered by both Divisions including a post of a Joint Secretary and a 
Director level officer.  
4.11 Further, the merger had infused a new vigour and the Division has ramped up its 
public diplomacy initiatives especially through various social media platforms. A case in 
point is the declaration of 21st June to be observed as the International Day of Yoga (IDY) 
by the United Nations. XPD Division coordinated the celebration of first ever International 
Yoga Day across the world in 192 countries with live streaming events, and social media 
updates in real time. These took place as events unfolded from East to West, with the main 
celebrations in India as well as that in the UN Headquarters and Times Square, New York 
being the highlight. Consequently each year down the line IDY saw more number of people 
and places to celebrate yoga. Events like celebrations of 125th anniversary of Dr. B. R 
Ambedkar, India –Africa Summit etc. used the Ministry’s social media channels effectively. 
The XPD Division played a nodal role in the 150th Birth Anniversary Celebrations of 
Mahatma Gandhi in India and abroad. Of special note was the launch of a video medley of 
the Mahatma’s favourite hymn, Vaishnav Jana Toh Tene Kahiye, performed by singers 
from 155 countries around the world. Similarly the 550thBirth Anniversary of Guru Nanak 
Devji was organized all over the world with the assistance of our Missions and Post abroad 
in 2019.  
 
4.12  The Committee note that in order to impart greater synergy in media outreach 
activities and public diplomacy initiatives within MEA, the External Publicity (XP) 
Division was merged with the Public Diplomacy (PD) Division to create the External 
Publicity & Diplomacy (XPD) Division. The XPD Division provides publicity material 
and other inputs to the different Divisions of the Ministry and the Indian Embassies 
and Consulates abroad to facilitate their engagement, partnership and dialogue with 
the relevant stakeholders for India’s soft power promotion. The Committee observe 
that the role of the XPD Division includes commissioning of short films, 
documentaries, audio-visual clips for social media promotion, publishing e-books, 
coffee table books, procuring books for supplying to Indian Embassies and Consulates 
abroad and organizing Distinguished Lecture Series. The Committee are pleased to 
know that the XPD Division has played an instrumental role in worldwide celebrations 

93 | P a g e 
 
of 125th Birth Anniversary of B.R. Ambedkar, 150th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma 
Gandhi and 550th Birth Anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev.  
As a key facilitator in India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy within the 
Ministry of External Affairs, the Committee urge that the XPD Division should expand 
India’s public diplomacy footprint and resort to active usage of print and social media 
to maximize the tangible outcomes. The Committee also desire that with the active 
involvement of Indian Missions/Posts abroad, the Division should continue to make 
focused and persistent efforts towards popularization of Indian personalities and 
historical events on a regular basis.  
(Recommendation No. 41) 
II. POLICY PLANNING AND RESEARCH DIVISION 
4.13 The Policy Planning and Research (PP&R) Division is the nodal division of MEA 
for medium and long-term planning and organizing public diplomacy initiatives with the 
strategic and academic community. The Division is also the administrative agency for 
matters pertaining to Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) AND Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (RIS). 
4.14 While tendering evidence before the Committee on 20 December 2019, the Foreign 
Secretary outlined the role of the PP& R Division as under: 
“The Policy Planning and Research Division is another important facilitator in the 
promotion of cultural diplomacy through Ministry’s three annual flagship events. 
Since 2016 the Raisina Dialogue, the Indian Ocean Conference and the Global 
Technology Summit are designed to bring global audiences to India and our region 
and they have become platforms to highlight different aspects of our soft power in 
surrounding regions including the Indo-Pacific. The Indian Ocean Conference in 
particular which is held in different countries of the Indo-Pacific region each year is 
intended to cast the spotlight on our historical and cultural ties stretching back to 
thousands of years and to link it to our current diplomatic efforts with this region.” 
4.15  The Committee note that the Policy Planning and Research (PP&R) Division is 
involved in medium and long-term planning and organizing public diplomacy 
initiatives with the strategic and academic community. Since 2016, the Division has 
been organizing three annual flagship events - Raisina Dialogue, the Indian Ocean 

94 | P a g e 
 
Conference and the Global Technology Summit to underscore various facets of India’s 
soft power. The Committee recommend that the Division should engage more 
vigorously and constructively with foreign think tanks, Universities and academic 
communities to widen the net of India’s global outreach. The Division should also 
devise mechanisms to formulate annual policy and plan for enhanced cultural 
engagement with different countries and circulate it to the concerned Missions/Posts 
abroad for timely execution.  
(Recommendation No.42) 
III. INDIAN MISSION/POSTS ABROAD 
4.16 As regards the role of Indian Missions/Posts in projection of our soft power the 
Ministry of External Affairs stated that MEA, India’s Missions abroad and ICCR constitute 
the triangle within which the task of India’s soft power projection through public and 
cultural diplomacy is fulfilled. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) accept the strategic 
significance of the work of soft power projection through public and cultural diplomacy as 
among the key tools in the formulation and implementation of India’s foreign policy and 
therefore, Heads of Mission  attach top priority and  importance to the task of soft-power 
projection. All ICCR’s activities, including those conducted through its extended arms 
Indian Cultural Centers, the Chairs of Indian Studies in Foreign Universities, and the foreign 
students’ scholarships programme, are conducted in close coordination with Indian 
Missions/posts in the country concerned.  
4.17 Missions draw the country-specific demand based on local interest and recommend 
activities, which should be effective in promotion of the soft power. Also Missions identify 
the major cultural events happening in the host country and recommend a fitting 
participation from India. MEA in consultation with other stake holders would arrange to 
send the desired delegation to represent India. Missions maintain close contacts with sources 
of soft power and carry out such activities which further enhance the soft power impact of 
India.  
4.18 When asked whether there is a mechanism for regular engagement of 
Embassies/Missions abroad with media, think tanks and other institutions shaping public 

95 | P a g e 
 
opinion in respective countries the Ministry stated that Indian Embassies and Consulates 
have been asked to proactively engage with foreign media, think tanks and key interlocutors 
who shape public opinion. Indian Embassies and Consulates regularly organize background 
briefing and briefing on important developments to local foreign media. Heads of Missions 
have been encouraged to remain actively engaged with foreign media explain official 
positions and address issues of mutual interest.  
4.19 The Ministry of External Affairs and Indian Missions have developed institutional 
linkages with think tanks. The Ministry supports four flagship annual conferences conducted 
by prominent think-tanks in the following domains: 
Theme Conference Name Organising Think-Tank Partner 
Geopolitics Raisina Dialogue ORF 
Geoeconomics Asian Economic Dialogue Pune International Centre 
Geotechnology Global Technology Summit Carnegie India 
Geostrategy Indian Ocean Conference India Foundation 
 These conferences have evolved into influential platforms for engaging think tanks 
and prominent individuals. Ministry also supports other conferences that engage think-tanks 
and academic constituencies.  
 
4.20 On the Committee’s query regarding measures taken to counter negative press that 
have the impact of tarnishing our image abroad, the Ministry submitted that articles by 
External Affairs Minister and Foreign Secretary have been translated in local foreign 
language and published in local print and online media. Wherever needed Head of Missions 
give interviews and write op-ed pieces and articles in local media. Indian Missions/Posts 
generate publicity content in local language. Missions/Posts are increasingly using locally 
translated/subtitled publicity material for wider dissemination.  Indian Missions/Posts have 
established system of communication with prominent NRIs and Indian Diaspora groups. 
Publicity material including short video clips, info graphics and e-pamphlet etc are provided 
containing facts and figure for dissemination locally by Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
Positive articles highlighting success stories and achievement of Indians in the different 
spheres are shared with foreign interlocutors and local media by Indian Missions/Posts.  

96 | P a g e 
 
4.21 Additionally, the Ministry organizes visits of foreign journalists to India with the 
objective of familiarizing them with the country. The familiarization programme includes 
engagements with Ministers/senior Government officials in the MEA and other 
Ministries/Departments, and field visits to places of commercial, scientific, educational, and 
touristic interest. Besides regular dissemination of information by Missions/Posts to 
government interlocutors, media outlets, business chambers, civil society institutions and 
Diaspora, there is regular engagement with foreign media to facilitate objective coverage on 
various issues of global and national interests.XPD Division coordinates with Indian 
Embassies and Consulates for dissemination of Government of India’s policies, programmes 
and initiatives. 
4.22 The Committee are aware that Indian Missions/Posts abroad have been playing 
a critical role in advancing India’s soft power and cultural outreach. The Committee 
note that all the cultural activities of Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) are 
carried out through close coordination with the Missions/Posts in the concerned 
country. Missions/Posts also chalk out country-specific requirements and activities that 
can be effective in promotion of the soft power. The Committee also notice that the 
Missions identify the major cultural events happening in the host country and 
recommend a fitting participation from India.  
While acknowledging the significant role performed by the Indian 
Mission/Posts abroad, the Committee feel that there is lack of vigor in countering 
negative press that have the impact of tarnishing our image abroad. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Ministry should ensure every Mission/Post has one 
Public Relations officer, specifically for the purpose of giving diplomatic push to 
Brand India. The Missions/Posts should continue charting annual cultural 
enhancement plans for constructive, focused and meaningful cultural engagement with 
the concerned country.  
(Recommendation No.43) 
III. Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) 
4.23 Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) was set up in 
1983 in New Delhi as a leading policy research institution of developing countries on 

97 | P a g e 
 
international economic policy issues. The institute owes its origin to the Non-aligned 
Movement (NAM) Summit held in New Delhi in 1983. It functions as a Registered Society 
with independent Governing Council and is funded by the Ministry of External Affairs, 
Government of India. In the various Group of 77 (G-77) and NAM Summits in the late 
1970s it was increasingly recognised that developing countries should have their own 
institutional support for devising policy options and negotiating strategies so as to promote 
and safeguard their interests in a more effective manner.  
4.24 Specifying the exact role of RIS in promotion of India's soft power and cultural 
diplomacy the Ministry stated thatas soft power is the ability to shape the preferences of 
others through appeal and attraction, RIS is steadfastly engaged in promoting India’s 
philosophy of “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam – वसुधैवक ु टुɾक ं” and our Government’s policy of 
laying emphasis on ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas and Sabka Prayas’ and 
‘Aatma Nirbhar Bharat’ through its ongoing policy research studies to defend  and promote 
the trade and economic interests of the country, as well as of Global South.  
4.25 As a consequence of its constant efforts to work for the promotion of the interests of 
the developing countries, India’s solidarity based development cooperation initiatives are 
receiving far greater traction abroad than ever before, particularly since it is   not based on 
any sort of pre-conditions.Itis conducted in accordance with the priority, programmes and 
approval of the recipient countries, treats its recipients as development partners and does not 
result in mounting debts for them unlike the OECD prescribed Western development 
paradigm for economic aid which is linked to a wide range of conditionality for developing 
countries. Further, unlike China, India’s development programme is free from accusations 
of trampling sovereignty or integrity of its partners or strangulating them financially with 
unbearable debt trap.  
4.26 In order to promote India’s unique international development cooperation narrative, 
RIS convenes a wide range of dialogues and discussions at the regional and global level.   In 
this context, RIS organizes an annual international conference on South-South Cooperation 
in which global development research scholars, policy shapers, academia, think-tanks, civil 
society organizations, and thought leaders take part apart from UN Office for South-South 

98 | P a g e 
 
Cooperation. In addition, RIS has also added the dimension of University Connect to it by 
inviting young scholars  from India and abroad to its dedicated sessions as part of its larger 
strategy to prepare the next generation of  young scholars and thinkers to  adopt India’s 
policy postures on key trade and economic issues for accelerated advancement of Global 
South.  
4.27 As such the entire spectrum of the work programme of RIS is anchored on issues 
having a major bearing on India’s national interest as well as Global South  in areas such as 
Blue Economy, Indo-Pacific Trade, digital trade, ASEAN connect, IBSA and BRICS, STI 
and SDGs and RIS  shares its knowledge, experience and expertise through a wide range of 
dialogues and publications to promote India’s soft power abroad. Currently, RIS  is also 
giving added importance to its  research work on the impact of Industrial Revolution 4.0 on 
developing countries, covering Artificial Intelligence, Science, Technology and Innovation, 
automation and robotics, digital technology, and nontechnology which constitute a vital part 
of global trade, financial and economic world order.  RIS  not only gives vital inputs to the 
Government in its policy making process  but also  shares its expertise with its wide network 
of international partners to promote clearer understanding of India’s standpoint on such 
important and emerging issues impacting the interests of the developing countries.  
4.28 Further, RIS devotes a major component of its research work on Trade in Services 
and e-commerce which are gaining far higher importance at regional and global level than 
ever before and are posing major challenges for the developing countries.RIS  has also  
intensified its research work on SDGs, in addition to climate change, emergence of new 
renewable energy policies etc to address the emerging challenges being faced by the country 
and other developing countries.   
4.29 As these issues require intense engagement with national, regional and global 
research scholars and policy shapers, RIS organizes them through a wide range of webinars, 
dialogues, workshops and conferences and brings out practical, evidence-based and rigorous 
research studies which are widely appreciated in Global South.  Seeing the growing 
influence of specific studies being conducted by RIS, many of the Western countries and 
think tanks regularly seek the participation of RIS in their policy research dialogues to 

99 | P a g e 
 
understand the key interests of the developing countries.Over the years,they have also 
increasingly started using the expressions of partnership, assistance and demand driven 
approaches advocated by India through its research studies on international development 
assistance.  Over the years, RIS has taken several institutional initiatives to promote India’s 
policy and programmes among developing countries, including AIC, GDC, FISD, BEF, 
FITM, STIP, SACEPS, BRICS Academic Forum BNPTT, AINTT, IBSA Academic Forum, 
NeST and FIDC. 
4.30 The mandate and objectives of RIS are as follows:- 
a) To promote the concept of self-reliance among the developing countries and 
to forge and maintain a system of effective links amongst the various 
research institutions of these countries with a view to utilize their research 
capabilities for the maximum common benefit; 
b) To undertake and/or commission analytical studies; to evaluate and interpret 
information and data; to conduct or cause to conduct research in current 
trends and future projection concerning social, economic, scientific and 
technological matters on a global and regional basis as appropriate; 
c) To disseminate factual information and data relating to diverse aspects such 
as trade, industrialisation, finance, energy, raw materials, technology transfer, 
education, health, etc. in such form and manner as best calculated to 
strengthen the unified position and approach of the non-aligned and other 
developing countries; 
d) To serve as a national focal point for co-ordination of research activities 
among the non-aligned and other developing countries and to this end 
organize conference, meetings, seminars and workshops as appropriate; 
e) To serve and effectively function on a continuous basis as a data 
bank/information storage, processing and retrieval centre, on global and 
regional problems bearing on the interest of non-aligned and other 
developing countries; 
f) To promote research studies bearing on cooperation among developing 
countries to economic, scientific, technological and related areas; 

100 | P a g e 
 
g) To advise the Government of India on all matters pertaining to multilateral 
economic and social issues, as may be referred to it from time to time, 
including collaborative arrangements with developing countries; 
h) To give grants for publications of research undertaken by RIS and for 
periodicals and journals devoted to such research; and 
i) To undertake all such other activities as are incidental to or necessary for or 
conductive to achieving all or any of the above objectives. 
4.31 In order to share India's development experience with partner developing countries 
the Global Development Centre has been set up at RIS. When asked about the objectives 
and functioning of the Centre, the Ministry stated that India as a developing country is 
gaining increasing relevance as a major global actor extending development assistance to its 
partners in Global South.  It is also actively engaged in shaping narratives, policies and 
institutors in the global governance system and is playing a crucial role for the achievement 
of the 2030 agenda for the rest of the developing world through the creation of an ecosystem 
that allows for cross pollination of ideas and solutions.  
4.32 In order to deepen India’s development and economic partnerships, GDC is engaged 
in the formation of partnerships with relevant key Ministries in India, particularly those that 
have attained considerable expertise through Government’s flagship programmes to share 
with GDC partner countries. It is engaged in the process of developing sound mechanisms 
through which it can sustainably collaborate other experienced development actors as well 
its partners.  
4.33 GDC is giving shape to extend its support to India’s development initiatives by 
building on multi stakeholders’ engagement through platforms like IBSA, BRICS, ASEAN, 
BIMSTEC, UNOSSC, G-20 etc. It can be accomplished by conducting series of 
roundtables, events etc. in which RIS would be the anchor partner. As such, GDC works at 
governmental and other levels contributing to strengthening of its partnerships at multiple 
levels of engagement through government, civil society and think tanks, academia, private 
sector etc.  

101 | P a g e 
 
4.34 On SDGs, GDC is developing a vibrant, cooperative and constructive engagement 
for development with the aim of making accelerated progress within the country, across its 
borders among interested partners and with other partner countries in Asia and Africa. As a 
matter of fact, GDC aims to effectively function as the reliable single window depositary of 
developmental experience, expertise and capabilities with a strong network of partners 
coming from the government, civil society, academic, private sector and other players to 
further strengthen South-South and global partnerships. 
4.35 The focus areas of GDC are as follows: 
i)  Building of resilient health services;  
ii) Agriculture with particular focus on nutrition and sustainable healthy food 
systems;  
iii) Digital financial inclusion; and  
iv) Women’s economic empowerment with particular focus on women’s 
entrepreneurship.  
4.36 GDC is attempting to promote India’s role in the international development echo 
system as a major provider of development assistance by sharing its innovations for 
development with other countries thereby supporting South-South Cooperation. It is 
working to  diffuse  evidence based good practices from India, learning from global good 
practices of other developing countries and strengthening GDC’s commitment for policy 
implementation within India and abroad in its partner countries.  
4.37 Specifying the role of RIS in projection of soft power projection, the representative 
of the Ministry of External Affairs while giving evidence before the Committee on 18 
December 2020 stated: 
“As far as soft power is concerned, RIS exercises this through South-South 
Cooperation, sharing of best developmental practices with developing and least 
developed countries, propagating the Indian technical and economic programmes, 
which we call as ITEC programmes, hosting of India, Brazil, South Africa, which 
are IBSA scholars, providing a common platform for discussion and finding 
solutions to developmental problems, etc. RIS also attempts to be the voice of the 
global South when it comes to economic policy issues. The publications and 

102 | P a g e 
 
occasional papers of RIS are referred to by policy and decision makers, academics 
and think tanks.  
 The work programme of RIS also includes promotion of traditional medicine 
systems which have been a strength for dealing with multiple health issues. RIS has 
set up the Forum on Indian traditional medicines with the support of the Ministry of 
AYUSH in the Government of India.” 
 
4.38  The representative of the Ministry further added: 
“What is often ignored is economic soft power. I would like to say, that is what RIS 
best represents in terms of Indian economic power which, I would say for the sake of 
understanding, is the polar opposite of Chinese economic soft power.  The Chinese 
economic soft power is: you lend money; you take your own people; you build 
something; you get countries into debt.  I would like to say that we do exactly the 
opposite.  Our intention is to first ask the countries what they need from us.  So, it is 
a bottom-up approach.  Second, we do not create dependency.  We create inter-
dependency so that India and the Southern countries can work together for their 
advancement.  The third and the most important is capacity building for developing 
and least developed countries.  So, this is what RIS is about.  RIS is about creating a 
voice for the global South.  It is because, between you and me I am frankly speaking, 
many countries do not understand the grave implications of global economic fora, 
the positions to take in WTO, the positions to take in G20.  They do not understand.  
For example, we had a detailed seminar on e-commerce, electronic commerce, and 
there are negotiations currently going on in WTO on e-commerce.  Many countries 
do not understand why data is considered the new oil.  The way oil and coal were, 
we say data is the new oil.  But what is significant about data?  How do the countries 
have to protect data? Even India is grappling with this subject.” 
4.39 The Committee note that Research and Information System for Developing 
Countries (RIS) is an autonomous body within MEA and is entrusted with the task of 
conducting research on international economic issues. Role of RIS in soft power 
projection involves South-South cooperation, sharing India’s development experience 
with partner countries, propagating Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(ITEC) programmes, hosting India Brazil South Africa (IBSA) scholars, promotion of 
traditional medicine system, etc. The Committee also note that RIS has set up a Global 
Development Centre to serve as a single window depository of India’s developmental 
experience, expertise and capabilities. While noting that RIS has been playing a 
pioneering role in promoting India as an economic power, the Committee find that its 

103 | P a g e 
 
mandate is still rooted in Cold War lexicon. The Committee, therefore, urge that the 
MEA should re-formulate the objectives, functions and structure of RIS to make it 
more contemporary and relevant. 
(Recommendation No.44) 
  
IV. Archaeological Survey of India 
4.40 The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), under the Ministry of Culture, is the 
premier organization for the archaeological researches and protection of the cultural heritage 
of the nation. Maintenance of ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains of 
national importance is the prime concern of the ASI. Besides it regulate all archaeological 
activities in the country as per the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958. It also regulates Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972. 
4.41 Set up to preserve and conserve monuments and historical sites of national 
importance, ASI has gone past national boundaries to act as India’s cultural ambassador in 
nations such as Vietnam, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Laos, Cambodia, Nepal, Bahrain, Angola, 
Afghanistan, Maldives, Bhutan and Egypt. The efforts have helped foster favourable public 
opinion towards India and Indians and opened doors to a myriad of opportunities. Some of 
the major activities of ASI that directly impinges on promoting India’s cultural diplomacy 
are as follows: 
(a) Project Mausam is a project of the Ministry of Culture launched by India at 
the 38th Session of the World Heritage Committee held in Doha, Qatar. 39 countries 
in the Indian Ocean region have been identified under Project Mausam.   
The objectives include Achieving Transnational Nomination on ‘Indian Ocean 
Maritime Routes’ under World Heritage List of UNESCO, listing of sites, intangible 
heritage and inscriptions on the Memory of the World Heritage Register; creating 
links to existing World Heritage Sites; reviving lost linkages with nations; 
Redefining 'Cultural Landscapes; to support promotion of cultural relations with 
several countries in the Indian Ocean region. 
(b) The conservation work of Ta Prohm temple in Cambodia is being executed 
by the ASI since May 2007. Phase-l and ll of conservation work have been 

104 | P a g e 
 
completed and the Phase-Ill of the conservation work of this temple amounting to 
Rs. 29.32 crores is being executed since 2016-17. 
(c) The conservation work for the Vat Phou temple in Lao PDR by the ASl took 
8 years from 2009 to 2017. The Phase-ll work for Vat Phou temple will be 
completed within a period of 10 years beginning 2018-19.  
(d) The structural conservation and chemical preservation work of Ananda 
Temple, dedicated to Lord Buddha, at Bagan in Myanmar was taken up by ASI from 
May, 2012 to June, 2018.  The work has been completed. Another project for 
structural conservation & chemical preservation of 12 earthquake damaged 
monuments at Bagan has been approved and is proposed to be initiated shortly. 
(e) Conservation works of Cham monuments in Vietnam is being undertaken by 
ASI under the purview of India-Vietnam Cultural Exchange Program.  The ASI 
Team is being deputed since 2017 for execution of conservation work.  
(f) ASI has undertaken the project for structural conservation and chemical 
preservation of Friday Mosque at Male, Maldives. ASI Team has proceeded to 
Maldives on 10.12.2019 for execution of work. The conservation work is proposed 
to be completed over a period of two years. 
 
4.42 The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), as an attached office under 
the Ministry of Culture, is the premier organization for the archaeological researches 
and protection of the cultural heritage of the nation. As part of its cultural diplomacy, 
ASI and MEA have been actively involved in restoration of historical sites and 
monuments in our immediate as well as extended neighbourhood. ASI has crossed 
national boundaries and undertaken conservations works in Bhutan, Vietnam, Nepal, 
Maldives, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Laos and so on. The Committee feel that 
such endeavours have opened up new avenues for international diplomatic and 
economic cooperation. The Committee suggest that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should cooperate with ASI and tap these new avenues for promoting India’s cultural 
diplomacy by forging collaboration with international and national institutions. 
(Recommendation No. 45) 
 

105 | P a g e 
 
Annexure- I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2019-20) HELD ON 20 DECEMBER, 2019. 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20 December, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs in 
Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Pakauri Lal Kol 
3  Smt Meenakshi Lekhi 
4. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
5. Shri P.C.Mohan 
6. Shri Borlakunta Venkatesh Netha 
7.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
8.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
9. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla 
10. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri K.J. Alphons 
12. Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
13. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
14. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai     Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No.  Name    Designation 
1. Shri Vijay Gokhale    Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Dinesh K. Patnaik    Additional Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
3. Shri   Akhilesh Mishra   Additional Secretary, DG (ICCR) 

106 | P a g e 
 
4. Smt. Namrata Kumar    Joint Secretary, DDG (ICCR) 
5. Smt. Shubhdarshini Tripathi   Joint Secretary, DDG (ICCR) 
6. Shri Prashant Pise    Joint Secretary, DDG (ICCR) 
7.     Shri Raveesh Kumar    Joint Secretary  
8. Shri Robert Shetkintong   Joint Secretary  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to have a briefing on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and Cultural Diplomacy: 
Prospects and Limitations’. The Chairperson also drew the attention of all the 
representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to 
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings.  
3. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs set the context and tone for 
discussion on the subject and delved upon issues which inter alia included objectives of 
India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy; definition, scope and tools of soft power; role of 
Indian Diaspora in promoting cultural diplomacy; budgetary constraints; coordinating 
mechanisms between multiple agencies involved in soft power projection; Public 
Diplomacy Division; rebuilding historical monuments displaying Indian influence; sports 
training; Youth Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas; role of Diaspora in cultural diplomacy; 
engagement with press and so on. 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised pertinent queries impinging on issues such as; 
objectives, mandate and activities of ICCR; empanelment of artists in ICCR; scholarship to 
foreign students; overlapping of mandates of concerned line Ministries; youth exchange 
programmes etc. 
5.  The representatives of both the Ministries responded to the concerns raised by 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee to the 
Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
 

107 | P a g e 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 | P a g e 
 
Annexure- II 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2019-20) HELD ON 7 JANUARY , 2020 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7 January, 2020 from 1500 hrs to 1705 hrs in 
Committee Room  ‘E’ , Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi 
PRESENT 
Shree P.P Chaudhary – Chairperson 
     Lok Sabha 
1. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
2. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
3. Dr. K.C. Patel 
4. Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
5. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
6. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
7. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri K.J. Aphons 
9. Shri P. Chidambaram 
10. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  - Additional Director 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
  
1. Smt. Vijay Thakur    - Secretary (EAST) 
2. Shri Dinesh K. Patnaik  - Additional Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
3. Shri Akhilesh Mishra   - DG (ICCR) (Additional Secretary)  
4. Smt. Namrata Kaur    - DDG (ICCR) (Joint Secretary Rank) 
5. Smt. Shubhdarshini Tripathi  - DDG (ICCR) (Joint Secretary Rank)  
6. Shri Raveesh Kumar   - Joint Secretary (XP) 
7. Shri Robert Shetkingtong  - Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Yogendra Tripathi     -  Secretary 
2. Shri S. C. Barmma  - Joint Secretary 

109 | P a g e 
 
3. Shri Pranav Kullar  - Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Nirupama Kotru  -  Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai - Joint Secretary 
6. Shri P. L. Sahu  - Joint Secretary 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
1. Shri Yogendra Tripathi - Secretary (Tourism) 
2. Mrs. Meenakshi Sharma - Director General (Tourism) 
3. Shri Vikas Rustagi  - Joint Director General (Publicity) 
 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
1. Shri Radhe Shyam Julaniya - Secretary (Youth Affairs Sports)  
2. Shri Asit Singh  -  Joint Secretary (Youth Affairs) 
 
MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
1. Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha - Secretary (AYUSH)   
2. Shri P. N. Ranjit Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Manoj Nesari  - Advisor (Ayurveda) 
4. Dr. Anupam Srivastava - Director (Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeth)  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of 
Tourism, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Ministry of AYUSH to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have a briefing on the subject ‘India’s soft power and Cultural 
Diplomacy: Prospects and Limitations’. He also drew the attention of the representatives of 
the Ministries to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. The Secretary (EAST) briefed the Committee on the various issues pertaining to the 
subject which inter-alia included various activities being carried out by the ICCR towards 
promoting India’s soft power through the cultural centres, by collaborating with other 
Ministries, through overall functioning of the missions abroad as well as through External 
Publicity and Diplomacy Division, Indian Overseas Division and celebration of the 
International Yoga Day in collaboration with Ministry of AYUSH etc. Thereafter, 
representatives of Ministries of Tourism and Culture made PowerPoint presentations on 
their respective initiatives. Ministry of AYUSH and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
also briefed the Committee on their role and achievement. 

110 | P a g e 
 
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised various queries related to rationale 
for the merger of External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division; budgetary allocation of 
ICCR and its utilization; lack of clarity about the revamping of ICCR by the Ministry of 
Culture; requirement of legislation for approval of AYUSH medicines; appointment of 
Cultural ambassadors; use of Indian diaspora for cultural activities etc. The need for close 
cooperation between the various concerned Ministries was stressed by the Committee. The 
representatives of all the Ministries responded at length to the queries of the Members. The 
Ministries were asked to furnish written replies to some queries, replies to which were not 
readily available. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A Verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

111 | P a g e 
 
Annexure- III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2019-20) HELD ON 26 AUGUST, 2020 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26 August, 2020 from 1500 hrs. to 1740 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Margani Bharat 
3  Smt Meenakshi Lekhi 
4. Shri P.C.Mohan 
5.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
6.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
7. Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla 
8. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
9. Shri Premachanndran 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri K.J. Alphons 
11. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai     Director 
2. Shri Paolienlal Haokip    Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Manoj K. Bharti Special Secretary (AD) 
2. Shri Akhilesh Mishra Additional Secretary (DPA) 
3. Shri Dinesh K Patnaik DG (ICCR) 
4. Shri Prashant Pise DDG (ICCR) 
        5. Dr. Anupam Ray Joint Secretary (PP & R) 

112 | P a g e 
 
     6. Shri Manish Joint Secretary (OIA-II)  
     7. Shri Anurag Srivastava Joint Secretary (XP) 
     8. Shri Rober Shetkintong Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
1. Shri Amit Khare Secretary  
2. Ms. Neeta Prasad Joint Secretary  
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
1. Shri Darpan Jain Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Sangeeta Saxena Director 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
1. Shri Amit Khare Secretary 
2. Shri S.S Vempati CEO, Prasar Bharti 
3. Shri K. S. Dhatwalia Pr. DG, PIB 
4. Shri Atul Kumar Tiwari Additional Secretary 
        5. Ms. T.C.A Kalyani Joint Secretary (Films) 
        6. Ms. Neerja Sekhar Joint Secretary 
 
NITI AAYOG 
1. Dr. Rakesh Sarwal Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Avinash Mishra Adviser (JS Rank) 
3. Dr. Prem Singh Adviser (JS Rank) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Education, Commerce & Industry, 
Information and Broadcasting and NITI Aayog to the Sitting of the Committee convened to 
take oral evidence on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects & 
Limitations’. The Chairperson then drew the attention of all the representatives to Direction 

113 | P a g e 
 
55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to maintain the confidentiality of 
the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised the witnesses about the provisions of 
Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. After presenting a brief overview of the mechanisms for the welfare, protection and 
engagement of Indian Diaspora, the Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
delved upon issues such as role of private players in soft power projection, Soft Power 
Matrix, diaspora as cultural ambassadors, Videsh Bhawans, coordination with State 
governments, ICCR Cultural Centres, ICCR Regional Offices, Yoga Certification Boardand 
so on. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Education and NITI Aayog gave a brief overview of the role of their respective 
Ministries/organizations in the conduct of India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy.  
4. During the course of discussion, the Chairperson and the Members raised a number 
of queries about single admission portal for foreign students, religious diplomacy, UN 
Democracy Fund, Champion Sector Service Sector Scheme, ICCR Scholarships, Prasar 
Bharati ,DD India , etc. 
5.  The representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Education, Commerce & 
Industry, Information and Broadcasting and NITI Aayog responded to the concerns raised 
by the Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the members of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 

114 | P a g e 
 
Annexure- IV 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) HELD ON 28 OCTOBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28 October, 2020 from 1600 hrs. to 1810 
hrs in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4 Smt Meenakshi Lekhi 
5. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
6.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
7. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
9. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
10. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.C. Koul     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Paolienlal Haokip   Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Manoj K. Bharti Special Secretary  
(AD) 

115 | P a g e 
 
2. Shri Dinesh K Patnaik DG (ICCR) 
3.  Ms. Manika Jain Joint Secretary  
(OIA-II) 
4. 
 
Dr. Anupam Ray Joint Secretary  
(PP &R) 
5. 
 
Shri Prashant Pise DDG (ICCR) 
6. Shri Anurag Srivastava Joint Secretary  
(XP) 
7. Shri Anil Kumar Rai Joint Secretary  
(Parl & Coord) 
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh Secretary 
2. Ms. Nirupama Kotru Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary 
5. Dr. K. Sreenivasarao Secretary, (Sahitya Akademi) 
6. Dr. Uttam Pacharne Chairman,( Lalit Kala Akademi) 
7. Shri Ramakrishna Vedala Secretary, I/C (Lalit Kala Akademi) 
8. Ms. Rita Swami Choudhary Secretary Sangeet Natak Akademi 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs (MEA) and Culture to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have oral evidence on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and Cultural 
Diplomacy: Prospects and Limitations’. The Chairperson drew the attention of all the 
representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to 
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings and also apprised the witnesses about the 
provisions of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 

116 | P a g e 
 
3.  At first, the Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs delved upon 
issues such as soft power approach, sending of cultural troupes abroad, promoting 
democracy, comparison with other soft power organizations, coordination mechanism 
between concerned Ministries, organizational strength within the Indian Cultural Centres 
abroad and so on.  
4. Thereafter the representatives of the Ministry of Culture apprised the Committee 
about Cultural Exchange Programmes, cultural activities undertaken through multilateral 
organizations, role of Lalit Kala Akademi, Sahitya Akademi and Sangeet Natak Akademi 
in cultural diplomacy, cultural spaces, Project Mausam, Indo-Foreign Friendship Cultural 
Societies, participation in Indian Book Fairs etc.  
5.  The Chairperson and Members raised a number of queries on the subject. 
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministries responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee to the 
Secretariat at the earliest.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

117 | P a g e 
 
Annexure- V 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2020-21)  HELD ON 18 DECEMBER, 2020 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 December, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 
1300 hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt Meenakshi Lekhi 
4  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
6.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
7. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
8.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
9.  Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma 
10.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri K.J. Alphone 
12.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
SECRETARIAT 
2. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Chatterjee Additional Secretary  
2. Dr Mohan Kumar Chairperson, RIS 
3.  Shri Dinesh K Patnaik DG (ICCR) 

118 | P a g e 
 
4. Dr. Anupam Ray Joint Secretary (PP &R) 
5. Shri Prashant Pise DDG (ICCR) 
7. Shri Anil Kumar Rai Joint Secretary  (Parl & Coord) 
8.  Shri Sachin Chaturvedi  DG, RIS 
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Ms. Nirupama Kotru Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs (MEA) and Culture to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have a briefing on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and Cultural 
Diplomacy: Prospects and Limitations’. The Chairperson also drew the attention of all the 
representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in order to 
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings and also apprised the witnesses about the 
provisions of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) gave a detailed account of the role of 
RIS in India’s soft power diplomacy, Global Development Centre (GDC), work 
programme of RIS, policy inputs provided to other countries, South-South cooperation, 
digital connectivity, Atmanirbhar Bharat, Responsible Research and Innovation and so on.  
4.  After providing a broad overview of the functioning of the National School of 
Drama (NSD) through a Power point presentation, the representatives from the Ministry of 
Culture briefed the Committee on issues relating to the Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoUs) signed by NSD, and various measures being taken to internationalize the standards 
of NSD.  
5.  The Chairperson and Members raised a number of queries on the subject. 
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Culture responded 
to the queries raised by the Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also 

119 | P a g e 
 
directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the 
Committee to the Secretariat at the earliest.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

120 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure- VI 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 30 JUNE, 2021 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘C’,   
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
3. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
6. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
7. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
8. Shri P. C. Mohan 
9. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
10. Dr. K.C. Patel 
11. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
12. Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
13. Shri Rebati Tripura 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri K. J. Alphons 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
16. Shri P. Chidambaram 
17. Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
18.Shri Brijlal 
WITNESSES 

121 | P a g e 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1 Shri Dammu Ravi  Shri Dammu Ravi OSD (Secretary level) 
2 Shri Dinesh K Patnaik  DG (lCCR) 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1 Shri Raghvendra Singh Secretary 
2 Shri Rohit Kumar Singh              Additional Secretary 
3 Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma Additional Secretary 
4 Ms. Lily Pandeya Joint Secretary 
5 Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai Joint Secretary 
6 Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary 
7 Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General (ASI) 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Director 
2. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  - Additional Director 
3. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Culture to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and 
Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects and Limitations’. The Chairperson then drew the attention 
of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in 
order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised 
the witnesses about the provisions of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. 
3. At first, the Representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs delved upon 
issues such as tools of soft power diplomacy; restructuring of ICCR; literary festivals; 
promotion of arts, theatres, language, cuisines etc; mechanism for inter-Ministerial 
coordination, cultural troupes and so on. 

122 | P a g e 
 
4. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Culture presented detailed views on 
steps taken to raise standard of Indian Museums; enlargement of cultural spaces; Indian 
Institute of Heritage; Buddha Gallery; cultural mapping of villages; digitization of 
cultural places and excavated sites; non-personal data etc. 
5. During the course of discussion, the Chairperson and the Members raised a 
number of queries on issues related to scholarship to foreign students; overlapping of 
mandates; heritage buildings; recruitment of art historians, curators and conservationists; 
policy for empanelment of artists in ICCR etc. 
6.  The representatives of both the Ministries responded to the concerns raised by 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee to the 
Secretariat at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

123 | P a g e 
 
Annexure- VII 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 31 JANUARY, 2022. 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘D’,   
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Shri P. C. Mohan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
5. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
6. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri K. J. Alphons 
8. Shri Brijlal 
9.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
10.Shri K. Somaprasad 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Dammu Ravi Secretary(ER) 
2. Shri Kumar Tuhin DG(ICCR) 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Rai Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
4. Shri Rajeev Kumar DDG (Admn), ICCR 
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
 
1. Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
2. Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma Additional Secretary 

124 | P a g e 
 
3. Ms. Uma Nanduri Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General(ASI) 
5. Shri Dinesh Khanna Director (NSD) 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - JS(RR) 
2. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Director(C, R &EA) 
2. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Culture to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and 
Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects and Limitations’. The Chairperson then drew the attention 
of all the representatives to Direction 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha in 
order to maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The Chairperson also apprised 
the witnesses about the provisions of Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. 
3. In their initial remarks, the representatives of the Ministries of Culture and 
External Affairs shared broad observations on the various facets of the conduct of India’s 
soft power and cultural diplomacy. They delved upon issues such as people to people 
cultural exchange programmes; Democracy Network Programme; promotion of Yoga; 
Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav and so on. 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson and the Members raised pertinent questions on issues 
related to restructuring of ICCR; Bilateral Cultural Agreements; Cultural Exchange 
Programmes; exorbitant tickets fee for foreign tourists; popularization of Ayurveda; soft 
power matrix; ICCR scholarships; coordination and consultation among multiple 
agencies; empanelment of artists; ICCR Cultural Centres, etc. 
6.  The representatives of both the Ministries responded to the queries raised by 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson also directed the witnesses to 

125 | P a g e 
 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members of the Committee to the 
Secretariat at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 

126 | P a g e 
 
Annexure-VIII 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) HELD ON 8 AUGUST, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 8 August 2022 from 1000 hrs. to 1030 hrs in 
Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt Preneet Kaur 
4  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
5. Dr. K. C. Patel 
6. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
8.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
9.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
10.  Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
12.  Shri. Brijlal 
13.   Shri. Abdul Wahab 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai     Joint Secretary 
2.    Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut   Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject ‘India’s 
Soft Power and Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects & Limitations’. 

127 | P a g e 
 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The members suggested some minor modifications. 
The Committee adopted the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to 
Parliament. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

128 | P a g e 
 
 
Annexure I 
KEY CULTURAL EVENTS ON MULTILATERAL PLATFORM IN THE RECENT 
PAST BY MINISTRY OF CULTURE  
BRICS –  
 Indian delegation led by Hon’ble MOS (I/C) for Culture participated in BRICS 
Culture Ministers Meeting held through video conference under the Chairpersonship 
of  Russia on 3.9.2020 
 Under the auspices of BRICS alliance of Art Museums and Galleries, the National 
Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi curated an in-house exhibition entitled A Glimpse 
into Modern Indian Art that showcased 15 works of art works of art. The exhibition 
was organized as a part of BRICS Cultural Festival at Xiamen Art Gallery, China 
from 15th – 22nd September 2017  
 Under the auspices of BRICS Alliance of Art Museums and Galleries, National 
Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi participated in the exhibition entitled Uniqueness 
and Convergence along with national level museums from Brazil, Russia, China and 
South Africa held at National Art Museum of China, Beijing from 10th April – 23rd 
April 2018. NGMA Delhi presented an in-house exhibition entitled Reflections: Man 
and Nature in the paintings of Bireswar Sen. The exhibition showcased 20 works of 
art from NGMA collection.  
 The next edition of proposed joint-exhibition titled ‘Bonding Regions & Imagining 
Cultural Synergies’ under BRICS Alliaince of Art Museums & Galleries had been 
postponed due to Global Pandemic Covid-19. However, it is proposed to organise the 
same in 2021 coinciding with the BRICS event that India would be hosting in 2021. 
Works of art from Brazilian National Museum of Fine Arts from Brazil, State 
Museum of Oriental Art from Russia, National Gallery of Modern Art India, National 
Art Museum of China and Iziko Museum from South Africa are proposed to be on 
display at the National Gallery of Modern Art.  
 The National Library has initiated the process for Opening of BRICS Corner. In this 
regard National Library has identified 1500 sq ft. area at the Second Floor of 
BhashaBhavan Building for opening the BRICS Corner.The corner will display the 
books, periodicals and other E-resources gifted by the BRICS countries, viz, Brazil, 
Russia, China and South Asia.  The Corner is proposed to be opened during India’s 
BRICS Presidency in 2021. 
 BRICS Culture Ministers’ Meeting is proposed to be hosted by India during the 
BRICS Presidency of India in 2021.  Cultural events are also proposed to be held on 
the occasion. 
 

129 | P a g e 
 
 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) –  
 Hon’bleMOS(I/C), Culture  participated in the 17th SCO Culture Ministers’ Meeting 
held through video conference under the Chairpersonship of  Russia on 10.9.2020.  
 Artists from SNA participated in SCO Gala Concert on sidelines of SCO Heads of 
State Summit on 13.6.2019 
 2 Artists from SahityaAkademi nominated for Kyrgyz Epic Festival during 26-30 
June, 2019. 
 An Online Digital exhibition on “SCO shared Buddhist Heritage” is being organized 
by National Museum in India as a part of SCO Calendar of activities.  
 Sahitya Akademi is carrying out the translation work of 10 Indian literary works into 
Russian and Chinese as a follow up to the announcement made by Hon’ble P.M 
during his speech in SCO Summit 2019.  These translations are proposed to be 
released during the upcoming SCO Council of Heads of Government Meeting (PM 
Level) in November, 2020 
 
BIMSTEC - Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation  
 Officers/Minister Participate in the meeting from time to time.  As a follow-up to the 
PM announcement at Kathmandu in 2018, a three days training program cum 
workshop was proposed for training and capacity building of conservation 
professionals from the BIMSTEC countries. Two days program has been proposed 
at Institute of Archaeology under Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) for 18 
Professionals.  
SAARC – 
 Officers from the Ministry of Culture participate in Governing Board Meeting of 
SAARC Cultural Centre from time to time to finalize programme schedule of 
calendar of cultural events assigned to member states. Recently seminar on ‘Hindu 
Cultural Trails’ under the aegis of SAARC Cultural Centre, Sri Lanka was hosted 
by India.   
 National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi (NGMA Delhi) participated in the 
SAARC Artist Camp & Exhibition of Paintings 2017 - Nepalorganised by the 
SAARC Cultural Centre - Sri Lanka, in collaboration with the Federal Democratic 
Republic of Nepal from 28th to 31st July 2017. Five artists from India participated 
in the said camp. The theme for the camp was Sacred Sites and The Beauty of 
Nature. 
   

130 | P a g e 
 
UNESCO  
 India is a member of all the significant cultural conventions of UNESCO such as  
(a) UNESCO’s Convention for ‘Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage (ICH)’.  So far 13 elements from India have been inscribed on this list. 
 (b) UNESCO’s 2005 Convention for the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions  
(c) UNESCO‘s World Heritage Convention, the purpose of which is to protect 
and preserve the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. So far 38 Indian sites 
have been included in the UNESCO’s World Heritage List. 
(d) UNESCO’s Memory of the World Programme vision is that the world‘s 
documentary heritage should be preserved and protected with due recognition 
of cultural mores and practicalities and permanently accessible to all without 
hindrance. So far, 9 documentary heritages from India have been included in 
the Memory of the World Register. 
(e) UNESCO’s Creative Cities Network (UCCN) aims to strengthen cooperation 
among cities that have recognized creativity as a strategic factor of 
sustainable development with regard to economic, social, cultural and 
environmental aspects. So far, 5 cities from India have been designated as 
creative cities i.e. Varanasi and Jaipur in 2015 as creative cities of Music and 
Crafts & Folk Arts respectively, Chennai in 2017 as Creative City of Music 
and Mumbai and Hyderabad in 2019 as creative cities of Film & Gastronomy 
respectively. 
 
M/o Culture regularly participates in Inter-Governmental meetings of the above UNESCO 
Conventions in order to claim a leadership role and also regularly sends nominations for 
inscription for tangible and intangible heritage, memory of world and creative cities 
network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

131 | P a g e 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
STATUS NOTE ON MOUs AND YOUTH EXCHANGE PROGRAMMES 
ORGANIZED BY DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AFFAIRS 
 
S.No Name of the 
Country 
No. of 
delegates 
exchanged 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU / Place 
Status 
1. Armenia - 25.04.2017/ 
Yerevan 
Yet to begin 
2. Bahrain 20 19.02.2014 / New
Delhi 
Regular Exchange Programmes are being 
organized 
3. Bangladesh - 05/10/2019 Yet to Begin 
4. Belarus - 12.09.2017 / New 
Delhi 
Yet to begin 
5. BRICS Nations 
(Brazil, Russia, 
India, China, 
South Africa) 
- 06.07.2015 / 
Kazan 
BRICS Youth Forums are being 
organized annually. 
Russia – 2015, India – 2016, China – 
2017, South Africa – 2018, Brazil 2019 
6. Indonesia - 12.12.2016 / New 
Delhi 
Yet to begin 
7. Kuwait - 08.11.2013 / New 
Delhi 
Since, no activities are being held, we 
have  recommended  for discontinuation 
of MoU. 
8. Kyrgyzstan 20 20.12.2016 / New 
Delhi 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized 
9. Mozambique - 07.07.2016 / 
Maputo 
Yet to begin 
10. Morocco - 18.02.2019 / 
Rabat 
Yet to begin 
11. Nepal 50 25.11.2014 / 
Kathmandu 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized 
12. Palestine 50 16.05.2017 / New 
Delhi 
One delegation of 50 members was 
exchanged from each side during 2017. 
The quantum of the exchange was 
increased from 50 to 100 consequent 
upon the visit of the 
Prime Minister of India to Palestine on 
10.02.2018. A 50-member Palestine 
Youth Delegation visited India from 1 –
October, 2018. 

132 | P a g e 
 
13. Portugal 10 24.06.2017 / 
Lisbon 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized. 
14. Russia 50 18.11.2016/ New 
Delhi 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized 
15. South Korea 25 18.05.2015 / 
South Korea 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized 
16. Sri Lanka 25 13.03.2015 / 
Colombo 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized. 
S.No Name of the 
Country 
No. of 
delegates 
exchanged 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU / Place 
Status 
17. Tajikistan 10 08.10.2018 / 
Dushanbe 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized. 
18. Tunisia 20 30.10.2017 / New 
Delhi 
Regular Exchange Programmes are being 
organized 
19. Vietnam 10 15.09.2014 / 
Hanoi 
Regular Exchange programmes are being 
organized 
 
Apart from the above the following Youth Exchange programmes are also been organized 
by Department of Youth Affairs 
(a) Exchange of 100-member Youth Delegations with China has been continuing since 
2006 on the strength of Joint Statement during the visit of Chinese President in 2006 
(with exception that during 2011, 500-member delegations were exchanged). In the 
Joint Statement issued on 19.09.2014 on the occasion of visit of Chinese President, it 
has been decided to exchange 200member youth delegations from 2015 to 2019. On 
the occasion of the 70th anniversary of bilateral Diplomatic relations with China, it 
has been decided in consultation with the Ministry of External Affairs that during the 
year 2020, a 500-Youth delegation will be exchanged from each side. 
(b) A 100-member youth delegation from Bangladesh has been visiting India since 
2012. No youth delegation from Indian side is sent to Bangladesh. This is a joint 
programme of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Ministry of External Affairs; 
(c) Youth Exchange Programme with Maldives are also continuing with Maldives since 
2016 on the basis of MoU signed by Department of Sports; 
(d) On the recommendation of MEA and in pursuance of the meeting held by a 
delegation with Hon’ble MoS (IC), YAS in 2017, a 22-member Youth delegation 
from Uzbekistan visited India from 12-20 December 2017. Reciprocal visit of the 
Indian Youth delegation is expected in 2019. 

133 | P a g e 
 
(e) Delegations are also sent to participate in “the Ship for World Youth Leaders 
Programme” organized by the Government of Japan as and when invitations are 
received 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

134 | P a g e 
 
Annexure III 
List of Countries with whom India has EEP/MOC/JDI/LoI 
Sl No Name of the  Country 
1.  AFGHANISTAN 
2.  ARMENIA 
3.  AUSTRALIA 
4.  BELARUS 
5.  BOTSWANA 
6.  BRAZIL 
7.  BRICS (countries) 
8.  BURUNDI 
9.  CANADA 
10.  CHILE 
11.  CHINA 
12.  CROATIA 
13.  CZECH REPUBLIC 
14.  ECUADOR 
15.  ESTONIA 
16.  ETHIOPIA 
17.  FRANCE 
18.  GERMANY 
19.  GUYANA 
20.  HUNGARY 
21.  INDONESIA 
22.  ISRAEL 
23.  JAPAN 

135 | P a g e 
 
Sl No Name of the  Country 
24.  KUWAIT 
25.  MALAYSIA 
26.  MAURITIUS 
27.  MEXICO 
28.  MONGOLIA 
29.  MOROCCO 
30.  MOZAMBUQUE 
31.  MYANMAR 
32.  NEW ZEALAND 
33.  NORWAY 
34.  OMAN 
35.  PERU 
36.  PORTUGAL 
37.  QATAR 
38.  REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
39.  RUSSIA 
40.  RWANDA 
41.  SAUDI ARABIA 
42.  SOUTH AFRICA 
43.  SRI LANKA 
44.  SYRIA 
45.  TAJIKISTAN 
46.  TANZANIA 
47. THAILAND  
48.  TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 

136 | P a g e 
 
Sl No Name of the  Country 
49.  TURKMENISTAN 
50.  UNITED KINGDOM 
51.  U.A.E. 
52.  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
53.  UZBEKISTAN 
54.  VIETNAM 
55.  YEMEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

137 | P a g e 
 
 
Annexure IV 
SPARC: Country-Wise Data 
 
Sl No 
Country 
Number of 
Proposals approved 
in 2018-19 
Number of Proposals 
currently under 
evaluation in 2019-20 
1.  Australia 54 199 
2.  Austria 2 6 
3.  Belgium 4 8 
4.  Brazil 2 8 
5.  Canada 19 84 
6.  China 9 32 
7.  Denmark 4 23 
8.  Finland 5 15 
9.  France 7 19 
10.  Germany 20 30 
11.  Hong Kong 3 5 
12.  Israel 8 17 
13.  Italy 5 23 
14.  Japan 12 28 
15.  Netherlands 7 24 
16.  New Zealand 4 12 
17.  Norway 7 17 
18.  Portugal 3 10 
19.  Russia 2 20 
20.  Singapore 9 66 
21.  South Africa 4 5 
22.  South Korea 6 21 
23.  Spain 4 13 
24.  Sweden 6 18 
25.  Switzerland 2 7 
26.  Taiwan 3 26 
27.  United Kingdom 66 160 
28.  United States of America 117 326 
 Grand Total 394 1222 
 

138 | P a g e 
 
 
Annexure V 
INTERNATIONALIZATION OF EDUCATION UNDER NATIONAL EDUCATION  
POLICY 2020 (NEP 2020)  
1. Curricular and Institutional Reforms under NEP 2020 will promote 
internationalization, by aligning Indian systems to international systems, facilitating 
credit transfer and equivalence of degrees, improving quality of education, attracting 
students with better choice of subjects (Para 12.7) . Some of the major reforms in this 
regard are : 
 Developing Multidisciplinary universities/ colleges/ HEI clusters/ knowledge Hubs 
(Para 10.1, 10.7, 10.9, 11.111.5 ) 
 Flexibility in Curriculum – (Para 11.6, 11.7) 
 Credit based Education/ Bank of Credit (Para 11.8, 11.9, 12.2) 
 Catalyzing  Research through National Research Foundation –Para 17 
 Single Regulator with four verticals (Para 18) 
 Governance Reforms – Graded Autonomy (Para 10.4), Board of Governors ( Para 
19) 
2. Campus of Foreign Institutions can open in India and of  Indian Institutions 
Abroad (Para 12.8) 
 A legislative framework / guidelines  will be put in place for this 
 Special Dispensation regarding regulatory, governance, and content norms will be 
given to foreign institutions at par with autonomous institutions of India.  
 High Performing Indian Universities will be encouraged to set up Campuses in Other 
Countries.  
3.  Energizing Research/Academic Collaborations (Para 12.8) 
• National Research Foundation will foster research and innovation culture  
• Focus on enhancing research/teaching collaborations, faculty/student exchanges, 
knowledge creation and exchange 
• Credits earned in foreign universities will be counted for the award of a degree. 

139 | P a g e 
 
• Regulations being put in place to allow Joint Degrees, Twinning Arrangements 
and Dual Degrees between Indian and Foreign institutions 
     4. On Campus Support for Foreign Students (Para 12.8)  
• An International Students Office at each HEI hosting foreign students 
• Coordinate matters relating to welcoming and supporting students  
• Quality Residential Facilities, International Cuisine 
• Meaningful opportunities for Social Engagement.  
• Course in English as per requirement  
 
III.   FURTHER PLAN TO STRENGTHEN INTERNATIONALIZATION (IN 2020-
21) 
1. Building Synergybetween educational collaborations and programmes by various     
ministries/ institutions through a  CommonAdmission Portal 
2. Foreign Students Office in top 20 institutions taking foreign students  
3. Universities to start  Alumni Connect – to leverage goodwill of alumni in the 
process of internationalizing Indian education 
4. UGC and AICTE to formulate  regulations for Credit Transfer  with Equivalence 
5. UGC and AICTE  to formulate  regulations for Joint Degree/ Dual Degree/ 
Twinning 
(e) Languages, 
Ministry of Culture through one of its organization SahityaAKademi has undertaken the 
following work of translation of Indian literary master pieces into foreign language: 
1. 10 titles of modern Indian literature in to Russian and Chinese under SCO 
translation project. 
2. Herbert by Nabarun Bhattacharya into German (Publisher – DraupadiVerlag) 
3. Train to Pakistan by Khushwant Singh into Swedish (Publisher – Aranan 
Publishing House) 
4. KaattilOruMaan by Ambai into French (Publisher – Zulma) 
5. Bhartala Da NatyaShastra by KapilaVatsayan into Russian 
6. Indian Short Stories by E.V. Ramakrishnan into Russian 

140 | P a g e 
 
7. Kabita into Slovenian 
8. The Dual of the Heart (Slovenian) in English 
9. The Ayodhya Canto of the Ramayana as told by Kamban from Tamil into 
English 
10. Chemmeen from Malayalam into English and several Eastern European 
languages 
11. GarambicaBapu by S.N. Pendse into English 
As far as languages are concerned, we have a special division in the Ministry of External 
Affairs – RashtraBhasha. They look after all the Indian languages. The effort is to promote 
all Indian languages. We had a programme which is called Bharat EkParichay and we had 
sent out a set of 51 books to most of our Embassies overseas. 
(1630/SNT/IND) 
They were to approach various universities and try to setup an Indian corner where 
these books would be housed, and those books, Sir, had regional languages. We had books 
about India and we had regional languages there. So, Sir, the effort is to promote all Indian 
languages. 
 We also have Chairs abroad. We have Chairs on Hindi, we have Chairs on Sanskrit, 
Tamil, Urdu and Bengali. So, the effort is to work on all Indian languages.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

141 | P a g e 
 
Annexure-VI 
DETAILS OF COUNTRY WISE SCHOLARSHIP PROVIDED UNDER ICCR 
SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAMME 
 
Sl. No. Country  2013- 142014-152015-162016-172017-182018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 
2021-22
1 Afghanistan  1004 1000 1000 1000 1000 1500 1421 1381 1361 
2 Algeria 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 1 1 
3 Angola 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 34 30 
4 Argentina 1 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
5 Armenia 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
6 Australia 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
7 Azarbaijan 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
8 Bangladesh  202 202 202 202 222 222 222 222 222 
9 Belarus 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 
10 Belgium 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 
11 Belize 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
12 Benin 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 2 
13 Bhutan 20 23 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 
14 Botswana 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 50 50 
15 Brazil  1 1 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 
16 Bulgaria 0 0 0 6 6 6 6 6 6 
17 Burkina Faso 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 
18 Burundi Concurrent 
with Ugnada 
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 
19 Cambodia 15 15 17 23 23 23 23 23 23 

142 | P a g e 
 
20 Cameroon 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 0 3 
21 Canada 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 
22 Cape Verde(Cabo 
Verede) concurrent 
with Senegal 
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 2 2 
23 Central African 
Republic  
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0 1 
24 Chad concurrent 
with Nigeria  
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 
25 Chile 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 
26 China 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 
27 Colombia 2 2 2 10 10 10 10 2 2 
28 Comoros concurrent 
with Madagascar 
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 5 
29 Congo (Republic of 
congo) 
12 12 12 12 12 12 12 0 1 
30 Cote d'Ivoire 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 7 7 
31 Cuba 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
32 Cyprus 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 
33 Democratic 
Republic of Congo 
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 5 
34 Djibouti  11 11 11 11 11 11 11 15 15 
35 Egypt 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 11 13 
36 Equatorial Guinea 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 0 1 
37 Eritrea 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 5 
38 Ethiopia  55 55 55 55 55 55 55 60 60 
39 Fiji (Suva) 25 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 

143 | P a g e 
 
40 Fiji (Tuvalu) 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
41 France 2 2 2 7 7 7 7 7 7 
42 Gabon 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 0 1 
43 Gambia concurrent 
with Senegal 
30 30 30 30 30 30 30 33 33 
44 Georgia 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
45 Germany 4 4 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
46 Ghana 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 50 35 
47 Greece  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
48 Guatemala 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
49 Guinea   5 5 5 5 5 5 5 0 1 
50 Guinea-Bissau 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 0 1 
51 Guyana 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 
52 Hungary 4 4 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 
53 Indonesia 34 32 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 
54 Indonesia (Timor 
Lestei) 
0 0 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 
55 Iran 30 30 10 20 20 20 20 20 20 
56 Iraq 50 50 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 
57 Israel 7 7 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 
58 Jamaica 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
59 Japan 12 12 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 
60 Jordan 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
61 Kazakhstan 14 14 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 
62 Kenya 52 52 52 52 52 52 52 52 50 

144 | P a g e 
 
63 Kuwait 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
64 Kyrgystan 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 
65 Laos 14 14 10 12 12 12 12 12 12 
66 Lebonan  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
67 Lesotho concurrent 
with South Africa  
18 18 18 18 18 18 18 43 35 
68 Liberia concurrent 
with Cote d'IVOIRE 
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 6 1 
69 Libya 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 0 1 
70 Loa PDR 10 10 12 10 10 10 10 10 10 
71 Madagascar 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 23 20 
72 Malawi 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 30 20 
73 Malaysia 8 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
74 Maldives 37 37 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 
75 Mali 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 7 7 
76 Mauritania 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 0 1 
77 Mauritius/Rodrigues 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 70 70 
78 Mexico 2 2 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 
79 Mongolia 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 
80 Morocco 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 4 4 
81 Mozambique 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 38 38 
82 Myanmar 26 26 26 26 26 26 26 26 26 
83 Namibia 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 29 29 
84 Nepal 119 119 134 134 134 134 134 134 134 
85 Netherlands 0 0 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 

145 | P a g e 
 
86 New Zealand  2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
87 Niger 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 5 
88 Nigeria 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 15 20 
89 Norway 5 5 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
90 Oman 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
91 Palestine 8 8 10 25 25 25 25 50 50 
92 Papua New Guinea 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 
93 Poland  11 11 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 
94 Portugal 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
95 Qatar 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
96 Reunion Island 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
97 Romania 0 0 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
98 Russia 17 17 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 
99 Rwanda 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 0 5 
100 Sao Toem & 
Prinicpe concurrent 
with Angola  
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 1 
101 Saudi Arabia 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
102 Senegal 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 0 1 
103 Serbia 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
104 Seychelles 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 5 5 
105 Sierra Leone 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 15 15 
106 Slovenia 5 5 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 
107 Somalia 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 17 17 
108 South Africa  52 52 52 52 52 52 52 26 30 

146 | P a g e 
 
109 South Korea 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
110 South Sudan 7 7 7 7 7 15 15 15 20 
111 Spain 5 5 7 10 10 10 10 10 10 
112 Sri Lanka  200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 
113 Sudan 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 60 60 
114 Suriname  2 8 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 
115 Swaziland 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 25 25 
116 Syria 19 19 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 
117 Tajikistan 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 
118 Tanzania 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 79 79 
119 Thailand  24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 
120 Togo concurrent 
with Ghana  
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 5 
121 Trinidad & Tobago 5 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 
122 Tunisia  10 10 10 10 10 10 10 0 2 
123 Turkey 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
124 Turkmenistan 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 
125 UAE 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
126 Uganda  30 30 30 30 30 30 30 35 35 
127 Ukraine  2 2 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
128 United Kingdom 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
129 Uzbekistan 18 18 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 
130 Venezuela 0 0 0 4 4 4 4 4 4 
131 Vietnam 40 40 44 48 48 48 48 48 48 
132 Yemen 52 52 58 58 58 58 58 58 58 

147 | P a g e 
 
 
[Ref: Annexure II, Replies to Additional LOPS, MEA] 
133 Zambia 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 10 10 
134 Zimbabwe  19 19 19 19 19 19 19 10 10 
 Total(A) 3140 3153 3137 3207 3227 3738 3659 3655 3616 
  
Schemes(Slots offers Globally) 
* ICCR Scholarship 
Scheme for Training 
in Indian Music and 
Dance 
100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 
* Ayush Scholarship 
Scheme for Bimestic 
Countries  
30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 54 
* Ayush Scholarship 
Scheme for non- 
Bimestic Countries 
25 25 25 25 25 25 25 20 27 
* Ayush Scholarships 
Scheme(for 
Malaysian ) 
20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 5 
* Ayush Scholarships 
Scheme for South 
East Asian Region 
29 29 29 29 29 29 29 29 23 
 Total (B) 204 204 204 204 204 204 204 199 209 
 Grand Total 3344 3357 3341 3411 3431 3942 3863 3854 3825 

148 | P a g e 
 
Annexure-VII 
 
STATE-WISE LIST OF CULTURAL GROUPS SENT ABROAD 
 
Sl. No.States 2012-132013-142014-152015-162016-172017-182018-192019-202020-212021-22 (till 
date) 
1 Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
          
2 Andhra Pradesh 1 1 1 2   4  1  
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1         
4 Assam 1 2 5 1 3 2 3 2   
5 Bihar   1    1    
6 Chandigarh           
7 Chhattisgarh   1     2   
8 Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
and Diu 
          
9 Delhi 33 26 19 28 58 48 19 28 2 7 
10 Goa 2  1 1  1 1    
11 Gujarat 10 3 3 12 4 3 10 1   
12 Haryana   1 1  1 2 3   
13 Himachal Pradesh          
14 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
1  2  1 2    1 
15 Jharkhand 1 2 1   1  1   
16 Karnataka 10 2 1 5 8 14 9 4  1 
17 Kerala 8  2 6 4 7 8 7   
18 Ladakh        1   
19 Lakshadweep           
20 Madhya Pradesh 1  2 2 1 1 1 2   
21 Maharashtra 19 10 12 13 18 23 12 11 2 3 
22 Manipur 5  4 3 7 5 5 4   
23 Meghalaya 1   1  1     
24 Mizoram   1  1 1     
25 Nagaland 1  1  2 2  1   
26 Odisha 4 1 1  4 7 6 7  2 
27 Puducherry           
28 Punjab 4 1 1 6 2 4 3 7 1  
29 Rajasthan 6 4 7 11 8 13 8 3 2  
30 Sikkim      1     
31 Tamil Nadu 9 6 7 6 10 8 10 3 1 1 
32 Telangana    2 6 1 1  1 1 
33 Tripura           
34 Uttar Pradesh 4 1 2 8 7 6 5 6 1  

149 | P a g e 
 
35 Uttarakhand       1    
36 West Bengal 17 1 8 13 22 23 9 2 1 2 
 Total 154 61 86 121 166 175 118 94 12 18 
 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 