 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs 
for the year 2025-26’ 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
10 
 

 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2025-26 
  
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2025 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………      1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................    22 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………  58 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..    60 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………     68 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 16 December, 2025.             84                                                            
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee  
On External Affairs  (18th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………....        86 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
9. Shri Navaskani K. 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Dr. John Brittas 
24. Shri Raghav Chadha 
25. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
28. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
29. Shri A. D. Singh 
30. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
31. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar                      –  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik                        –  Director  
3. Ms. Smita Singh                                  – Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 

   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2025-26) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on action 
taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2025-26.  
2. The Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 
17 March 2025. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 30 July 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on 16 
December 2025. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the 
Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                      
16 December, 2025                                                                                                  Chairperson,                                
25 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                                           Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iii) 

1 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Fifth Report 
on the subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2025-
26’ which was presented to the both Houses of Parliament on 17 March, 2025. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs 
on all the 52 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been categorized as follows: - 
  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19, 21, 23, 24, 25. 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 49, 50 and 51. 
 Total- 35 
Chapter-II 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
  Recommendation No.    22                                             
        Total- 01 
Chapter-III 
(iii)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos.   3,10, 14, 20, 34, 37, 38, 43 and 52              
Total- 09 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation No.  6, 9, 17, 18, 39, 47 and 48,  
Total- 07 
Chapter-V 

2 | P a g e 
 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
LoC Provisioning 
(Recommendation No.3) 
5. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee find that this year’s budgetary allocation of Rs. 20,516.61 crore 
for MEA excludes the Indian Exim Bank sovereign guarantees which in BE 
2024-25 had accounted for 15.45% increase (Rs. 2744.91 crore) from the 
productive BE 2024-25. The Committee acknowledge the clarification provided 
by the Ministry regarding the non-inclusion of a provision for the Lines of Credit 
(LoC) in the Ministry’s budget for the fiscal year 2025-26. The Committee 
understand that LoC provisioning, which is a necessary mechanism to address 
the non-performing assets in the Exim Bank’s balance sheet, has been a 
significant and somewhat unforeseen budgetary requirement in recent years. 
However, the Committee are of the view that the inclusion of such provisions 
within the regular budget distorts the correct picture of actual allocation to the 
MEA and also impinges on its ability to meet core diplomatic and development 
responsibilities, as the provisioning for the Indian Exim Bank are non-productive 
in nature and do not contribute directly to the foreign policy objectives of the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of External 
Affairs make a compelling case to the Ministry of Finance to treat EXIM Bank 
provisioning as a separate item. The provisioning for non-performing loans 
should be allocated outside of the regular MEA budget, over and above the 
core funding necessary for the Ministry’s diplomatic and developmental 
functions. This distinction will ensure that the Ministry’s essential international 
responsibilities are adequately funded, without being compromised by non-
productive and non-diplomatic financial obligations.” 

3 | P a g e 
 
 
6. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“As part its budget, the Ministry provides ‘Support to Exim Bank towards GoI 
Guaranteed Line of Credit (LoC)’, which is for provisioning requirement and 
invocation of guarantee claims that have arisen in respect of LoCs extended 
under IDEAS scheme due to non-payment of loan and interest in a timely 
manner by the borrowing entities, i.e. sovereign nations. This provisioning 
amount is an expenditure charged to the Guarantee Redemption Fund – a 
notional expenditure and an adjustment of accounts between different 
branches of the Government. As per the directions of the Reserve Bank of India 
and the Ministry of Finance, the MEA is required to cover in its budget, the 
payments that are due to the Exim Bank of India on account of the LoCs that 
the latter extends to foreign countries on MEA’s recommendation. Based on the 
claims raised by Exim Bank, and approval from Department of Economic 
Affairs, payments have been made to Exim Bank towards provisioning over the 
last three years. GoI has paid 100% provisioning to Exim Bank for a majority of 
countries. Exim Bank’s books have been strengthened substantially. No budget 
has been allocated in the BE of 2025-26 towards provisioning. 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee that the provisioning for 
non-performing loans be allocated outside of the regular MEA budget, over and 
above the core funding necessary for Ministry’s diplomatic and development 
functions, is important, as this will ensure that Ministry’s core responsibilities 
receive adequate funding. The Ministry remains engaged with RBI and Ministry 
of Finance on the matter.” 
 
7. Noting that inclusion of Lines of Credit (LoC) in the Ministry’s budget 
distorted the correct picture of actual allocation to the MEA, the Committee in their 
original report had recommended the Ministry of External Affairs to make a 
compelling case to the Ministry of Finance to treat EXIM Bank provisioning as a 
separate item. The Committee note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that 
this is done as per the directions of the Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of 

4 | P a g e 
 
Finance for payments due to the Exim Bank of India on account of the LoCs that 
the latter extends to foreign countries on MEA’s recommendation. The Ministry has 
also informed the Committee that the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee 
is important, as this will ensure that Ministry’s core responsibilities receive 
adequate funding and the Ministry continue to engage with RBI and Ministry of 
Finance on the matter. Considering that the Ministry of External Affairs is still 
engaged with RBI and Ministry of Finance on the matter, the Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that the MEA should continue to make a compelling 
case before the Ministry of Finance to treat EXIM Bank provisioning as a separate 
item, so as to bring the matter to a logical conclusion. The Committee are of the 
considered view that proper implementation of this recommendation will provide a 
correct picture of actual allocation of Ministry’s diplomatic and developmental 
functions. The Ministry may keep the Committee apprised of any progress made in 
this regard. 
 
Adequate Gender Representation in Indian Foreign Service (IFS) 
(Recommendation No.10) 
8.    The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee commend the Ministry for increased representation of women 
in the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), with women officers constituting 39.39% of 
the 2024 batch. The appointment of 15 lady officers as Heads of Missions is a 
notable step towards promoting gender equality at the senior-most levels of the 
Ministry. Additionally, the establishment of the Gender Budget Cell, the 
implementation of mentorship programmes and the provision of creche facilities 
for employees are positive initiatives that reflect the Ministry’s commitment to 
creating an inclusive and supportive environment for women. However, the 
Committee believe that further efforts are necessary to enhance gender 

5 | P a g e 
 
equality, not only in terms of representation butalso in terms of professional 
advancement, particularly in senior and decision-making roles.  
While the increase in the number of women officers is commendable, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that women are not only well-
represented in numbers but are also given the tools, resources, and 
opportunities needed to progress to leadership positions. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take proactive steps to encourage the 
recruitment of more women into the IFS and other departments within the MEA. 
Although the UPSC examination process is gender-neutral, the Ministry should 
explore additional measures, such as targeted awareness programmes, 
mentorship schemes, and career development initiatives, to create a more 
supportive and encouraging environment for female candidates. These 
initiatives should be designed to specifically address the barriers, if any, that 
women face in entering and advancing in diplomacy. Furthermore, the 
Committee emphasize the importance of prioritizing women in diplomacy, as it 
can significantly enhance the nation’s global standing.” 
9. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. Ministry 
is taking a number of steps to create a more supportive and encouraging 
environment for women personnel in the Ministry. For this purpose, Ministry has 
commissioned a study on Gender Budgeting in other countries so that the best 
practices could be adopted. The Exim Bank, which is involved in funding and 
execution of projects abroad, has also been requested to undertake a gender 
impact assessment and provide recommendations. The Ministry will continue to 
ensure that barriers, if any, to career progression of women officers in the 
Ministry are resolved while creating a conducive environment for the professional 
progress of women officers.” 
10. The Committee had inter alia recommended that the Ministry should take 
proactive steps to encourage the recruitment of more women into the Indian 
Foreign Service (IFS) and other departments within the MEA. The Committee note 

6 | P a g e 
 
from the Action Taken Reply that the Ministry is taking a number of steps to create 
a more supportive and encouraging environment for women personnel in the 
Ministry. The Committee also note from the reply that the Ministry will continue 
to ensure that barriers, if any, to career progression of women officers in the 
Ministry are resolved while creating a conducive environment for the professional 
progress of women officers. However, the reply of the Ministry does not expressly 
address the specific recommendation of the Committee to explore additional 
measures, such as targeted awareness programmes, mentorship schemes, and 
career development initiatives, to create a more supportive and encouraging 
environment for female candidates. The Committee desire a concrete reply from 
the Ministry on the various measures taken to implement the recommendations 
of the Committee, especially on the measures taken to prioritize entry of women 
in diplomacy.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that the Ministry should take proactive steps to encourage the recruitment of 
more women into the IFS and other departments within the MEA and address the 
barriers, if any, the women face in entering and advancing diplomacy. The 
Committee are of the view that prioritizing women in diplomacy can significantly 
enhance the nation’s global standing.  
 
Indian Missions/Posts Abroad 
(Recommendation No.14) 
11. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“It is observed that there are currently 216 Indian Missions and Posts abroad.  
The Committee also take note of the criteria for establishing new Missions, 
focusing on economic partnerships, strategic cooperation, diaspora 
engagement and multilateral diplomacy. The Committee recognizes the 

7 | P a g e 
 
establishment of new Missions in Riga (Latvia), Tbilisi (Georgia), Tirana 
(Albania), Libreville (Gabon), Dili (Timor Leste), and La Paz (Bolivia), as well as 
new Consulates in Brisbane (Australia), Marseille (France), Barcelona (Spain), 
and Auckland (New Zealand). The Committee have also been informed about 
the future plans to open 5 new Missions in Europe, Latin America and 
Caribbean regions. However, the Committee observe that India currently lacks 
a resident Mission or Post in 41 countries, limiting opportunities for engagement 
with potential partners and the strengthening of diplomatic, economic, and 
strategic ties. The Committee emphasize that Missions should be prioritized in 
countries where there is significant potential for trade and investment, a strong 
Indian diaspora, or an opportunity for India to bolster its political outreach in 
multilateral forums. The Committee urge the Ministry of External Affairs to 
expedite the establishment of Missions and Posts in these countries and to 
seek additional funds, if necessary, during the Revised Estimate stage to 
ensure timely operationalization of Missions, especially, the proposed Missions 
in Europe, Latin America and Caribbean regions. 
15. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. The 
Ministry formulates proposals from time to time for opening of resident Missions 
in countries where there are no Indian Missions. The objective of our Foreign 
Policy is to build a conducive environment for India’s growth and development 
through partnerships with friendly countries. India’s Missions and Posts across 
the world serve as conduits of its relations with partner countries. The decision 
to open new Indian Missions is to expand India’s footprint in various regions 
and broaden international support for our priorities. 
In 2024, 10 new Missions and Posts were operationalized. By June 
2025, five new Posts have been operationalized in Belfast (UK), Manchester 
(UK), Fukuoka (Japan), Boston (USA) and Los Angeles (USA). Ministry is 
working to operationalize Missions in countries where India currently does not 
possess a diplomatic Mission on a need basis. In all the 41 countries without a 
diplomatic Mission, diplomatic relations are currently being handled by 

8 | P a g e 
 
concurrent accreditation with neighbouring Missions and appointment of 
Honorary Consuls.  
Approval has been received for operationalizing five new Missions in 
Europe and in Latin America and Caribbean region. Additionally, new 
Consulates are also being opened by the Ministry in view of India’s increasing 
diplomatic engagement. In FY 2025-26, new Consulates are expected to be 
operationalized in Kazan (Russia) and Yekaterinburg (Russia). Ministry will also 
send proposals seeking allocation of funds well in advance of operationalization 
of Missions/Posts to ensure that they can be operationalized expeditiously.” 
 
16. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2025-26) the Committee 
had observed that India currently lacks a resident Mission or Post in 41 
countries. Accordingly, the Committee in their original Report had emphasized 
that Missions should be prioritized in countries where there is significant 
potential for trade and investment, a strong Indian diaspora, or an opportunity 
for India to bolster its political outreach in multilateral forums. The Committee 
note from the Action Taken Reply that by June 2025, five new Posts have been 
operationalized in Belfast (UK), Manchester (UK), Fukuoka (Japan), Boston 
(USA) and Los Angeles (USA). However, the Committee note that no progress 
has been made in opening of a resident Mission or Post in 41 countries, and the 
diplomatic relations in these countries are currently being handled by 
concurrent accreditation with neighbouring Missions and appointment of 
Honorary Consuls. The Committee had noted that approval had been received 
for operationalizing five new Missions in Europe, Latin America and Caribbean 
region. The Committee note that during the FY 2025-26, new Consulates are 
expected to be operationalized in Kazan (Russia) and Yekaterinburg (Russia). 
The Committee hope that the two new Consulates have been opened by now. 

9 | P a g e 
 
The Committee however, failed to understand the reasons why India currently 
still lacks a resident Mission or Post in 41 countries. The Committee would 
appreciate if the Ministry could provide the reasons for the same. The main 
concern of the Committee is that absent of resident mission or posts in 41 
countries would have adversely affected the objective of our Foreign Policy to 
build a conducive environment for India’s growth and development through 
partnerships with friendly countries. Should the Ministry require the expansion 
of diplomatic corps to facilitate the expansion of Missions and Posts, the 
Committee are pleased to recommend such expansion. Considering that India’s 
Missions and Posts across the world serve as conduits of its relations with 
partner countries, the Committee once again urge the Ministry to expedite 
operationalization of five new Missions in Europe, Latin America and Caribbean 
region approval for which has been taken, including opening a resident mission 
in countries where India still does not have, so as to increase India’s diplomatic 
and strategic footprints. 
 
 
mPassport Police App 
(Recommendation No.20) 
17. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee recognize the progress made by the Ministry in improving the 
Police Verification Report (PVR) process through the introduction of the 
mPassport Police App. The Ministry has informed that the App has been 
successfully rolled out in 25 States/UTs, covering over 9,400 Police Stations. 
The digitalization of the process has significantly reduced the average time for 
Police Verification Reports (PVRs). The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should prioritize the deployment of the mPassport Police App in the 
remaining 12 States/Uts where it is yet to be launched. The Ministry should 

10 | P a g e 
 
continue to collaborate with the concerned State/UT authorities to address any 
infrastructure challenges and work towards the timely rollout in these areas. 
The Ministry should also ensure that training and support is provided to police 
personnel to enhance the optimal use of the App.” 
18. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“It is mentioned that 25 States/Uts covering more than 9425 Police Stations 
across the country have already launched the mPassport Police App. The 
Ministry and the concerned RPOs are coordinating with the States/Uts where 
mPassport Police App has not yet been launched. It is also submitted that the 
Ministry is providing all technical support to States/Uts including the application 
support, training and handholding to police personnel (before and after the 
launch of mPassport Police App) through the Service Provider of Passport Seva 
Program, M/s. TCS. Post deployment, all technical support is also provided to 
State/Uts regarding police verification and submission. It may be further noted 
that the roll out of mPassport Police App at States/Uts depends on the 
readiness of IT infrastructure at the concerned State/UT for which the Ministry 
is also providing financial support to each State/UT, per application processed 
by them and for verification and submission of Police Verification Report (PVR). 
 
19. Noting that mPassport Police App has been successfully rolled out in 25 
States/UTs, covering over 9,400 Police Stations, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry should prioritize the deployment of the 
mPassport Police App in the remaining 12 States/UTs. The Committee note from 
the Action Taken Reply that the Ministry is providing all technical support to 
States/UTs including the application support, training and handholding to police 
personnel (before and after the launch of mPassport Police App) through the 
Service Provider of Passport Seva Program, M/s. TCS. However, the rollout of 
the app in the remaining 12 states/UTs is currently under consideration 

11 | P a g e 
 
following the Committee’s recommendation. The main reason of the delay is the 
roll out depends on the readiness of IT infrastructure at the concerned State/UT. 
The Committee note that the Ministry is providing financial support to each 
State/UT for application processed by them and for verification and submission 
of Police Verification Report (PVR). The Committee are of the view that rolling 
out this app in the remaining States/UTs is important, considering that the 
digitization process has significantly reduced the average time taken for Police 
Verification Reports. Keeping in view that mPassport Police App is both citizen 
friendly and useful to law enforcing authority in completing the passport 
verification process, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for 
rolling out the service to all the remaining 12 states/UTs, and also provide 
necessary technical and financial assistances so as to address any 
infrastructural challenges.  
 
Aid to Afghanistan 
(Recommendation No.34) 
20. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for ‘Aid to Afghanistan’ was 
Rs. 200 crore during BE 2024-25, which was decreased to Rs. 50 crore at the 
RE 2024-25 stage and then increased to Rs. 100 crore in BE 2025-26. 
Regarding the reductions, the Ministry stated that the budgetary allocation to 
Afghanistan over the past three and a half years was primarily aimed at 
stabilizing the country in terms of food security, medicines and emergency 
supplies, etc. and now, that these efforts have been fruitful, leading to marked 
improvement in these areas, it has been decided to explore development 
cooperation projects in addition to the ongoing humanitarian aid. The 
Committee welcome this move as it presents a good opportunity for furthering 

12 | P a g e 
 
our foreign policy objectives through development cooperation and desire that 
projects/programmes which caters to the domestic needs of the people of 
Afghanistan should be identified and action plan drawn up for implementation 
at the earliest.  
21. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“India and Afghanistan share deep-rooted civilisational and historical ties. India 
has traditionally enjoyed close relations with the Afghan people and post-
August 2021, has extended humanitarian assistance for their development 
needs. These efforts have been noted positively by the Afghan authorities and 
the UN agencies. During the meeting of the Foreign Secretary with the Acting 
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan in January 2025, it was decided to explore 
development cooperation projects in Afghanistan. In this regard, we have been 
in touch with the Afghan side and have endeavoured to identify projects that 
cater to the domestic needs of the Afghan people.” 
22. In their original Report, the Committee had desired that the Ministry to 
identify projects/programmes that would cater to the domestic needs of the people 
of Afghanistan and draw up an action plan for implementation.  The Committee are 
pleased to note that post-August 2021, India has extended humanitarian assistance 
for the development needs of Afghanistan, and these efforts have been positively 
acknowledged by the Afghan authorities and the UN agencies. The Committee also 
note that following the meeting between the Foreign Secretary of India and the 
Acting Foreign Minister of Afghanistan in January 2025, both sides are in 
communication to identify projects that will cater to the domestic needs of the 
Afghan people. The Committee note that India has traditionally enjoyed close 
relations with the Afghan people,  and Afghanistan continues to be a strategically 
important country for advancing India’s diplomacy and security interests. It is 
therefore essential that India scale up its development cooperation and have a 

13 | P a g e 
 
meaningful presence in Afghanistan. Since no specific projects have been 
identified yet, the Committee once again reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
suitable projects/programmes catering to the needs of the Afghan people, 
particularly women and children, may be identified and action plan for its 
implementation prepared at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of all the progress made in this regard. 
 
Aid to African Countries 
(Recommendation Nos. 37& 38) 
23. The Committee in the Recommendation No 37 of their report has 
observed/recommended as under  
“The budgetary allocation for ‘Aid to African Countries’ has been marginally 
increased from Rs. 200 crore in BE and RE 2024-25 to Rs. 225 crore in BE 2025-
26. The Committee note that no budgetary provision has been made for the India-
Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) for the FY 2025-26 as agreement of African Union for 
hosting of IAFS-IV is yet to be firmed up. The Committee are concerned about the 
delay in conducting the India-Africa Forum Summit–IV and urge the Ministry to 
maintain active coordination with the African Union so that dates for the summit 
are finalized at the earliest and seek additional allocation for the same at Revised 
Estimate stage, if necessary. In respect of ongoing projects committed under IAFS- 
I, II and III, the status may be communicated to the Committee.” 
24. In its action-taken reply to Recommendation No 37, the Ministry of External 
Affairs has stated as under: 
“India-Africa Forum Summit-IV (IAFS-IV) was anticipated to be held in the Year 
2024 due to which budgetary allocation of Rs. 40.00 Crore was made for the 
FY 2024-25. Though the budgetary provisions for IAFS-IV were not made for 
FY 2025-26, the available funds under the budget head ‘Aid to African 
Countries’ will be utilized to meet the expenses on hosting of IAFS-IV as and 

14 | P a g e 
 
when finalized. Additional funds, if required, will be sought at RE stage under 
the budget head “Aid to African Countries”. The Ministry of External Affairs and 
the African Union are exploring various options for organizing the IAFS-IV. 
Status Report on Ongoing Projects under IAFS-I, IAFS-II & IAFS-III is enclosed 
at Annexure I.” 
25. The Committee in the Recommendation No 38 of their report has 
observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Research & Information Systems for Developing 
Countries (RIS) is conducting mid-term impact assessment of the e-VBAB 
Network Project.  The Terms of Reference, timeline and status of the 
assessment may be communicated to Committee. Further, the feasibility of 
conducting mid-term impact assessment of the projects under IAFS by RIS may 
also be explored.” 
 
26. In its action-taken reply to Recommendation No 38, the Ministry of External Affairs 
has stated as under: 
“RIS has successfully conducted the Mid-Term Impact Assessment of the e-
VBAB Network Project, and has submitted their report in April 2025. The 
information as sought is as follows: 
Terms of Reference (ToR): is enclosed at Annexure II. 
Timeline: As per the Terms of Reference RIS was expected to complete the 
Mid-term impact assessment and submit the final report within 2 months. The 
timeline commenced after MEA conveyed the approval of Competent Authority 
to RIS vide email dated 11 November 2024. However, as the evaluation 
included inputs from various stakeholders, including foreign students and 
Universities, the report was finally submitted in April 2025. 
Current Status: RIS completed the activities viz., Data collection, stakeholder 
consultations, and e-VBAB learner surveys, on account of impact assessment. 
The final report was submitted by RIS to MEA on 8 April 2025. The report was 
also forwarded to concerned official in NITI Aayog on 23 April 2025 for further 

15 | P a g e 
 
action. Thereafter, RIS made a comprehensive presentation to Secretary (ER) 
on e-VBAB impact assessment to clarify the queries. The report is under review 
in the Ministry.  
Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation for undertaking mid-term impact 
assessment of the completed IAFS projects has been noted.” 
27. Noting that the dates for the India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS)-IV is yet to be 
decided, the Committee had expressed concerned over the delay and urged the 
Ministry to maintain active coordination with the African Union to finalize the dates 
at the earliest. The Committee had also recommended that the feasibility of 
conducting mid-term impact assessment of the projects under IAFS by RIS may 
also be explored. The Committee are concerned to note that the dates for IAFS-IV 
have not been finalized yet and it is unlikely that it will take place in 2025. Moreover, 
a thorough review of the status report on ongoing projects under IAFS-I, IAFS-II & 
IAFS-III, as furnished by the Ministry, reveals that although 21 projects have been 
identified for implementation, actual implementation has not commenced in 16 of 
them due to various constraints. With regard to the establishment of the Pan 
African University of Life and Earth Sciences (PAULESI) at University of Ibadan, 
Nigeria which is an IAFS-II project, the Committee note that Nigeria has not shown 
interest in pursuing the project.  
From the above observations, the Committee note that even though India 
has committed numerous projects in Africa, the actual progress of their 
implementation is unsatisfactory. The Committee are of the considered view that 
date for IAFS-IV summit need to be finalised at the earliest. The Committee further 
emphasize that Africa is emerging as a vital arena for global diplomacy, and it 
should be India’s earnest endeavour to significantly enhance its presence across 

16 | P a g e 
 
the African continent. The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of conducting mid-term impact 
assessment of the projects by RIS, with a view to improving the planning and 
implementation of ongoing and future initiatives under the IAFS framework. 
Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Programme 
(Recommendation No.43) 
28. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme 
launched by the Ministry of External Affairs in January, 2018 under the 
‘Surakshit Jaayein Prashikshit Jaayein’campaign of the Government of India 
provides one day free of cost orientation training to emigrant workers to help 
them understand local rules and regulations of the destination country, its 
culture, tradition, language, etc. in addition to enhancing their soft skills.From 
itsinceptiontill31st January 2025, a total of 1, 82,381 emigrant workers have 
been imparted orientation training under PDOT programme and financial 
assistance for the same is being disbursed to the State government run 
departments/agencies. However, the Committee are startled to see that no fund 
was released to the State Agencies in 2022-23 and in 2023-24, Rs. 79.77 lakh 
out of 1.20 Crore and in 2024-25, only 16.08 lakh have been released till 
January 2025 out of the 1 crore Budget. This financial performance of the 
scheme makes the Committee worry about the working of the scheme as well 
as its efficacy. The Committee, while expressing their displeasure, desire that 
the reasons may be identified and earnest efforts are made for 
optimumutilization of the funds so that the migrant workers are sensitized about 
the pathways to safe and legal migration as well as on about various 
government programmes for their welfare and protection.” 
 
29. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 

17 | P a g e 
 
“During the COVID-19 Pandemic, the Pre-Departure Orientation Training was 
stopped from March 2020 to November 2021. The PDOT Centers, which were 
closed down during the pandemic, were gradually re-opened. After resumption 
of PDOT in November 2021 in some centres, initially the training did not pick 
up pace due to low demand as the pandemic had led to large scale job loss for 
emigrants going abroad and there were restrictions in place during the 
subsequent waves of the pandemic. The training started to gradually pick up 
pace in most centres from late 2022.  A proposal for opening of 58 new PDOT 
centres in 11 states had been approved by the Ministry in July 2022 and the 
same was conveyed to the concerned states. The Ministry reached out to the 
States in September 2022, requesting them to send requisition of funds for 
PDOT. Keeping in view the expansion of the programme, the Division had 
requested for a budget grant of Rs. 3 crore for FY 2023-24.  
In the Financial Year 2023-24 on receipt of demands for funds from the states 
of Telangana, Punjab and Karnataka, funds amounting to Rs. 79.77 lakhs were 
disbursed accordingly out of the allocated budget amount of Rs. 3 Crore. In 
January2024, the Ministry again reached out to the concerned State 
Governments to seek their proposals for allocation of funds to carry out the 
PDOT.  
Additionally, in March2024, the Ministry reached out to the Principal Secretaries 
of the concerned States seeking their intervention to operationalize the 
approved new PDOT centres in their states and send their budget proposals 
for running of the centres. Subsequent reminders to follow-up on the subject 
matter were sent in July, October and December of 2024, and in February 2025. 
On receipt of demands from the states of Assam, Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana during 2024-25, a total amount of Rs. 45,71,300/- was disbursed to 
the State Agencies of Assam, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana out of the 
allocated budget. The BE for FY 2025-26 is Rs. 5 crore which is the same as 
the BE for FY 2024-25. 
Since the inception of the PDOT programme in 2018, a total of 1,90,362 
emigrant workers have been imparted orientation training till 28 February2025. 
The pace of PDOT is expected to pick up during the current Financial Year as 

18 | P a g e 
 
Ministry has been closely coordinating with all State Governments/Training 
Partners to expand the PDOT outreach. 
Detailed budget statement on PDOT for last three FYs is given below: 
Financial 
Year 
Budget 
Estimates (BE) 
(Rs) 
Revised 
Estimates 
(RE) (Rs) 
Final 
Estimates 
(FE) (Rs) 
Funds released 
to State 
Agencies (Rs) 
2022-23 3 Crore 3 Crore 3 Crore 0 
2023-24 3 Crore 3 Crore 1.20 Crore 79.77 lakhs 
2024-25 5 Crore 1 Crore 0.50 Crore 45.71 lakhs 
2025-26 5 Crore -- -- -- 
 
30. The Committee had noted that the Pre-Departure Orientation Training 
Programme was launched by the Ministry of External Affairs in January, 2018 
under the ‘Surakshit Jaayein Prashikshit Jaayein’ campaign of the Government 
of India to provide one day free of cost orientation training to emigrant workers 
to help them understand local rules and regulations of the destination country, 
its culture, tradition, language, etc. in addition to enhancing their soft skills. 
Noting the poor financial performance under the scheme, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to identify the reasons and made earnest efforts for 
optimum utilization of the funds. The Committee note from the Action Taken 
Reply that low utilization of funds was mainly because only few states are 
implementing the scheme. During 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 79.77 lakh was 
disbursed to states of Telangana, Punjab, and Karnataka. Similarly, during 2024-
25, a total amount of Rs. 45,71,300/- was disbursed to the state agencies of 
Assam, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Since the inception of the PDOT 
programme in 2018, a total of 1,90,362 emigrant workers have been imparted 

19 | P a g e 
 
orientation training till 28 February 2025. From the above information, the 
Committee observe that many states/UTs are yet to show any interest in 
implementing the scheme. This is in spite of the efforts made by MEA to 
operationalize the approved new PDOT centres in their states and send their 
budget proposals for running of the centres. The Committee are of the view that 
PDOT is a very far-sighted and visionary initiative by MEA which will greatly help 
the emigrant workers to understand local rules and regulations of the 
destination country. To better equip them with the knowledge of the destination 
country, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to increase 
coordination with various states governments and enhance their awareness of 
this scheme in order to expand the outreach programme. The Committee, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that earnest efforts should be made by 
the Ministry for optimum utilization of the funds so that the migrant workers are 
sensitized about the pathways to safe and legal migration, as well as the various 
government programmes available for their welfare and protection. 
 
        Foreign Policy Document 
(Recommendation No. 52) 
31. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee acknowledge the longstanding and well-established principles 
that have underpinned India’s foreign policy, which have significantly 
contributed to the nation’s diplomatic successes and global standing. The 
Committee also recognize that a growing number of countries, such as the 
United Kingdom, United States, Germany, and Japan have formalized national 
foreign policy strategies, which have proven to be valuable tools in guiding their 
international engagement. India, with its burgeoning geopolitical influence must 
not lag behind in articulating its own roadmap for a future-oriented foreign policy 

20 | P a g e 
 
that corresponds to its increasing global stature. The Ministry of External 
Affairs, through its ongoing assessment of the foreign policy strategies of other 
nations has undertaken a valuable exercise in understanding the shifting 
paradigms of global diplomacy. The Committee, however, suggest that the 
Ministry should consider the desirability of taking the logical next step which is 
the formulation of a formal and comprehensive foreign policy 
document/strategy that is specifically tailored to India’s distinctive geopolitical 
context, emerging economic clout, and evolving global relationships. The 
Committee recommend that MEA should expeditiously initiate consultations 
with relevant stakeholders, including experts, diplomats, policymakers, and the 
Committee, to explore the feasibility and scope of such a document. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
32. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“Recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to initiate consultations with 
relevant stakeholders is duly noted. The Ministry will keep the Hon’ble 
Committee apprised of such consultations as and when they are undertaken.” 
33. The Committee have consistently underscored the importance of creating 
a formal, comprehensive foreign policy document tailored to India’s unique 
geopolitical situation, growing economic influence, and dynamic global 
relations. In their original report for the current year, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) take immediate steps 
to engage in consultations with relevant stakeholders such as experts, 
diplomats, policymakers, and the Committee itself on the feasibility and scope 
of developing such a document. However, the Ministry’s response indicates that 
no concrete actions have been taken so far regarding either the identification of 
stakeholders or the formulation of the document. The Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should prioritize these consultations 

21 | P a g e 
 
at the earliest with a view to expediting the preparation of such a document and 
keep the Committee apprised of the progress at each stage. Furthermore, the 
Committee expect to be informed of the progress on this matter during the 
examination of the Demands for Grants for the year 2026-27. 
  

22 | P a g e 
 
Chapter-II 
 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Upon a detailed examination of the budgetary allocation of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the fiscal year 2025-26, the Committee observe with dismay that 
despite India's growing global profile and expanding diplomatic and development 
responsibilities, the Ministry’s allocation remains disproportionately low compared to the 
increasing global role that India is expected to play. The allocation in the Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2025-26, at Rs. 20,516.61 crore, represents a 7.39% reduction from BE 
2024-25 and an 18.83% decrease compared to the Revised Estimates (RE) for 2024-25.  
India’s diplomatic influence is growing, and the country is taking on an increasingly 
important role in global affairs, including multilateral engagements, regional security, 
development partnerships, and responding to emerging challenges such as climate 
change, cyber security and global public health. However, MEA's allocation as a 
percentage of the Government of India’s total budget continues to decline from 0.46% in 
FY 2024-25 to 0.41% in FY 2025-26. This reduction in MEA’s share is alarming, 
particularly given the broadening scope of India's international outreach and 
responsibilities. While the Ministry has worked within its means, managing to fulfill its 
international obligations, it must be acknowledged that India’s role on the global stage 
continues to expand, with increasingly complex diplomatic engagements, security 
concerns and development commitments that demand more robust financial support. 
The Committee are of the firm view that the current allocation does not adequately 
support India’s foreign policy priorities and international stature and urgently calls for 
a substantial increase in the MEA’s budget to ensure that India can meet its diplomatic 
and development objectives effectively and assert its growing influence on the world 
stage. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Government should consider 
increasing the budgetary allocation of MEA by at least 20% in the next fiscal year to meet 
the expanding needs and ensure more effective engagement on the global stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has been following the Hon’ble Committee’s advice to take up the 
requirement of optimum allocation of funds with the Ministry of Finance. The Hon’ble 
Committee has recommended an increase of budgetary allocation of at least 20% in the next 
fiscal year and had earlier recommended a phased increase of at least 20% annually in the 
Ministry’s budget over the next five years. In an effort towards this target, sustained 
engagement with the Ministry of Finance has resulted in an increased budgetary allocation to 
the Ministry for BE 2025-26 of Rs. 20,516.61 crore. This is an increase of Rs. 2744.91 crore 
i.e.15.45% from productive BE of 2024-25 i.e. BE 2024-25 minus LOC provisioning. The 
Ministry will make a strong case to the Ministry of Finance for a further increase in budgetary 

23 | P a g e 
 
allocation at the 2025-26 RE stage. The Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry of 
Finance at all levels to emphasize the importance of providing adequate budgetary allocations 
so that there is no shortage of funds for the Ministry in the pursuit of India’s international 
commitments. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee underscores that the current budget allocation for the Ministry of 
External Affairs is neither reflective of India’s growing stature on the world stage, nor 
does it adequately support the expanding mandate of the Ministry in line with the 
country’s foreign policy aspirations. While the Ministry has provided a comprehensive 
assessment of its funding requirements, including the identification of critical areas in 
need of enhanced financial support, the Committee emphasize that the allocation remains 
insufficient given the challenges and opportunities India faces internationally. The 
Committee would like to highlight three key areas that require urgent attention: human 
resource development to strengthen India’s diplomatic cadre; embassy and mission 
operations to enhance India’s presence abroad; and acquisition of diplomatic real estate 
to establish more permanent and cost-effective missions globally, alongside increased 
funding for development assistance to further India’s strategic objectives through 
goodwill and partnerships. The Committee strongly urge the Government to prioritize 
these critical areas by providing substantial additionalresources to MEA. These funds are 
necessary to ensure that the Ministry can effectively build a robust diplomatic 
infrastructure capable of meeting the demands of India’s expanding global role. The 
Committee also call on the Government to reassess the Ministry’s budget allocations, not 
only at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage but also in future budget cycles, to ensure that 
the Ministry has the resources it needs to fully capitalize on India’s diplomatic and 
development opportunities. Such an investment will enable India to maximize its 
influence and uphold its interests on the world stage, positioning it as a leader in 
addressing both regional and global challenges. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation on increasing the allocation of budgetary resources 
towards the highlighted critical areas is noted.With an aim to enhance India’s presence abroad 
and opening up of new Missions, theallocation under ‘Embassies and Missions’ budget head 
for BE 2025-26 is 8.7% higher than BE 2024-25 (Rs. 4,206.22 crore in FY 2025-26 as against 
Rs. 3,867.64 crore in FY 2024-25). The Ministry had utilized 99.3% of the budgetary allocation 
of Rs 3969.19 crore under Embassies and Missions allotted during RE of 2024-25. 
On the acquisition of diplomatic real estate, it is shared that the RE 2024-25 was increased by 
22% over the 2024-25 BE (2024-25 RE of Rs. 700.89 crore as against 2024-25 BE of Rs. 574 

24 | P a g e 
 
crore). The allocated amount was fully utilized. Similarly, the allocation for human resource 
development to Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service was fully utilized. 
On development assistance to further India’s strategic objectives through goodwill and 
partnerships, it is shared that the budgetary allocation in FY 2024-25 was fully utilized. 
For BE 2025-26, the allocation towards development partnerships is Rs 6,750 crore, which is 
an increase of Rs 1,082 crore i.e. 19.10% over the previous year’s allocation of Rs 5,667 crore 
and is in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to aim for 20% annual increase 
in budget.  
The Ministry will make a strong case with the Ministry of Finance for increased allocations at 
the 2025-26 RE stage and for the BE of 2026-27, as per the Hon’ble Committee’s 
recommendation to enhance budgetary allocation towards the identified critical areas. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No .4 
The Committee has observed with concern the consistent trend of significant gaps 
between the budgetary demands and the actual allocations for the Ministry of External 
Affairs (MEA) over the past few years. The most notable instance is the sharp differential 
observed in the allocation for BE 2025-26, where the Ministry’s demand for Rs. 30,871.82 
crore has been slashed down to Rs. 20,516.61 crore, resulting in a differential of Rs. 
10,355.21 crore—the highest recorded in recent years. This trend of budgetary allocations 
falling short of the Ministry’s demands is a matter of serious concern. The Committee 
note that such discrepancies have created challenges for the Ministry in meeting its core 
diplomatic, development, and operational objectives, particularly in light of the evolving 
global challenges and India’s aspirations for a more prominent role on the global stage. 
The Committee urge the Ministry of Finance to take a more forward-looking approach 
to budget allocation, factoring in not only the Ministry’s ongoing commitments but also 
its future aspirations, and provide MEA with adequate and timely financial support to 
fulfill its expanding global responsibilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has received BE of Rs. 20,516.61 crore for 2025-26. This allocation is an increase 
of 15.45% in BE 2025-26 from the productive BE of 2024-25 (i.e. BE 2024-25 minus LOC 
provisioning). The Ministry will again make a strong case to the Ministry of Finance for 
increased budgetary allocations at the RE stage for 2025-26 and for an enhancement of at least 
20% for BE 2026-27 over 2025-26 BE, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s 
recommendations. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 

25 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
In pursuance of the Committee’s ongoing recommendations, the Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) has conducted an inter-Ministerial 
and cross-country comparison of budgetary allocations for foreign affairs. The findings 
of the report titled ‘Analysis of Trends of MEA Budgetary Allocation’ are highly 
illuminating and further underscore the necessity for substantial budgetary support to 
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to effectively meet its expanding global 
responsibilities and advance India’s aspirations on the world stage. The Committee note 
that, for the current fiscal year, the MEAhas been allocated Rs. 20,516.61 crore, 
positioning 22nd amongst the ministries of the Government of India. This situation 
reinforces the Committee’s long-standing concern that the MEA is significantly 
underfunded. The Committee, hence, strongly urge that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should urgently utilize the data and insights from the RIS Report, alongside inter-
Ministerial comparisons, to present a compelling case to the Ministry of Finance for a 
substantial increase in the budgetary allocation to ensure that India’s foreign policy can 
evolve in alignment with the country's expanding global stature. By presenting a data-
driven argument, the MEA will be better positioned to advocate for the resources 
necessary to build a more robust diplomatic infrastructure and meet the increasingly 
complex and diverse demands of international relations and development cooperation. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations, the Ministry had made a strong case 
for increased funding to the Ministry of Finance for the FY 2025-26. As a result, Ministry has 
received BE 2025-26 of Rs. 20516.61 Crore, which is an increase of Rs. 2744.91 Crore i.e. 
15.45% from productive BE 2024-25 i.e. BE 2024-25 minus LOC provisioning. The Ministry 
had also received an augmentation of Rs 3,122.56 crore in the first Supplementary and 
additional Rs 300 crore in the second Supplementary for FY 2024-25. 
Ministry accords utmost priority to effective budgetary allocation and resource 
prioritization. The Ministry continues to hold extensive discussions with Ministry of Finance 
at all stages of the budgetary cycle to convince and impress upon the need for judicious 
allocation of funds, within the overall constraints of Government finances. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that the budget classifications for the Ministry of External Affairs 
are divided into Revenue and Capital heads, as well as Scheme and Non-Scheme sections. 
The Scheme section primarily supports MEA’s Central Sector Schemes, which are 
critical for India's development partnerships and cooperation with other countries. On 
the other hand, the Non-Scheme section covers a range of essential functions, including 

26 | P a g e 
 
establishment costs, assistance to autonomous institutions, passport and emigration 
services, welfare of the Diaspora, and international cooperation. For the fiscal year 2025-
26, the total budgetary allocation to MEA includes Rs. 6,750 crore for the Scheme section 
and Rs. 13,766.61 crore for the Non-Scheme section. Both sections are vital for the 
Ministry’s functioning and should see increased funding. The Committee have 
consistently underscored the importance of the Scheme section due to its direct impact 
on India's international development commitments and partnerships. The Committee 
strongly reiterate that the Scheme sectionshould be appropriately funded, and under no 
circumstances should it be subjected to budgetary cuts, particularly during fiscal 
rationalization or resource allocation exercises. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has noted the advice of Hon’ble Standing Committee regarding budgetary 
allocation to the Scheme section of MEA. Ministry’s scheme commitments have ranged 
between 32-43% of the Ministry’s overall budget for the last few years, reflecting steadfast 
prioritization of development partnership with international partners. 
The Ministry had received an overall increase of Rs 3422.53 crore in the Supplementary 
Demand for grants in 2024-25 out of which Rs 1714.45 was only in the Scheme section. This 
was an increase of 30.45% over Scheme section allocation during BE 2024-25 and was 
completely utilized. For BE 2025-26, the allocation towards the Scheme section is Rs 6750 
crore, which is 33% of the overall budget. This is an increase of Rs 1082 crore i.e. 19.10% over 
the previous year’s Scheme section allocation of Rs 5667 crore, which is in line with the 
Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to aim for 20% annual increase in budget. The Ministry 
will once again make a case with the Ministry of Finance for increased budgetary allocations 
under the Scheme section at the 2025-26 RE stage and for the BE of 2026-27. 
Ministry accords utmost priority to effective budgetary allocation and resource 
prioritization. The Ministry continues to hold extensive discussions with Ministry of Finance 
at all stages of the budgetary cycle to convince and impress upon the need for judicious 
allocation of funds, within the overall constraints of Government finances.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee take note of MEA’s consistent efforts over the years to optimize the 
utilization of its allocated budgetary resources. The data presented for the last three fiscal 
years clearly demonstrates the Ministry’s commitment to efficient expenditure 
management. The Foreign Secretary’s testimony further reinforces Ministry's record of 
achieving high levels of budget utilization, with an impressive 99.6% utilization for the 
financial year 2023-24 and 82.5% utilization as of January 2025 for the current fiscal 
year, 2024-25. The Committee appreciate the effective quarterly expenditure 
management and close monitoring of fund releases in alignment with physical and 
financial progress by MEA. However, the Committee also note the unspent balances of 
the Ministry in the past few years, which include Rs. 3,110.72 crore in 2021-22, Rs. 281.17 

27 | P a g e 
 
crore in 2022-23, and Rs. 66.68 crore in 2023-24. While the overall utilization rate has 
been high, the Committee desire that the Ministry further strengthen its efforts to 
minimize unspent balances by ensuring the timely and efficient execution of all projects 
and schemes, particularly in the last quarter of the financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has duly noted the advice of Hon’ble Standing Committee and has almost fully 
utilized (99.8%) the budgetary allocation for 2024-25. Ministry has also made full efforts to 
ensure optimum utilization of available budgetary allocation evenly throughout the year. 
Budgetary demand and allocation are a dynamic exercise aided by regular assessment of 
Ministry’s expectation of expenditure progress in a financial year. Instruments of re-
appropriation of budget, Supplementary demands, etc. allow re-prioritization and reallocation 
of funds for the full and efficient utilization of budgetary resources. The Ministry has been 
holding regular quarterly budget review meetings to ensure rigorous budget planning, sharper 
monitoring and budget management, the last one being held in the month of May and chaired 
by the Foreign Secretary. These meetings aid in the analysis of expenditure utilization, 
assessment of budgetary resources and the useful repurposing of budgetary distribution as per 
Ministry’s international commitments. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note with concern the reduction in the budgetary allocation for the 
Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS) for the fiscal year 2025-26, despite 
its vital role in providing in-service training for Indian Foreign Service officers, MEA 
personnel, and foreign diplomats. The Ministry has clarified that this reduction is 
primarily due to a decrease in the number of training days for foreign diplomats as per 
indicationsfrom the participating countries. Further, it has also been assured that this 
reduction in the budget will not lead to a decrease in the number of training programmes 
conducted and that all mandatory and skill development training programmes will 
continue as scheduled. However, the Committee believe that any reduction in budgetary 
allocation, even if not immediately impactful, may limit the scope of future training 
initiatives and hinder the ability of SSIFS to adapt to new challenges in diplomatic 
training. Furthermore, the Committee appreciate the Ministry’s initiative to incorporate 
feedback from trainees through written and virtual sessions, which is a valuable 
mechanism for improving training content and delivery. 
In light of the growing demands of diplomacy and the constantly evolving 
international landscape, it is essential to ensure that the FSI remains adequately funded 
to meet the challenges of a modern diplomatic workforce. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry of External Affairs consider revisiting the allocation of funds for 
training on a regular basis to ensure that it aligns with the evolving needs of Indian 

28 | P a g e 
 
diplomats. Additionally, the Ministry should continue to monitor the effectiveness of 
training programmes by incorporating regular feedback from trainees and making 
necessary adjustments based on their suggestions. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Budgetary Allocation of Rs.24.72 crore for the FY 2025-26 is broadly in line with the 
expenditure incurred in the previous financial years, even with a reduction in number of 
training days for foreign diplomats from the participating countries. The SSIFS remains 
adequately funded to meet the challenges of a modern diplomatic workforce and no new 
initiatives shall be postponed. As part of monitoring the effectiveness of training programmes, 
SSIFS launched a Learning Management Software (LMS) Platform in January 2025. This 
platform aims to make training more paperless, efficient, transparent, and therefore more 
effective. It is also being used to explore new pedagogical approaches that leverage technology, 
including AI tools, to enhance the learning experience. The LMS platform has a feature for 
collecting feedback from trainees, which is taken into account, as appropriate, to incorporate 
improvements in training content and delivery.Any requirement for additional funds willbe 
raised at the RE stage. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee appreciate the ongoing efforts of the Ministry of External Affairs to 
professionalize the Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS) by inducting 
domain experts and faculty from a wide range of backgrounds, including retired Indian 
Ambassadors, serving officials from the MEA and other Ministries, as well as domain 
experts from think tanks and industry bodies. This diverse approach in faculty selection 
contributes to a well-rounded and comprehensive training programme for Indian 
diplomats. Additionally, the inclusion of foreign experts, as seen in the recent 5th Annual 
Disarmament & International Security Affairs Fellowship Programme is a commendable 
initiative. Furthermore, the Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s initiative to 
incorporate emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, cyber security, and 
digital diplomacy into the training curriculum. The inclusion of such cutting-edge topics 
is crucial in preparing diplomats to navigate the evolving digital landscape and address 
modern challenges in diplomacy. The Ministry’s collaboration with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), particularly in relation to events like 
the Artificial Intelligence Action Summit in Paris, highlights the commitment to 
equipping diplomats with the necessary technological skills. 
However, the Committee believe that while the steps taken so far are 
commendable, more should be done to ensure that the curriculum is continuously 
updated to reflect the rapidly changing global landscape, particularly in areas like digital 

29 | P a g e 
 
diplomacy, cyber security, and artificial intelligence. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of External Affairs should further strengthen its collaboration with 
international organizations and governments to share best practices in diplomatic 
training. The 101 MoUs signed by SSIFS with 98 countries and three plurilateral 
groupings are a significant step in this direction. The Committee encourage the Ministry 
to continue expanding these partnerships to include more countries and international 
organizations that are at the forefront of diplomatic training, particularly those with 
expertise in emerging technologies and global challenges. 
Reply of the Government 
SSIFS updates its curriculum across all courses, both on its own initiative and based on 
feedback received from trainees. Topics such as digital diplomacy, cyber security and artificial 
intelligence are already integrated into the training modules, including both the Induction and 
mid-career training programmes. Since the last update to the Hon’ble Committee, SSIFS has 
signed four more MoUs with diplomatic academies of Ireland, Armenia, Mauritius and 
Slovakia, bringing the total number of MoUs to 105.These agreements reflect SSIFS’s ongoing 
efforts to strengthen collaboration with international organizations and governments for 
exchange of best practices in diplomatic training.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
The Committee note the upward trend in the budgetary allocation under the sub-head 
'Embassies and Missions', from Rs. 3867.64 crore (BE 2024-25) to Rs. 3969.19 crore (RE 
2024-25), and further to Rs. 4206.22 crore (BE 2025-26), driven by the opening of new 
Missions and future plans for expansion. While the increased allocation reflects a 
proactive approach to India’s growing diplomatic engagement, the Committee observe a 
gap between budget projections and actual expenditures in previous years, particularly 
in 2021-22 and 2024-25. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs prioritize the expansion 
of India’s diplomatic footprint abroad, which is crucial for strengthening bilateral 
relations and enhancing India's global standing. Additionally, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to improve its budget forecasting process to ensure better alignment between 
projected and actual expenditures, especially given the increasing number of new 
Missions and Consulates abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the Hon’ble Standing Committee’s recommendations, the Ministry has almost fully 
utilized (99.3%) the budgetary allocation of Rs 3969.19 crore allotted under ‘Embassies and 
Missions’ during RE of 2024-25. The allocation under ‘Embassies and Missions’ under BE 

30 | P a g e 
 
2025-26 is 8.7% higher than BE 2024-25 (Rs. 4206.22 crore in FY 2025-26 as against Rs. 
3867.64 crore in FY 2024-25), keeping in line with the opening of new Missions and future 
plans for expansion. The Ministry has noted the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to 
prioritize the expansion of India’s diplomatic footprint abroad and improve budget forecasting 
to ensure better alignment between projected and actual expenditures. The Ministry utilizes the 
instruments of re-appropriation of budget, etc. for re-prioritization and reallocation of funds to 
ensure the full and efficient utilization of budgetary resources allotted under ‘Embassies and 
Missions’. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Recognizing the importance of an effective monitoring mechanism for ensuring the 
optimal performance of Indian Missions and Posts abroad, the Committee note the 
establishment of the Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) by the 
Ministry. The Ministry's efforts to expand the scope of inspections, conduct annual 
evaluations, and provide performance scores to Missions/Posts are commendable. 
However, the Committee observe that certain concerns raised by Missions/Posts, such as 
the applicability of specific questions and technical difficulties in updating webpages or 
verifying social media accounts, need to be addressed more systematically. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should continue to refine the PEMS portal by 
regularly updating the evaluation criteria to ensure their relevance, providing enhanced 
training and technical support to Missions/Posts, streamlining approval processes for 
critical activities such as the Crises Management Plan (CMP), and establishing a robust 
follow-up mechanism to address concerns promptly. These actions will further 
strengthen the monitoring system, ensuring that it remains efficient and responsive to the 
evolving needs of Missions/Posts abroad. 
Reply of the Government 
 
With reference to the recommendations of the Hon’bleCommittee, it is submitted that different 
questionnaires are given to Missions/Posts and Multilateral Missions to ensure the applicability 
of questions. Besides, a ‘Not Applicable’ option is available for Missions/Posts, which can be 
opted if any question is not applicable to a particular Mission/Post. Regarding the technical 
difficulties in updating web pages and verifying social media accounts, Missions/Posts have 
been specifically advised to approach XP Division for further assistance. 
 Evaluation criteria are regularly reviewed and updated at the launch of every new 
PEMS version. Under PEMS 6.0, which was launched in May 2025 for evaluating performance 
of Missions/Posts for FY 2024-25, a subjective evaluation criteria has been introduced. This 
evaluation will be done by the concerned territorial Division and will carry a weightage of 20% 
in the overall score of Mission/Post. Moreover, the questionnaire for PEMS is also revised 
every year to keep it relevant to the functionality of Missions/Posts. 
 For technical assistance, user guide and step-by-step tutorial regarding using the PEMS 
portal are shared with Missions/Posts during the launch of new PEMS version every year. 

31 | P a g e 
 
Further, this guide and tutorial are also uploaded on the portal for ready reference of the 
Missions/Posts. Any other technical issue faced by Mission/Post is promptly addressed by the 
Technical Cell by providing technical support/guidance, as and when required.  
Mission/Post is instructed at each stage of evaluation to follow up on the pending action 
points with the concerned divisions in the Ministry. In PEMS 5.0, improvement was seen in 
the compliance rate of critical activities like approval of Crisis Management Plan, which 
increased from 54% in PEMS 4.0 to 66% in PEMS 5.0. Further, a new feature has been 
included in PEMS portal through which HODs of functional Divisions at HQ can monitor the 
action taken by Missions/Posts related to their concerned area of work. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
The Committee note that India’s Missions and Posts abroad currently operate with a 
strength of 6277, comprising 3158 India-based posts and 3119 local posts as of 1 February 
2025. These positions span various cadres, including the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), 
General Cadre of IFS Branch B, Stenographers Cadre, Interpreters Cadre, and Legal 
and Treaties Cadre. The Committee also acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry in 
optimizing human resource deployment at Indian Missions and Posts. However, given the 
growing diplomatic, economic, and consular challenges, the Committee emphasizes the 
need for a more proactive approach to addressing evolving manpower requirements. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should undertake a periodic and comprehensive 
assessment of staffing needs in each Mission and Post, considering region-specific 
political, economic, and consular dynamics. The Committee further suggest that that the 
Ministry should expedite recruitment processes to ensure timely filling of vacancies, while 
also expanding the pool of specialized personnel for evolving diplomatic roles. In addition, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to implement a robust, continuous training programme 
that enhances practical skills for handling complex diplomatic and consular tasks, with a 
particular focus on crisis management, intercultural communication, and familiarity 
with international regulations. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Hon’bleCommittee have been duly noted. The Ministry accords 
highest priority to optimize the deployment of its human resources to help fulfil its growing 
responsibilities. The Ministry regularly reviews the requirement of manpower at various levels 
and takes appropriate action, including recruitment of additional officers and staff, through 
placement of requisite indents with the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and the 
Staff Selection Commission (SSC), respectively. 
The Ministry received approval of the Union Cabinet for the Fifth Cadre Review of the 
Indian Foreign Service in October 2023 to be implemented between 2023-27. These were 
aimed at keeping the Ministry’s personnel requirements in line with India’s expanding 
diplomatic footprint, enabling the growth of bilateral trade, investment, and economic 

32 | P a g e 
 
engagements, bolstering political outreach in multilateral fora, and helping garner support for 
India’s foreign policy objectives. 
Keeping in mind the requirements of the Ministry, and to fill up the vacancies on a 
priority basis, Ministry has increased its indent with the UPSC to 55 in 2024 for CSE 2025. 
Further, to inculcate specialized expertise into MEA, the Ministry also takes officers with 
specialized skills from other Departments/Ministries on deputation. The Ministry also engages 
consultants with relevant skillsets in key areas of functioning of the Ministry such as counter 
terrorism, project management, bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, international law, 
consular and disarmament related work. 
With regard to the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation on training, it is shared that 
the Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS) regularly conducts training programs 
for serving MEA officers at key stages of their careers. These sessions cover core aspects of 
diplomacy, including crisis management case studies, intercultural communication, and 
relevant international legal frameworks. The programs also introduce thematic areas for 
potential specialization, encouraging officers to explore these further. Additionally, SSIFS 
offers customized training for specialized cadres, incorporating subject experts, simulations, 
and peer learning. The overarching aim is to strengthen both the domain expertise and 
behavioral competencies of officers, enhancing their overall diplomatic effectiveness. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
The Committee note that database on passport has been integrated with the Bureau of 
Immigration (BOI) and NATGRID and the integration with Crime and Criminal 
Tracking Network & Systems (CCTNS) database of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is 
ongoing. With the introduction of e-passports, which involve the storage of critical 
information on an embedded RFID chip, the Committee is of the considered opinion that 
it is imperative that the Ministry continue to prioritize data protection. The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry expedite the full integration of the Passport 
SevaProgramme with MHA’s CCTNS database to further enhance security and improve 
the verification process for passport applications. The Committee also suggest that the 
Ministry conduct public awareness campaigns highlighting the robust data security 
measures in place, reassuring citizens of the safety and privacy of their information 
during the e-passport rollout. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has already initiated the integration process between the PSP system and the 
Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & Systems (CCTNS) database of Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA). Regarding data security measures, Ministry has taken several steps like pop-
up alert on Passport Portal for fake websites, sending advisory to the applicants over email 
regarding password/data protection. As per Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation, data 

33 | P a g e 
 
security measures are also implemented in the PSP portal to protect the citizen’s data being 
uploaded as part of passport issuance process. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
The Committee note that the Central Passport Organization (CPO) is operating with a 
working strength of 1,737 out of a sanctioned strength of 2,737, leaving a significant 
number of vacancies, particularly in crucial positions such as Assistant Passport Officers 
(APOs) and Verifying Officers (VOs). While the Committee acknowledge Ministry's 
efforts to address this staffing gap, they express concern that the current vacancies could 
affect the efficiency and timeliness of passport services. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should prioritize expediting the recruitment process to fill these vacancies, 
particularly for positions advertised through the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for 
Junior Passport Assistants, Assistant Superintendents, and other essential roles. 
Additionally, the Committee suggest exploring further measures to streamline 
recruitment procedures, ensuring that manpower resources meet the growing demand 
for passport services. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Staff Selection Committee (SSC) has declared results for recruitment in the grade of 
Junior Passport Assistant (JPA), Assistant Superintendent (AS) and Office Assistant 
(OA). Offer of appointment against 63 vacancies of Assistant Superintendent, 300 
vacancies of Junior Passport Assistant and 46 vacancies of Office Assistant for the year 
2024 have been issued by the Ministry. Additionally, the Ministry has invited applications 
from Section Officers of the Central Secretariat Service (CSS) for appointment in the 37 
Passport Offices on deputation basis to address the issue of critical shortage in these 
offices. These initiatives taken by the Ministry are likely to improve the availability of 
staff and passport issuance delivery in the Passport Offices across the country.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
Recommendation No. 23 
The Committee acknowledge the steadfast commitment of the Government of India to 
reviving the ancient seat of learning through the establishment of Nalanda University 
under the Nalanda University Act, 2010. However, despite substantial budgetary 
allocations and the completion of a state-of-the-art Net-Zero sustainable green campus 
spanning 455 acres, the delays and operational challenges have hindered the University’s 
full operationalization. Although the campus was inaugurated in June 2024, delays 
caused by logistical bottlenecks, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the shortage of skilled 
manpower has resulted in significant time and cost overruns.  
While recognizing the progress made by Nalanda University in terms of 
infrastructure, academic programmes and regional collaborations, the Committee 

34 | P a g e 
 
express their concern regarding its financial sustainability and global academic standing. 
Despite its mandate under the East Asia Summit framework to function as a collaborative 
global enterprise, financial support from member states and international donors has 
been sporadic and inadequate. The Committee also note that while Nalanda University 
has entered into several bilateral agreements, its global academic presence remains 
underdeveloped. The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should adopt a 
more proactive approach in urging member states to honor their financial commitments, 
while diversifying funding sources through philanthropic donations, corporate 
sponsorships, and endowments. Furthermore, to strengthen its position as a centre of 
global academic excellence, the university must accelerate its research output, 
particularly in emerging fields such as climate change, sustainable development, and 
digital transformation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and Nalanda University continue totake necessary 
steps to implement the esteemed Committee’s recommendations toaddress challenges in the 
University’s establishment. The University has put in place oversight mechanisms as mandated 
by the Nalanda University Act and its Statutes. These include the Building and Works 
Committee, Finance Committee, Executive Council, and Academic Council, all ofwhich 
regularly monitor progress in infrastructure development, faculty recruitment,academic 
programme expansion, and research initiatives. Having overcome the disruptions and logistical 
challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the University’s core infrastructure is now fully 
functional, with only minor finishing work and some need-based construction underway. To 
ensure stable academic and administrative leadership, a regular Vice Chancellor was appointed 
on 21 May 2025. 
To enhance financial and institutional support through diplomatic engagement, Nalanda 
University continues active engagement with East Asia Summit (EAS) member states. Regular 
bilateral meetings and campus visits by Ambassadors and diplomats have enhanced the 
University’s international visibility and partnerships. Asper Section 9(2) of the Nalanda 
University Act, 2010, financial contributions and endowments have been received from foreign 
governments, private individuals/institutions on a voluntary basis. 
Progress has been made in building academic partnerships and launching 
interdisciplinary programmes through several bilateral and multilateral MoUs and agreements 
with various countries/institutions of repute. Emphasis will be placed on strengthening 
research, particularly in areas such as climate change, sustainable development, and cultural 
diplomacy. 
The Ministry remains committed to realizing the vision of Nalanda University as a 
world-class institution that embodies India’s civilizational heritage and contributes 
meaningfully to global academic discourse. The esteemed Committee will be kept informed of 
all significant developments and progress. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 

35 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
The Committee acknowledge the significant role that development cooperation plays in 
India's foreign policy and the expanding scope of India’s development assistance across 
various regions, including its immediate neighborhood, Africa, South East Asia, and 
beyond. The allocation under the overseas development partnership portfolio for the 
financial year 2025-26, which amounts to Rs. 6,750 crore, constitutes 33% of the overall 
budget of MEA. This increase of approximately 20% over the previous year's allocation 
is in alignment with India’s foreign policy objectives and responds to the growing 
demands of partner countries for developmental assistance. The Committee recognize 
that this enhanced allocation is a step towards meeting India’s global aspirations and 
fulfilling its international obligations, especially in areas like infrastructure development, 
capacity building, and people-to-people ties. Emphasizing the growing scope and 
complexity of India’s development assistance, the Committee recommends that the 
allocation for this Head be consistently increased, as per the trajectory set by the current 
fiscal year's increase, to maintain and further enhance India’s developmental 
partnerships. This increase should not only account for expanding global engagements 
but also cater to the rising demand for projects in emerging regions such as Africa, Latin 
America, and the Indo-Pacific. 
Reply of the Government 
The Hon’ble Standing Committee has noted that the allocation under the overseas development 
partnership portfolio for the financial year 2025-26, which amounts to Rs. 6,750 crore, 
constitutes 33% of the overall budget of MEA. This increase of approximately 20% over the 
previous year's allocation is in alignment with India’s foreign policy objectives and responds 
to the growing demands of partner countries for developmental assistance.The Ministry has 
fully utilized the funds allotted under the overseas development partnership portfolio during 
the RE 2024-25. 
For FY 2025-26, the BE under ‘Aid to Africa’ head has been enhanced to Rs 225 crore, 
keeping in view the funding needs of ‘India-Africa Maitri Scholarship Scheme’ and other 
bilateral projects. The Fourth India-Africa Forum Summit is planned to be held in CFY 2025-
26, which is expected to bring enhanced focus to the region in terms of developmental 
partnership projects. 
The BE allocation under ‘Aid to Latin American Countries’ in 2024-25 was increased 
from Rs 30 crore to Rs 90 crore at the RE stage. The allocated funds were fully utilized 
following multiple proposals for HADR support from countries beset with natural disasters and 
updated payment schedules in respect of ongoing projects. BE 2025-26 (Rs 60 crore) is twice 
the amount allocated in BE 2024-25 (Rs 30 crore). Enhanced allocation is expected at the RE 
stage this year considering various commitments, including the announcements made by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister during the second India-CARICOM Summit in Georgetown, Guyana 
in November 2024.  
To streamline the financial allocation and execution of projects to ensure targeted and 
impactful utilization of resources in the 14 Pacific Island Countries (PICs), a new sub head for 

36 | P a g e 
 
Aid to Pacific Island Countries has been created in the Detailed Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry for the year 2025-26.  
The Ministry notes the Hon’ble Committee recommendation on consistently increasing 
the allocation for the Development Partnership Head to maintain and enhance India’s 
developmental partnerships. Budgetary demand and allocation is a dynamic exercise aided by 
regular assessment of Ministry’s expectation of expenditure progress in a financial year. 
Instruments of re-appropriation of budget, Supplementary demands etc., allow re-
prioritization, and re-allocation of funds for full and efficient allocation of budgetary resources. 
The Ministry's Quarterly Budget Management Meetings aid in analysis of expenditure 
utilization and assessment of budget resources and the useful repurposing of budgetary 
distribution as per Ministry’s international commitments. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
The Committee commend the Ministry of External Affairs for its efforts to implement 
and monitor its development cooperation projects effectively. The creation of a dedicated 
Project Management Unit, the establishment of an online dashboard system for tracking 
project progress, and the active involvement of both Indian and host country 
stakeholders in project implementation are all positive steps in ensuring the effectiveness 
and efficiency of India’s development assistance. However, the Committee emphasize the 
need for more robust and transparent monitoring mechanisms to ensure the optimal 
utilization of resources and timely execution of projects. The Committee also recommend 
that the Ministry should establish a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation 
framework for all ongoing and upcoming development projects.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation regarding robust and transparent 
monitoring mechanisms, it is shared that theMinistry ensures regular monitoring of the projects 
both from the Headquarters as well as through Indian Mission in the country where the project 
is undertaken. Many Indian Missions have designated officers for project monitoring and in 
countries with large number of projects, a separate project unit functions under the overall 
supervision of the Head of Mission. Site visits are undertaken by representatives from the 
Indian Mission and occasional visits undertaken from the Ministry for project monitoring and 
evaluation. Institutional mechanisms such as Joint Project Monitoring Committee (JPMC) 
regularly review and monitor all major projects to iron out issues hindering smooth 
implementation. 
In addition, the review mechanisms exist at multiple levels both internally in the 
Ministry as well at the level of Prime Minister’s Office (through PRAGATI mechanism). 

37 | P a g e 
 
Regular returns are sent on the status of projects through the prescribed channels. Ministry has 
also ensured the adoption and implementation of Integrity pact for the projects as per standard 
operating procedures circulated by the Central Vigilance Commission. The process of 
overseeing and implementation of Integrity pact by Independent External Monitors (IEM) is 
also being followed. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
The Committee understand that implementation of development projects abroad is a 
challenging task with the nature of challenges varying from country to country, especially 
with the changing politico-security situation. Recognizing that the impact of such 
challenges can best be managed or minimized, the Committee urge the Ministry to evolve 
robust institutional mechanisms at the earliest so that the challenges faced in project 
execution abroad are managed in a systematic and organized manner.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry keeps track of the changing politico-security situation of the countries where the 
projects are being undertaken. Regular contact with the Indian Mission and inputs from the 
project implementing agency ensure that challenges faced in the project are dealt within an 
organized manner, with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders, including the authorities 
from the host country. Institutional mechanisms such as Joint Project Monitoring Committee 
(JPMC) meetings are organized, as provided under the agreements, to tackle any challenges in 
the projects. 
Additionally, anMoU has been signed between IIFCL Project Ltd. (IPL) and MEA 
on February 21,2025. This MoU outlines the framework and agreement for the establishment 
of a Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) for implementation of GoI aided projects. This PMU, will 
be involved from ‘concept to commissioning’ of projects abroad, including assistance in 
contract and project monitoring with critical paths, advising corrective measures and mitigative 
actions, risk assessment frameworks, legal advice etc. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
The Committee find that there is lack of information in public domain which provides a 
comprehensive visibility on all the grants/LoCs extended, projects undertaken or the 
capabilities developed abroad by India despite having completed several significant 
development partnership projects in various countries, especially in neighbouring 
countries. Though the External Publicity Division of the Ministry is using social media, 
influencers, regional press, reels, films and documentaries for dissemination of 
information among Indian and global audiences about various aspects of India’s foreign 
policy, art, culture, economy, etc, it is felt that not enough is being done to amplify the 

38 | P a g e 
 
information specifically on India’s aid programmes either in the recipient communities 
or in India. Since India’s people-oriented aid programmes in other countries are seen to 
impact the people at grassroots levels generating significant goodwill for India, the 
Committee feel the need to leverage the same into deep people-to-people ties through 
awareness generation about India's contributions. In this context, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry publicize our international aid projects and their impact in 
host countries as well as in India so that the visibility of India’s aid programmesis 
increased among domestic and global audiences. Once projects are completed, publicity 
activities may be undertaken to bring forward the impact and value of these projects in 
the local communities where they are executed.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry through its External Publicity & Public Diplomacy (XPD) Division undertakes 
several measures to increase visibility and of India’s foreign aid programs among domestic and 
global audiences. 
a. MEA’s Performance Smart Board/Dashboard: The MEA ’s Performance Smartboard 
captures all major schemes, programmes and initiatives of the Ministry. It aims to 
provide information to the public while improving transparency and accountability in 
governance. Accordingly, it is used not only as a performance monitoring tool within 
the government, but also as a tool to keep citizens, Diaspora and foreigners informed 
of the services, activities and functioning of the Ministry. Information on Iconic 
Projects undertaken by Ministry in various countries and the Grants and Loans extended 
as Development Assistance to countries abroad will continue to be made available. The 
performance Board has been integrated with Ministry’s website for enhanced visibility 
and easy access. 
 
b. Media Engagement: The Ministry engages and brief the local and international media 
on its development partnerships abroad. This wouldhelpin not only disseminating its 
aid program but also provide a larger context to its efforts. Capsules providing key facts 
or insights on developmental cooperation with countries especially during Prime 
Minister’s visits abroad are designed for electronic media to ensure broader awareness 
about India’s aid programs.Ministry will continue to organize interactions of visiting 
foreign media delegations, especially from Global South, with senior officials of 
Ministry, on India's development partnership initiatives and its impact.  
 
c. Short films, documentaries and videos:The Ministrywill continue to commission 
short films and documentaries for dissemination of information among Indian and 
global audiences about India’s development programmes, its approach to the global 
south and various aspects of Indian foreign policy. A documentary “India and Global 
South” highlighting India’s developmental partnership with countries of Global South 
is under process. The documentary will cover information on India’s people centric 
projects and their impact in more than 25 countries in India’s neighbourhood and around 
the globe. In the recent past, the Ministry has commissioned short films on India-

39 | P a g e 
 
BIMSTEC, India & Africa, ‘Nalanda University’, ‘Restoration of temples in Wat Phou’, 
‘Restoration of temples in ASEAN countries’ ‘What MEA did’, ‘Forum for India 
Pacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC), ‘Marching together- India’s Development Co-
operation Initiatives’, ‘Operation Dost’, etc. which also cover India’s aid programs in 
these regions. In addition, ahead of each visit of a foreign leader to India or during 
President, Vice President or Prime Minister’s visit abroad, videos are made for 
publicity. These contain detailed information and visuals of our development assistance 
and projects. 
 
d. Commissioning of articles by experts and former Ambassadors: MEA will continue 
to commission articles on various themes authored by retired Indian diplomats and 
eminent experts which will be published across the world through Indian 
Missions/Posts. Ministry will also continue to encourage Ambassadors to regularly 
write articles on India’s development cooperation with other countries. 
 
e. Social media engagements: MEA has strong social media presence with more than 7.5 
million followers on several digital platforms i.e. X, Facebook, Instagram, Whatsapp, 
YouTube, LinkedIn, etc. Ministry will continue to use these to amplify information 
related to the progress of its aid programs in other countries. MEA also plans to give 
due visibility to the posts from Indian Missions and Posts by reposting, sharing, 
retweeting etc. News reporting and content related to India's aid programs, from private 
media, freelancers, influencers and experts will also be amplified on MEA’s social 
media platforms. MEA will utilize modern tools such as infographics, stories, 
highlights, reels among others to ensure larger appeal and visibility of India's programs. 
In extraordinary situations like HADR operations, the Ministry will provide regular 
updates of efforts by other Government of India agencies such as NDRF, Indian Army, 
Indian Air Force among others. 
 
f. Familiarization Visits & Influencer Engagements: MEA will continue to organize 
familiarization visits of foreign journalists and Social Media Influencers as part of 
India’s public diplomacy and media outreach efforts. A total of 306 Journalists and 
Content Creators from 114 countries visited India during 2024-25 and were exposed to 
different facets of Indian foreign policy, including visibility of India's aid programs 
through interactions with senior officials of the MEA. Additionally, interactions with 
organizations such as CDRI, ISA, IFC-IOR, RIS, FICCI, PSUs among others, also 
provide them an opportunity to gain insights on India's aid and developmental 
assistance to other countries. During and after the visit, participants create posts, reels, 
stories, blogs etc. on social media platforms to share their experiences and learnings 
with their audiences and followers. MEA will remain in continuous touch with the 
alumni of such visits for amplification of specific posts and more visibility of India 
related content, including those related to India's aid programs. 
 
g. Dissemination of information among regional press: MEA will continue to 
disseminate information on India's foreign policy initiatives, including aid programs to 

40 | P a g e 
 
over 100 regional/vernacular media outlets in a time bound manner. The stories on aid 
programs received from Missions/Posts will be placed in regional media, with special 
focus on tier 2 and tier 3 cities. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 28 
The Committee note that no new High Impact Community Developemnt Projects 
(HICDPs) are expected to be initiated in 2025-26 as the political and security situation in 
Bangladesh remains disturbed, however, two HICDPs are expected to be completed by 
May of the current year. The Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link Project initiated to provide 
better connectivity between India and Bangladesh has achieved 100% physical progress 
and is currently in the Defect Liability Period. Government of Bangladesh has recently 
processed the case for extension of project validity till 30 June 2025, and made adequate 
provisioning in their ongoing FY (till June 2025) to help the project attain financial 
closure. The Committee expect that these projects, as well as the ongoing work of 
dredging inland waters of the Jamuna and Kushiyara Rivers, would be completed as per 
schedule. Active coordination with Government of Bangladesh should be maintained to 
insulate such projects from the political and security related challenges and the feasibility 
of taking up new projects too may be explored along with additional budgetary provision 
at the RE stage.   
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry notes the Hon’ble Committee’s observation and remains closely engaged with 
the Interim Government of Bangladesh. Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link project and dredging 
works on Jamuna and Kushiyara rivers in identified stretches are progressing on ground. The 
Ministry will evaluate new proposals based on their strategic relevance, socio-economic impact 
and alignment with India’s foreign policy objectives, mindful of the political and security 
situation on the ground.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
The Committee note that Bhutan has again garnered the highest share from the external 
aid portfolio with an outlay of Rs. 2,150 crore in the budget for 2025-26. It includes a 
Grant component of Rs. 1775 crore and Rs. 375 crore as Loans. The Grant component 
has increased by Rs. 101 crore (6%) compared to the RE 2024-25 allocation of Rs. 1673.78 
crore. Till date, 61 Project Tied Assistance (PTA) projects worth Rs. 4957 crore and 283 
High Impact Community Development Projects (HICDP) worth Rs. 417 crore have been 
approved by both Governments and have commenced implementation. In respect of 
hydroelectric projects, technical discussions are underway for Punatsangchhu-I HEP 
while all the 6 units of Punatsangchhu-II HEP are expected to be commissioned by 

41 | P a g e 
 
September 2025. The Committee urge for fruitful completion of the ongoing PTA projects 
and HICDPs at the earliest.  Hydro-electricity being central to Indian-Bhutan economic 
cooperation under the plan outlay, all out efforts should be made to conclude the technical 
discussions for Punatsangchhu-I HEP so that the project is brought forward without 
further delay and Punatsangchhu-II HEP is fully commissioned as scheduled.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The PTA and HICDP projects in Bhutan are monitored periodically through bilaterally agreed 
mechanisms so that they remain on track and are completed on time. Status update of all the 
ongoing projects in Bhutan are as follows: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Category under 
Development Cooperation 
Plan Period of 
Bhutan 
Number of 
Projects 
Approved 
amount (in 
RS. Crore) Status of the project 
1 
Project Tied Assistance 
(PTA) 
13th FYP 
(2024-2029) 61 4957.9 
Under implementation; 
to be completed in 13th 
FYP period. 
 
RS. 529 crore have been 
released till date 
2 
High Impact Community 
Development Projects 
(HICDP)/Small Development 
Projects (SDP) 
13th FYP 
(2024-2029) 283 417.191 
Under implementation; 
to be completed in 13th 
FYP period. 
 
RS. 375 crore have been 
released till date 
With regard to the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation regarding hydroelectricity being 
central to India-Bhutan economic cooperation and the need to observe timelines for 
Punatsangchhu-I and Punatsangchhu-II HEPs, the following is submitted: 
 
Sl. No. 
Name of the hydroelectric 
project 
Approved Cost (in RS. 
crore) Status of the project 
1 Punatsangchhu – I HEP 
9375.575 at December 
2013 Price Level 
(1st RCE) 
Under implementation.  
Overall physical progress as on April 
2025 is 87.75%. 
 
Technical discussions ongoing to 
reach a common understanding on the 
way forward regarding construction 
of main dam structure. 
2 Punatsangchhu – II HEP 
9445.68 (cost to 
completion as vetted by 
CEA) 
Under implementation. 
Physical progress as on April 2025 is 
98.91%. 
 

42 | P a g e 
 
3 out of 6 units have been 
commissioned so far. All the units are 
likely to be commissioned 
by September 2025. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 30 
India’s development aid to Nepal covers key sectors such as earthquake reconstruction 
and capacity building infrastructure, energy supply and related infrastructure, trade & 
connectivity, defence and community development. The Committee find that the 
assistance to Nepal in the wake of the massive earthquake is currently being completed 
and is in its final stages. Major ongoing projects include construction of National Police 
Academy, ICPs at Bhairahawa and Dodhara Chandani, Terai roads projects, Jayanagar-
Bardibas rail link, Jogbani-Biratnagar rail link, Nepal Bharat Maitri Polytechnic 
Institute, Hetauda, reconstruction of health facilities and cultural heritage projects, etc.  
The Committee express hope that the Ministry would adequately give attention to cyber-
security, training and preparedness in neighbouring areas. Emphasizing the need to 
complete and operationalize all the ongoing projects within the specified timeframe and 
given in particular fraternal relationship that India seeks to maintain with our neighbour, 
the Committee urge for effective monitoring and oversight mechanism in the execution 
of such projects. The Committee hope that inadequate funds would not stand in the way 
of implementation of these projects and urge the Ministry to seek additional funds, if 
required, at the RE stage.  
Reply of the Government 
MEA acknowledges the Hon’ble Committee’s observations and reaffirms India’s commitment 
to strengthening its development partnership with Nepal through timely and effective 
implementation of high-impact people-centric projects across key sectors. 
Earthquake Reconstruction: Following the 2015 earthquake, India committed US$ 1 billion 
(US$250 million in grant assistance and US$ 750 million in Lines of Credit). The grant 
supported Housing (US$150 million), Education (US$ 50 million), Health (US$ 50 million), 
and Cultural Heritage (US$50 million). Housing and Education projects have been fully 
completed. In Health, 102 of 133 facilities are complete; in Cultural Heritage, 15 of 30 sites 
have been restored, with others in progress. The Ministry remains focused on completing the 
remaining projects in close coordination with the Government of Nepal.  
Major Infrastructure Projects: Key projects under implementation include the National 
Police Academy (65.68% complete; Rs. 625.94 crore), ICP Bhairahawa (71.2% complete; RS. 
161.76 crore), and preparatory work at ICP Dodhara Chandani. The Terai Roads Project (Rs. 
500 crore) has achieved 100% physical progress. Under railway connectivity, the Jaynagar-

43 | P a g e 
 
Bijalpura-Bardibas line (RS. 783.83 crore) is partially operational, pending land handover; the 
Jogbani-Biratnagar link (Rs. 373.87 crore) is partially complete, with Phase-II awaiting land 
acquisition. The Nepal-Bharat Maitri Polytechnic Institute at Hetauda (Rs. 39.31 crore) is 
46.08% complete, pending decisions from the Government of Nepal. 
Energy and Digital Infrastructure: India is executing pipeline connectivity projects in Nepal. 
Phase II of Motihari Amlekhgunj cross border pipeline has recently been completed and future 
connectivities are being implemented. India and Nepal are expanding cooperation in 
cybersecurity, AI, and Digital Public Infrastructure. India has already operationalized Peer to 
Merchant UPI transactions in Nepal and is ready to launch peer to peer mechanisms for digital 
payment transfers. A Nepali delegation visited India in May 2025 for talks on DPI and e-
governance.  
Capacity Building and Training: Since 2003, India has implemented 573 HICDPs in Nepal 
(494 completed, 79 ongoing), valued at NPR 1359 crore. The project cap was raised in 2024 to 
NPR 20 crore (Rs. 12.5 crore). Over 500 Nepali officials were trained under ITEC in 2024-25. 
Fifteen scholarship schemes benefit around 800 students annually in India and 700 in Nepal. 
Specialized Exposure and Skills Programs: India organized thematic trainings including 
Natural Farming (Sept 2023), Urban Development (Nov 2023), and Organic Horticulture (Feb-
Mar 2024). Delegations from Humla (July 2024) and Sankhuwasabha (10-day rural 
development program at NIRDPR) also visited India. 
Monitoring and Financial Oversight: Projects are monitored through mechanisms like Joint 
Project Monitoring Committee, Joint Working Group, Project Steering Committee etc. 
Funding: Adequate funding will be provided to all projects and additional allocations 
would be requested at the RE stage as required.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 31 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to Sri Lanka' has been 
increased to Rs. 300.00 crore at RE 2024-25 as well as BE 2025-26 to cater to Phase IV of 
Indian Housing Project, Sri Lanka Unique Digital Identity project, Floating Dock and 
the Solar Electrification of Religious Places in Sri Lanka. Moreover, several projects 
under the High Impact Community Development Project (HICDP) framework are at 
various stages of implementation and would require budgetary support for their 
continued implementation. India’s announcement to extend grant assistance towards 
undertaking rehabilitation of Kankesanthurai Port, provision of 22 diesel locomotives to 
Sri Lankan Railways, training of 1500 Sri Lankan civil servants over 5 years, etc. further 
necessitated additional budgetary support for implementation. The Committee hope that 
inadequate funds would not stand in the way of implementation of these projects and urge 
the Ministry to seek additional funds, if required, at the RE stage.  

44 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The allocation under ‘Aid to Sri Lanka’ was increased from Rs. 245 crore to Rs. 300 crore at 
the RE 2024-25 stage. The funds have been fully utilized. Ministry closely monitors the 
progress in implementation of various ongoing projects such as Phase IV of Indian Housing 
Project, Sri Lanka Unique Digital Identity project, Floating Dock and the Solar Electrification 
of Religious Places in Sri Lanka, projects under the High Impact Community Development 
Project (HICDP) framework, the rehabilitation of Kankesanthurai Port, provision of 22 diesel 
locomotives to Sri Lankan Railways, training of 1500 Sri Lankan civil servants over 5 years as 
well as new initiatives such as Indian capacity building for 700 Sri Lankan citizens annually, 
the development of Thirukoneswaram and Sita Eliya temple complexes and the Sacred City 
Project in Anuradhapura. Based on effective utilization and progress in implementation of these 
projects, additional funds will be requested at RE stage for FY 2025-26. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
The budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to Maldives’ has been increased from Rs. 400 crore 
during BE 2024-25 to Rs. 600 crore in BE 2025-26. The major chunk of the budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 600 crore would cater for payment towards the EkathaHarbour project 
and the Greater Male Connectivity Project. The Committee appreciate the financial 
assistance extended by India for undertaking infrastructure and developmental works in 
Maldives and desire that the Government should continue to extend support - financial 
or technical, in view of the special place it holds under India’s Neighbourhood First Policy 
and Vision SAGAR. 
Reply of the Government 
 
With regard to the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations, it is shared that the anticipated 
expenditure projected under the ‘Aid to Maldives’ is based on the upcoming milestones as part 
of implementation of various infrastructure development projects and initiatives being carried 
out by the Government of India in Maldives. These primarily pertain to the Ekatha Harbour 
Project, Greater Male Connectivity Project (GMCP), High Impact Community Development 
Projects (HICDPs) and capacity building & training of Maldivian stakeholders. These efforts 
are aligned with the priorities and requirements of Maldives as well as India’s ‘Neighbourhood 
First’ policy and Vision MAHASAGAR, i.e., Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security 
and Growth Across Regions. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
 
 

45 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
The budgetary allocation under ‘Aid to Myanmar’ was increased from Rs. 250.00 crore 
during BE 2024-25 to Rs.400.00 crore at RE 2024-25 and to Rs. 350.00 crore in BE 2025-
26.  The Committee note that the political turmoil and the security situation have 
negatively impacted the pace of progress of key projects underway in Myanmar, however, 
projects stalled or delayed due to COVID-19 pandemic and political crisis have been 
revived and the work on the same has progressed further. The Committee find it 
reassuring that construction works are underway including key projects such as the 
Kalewa-Yargi road section and Road component of Kaladan Multi-Modal Transport 
Corridor and agreements have been concluded on new proposals including small 
community infrastructure, education, capacity building initiatives, healthcare, etc.  The 
Committee urge the Government to extend all assistance to the stakeholders involved in 
the implementation of these projects for early completion.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry notes the Hon’ble Committee’s observations and remains committed to 
advancing key infrastructure projects in Myanmar, including the Kaladan Multi Modal 
Transport corridor and the Kalewa-Yargi road section, despite the prevailing challenges. The 
project-related activities are underway, and collaboration with various stakeholders is being 
actively pursued to ensure timely progress. The Ministry also supports new proposals focused 
on community development and capacity building contributing to overall development.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 35 
The security situation in Afghanistan is a matter of concern for the safety of Indian 
personnel involved in developmental and humanitarian work. The Committee have been 
informed that the Technical Mission in Kabul oversees our developmental assistance to 
Afghanistan. It is also true that the Afghan side have underlined their sensitivities to our 
security concerns in meetings with them. The Committee, however, feel the need for a 
separate mechanism/wing to give focused attention to the security aspects and urge the 
Government to work out the modalities in this regard, in consultation with the agencies 
concerned in India. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India accords highest priority to security of our Technical Mission in Kabul 
and the safety and well-being of Mission personnel in Afghanistan. In this regard, Ministry is 
in touch with the concerned agencies to ensure focused attention on all aspects related to the 
security of Mission in Afghanistan.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 

46 | P a g e 
 
 
Recommendation No. 36 
The Committee note that India has provided assistance to support women and children 
in Afghanistan through the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, e-ICCR 
scholarships, Special Scholarship Scheme for Afghan Nationals (SSSAN) and Scholarship 
Scheme for Afghan National Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF).Currently, there are 
600 female students approximately, out of 2000 Afghan students studying under the e-
ICCR scholarships while 74 female students out of 489 Afghan students under SSSAN. 
Out of 53 Afghan students, the number of female students studying under ANDSF is only 
6. The Committee feel that the coverage of female students under these scholarship 
schemes needs to be improved and urge the Government to make efforts in this direction. 
The Committee attach the highest importance to the welfare of women in Afghanistan as 
an objective of India’s foreign policy and therefore desire that projects/programmes 
aimed at the welfare of women and children may be launched and additional funds, if 
required, may be sought at the RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee. It is shared that 
the 351.4 tons of medical assistance and 32 tons of social support extended by India to 
Afghanistan post-August 2021 have been aimed at benefiting the Afghan nationals including 
women. India has also extended assistance to Habibia High school in terms of 500 units of 
winter clothing, 650 GI tagged Channapatna toys and 1.2 tons of stationery kits, with majority 
of beneficiaries being girl students. India has engaged with the United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime (UNODC) in Afghanistan, to provide assistance for the welfare of the Afghan drug-
user population, particularly women. As part of education and capacity building programmes, 
India has provided e-ICCR scholarship to 2000 Afghan nationals, out of which nearly 580 are 
girls/women. Additionally, India continues to offer online scholarships for agriculture-related 
fields in collaboration with the Afghanistan National Agricultural Science and Technological 
University (ANASTU), from which Afghan students, including girls/women have benefited. 
Any future programme/scheme would be considered depending on the prevailing 
circumstances and policy priorities, while remaining mindful of the needs of Afghan women 
and children. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 40 
The Committee note that in addition to India’s resident diplomatic missions in 17 Latin 
American and Caribbean (LAC) countries, plans to open more are in the pipeline. India 
has also been consistently engaging with key regional groupings in Latin America, 
including CELAC (Community of Latin American and Caribbean States), CARICOM 
(Caribbean Community), SICA (Central American Integration System) and 
MERCOSUR (Southern Common Market). 26 LAC countries have signed ISA 

47 | P a g e 
 
framework agreement, 12 countries have joined CDRI, 5 countries have joined GBA, and 
5 countries have joined IBCA. For optimum exploitation of economic, cultural and 
diplomatic opportunities with the LAC countries, the Committee desire that resident 
Indian diplomatic missions should be opened in the identified countries of the LAC region 
at the earliest and the Ministry should make constant efforts to persuade the remaining 
countries in the LAC region to join the International Solar Alliance (ISA), Coalition for 
Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI), Global Biofuels Alliance (GBA) and 
International Big Cat Alliance (IBCA). 
 
Reply of the Government 
CDRI’s Membership in Latin and Caribbean (LAC) Region: CDRI’s total membership is 
43 Countries and 7 Organizations, of which 13 member countries are from the Latin and 
Caribbean (LAC) Region. Ecuador is the latest country to join CDRI in 2025. MEA is working 
closely with CDRI to build partnerships with Belize, Dominica, Marshal Islands, St Kitts and 
Nevis and St. Vincent and Grenadines as full member of CDRI and these countries are already 
receiving technical support under CDRI’s Infrastructure for Resilient Island States (IRIS) 
program for SIDS.  
GBA’s Membership in Latin and Caribbean (LAC) Region: The Global Biofuels Alliance 
currently has 27 member countries and 12 international organizations out of which 5 member 
countries are from the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region. MEA has been actively 
engaging with prospective member countries that have huge potential in biofuels to join the 
alliance.  
ISA’s Membership in Latin and Caribbean (LAC) Region: The International Solar Alliance 
(ISA) currently has 23 full Member Countries and 3 Signatory Countries in the Latin America 
and Caribbean (LAC) region. Over the past four years, MEA has worked significantly towards 
expanding ISA membership by adding 09 new Member Countries—an increase of over 50% in 
its LAC membership. Notably, Chile and Panama joined in 2023, followed by Paraguay in 
2024, reflecting the region’s growing commitment to solar energy. 
MEA is actively supporting ISA in expansion of its current membership with 7 prospective 
countries—Bahamas, Uruguay, Honduras, Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador, and Guatemala. Given 
the strong interest from the region, MEA is prioritizing outreach efforts with Colombia, 
Ecuador, Guatemala, and Mexico to facilitate integration into the Alliance and further 
accelerate solar energy adoption.  
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee on opening resident Indian diplomatic 
missions in the identified countries of the LAC region has been duly noted and it is shared that 
approval has been received for operationalizing five new Missions in Europe and in Latin 
America and Caribbean region. The Ministry formulates proposals from time to time for 
opening of resident Missions in countries where there are no Indian Missions. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 

48 | P a g e 
 
 
Recommendation No. 41 
 
The Committee observe that budgetary allocations are made for programmes aimed at 
welfare of Indian Diaspora and engagement with them under the sub-heads ‘Welfare of 
Overseas Indians’ and ‘Engagement with Indian Diaspora’.Know India Programme 
(KIP), Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC), Promotion of Cultural 
Ties with Diaspora (PCTD), celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD), Pre-
Departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation of Emigrant Worker, Evacuation of Indian 
due to War/Civil Disturbance, Repatriation of Indian Destitutes, Legal Assistance to 
Women facing problems in NRI Marriages and Legal Counselling/Assistance to Indian 
workers in the Gulf are funded from the grants.In 2025-26, Rs. 92.21 crore are seen to 
have been earmarked for these schemes which shows an increase of 55% as compared to 
BE 2024-25 of Rs. 59.21 crore. This increase, the Committee note is under the sub-head 
‘Engagement with Indian Diaspora’ and mainly on Celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas and Know India Programme. While appreciating this enhancement, the Committee 
note with concern that the allocation under the ‘Welfare of Overseas Indians’ has 
remained unchanged from BE 2024-25 and is almost stagnant for over the last several 
years without even accounting for inflation. While viewing that the existing allocations 
made to various schemes and programmes for the welfare of Overseas Indians is quite 
inadequate, the Committee desire that additional funds be sought during the next 
financial year.  Since the Indian Diaspora of 15.85 million NRIs and 19.57 million 
PIOs/OCIs, spread across the globe is one of the largest overseas communities comprising 
a diverse range from laborers/workers, traders, political leaders, professionals, students 
etc., the Committee have been continuously recommending the Ministry to ensure that 
requisite budgetary allocation for all the schemes for their welfare and protection are 
sought and received. While reiterating the same, it is strongly felt that an increase in funds 
is essential if our Missions/ Posts abroad have to meet the demands, expectations and 
priorities of the local Indian diaspora in their respective jurisdictions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PDOT: The Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Programme was launched by the 
Ministryin January 2018 under the PravasiKaushalVikasYojana (PKVY) with an aim at 
enhancing soft skills of Indian migrant workers largely going to the Gulf and other ECR 
Countries. Under this programme, the emigrant workers are given free-of-cost one-day 
orientation training to enable them to understand the culture, language, tradition and local rules 
and regulations of the destination country. The orientation training also helps to sensitize the 
migrant workers about pathways to safe and legal migration and various government 
programmes for their welfare, safety and protection such as ICWF, MADAD, PBBY etc. Since 
inception of the PDOT programme, a total of 1,90,362 emigrant workers have been imparted 
training through 41 PDOT Centres as on 28 February, 2025.  Proposal to open another 51 new 
P-DOT centres within the next one year is under implementation.   
 
The PDOT training is imparted under two models – 

49 | P a g e 
 
 
    • PDOT Centresoperated by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) empaneled 
training partners under the Pravasi KaushalVikas Yojna (PKKY), a joint collaboration under 
an MoU between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) for which a grant of Rs. 10 crore was extended by MEA to MSDE. 
 
    • The second model is PDOTCentres managed by State Government agencies. Ministry has 
been granting funds to State Governments to conduct PDOT Training to emigrant workers @ 
Rs. 500/- per candidate for in-person training and Rs. 100 for online training.  
The Ministry has been making concerted efforts to expand the PDOT outreach to 
promote safe, legal and orderly migration. Towards this end, Ministry has reached out to all 
concerned State Governments/agencies to send their proposal for allocation of funds to carry 
out PDOT and alsooperationalize the new PDOT centres approved by the Ministry. In this 
regard, letters have been written to the Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the concerned 
States seeking their intervention for promotion of PDOT programme and early 
operationalisation of new PDOT Centres in their States. The matter is being followed up 
directly with the State Governments as well as through the PoEs in these States.  Ministry is 
working in close coordination with all relevant stakeholders to expand the P-DOT outreach.   
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY): The PravasiBharatiyaBimaYojana (PBBY), a 
mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers going 
to ECR countries for overseas employment, provides an insurance cover of 10 lakhs in case of 
accidental death or permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal insurance 
premium of Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of two/three years. The Scheme was comprehensively 
revamped and has become effective from August 1, 2017. The scheme now provides for global 
coverage irrespective of employer and location and has facility for online renewal. The revised 
scheme is simpler and more beneficial for emigrant workers and is aimed at ensuring an 
expeditious settlement of claims. No budgetary allocation is provided for the scheme, since it 
is a user-paid scheme. 
 
Ensuring the welfare and protection of the large and diverse overseas Indian Community is the 
foremost priority of this Ministry. Besides the various Diaspora Welfare Schemes and 
Programmes, such as SPDC scholarship, Know India Programme, PCTD, etc., for which the 
budgetary allocations have been steadily increasing, the Government of India has different 
mechanisms / tools to assist distressed Indian nationals in foreign lands, to ensure that all 
possible consular assistance are provided to them, including emergency medical care and 
boarding/ lodging, whenever required. The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been 
set up in Indian Missions/ Posts abroad for assisting overseas Indian nationals in distress 
situations on a means tested basis in deserving cases. This is extra-budgetary in nature and is 
funded through additional levies on the services provided by Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
 
The Ministry’s budget head ‘Evacuation of Indians due to War/Civil Disturbance’ is used for 
safe evacuation of stranded Indian Nationals from foreign countries during crisis situations 
arising out of conflict/war/civil disturbances. The allocation under this budget head has been 

50 | P a g e 
 
Rs10 Crore on yearly basis in FY 2023-24, 2024-25 & 2025-26, except in 2023-24 when 
additional Rs50 crore were allocated in view of Operation Dost. The expenditure under this 
budget head is by definition uncertain and depends upon evolving situations abroad that 
necessitate evacuations. During FY 2023-24, the allocated fund of Rs. 60 Crore was booked 
upto more than 90%. In FY 2024-25, the expenditure could be booked upto only 3% out of 
allocated funds of Rs. 10 crore. As this budget head caters to exigencies, fund allocation is 
done on need basis in addition to the consistent budgetary outlay. 
 
Ministry is also in the process of setting up One-Stop Centers in selected cities across the world 
to provide 24/7 emergency assistance to Indian women in distress. This will be funded through 
the Nirbhaya Fund, set up by the Ministry of Women and Child Development. This Ministry 
has sought and received additional funds amounting to Rs 9.50 crore from the Ministry of 
Finance for setting up the One-Stop Centers. The Ministry will assess and make a case of 
additional required funds at the RE stage to meet the demands, expectations and priorities of 
the local Indian diaspora in their respective jurisdictions, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s 
recommendations. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 42 
Under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) initiative, the Ministry 
provides funds to Missions/Posts across the globe. In BE 2023-24 and 2024-25 an amount 
of Rs.4 crore was provided and in BE 2025-26, an enhanced allocation of Rs. 6 crore is 
made for PCTD. However, the Committee note with dismay that the funds released to 
Missions/Posts for financial year 2023-24 & 2024-25 are Rs. 3,48,38000 and Rs. 3,80,50000 
respectively. The Committee wonder, how the Indian Missions and Posts are expectedto 
organize cultural events with limited resources available to them and are surprised to see 
that the Ministry had projected only Rs. 10 crore for 66 Missions in the current FY 
despite knowing that it is difficult to meet the expectations with meager funds. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make further improvements in its Budgetary 
projections taking into consideration the requests received from Missions/Posts and 
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate Budgetary provisions so that 
the Missions are able to support their initiatives to strengthen ties with the Overseas 
Indian Community without being hindered by financial constraints. 
Reply of the Government 
Based on the increasing requests from Missions/ Posts abroad to support their initiatives to 
strengthen ties with the Overseas Indian Community, the Budgetary allocation under the 
Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) had increased by about 30% in FY 2024-25 
to Rs. 4 Crore, compared to FY 2022-23. The Ministry projected Rs. 10 crore for FY 2025-26 
and has been allocated Rs. 6 Crore, amounting to a 50% increase over the last Financial Year. 
The allocated amount has already been disbursed to 112 Missions and Poststo support their 
initiatives to strengthen ties with Diaspora and to preserve, maintain and showcase their Indian 

51 | P a g e 
 
heritage and culture. The Ministry intends to increase the coverage of the scheme by including 
more Missions/Posts, as new Missions/Posts have been established in the recent times. The 
funds under PCTD are intended as seed capital to organize events and initiatives for the above-
mentioned objectives, and the Missions/Posts are encouraged to include Indian Community 
Organisations and local government bodies as partners to share the expenditure of the events. 
This is in alignment with the larger vision of Jan Bhagidari of the Government of India. 
However, in line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to make further 
improvements in the budgetary provisions, the Ministry will reassess the requests received 
from Missions/Posts and their utilization of already released funds to make a strong case for 
additional funds at the time of RE for FY 2025-26. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 44 
The Committee are aware that the Diaspora Engagement (DE) Division of MEA plans, 
implements and monitors different schemes and programmes for engaging with and for 
the welfare of the Indian Diaspora living abroad. The Division also closely monitors the 
utilization of funds for different schemes by calling for detailed reports from Missions on 
the activities held by them through these funds and scrutinizing the reports regularly 
before approving any further allocation of funds. Though the Ministry has informed that 
the schemes and programmes of the Ministry are evaluated by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India, a closer look at the performance of the programmes/schemes 
aimed at welfare of Indian Diaspora and engagement with them, prompt the Committee 
to call for a thorough review in terms of effectiveness and impact, over and above the 
financial audit by CAG. In this regard, the Committee may be apprised of the outcome 
of the Joint Working Group constituted to analyze the objectives, working and challenges 
of various programmes/initiatives/schemes for welfare of Indian diaspora and the extent 
of reach and delivery of such schemes. The Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) has 
selected the subject ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant 
Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the 
Emigration Bill’ for detailed examination and Report during their current term. A more 
detailed Report on schemes and programmes for welfare of Indian disapora will be 
presented to the Parliament shortly.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Joint Working Group (JWG) on the subject mentioned by the Hon’ble Committee, was 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (CPV & OIA) and the Heads of Division of 
the erstwhile OIA-I, OIA-II (now Emigration Policy & Welfare and Diaspora Engagement 
Divisions, respectively), CPV, PSP and OE&PGE Divisions as members of the Working 
Group. The JWG met on 22.12.2021 to conduct a comprehensive review of all the diaspora 
welfare schemes and programmes implemented by the Government of India, before and after 
the transition of these Divisions from erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to the 

52 | P a g e 
 
Ministry, including a review of the Programmes which have since been closed/wound up. 
Besides taking stock of the existing Programmes, the working group also made two 
recommendations, viz. to include medical courses under SPDC Scheme, and to provide 50% 
reservation of seats for women under SPDC. These recommendations have since been 
implemented. Since then, Secretary (CPV & OIA) chairs weekly meetings with the Heads of 
respective divisions (members of JWG) under his charge to discuss issues in their respective 
domains and regularly monitors the progress of various schemes. As the purpose of Working 
Group was deemed to be well-fulfilled, the Working Group has been dissolved. However, 
subsequent to the suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee, the Ministry has decided to hold 
monthly meetings of the Working Group to deliberate upon effectiveness of various 
schemes/programmes/initiatives of the Government for engaging with the Diaspora and to 
address challenges for securing the latter’s welfare. 
The proposed ‘Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024 seeks to replace 
the existing  Emigration Act, 1983 with an aim of accessing a global workplace for citizens of 
India by developing a mechanism for safe, legal, orderly and regular mobility for employment 
and stay abroad through processes provided therein and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.The draft Bill 2024 has been revised in consultations with the relevant 
authorities, and the same is under internal consultations. Thereafter, it will be put for public 
consultations for 30 days which will be followed up by Inter-Ministerial consultations with the 
relevant line ministries along with the Draft Cabinet Note on the revised draft. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 45 
The Committee recognize the critical role played by autonomous bodies such as the 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) 
and Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS)in advancing 
India's foreign policy objectives, especially in the domains of cultural diplomacy, 
international relations, and research on emerging global issues. In the Committee's 
considered opinion, the current financial allocations to these institutions fall short of 
adequately supporting the expanding demands for their research, outreach activities, and 
strategic collaborations with international think tanks—endeavors that are pivotal to 
advancing India’s interests and influencing global discourse on critical issues such as 
South-South cooperation, Digital Diplomacy, Artificial Intelligence, Climate Action, 
Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE), Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI), food security, 
women-led development, sharing of best practices, etc. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly urge for a substantial augmentation of the financial provisions for these 
institutions to align with their expanded mandates and activities. The increased funding 
would facilitate the growth of their research capabilities, outreach initiatives, and global 
visibility, which are crucial for elevating India's standing in the international policy 
sphere. 
 
 

53 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been duly noted. It is shared that there has 
been an increase of Rs. 20 crore in ICCR’s Budget allocation for the current Financial Year 
2025-26 (Rs. 351.25 crore as against Rs. 331.25 crore in the last FY). Also, there has been an 
increase in the budget allocations of RIS and ICWA for the current Financial Year 2025-26 
(Rs. 19.51 crore and RS. 15.48 crore as against Rs. 18 crore and Rs15.47 crore in last FY).  
ICCR has accordingly initiated a comprehensive review of the current financial allocations and 
is formulating specific proposals for augmentation of its budgetary provisions in the current 
financial year (2025-26) to cater to new initiatives such as: 
(i) 50 new QUAD STEM Scholarships (a new scholarship scheme launched in 
2025); 
(ii) Sending 75 folk art troupes to perform abroad (3 troupes each from 25 Indian 
States with whom ICCR has signed MoU’s); 
(iii) Organizing 3 or 4 signature cultural events in premier global venues; 
(iv) Launch of 12 new cash awards for ICCR foreign scholars promoting Indian 
culture (‘ICCR YuvaMitra’  Prize and ‘ICCR Kala Sadhak’  Prize); 
(v) Organizing three cultural festivals in India - Festival of Ukraine, Festival of 
Belarus and Festival of Russia; 
(vi) Settling pending Tuition Fees to Universities hosting ICCR scholar (approx. 
₹37.00 Crore). 
In line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation, the Ministry will assess the funding 
requirements of these bodies and make a case for augmentation of funds to the Ministry of 
Finance at the 2025-26 RE stage and 2026-27 BE stage. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 46 
The Committee acknowledge that ICCR plays a crucial role in India’s cultural diplomacy 
and the projection of India’s soft power. The activities of ICCR encompass a broad 
spectrum, including scholarships, hosting of cultural delegations/events, establishment of 
Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad, promotion of Indian languages, dance, music, 
etc. The Committee note that allocation to ICCR for FY 2025-26 has been increased to 
Rs. 351.25 crore. The enhanced allocation is on account of expanding research and 
scholarship rates, cultural hospitality norms and for various cultural initiatives.  
The Committee observe with concern that the budget allocation for the Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) has always remained in the range of Rs. 300-350 
crore annually over the past decade. While acknowledging incremental improvements, 
the Committee contends that such funding levels are insufficient to meet ICCR’s 
expanding mandate and the growing breadth of its activities. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend a substantial increase in ICCR’s budget, proposing an allocation of Rs. 500-

54 | P a g e 
 
600 crore in the forthcoming years to enable the ICCR to carry out its pivotal role 
mandate of cultural outreach and promotion of India’s soft power. Further, efforts 
should also be geared towards diversification of ICCR’s resource generation, including 
the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model, exemplified by the ICCR’s Casa de la India 
in Valladolid, Spain.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has duly noted the Hon’ble Committee’s observations. The ICCR is expanding 
its cultural, academic and public outreach activities and will accordingly scale up its budgetary 
projections. For instance, ICCR has launched 50 new Quad STEM scholarships and is working 
on a new DAKSHIN scholarship scheme for the Global South. ICCR has also launched an 
annual global dance competition for foreigners and has institutionalized the award of 
Annapurna Certificates to authentic Indian restaurants abroad.  ICCR also proposes to 
undertake annual theme-based activities to promote specific aspects of Indian culture like 
Buddhism, North-east India, Indian Epics, etc. and conduct 3-4 signature cultural events in 
premier global events and international festivals. 
In the current Financial Year, ICCR has been allocated Budget of Rs 351.25 Crore, 
which is 20 Crore more than last year’s allocated Budget whereas the demand for Financial 
Year 2025-26 was Rs. 413.78 Crore. ICCR will seek additional funds at the Revised Estimates 
(RE) stage during 2025-26 to meet its varied requirements, viz., Scholarships, Awards, 
Incoming foreign cultural delegations (ICDs), Outgoing Indian cultural delegations (OCDs), 
Busts & Statutes, IDY 2025, Conferences & Seminars, Media & EGIT etc. 
ICCR is also actively promoting Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) and innovative 
funding models through Indian Embassies/ Consulates/ Indian Cultural Centres abroad.For 
instance:                 
i) ICCR has circulated policy guidelines for our Diplomatic Missions abroad to 
collaborate with local authorities, community organizations and diaspora in organizing cultural 
events abroad. Depending on the quantum of financial contribution by the local entity, ICCR 
is offering specific categories of incentives to local partners, including scholarships, travel 
grants, and visits to India. 
ii) ICCR is encouraging the establishment of new cultural centres in a PPP mode, on the 
lines of the Casa-de-la India in Valladolid (Spain). 
iii) Nearly half the Teachers of Indian Culture (TICs), currently teaching Yoga, Indian 
music, dance, languages, etc. abroad, are now local residents of foreign countries who are hired 
on contracts as Local Resource Persons (LRPs). 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 49 
 
The Committee are aware that the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) works 
in collaboration with various governmental bodies such as the Ministry of Culture, 

55 | P a g e 
 
Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Education, Ministry of AYUSH, and others. While 
ICCR currently coordinates with these ministries for specific events and scholarship 
schemes, the Committee believe there is significant potential for more integrated and 
cohesive planning and execution of joint initiatives. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that ICCR enhance its coordination with relevant ministries, particularly in 
areas such as managing cultural events, promoting Indian tourism, and fostering a more 
comprehensive approach to cultural diplomacy. A formalized mechanism for inter-
ministerial cooperation and resource sharing should be established to maximize the 
impact of India’s soft power initiatives. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) Enhanced coordination with relevant Ministries and an ‘all of government’ approach to 
cultural promotion is important for enhancing the scale and impact of cultural diplomacy. 
Accordingly, ICCR is working closely with the Ministry of Culture in anchoring Festivals of 
India abroad through Missions and also collaborated actively in organizing cultural events 
during G-20. Similarly, ICCR actively engages with the Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of 
Youth Affairs & Sports , Ministry of Education and entities like the Archaeological Survey of 
India (ASI), National Archives of India (NAI), National Book Trust (NBT), SangeetNatak 
Academy (SNA), Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), SahityaAkademi (SA), 
National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA), National School of Drama (NSD), National 
Museum etc. in organizing exhibitions, administering scholarships, youth exchange 
programmes, monument and manuscripts promotion, Book Fairs, Conferences, Seminars etc. 
(ii) ICCR also actively cooperates with other relevant Ministries/entities in formal 
mechanisms for international cultural cooperation. For instance, at the India-UAE Cultural 
Council Forum meeting chaired by ICCR on 19 March 2025, representatives from the 
Ministries of Culture, Tourism, Youth Affairs & Sports, NAI and NBT were also involved in 
drawing up an Action Plan as members of the Indian delegation. 
(iii) ICCR anchors cultural events for various Ministries, PMO, Lok Sabha &Rajya Sabha 
Secretariats, Vice President’s/ President’s Secretariats, NSCS, etc. at their request. 
(iv) ICCR also has MoU’s with 25 Indian States and works closely with them to project 
their culture abroad as well as facilitate participation of foreign artists in State Festivals and 
local cultural events. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 50 
The Committee note that the last empanelment by the Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) was conducted in 2019, with the inclusion of 451 artists/groups from 27 
states. The Committee appreciate the steps ICCR has undertaken to digitize the 
empanelment process and introduce measures such as national-level youth competitions, 

56 | P a g e 
 
inclusion of underrepresented regions through a lottery system, and the categorization of 
senior artists as 'Master Trainers'. In the considered view of the Committee, these 
initiatives, along with the signing of MoUs with 23 States to promote regional art forms, 
are commendable and should help in broadening the scope of cultural representation. 
There should be a five yearly review of the empanelment of artists by ICCR to give 
opportunity to emerging talents.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee for a five year review of the empanelment 
of artists by ICCR is noted and it is shared that the ICCR is currently undertaking a review 
of its empanelment process to, tap into fresh young talent, and provide opportunities for 
rural/tribal artists living in remote corners of India, differently-abled artists and winners of 
reality talent shows. The new empanelment process will be widely advertised in all leading 
national and regional newspapers of India, ICCR website, social media etc. to ensure pan-
India publicity so that any artist irrespective of his/her place of origin/residence, may apply 
for empanelment. 
Selection of artists for inclusion in ICCR’s panel will be done by distinguished expert 
Advisory/Sub Advisory Committees comprising eminent artists from specific genres. The 
empanelment will be done in a transparent and fair manner, and artists will be graded as 
‘Outstanding’, ‘Established’,& ‘Proficient’ depending on their skill and competence. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 51 
The Committee recognize the role of the Policy Planning & Research Division for its 
strategic outreach, policy research and engagement with academia, think-tanks and 
international partners in shaping India's foreign policy. The Committee appreciate the 
Division’s efforts to engage State Governments through regional strategic dialogues like 
NADI Dialogue, Kochi Dialogue, Health Diplomacy Dialogue and in organizing major 
strategic outreach initiatives such as the Raisina Dialogue, the Global Technology 
Summit, and the Indian Ocean Conference. Furthermore, the Division's collaborative 
engagements with universities, think tanks, and international institutions have 
strengthened India’s foreign policy framework by incorporating expert insights and 
fostering a culture of research-driven policy-making. The Committee urge the Ministry 
to continue its momentum in institutionalizing global collaborations, promoting greater 
inter-governmental coordination, and encouraging the active participation of non-
governmental stakeholders in foreign policy discussions on a regular basis. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are noted. The Ministry is continuously 
working on institutionalizing global collaborations, promoting and strengthening inter-

57 | P a g e 
 
governmental coordination and encouraging active participation of non-governmental 
stakeholders in foreign policy discussions. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
 
  

58 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 22 
The Committee express their deep concern regarding the slow progress in the 
establishment and operationalization of the South Asian University (SAU), which is a 
flagship initiative under the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). 
Though India is committed to covering 100% of the capital expenditure of SAU, the 
operational budget is supposed to be contributed by all the member countries. 
However,several SAARC member states have been unable to meet their financial 
obligations despite repeated efforts and follow-ups by both SAU and the Indian 
Government resulting in SAU’s operational budgetbecoming heavily dependent on 
India’s contribution, which currently stands at 57.49%. This disproportionate financial 
burden is especially disconcerting and the continued non-payment of dues by other 
member states without adequate justification has led to a growing financial imbalance. 
This, not only undermines the university’s capacity to expand its academic programmes, 
improve infrastructure, and offer scholarships but also threatens to derail its broader 
objective of fostering regional integration in providing quality education to the youth of 
South Asia. In light of these ongoing challenges, the Committee urge the Government to 
reconsider the operational structure of SAU. The Ministry should specifically explore the 
possibility of India assuming a principal role in both the administrative and academic 
management of the university, given its substantial financial contribution. India’s 
leadership should be accompanied by an effort to streamline operations and ensure that 
the university’s goals are met in a timely and efficient manner. As for the foreign member 
states, those countries that continue to make contributions to SAU should be granted 
representation on the advisory or governing board, in a manner that reflects their 
financial support.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The operational structure of South Asian University (SAU) is governed by the Inter-
Governmental Agreement on SAU signed by the SAARC Member States in 2007. As per the 
Agreement, there is no possibility for any one Member State to assume leading/higher role in 
administrative and academic management of the University even though it gives higher 
financial contribution. The only added facility that India has is to have half of the student intake. 
There is no provision in the Agreement either to remove or to give higher/lesser role to any of 
the Member States in governing the University. 
 
Any changes to the Agreement are to be proposed through necessary amendments by the 
Member States, which could only come into force upon ratification by all Member States. In 
view of the fact that SAARC runs on consensus principle, it is not possible to have any 

59 | P a g e 
 
amendments effected to the Agreement by India alone. Accordingly, Government of India 
continues its efforts through the University authorities and at the meetings of the SAU 
Governing Board and the SAARC Programming Committee, to urge the Member States to pay 
their dues at the earliest. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
  

60 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee find that this year’s budgetary allocation of Rs. 20,516.61 crore for MEA 
excludes the Indian Exim Bank sovereign guarantees which in BE 2024-25 had accounted 
for 15.45% increase (Rs. 2744.91 crore) from the productive BE 2024-25. The Committee 
acknowledge the clarification provided by the Ministry regarding the non-inclusion of a 
provision for the Lines of Credit (LoC) in the Ministry’s budget for the fiscal year 2025-
26. The Committee understand that LoC provisioning, which is a necessary mechanism 
to address the non-performing assets in the Exim Bank’s balance sheet, has been a 
significant and somewhat unforeseen budgetary requirement in recent years. However, 
the Committee are of the view that the inclusion of such provisions within the regular 
budget distorts the correct picture of actual allocation to the MEA and also impinges on 
its ability to meet core diplomatic and development responsibilities, as the provisioning 
for the Indian Exim Bank are non-productive in nature and do not contribute directly to 
the foreign policy objectives of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of External Affairs make a compelling case to the Ministry of Finance to 
treat EXIM Bank provisioning as a separate item. The provisioning for non-performing 
loans shouldbe allocated outside of the regular MEA budget, over and above the core 
funding necessary for the Ministry’s diplomatic and developmental functions. This 
distinction will ensure that the Ministry’s essential international responsibilities are 
adequately funded, without being compromised by non-productive and non-diplomatic 
financial obligations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As part its budget, the Ministry provides ‘Support to Exim Bank towards GoI Guaranteed Line 
of Credit (LoC)’, which is for provisioning requirement and invocation of guarantee claims 
that have arisen in respect of LoCs extended under IDEAS scheme due to non-payment of loan 
and interest in a timely manner by the borrowing entities, i.e. sovereign nations. This 
provisioning amount is an expenditure charged to the Guarantee Redemption Fund – a notional 
expenditure and an adjustment of accounts between different branches of the Government. As 
per the directions of the Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of Finance, the MEA is 
required to cover in its budget, the payments that are due to the Exim Bank of India on account 
of the LoCs that the latter extends to foreign countries on MEA’s recommendation. Based on 
the claims raised by Exim Bank, and approval from Department of Economic Affairs, payments 
have been made to Exim Bank towards provisioning over the last three years. GoI has paid 
100% provisioning to Exim Bank for a majority of countries. Exim Bank’s books have been 

61 | P a g e 
 
strengthened substantially. No budget has been allocated in the BE of 2025-26 towards 
provisioning. 
The recommendation of the Honble Committee that the provisioning for non-performing loans 
be allocated outside of the regular MEA budget, over and above the core funding necessary for 
Ministry’s diplomatic and development functions, is important, as this will ensure that 
Ministry’s core responsibilities receive adequate funding. The Ministry remains engaged with 
RBI and Ministry of Finance on the matter. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee commend the Ministry for increased representation of women in the 
Indian Foreign Service (IFS), with women officers constituting 39.39% of the 2024 batch. 
The appointment of 15 lady officers as Heads of Missions is a notable step towards 
promoting gender equality at the senior-most levels of the Ministry. Additionally, the 
establishment of the Gender Budget Cell, the implementation of mentorship programmes 
and the provision of creche facilities for employees are positive initiatives that reflect the 
Ministry’s commitment to creating an inclusive and supportive environment for women. 
However, the Committee believe that further efforts are necessary to enhance gender 
equality, not only in terms of representation but also in terms of professional 
advancement, particularly in senior and decision-making roles.  
While the increase in the number of women officers is commendable, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that women are not only well-represented in 
numbers but are also given the tools, resources, and opportunities needed to progress to 
leadership positions. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take proactive 
steps to encourage the recruitment of more women into the IFS and other departments 
within the MEA. Although the UPSC examination process is gender-neutral, the Ministry 
should explore additional measures, such as targeted awareness programmes, 
mentorship schemes, and career development initiatives, to create a more supportive and 
encouraging environment for female candidates. These initiatives should be designed to 
specifically address the barriers, if any, that women face in entering and advancing in 
diplomacy. Furthermore, the Committee emphasize the importance of prioritizing 
women in diplomacy, as it can significantly enhance the nation’s global standing.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. Ministry is taking a 
number of steps to create a more supportive and encouraging environment for women 
personnel in the Ministry. For this purpose, Ministry has commissioned a study on Gender 
Budgeting in other countries so that the best practices could be adopted. The Exim Bank, which 
is involved in funding and execution of projects abroad, has also been requested to undertake 
a gender impact assessment and provide recommendations. The Ministry will continue to 

62 | P a g e 
 
ensure that barriers, if any, to career progression of women officers in the Ministry are resolved 
while creating a conducive environment for the professional progress of women officers. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
2.52 It is observed that there are currently 216 Indian Missions and Posts abroad.  The 
Committee also take note of the criteria for establishing new Missions, focusing on 
economic partnerships, strategic cooperation, diaspora engagement and multilateral 
diplomacy. The Committee recognizes the establishment of new Missions in Riga 
(Latvia), Tbilisi (Georgia), Tirana (Albania), Libreville (Gabon), Dili (Timor Leste), and 
La Paz (Bolivia), as well as new Consulates in Brisbane (Australia), Marseille (France), 
Barcelona (Spain), and Auckland (New Zealand). The Committee have also been 
informed about the future plans to open 5 new Missions in Europe, Latin America and 
Caribbean regions. However, the Committee observe that India currently lacks a resident 
Mission or Post in 41 countries, limiting opportunities for engagement with potential 
partners and the strengthening of diplomatic, economic, and strategic ties. The 
Committee emphasize that Missions should be prioritized in countries where there is 
significant potential for trade and investment, a strong Indian diaspora, or an 
opportunity for India to bolster its political outreach in multilateral forums. The 
Committee urge the Ministry of External Affairs to expedite the establishment of 
Missions and Posts in these countries and to seek additional funds, if necessary, during 
the Revised Estimate stage to ensure timely operationalization of Missions, especially, the 
proposed Missions in Europe, Latin America and Caribbean regions. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. The Ministry 
formulates proposals from time to time for opening of resident Missions in countries where 
there are no Indian Missions. The objective of our Foreign Policy is to build a conducive 
environment for India’s growth and development through partnerships with friendly countries. 
India’s Missions and Posts across the world serve as conduits of its relations with partner 
countries. The decision to open new Indian Missions is to expand India’s footprint in various 
regions and broaden international support for our priorities. 
In 2024, 10 new Missions and Posts were operationalized. By June 2025, five new Posts 
have been operationalized in Belfast (UK), Manchester (UK), Fukuoka (Japan), Boston (USA) 
and Los Angeles (USA). Ministry is working to operationalize Missions in countries where 
India currently does not possess a diplomatic Mission on a need basis. In all the 41 countries 
without a diplomatic Mission, diplomatic relations are currently being handled by concurrent 
accreditation with neighbouring Missions and appointment of Honorary Consuls.  
Approval has been received for operationalizing five new Missions in Europe and in 
Latin America and Caribbean region. Additionally, new Consulates are also being opened by 
the Ministry in view of India’s increasing diplomatic engagement. In FY 2025-26, new 
Consulates are expected to be operationalized in Kazan (Russia) and Yekaterinburg (Russia). 

63 | P a g e 
 
Ministry will also send proposals seeking allocation of funds well in advance of 
operationalization of Missions/Posts to ensure that they can be operationalized expeditiously. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
The Committee recognize the progress made by the Ministry in improving the Police 
Verification Report (PVR) process through the introduction of the mPassport Police App. 
The Ministry has informed that the App has been successfully rolled out in 25 States/UTs, 
covering over 9,400 Police Stations. The digitalization of the process has significantly 
reduced the average time for Police Verification Reports (PVRs). The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should prioritize the deployment of the mPassport Police 
App in the remaining 12 States/UTs where it is yet to be launched. The Ministry should 
continue to collaborate with the concerned State/UT authorities to address any 
infrastructure challenges and work towards the timely rollout in these areas. The 
Ministry should also ensure that training and support is provided to police personnel to 
enhance the optimal use of the App. 
Reply of the Government 
It is mentioned that 25 States/UTs covering more than 9425 Police Stations across the country 
have already launched the mPassport Police App. The Ministry and the concerned RPOs are 
coordinating with the States/UTs where mPassport Police App has not yet been launched. It is 
also submitted that the Ministry is providing all technical support to States/UTs including the 
application support, training and handholding to police personnel (before and after the launch 
of mPassport Police App) through the Service Provider of Passport Seva Program, M/s. TCS. 
Post deployment, all technical support is also provided to State/UTs regarding police 
verification and submission. It may be further noted that the roll out of mPassport Police App 
at States/UTs depends on the readiness of IT infrastructure at the concerned State/UT for which 
the Ministry is also providing financial support to each State/UT, per application processed by 
them and for verification and submission of Police Verification Report (PVR). 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 34 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for ‘Aid to Afghanistan’ was Rs. 200 
crore during BE 2024-25, which was decreased to Rs. 50 crore at the RE 2024-25 stage 
and then increased to Rs. 100 crore in BE 2025-26. Regarding the reductions, the Ministry 
stated that the budgetary allocation to Afghanistan over the past three and a half years 
was primarily aimed at stabilizing the country in terms of food security, medicines and 
emergency supplies, etc. and now, that these efforts have been fruitful, leading to marked 
improvement in these areas, it has been decided to explore development cooperation 
projects in addition to the ongoing humanitarian aid. The Committee welcome this move 

64 | P a g e 
 
as it presents a good opportunity for furthering our foreign policy objectives through 
development cooperation and desire that projects/programmes which caters to the 
domestic needs of the people of Afghanistan should be identified and action plan drawn 
up for implementation at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
India and Afghanistan share deep-rooted civilisational and historical ties. India has traditionally 
enjoyed close relations with the Afghan people and post-August 2021, has extended 
humanitarian assistance for their development needs. These efforts have been noted positively 
by the Afghan authorities and the UN agencies. During the meeting of the Foreign Secretary 
with the Acting Foreign Minister of Afghanistan in January 2025, it was decided to explore 
development cooperation projects in Afghanistan. In this regard, we have been in touch with 
the Afghan side and have endeavoured to identify projects that cater to the domestic needs of 
the Afghan people.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 37 
The budgetary allocation for ‘Aid to African Countries’ has been marginally increased 
from Rs. 200 crore in BE and RE 2024-25 to Rs. 225 crore in BE 2025-26. The Committee 
note that no budgetary provision has been made for the India-Africa Forum Summit 
(IAFS) for the FY 2025-26 as agreement of African Union for hosting of IAFS-IV is yet 
to be firmed up. The Committee are concerned about the delay in conducting the India-
Africa Forum Summit–IV and urge the Ministry to maintain active coordination with the 
African Union so that dates for the summit are finalized at the earliest and seek additional 
allocation for the same at Revised Estimate stage, if necessary. In respect of ongoing 
projects committed under IAFS- I, II and III, the status may be communicated to the 
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
India-Africa Forum Summit-IV (IAFS-IV) was anticipated to be held in the Year 2024 due to 
which budgetary allocation of Rs. 40.00 Crore was made for the FY 2024-25. Though the 
budgetary provisions for IAFS-IV were not made for FY 2025-26, the available funds under 
the budget head ‘Aid to African Countries’ will be utilized to meet the expenses on hosting of 
IAFS-IV as and when finalized. Additional funds, if required, will be sought at RE stage under 
the budget head “Aid to African Countries”. The Ministry of External Affairs and the African 
Union are exploring various options for organizing the IAFS-IV. Status Report on Ongoing 
Projects under IAFS-I, IAFS-II & IAFS-III is enclosed at Annexure I. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 

65 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 38 
The Committee note that Research & Information Systems for Developing Countries 
(RIS) is conducting mid-term impact assessment of the e-VBAB Network Project.  The 
Terms of Reference, timeline and status of the assessment may be communicated to 
Committee. Further, the feasibility of conducting mid-term impact assessment of the 
projects under IAFS by RIS may also be explored. 
Reply of the Government 
RIS has successfully conducted the Mid-Term Impact Assessment of the e-VBAB Network 
Project, and has submitted their report in April 2025. The information as sought is as follows: 
Terms of Reference (ToR): is enclosed at Annexure II. 
Timeline: As per the Terms of Reference RIS was expected to complete the Mid-term impact 
assessment and submit the final report within 2 months. The timeline commenced after MEA 
conveyed the approval of Competent Authority to RIS vide email dated 11 November 2024. 
However, as the evaluation included inputs from various stakeholders, including foreign 
students and Universities, the report was finally submitted in April 2025. 
Current Status: RIS completed the activities viz., Data collection, stakeholder consultations, 
and e-VBAB learner surveys, on account of impact assessment. The final report was submitted 
by RIS to MEA on 8 April 2025. The report was also forwarded to concerned official in NITI 
Aayog on 23 April 2025 for further action. Thereafter, RIS made a comprehensive presentation 
to Secretary (ER) on e-VBAB impact assessment to clarify the queries. The report is under 
review in the Ministry.  
Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation for undertaking mid-term impact assessment of the 
completed IAFS projects has been noted. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 43  
The Committee note that the Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme launched 
by the Ministry of External Affairs in January, 2018 under the ‘Surakshit Jaayein 
Prashikshit Jaayein’ campaign of the Government of India provides one day free of cost 
orientation training to emigrant workers to help them understand local rules and 
regulations of the destination country, its culture, tradition, language, etc. in addition to 
enhancing their soft skills. From itsinceptiontill31st January 2025, a total of 1, 82,381 
emigrant workers have been imparted orientation training under PDOT programme and 
financial assistance for the same is being disbursed to the State government run 
departments/agencies. However, the Committee are startled to see that no fund was 
released to the State Agencies in 2022-23 and in 2023-24, Rs. 79.77 lakh out of 1.20 Crore 
and in 2024-25, only 16.08 lakh have been released till January 2025 out of the 1 crore 
Budget. This financial performance of the scheme makes the Committee worry about the 

66 | P a g e 
 
working of the scheme as well as its efficacy. The Committee, while expressing their 
displeasure, desire that the reasons may be identified and earnest efforts are made for 
optimum utilization of the funds so that the migrant workers are sensitized about the 
pathways to safe and legal migration as well as on about various government programmes 
for their welfare and protection. 
Reply of the Government 
During the COVID-19 Pandemic, the Pre-Departure Orientation Training was stopped from 
March 2020 to November 2021. The PDOT Centers, which were closed down during the 
pandemic, were gradually re-opened. After resumption of PDOT in November 2021 in some 
centres,  initially the training did not pick up pace due to low demand as the pandemic had led 
to large scale job loss for emigrants going abroad and there were restrictions inplace during the 
subsequent waves of the pandemic. The training started to gradually pick up pace in most 
centres from late 2022.  A proposal for opening of 58 new PDOT centres in 11 states had been 
approved by the Ministry in July 2022 and the same was conveyed to the concerned states. The 
Ministry reached out to the States in September 2022, requesting them to send requisition of 
funds for PDOT. Keeping in view the expansion of the programme, the Division had requested 
for a budget grant of Rs. 3 crore for FY 2023-24.  
In the Financial Year 2023-24 on receipt of demands for funds from the states of 
Telangana, Punjab and Karnataka, funds amounting to Rs. 79.77 lakhs were disbursed 
accordingly out of the allocated budget amount of Rs. 3 Crore. In January2024, the Ministry 
again reached out to the concerned State Governments to seek their proposals for allocation of 
funds to carry out the PDOT.  
Additionally, in March2024, the Ministry reached out to the Principal Secretaries of the 
concerned States seeking their intervention to operationalize the approved new PDOT centres 
in their states and send their budget proposals for running of the centres. Subsequent reminders 
to follow-up on the subject matter were sent in July, October and December of 2024, and in 
February 2025. On receipt of demands from the states of Assam, Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana during 2024-25, a total amount of Rs. 45,71,300/- was disbursed to the State 
Agencies of Assam, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana out of the allocated budget. The BE for 
FY 2025-26 is Rs. 5 crore which is the same as the BE for FY 2024-25. 
Since the inception of the PDOT programme in 2018, a total of 1,90,362 emigrant 
workers have been imparted orientation training till 28 February2025. The pace of PDOT is 
expected to pick up during the current Financial Year as Ministry has been closely coordinating 
with all State Governments/Training Partners to expand the PDOT outreach. 
Detailed budget statement on PDOT for last three FYs is given below: 
Financial 
Year 
Budget Estimates 
(BE) (Rs) 
Revised 
Estimates (RE) 
(Rs) 
Final Estimates 
(FE) (Rs) 
Funds released to State 
Agencies (Rs) 
2022-23 3 Crore 3 Crore 3 Crore 0 
2023-24 3 Crore 3 Crore 1.20 Crore 79.77 lakhs 
2024-25 5 Crore 1 Crore 0.50 Crore 45.71 lakhs 
2025-26 5 Crore -- -- -- 

67 | P a g e 
 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 52 
The Committee acknowledge the longstanding and well-established principles that have 
underpinned India’s foreign policy, which have significantly contributed to the nation’s 
diplomatic successes and global standing. The Committee also recognize that a growing 
number of countries, such as the United Kingdom, United States, Germany, and Japan 
have formalized national foreign policy strategies, which have proven to be valuable tools 
in guiding their international engagement. India, with its burgeoning geopolitical 
influence must not lag behind in articulating its own roadmap for a future-oriented 
foreign policy that corresponds to its increasing global stature. The Ministry of External 
Affairs, through its ongoing assessment of the foreign policy strategies of other nations 
has undertaken a valuable exercise in understanding the shifting paradigms of global 
diplomacy. The Committee, however, suggest that the Ministry should consider the 
desirability of taking the logical next step which is the formulation of a formal and 
comprehensive foreign policy document/strategy that is specifically tailored to India’s 
distinctive geopolitical context, emerging economic clout, and evolving global 
relationships. The Committee recommend that MEA should expeditiously initiate 
consultations with relevant stakeholders, including experts, diplomats, policymakers, and 
the Committee, to explore the feasibility and scope of such a document. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to initiate consultations with relevant stakeholders 
is duly noted. The Ministry will keep the Hon’ble Committee apprised of such consultations as 
and when they are undertaken. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
 

68 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee acknowledge the efforts made by the Ministry of External Affairs in 
establishing a Gender Budget Cell to assess and incorporate gender-related dimensions 
into the Ministry’s budgetary processes. The initiative to evaluate the gender-related 
contributions of projects implemented by the Ministry is a commendable step towards 
aligning the Ministry’s budgetary framework with India’s broader commitment to 
gender equality and inclusive development. However, the Committee observe that while 
the Ministry has undertaken a data collection exercise to evaluate the gender-related 
aspects of its projects, the data is still under analysis, and further action is awaited. Given 
the growing global recognition of gender equality as a cornerstone of sustainable 
development, it is imperative that the gender dimension be integrated into the Ministry's 
projects and budgetary demands in a more structured and timely manner. The Ministry 
should accelerate the analysis of the gender-related data it has collected and develop a 
concrete action plan to ensure that gender budgeting is systematically incorporated into 
all relevant projects and schemes. Furthermore, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
expand the capacity of the Gender Budget Cell and ensure that it is adequately resourced 
to carry out this essential work effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. The Ministry is 
committed to advancing India’s goals of gender equality and inclusive development. It is 
actively engaging with all relevant stakeholders to gather their inputs on the matter. This 
includes liaising with EXIM Bank officials and think-tanks/research organization such as RIS, 
etc. This consultative process is ongoing. Following a comprehensive analysis of the feedback 
received, Ministry will evaluate the need for further capacity-building. Additionally, the 
Ministry is continuously reviewing service rules and Government of India’s directives to 
improve gender-specific service conditions. Efforts are also underway to explore opportunities 
for broader dissemination of both existing and forthcoming success stories related to gender 
dimension of Ministry’s responsibilities, highlighting Ministry’s dedication to gender equality 
and United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 

69 | P a g e 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
After reviewing the current staffing situation in the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), 
the Committee are deeply concerned about the persistent gap between the sanctioned and 
actual cadre strength. As of February 2025, the Ministry’s sanctioned and actual strength 
stands at 5915 and 5121, respectively (excluding the local cadre in Missions/Posts 
abraoad). Over half of these positions are allocated to Missions and Posts abroad. Despite 
Ministry’s significant efforts to address this gap through the 5th Cadre Review of the 
Indian Foreign Service (IFS) and increased indents with the Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) and the Staff Selection Commission (SSC), the gap remains due to 
factors such as delays in the creation of new posts, prolonged recruitment cycles, and 
retirements. This gap continues to hinder the Ministry’s ability to fulfill its growing 
diplomatic, administrative, and global responsibilities efficiently. 
The Committee believe that more urgent action is needed to ensure that Ministry’s 
staffing levels align with India’s expanding diplomatic footprint and increasing global 
engagements. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should work in 
close coordination with the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and the Staff 
Selection Commission (SSC) to streamline recruitment processes and minimize the time 
lag between the creation of posts and their eventual fulfillment. Priority should be given 
to filling critical vacancies in Group A, B, and C posts, both at Headquarters and in 
Missions abroad, especially in areas that directly impact India’s foreign policy objectives. 
Additionally, the Committee urge the Ministry to explore measures for the induction of 
specialized expertise from other Ministries, academic institutions, think tanks, and the 
private sector. Such domain expertise in emerging fields such as climate change, cyber 
security, and artificial intelligence will be crucial for enhancing the Ministry’s capabilities 
in managing contemporary global challenges. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted. The Ministry is currently 
implementing the Fifth Cadre Review, and it is expected to be completed by 2027. The 
sanctioned strength of the Ministry has increased since inputs sent for the Fourth Committee 
on External Affairs Report. As of 01 April 2025, the current sanctioned strength of the Ministry 
stands at 9113, which previously stood at 9034 as on 01 February 2025. Out of this, 53.76 
percent strength is located in Missions and Posts abroad. These positions spanned various 
cadres within the Ministry, such as the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), IFS General Cadre, 
Branch B, Stenographers Cadre, Interpreters Cadre, Legal and Treaties Cadre. Missions/Posts 
abroad also consist of a Local cadre strength of 3149, which previously stood at 3119 on 01 
February 2025. MEA will steadily increase its India-based and local staff strength to implement 
the recommendation of the Fifth Cadre Review by 2027. Subsequent to this, the strength of 

70 | P a g e 
 
personnel in MEA will be reviewed and a roadmap will be laid down for further increasing the 
strength of the Ministry, based on vacancies arising due to superannuation of serving 
officers/officials, indent placed for intake of officers/officials, the number of Missions/Posts 
operational worldwide and those expected to be operationalized in the near future. 
To bridge the gap between sanctioned strength and in-position strength of India-based staff of 
MEA, Ministry will review and increase the yearly indent with UPSC and SSC in light of the 
opening of new Missions/Posts in the near future. Further, to inculcate specialized expertise 
into MEA, the Ministry also takes officers with specialized skills from other 
Departments/Ministries on deputation. The Ministry also engages consultants with relevant 
skill sets in key areas of functioning of the Ministry such as counter terrorism, project 
management, bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, international law, consular and disarmament 
related work. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
The Committee observe a significant increase in the budgetary allocation under the minor 
head ‘Passport and Emigration’, with the BE 2025-26 allocation rising to Rs. 1913.48 
crore from Rs 970.66 crore during BE 2024-25. This increase is primarily attributed to 
factors such as outstanding payments for passport production, the transition to e-
passports, higher personalization and printing costs, and payments to service providers 
such as TCS and the Department of Posts. The Committee acknowledge Ministry of 
External Affairs' efforts in expanding and improving passport services, including the 
enhancement of the Passport Seva Programme, which now includes 93 Passport Seva 
Kendras (PSKs) and 444 Post Office Passport Seva Kendras (POPSKs) and 37 Regional 
Passport Offices across the country. These initiatives have significantly expanded 
coverage across 505 Lok Sabha constituencies, improving accessibility to passport 
services. The Committee also note a steady increase in revenue earnings, particularly 
from passport fees, which have risen significantly from Rs. 2332.50 crorein FY 2021-22 
to an estimated Rs. 4000 crore in BE 2024-25. The Committee observe that since the 
payment of printing is carried forward to the next year, a significant portion of the budget 
in the coming year is likely to be consumed by outstanding payments for passport printing 
and related services. The Committee however note with concern, reports from Indians 
abroad about inordinate delays in issuance of passports. 
 
Keeping in view the rising demand for passport services, expansion of the Passport Seva 
Programme and the higher anticipated expenditure on travel document printing, freight 
charges, and service charges for the Passport Seva Project, the Committee are satisfied 
to observe the upward revision in allocation under this sub head. While emphasizing the 
importance of ensuring that the enhanced budget is utilized efficiently and effectively, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should prioritize the timely implementation of the 

71 | P a g e 
 
ePassport project, addressing any technical and operational challenges involved in the 
transition. The Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure that payments for passport 
production, service provider charges, and other related costs are processed promptly to 
avoid disruptions in service delivery. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Pilot testing of PSP V2.0 started in Regional Passport Offices at Bhubaneswar and Nagpur in 
April 2024. As on date, the project has been implemented in all 37 Passport Offices across the 
country. Pilot testing of GPSP 2.0 in 1 Mission is being done. Pilot testing in some more 
Missions/Posts are scheduled for July/August 2025. Once Pilot testing is successfully done, 
GPSP 2.0 will be rolled out in remaining Missions/Posts in batches. 
As regards payment of passport production, the Passport Booklets are provided by ISP Nashik. 
The payments to different stakeholders such as ISP Nasik, Service Provider of PSP, Police 
authorities, Department of Posts, e-Passport personalization vender are processed upon receipt 
of invoices. This is subject to verification of applicable Service Level Agreements and rates as 
per contract scope. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation No.18 
The Committee acknowledge that the issuance of passports is one of the most visible and 
citizen-centric statutory services provided by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). 
The Committee commend the ongoing efforts of the Ministry to modernize the Passport 
Seva Programme (PSP), particularly through the implementation of PSP V2.0, which 
incorporates advanced biometric matching, AI-driven assistance, and streamlined 
processes. The expansion of Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) and Post Office Passport 
SevaKendras (POPSKs) across 505 Lok Sabha constituencies is a commendable step in 
enhancing the accessibility of passport services. 
Welcoming the proposal to establish additional PSKs and POPSKs in underserved 
constituencies in 2025, the Committee encourage the Ministry to expedite the 
establishment of PSKs and POPSKs in the remaining 38 constituencies. The Committee 
also welcome the successful pilot launch of the e-passport initiative, which enhances 
security through the embedding of an RFID chip and look forward to its phased rollout 
across the country by April 2025. To further improve service delivery, the Committee 
suggest accelerating integration with government databases like Aadhaar and PAN, 
expanding e-passport issuance, strengthening technological infrastructure, conducting 
extensive public awareness campaigns, and prioritizing user experience. 
 
 
 

72 | P a g e 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Passport Seva Programme is the citizen centric flagship programme of Ministry of External 
Affairs. Ministry in association with Department of Posts (DoP) had decided in January 2017 
to open Passport Seva Kendras at the Head Post Offices (HPO)/ Post Offices (PO) in the 
country called Post Office Passport Seva Kendra (POPSK) in each Lok Sabha Constituency 
where there is no PSK or POPSK. As on date, 93 PSKs and 450 POPSKs have been set up in 
the country and are operational across 510 Lok Sabha Constituencies to cater to the needs of 
passport seekers. The Ministry is working on the Committee’s recommendation to establish 
PSKs and POPSKs in the remaining 33 constituencies. 
The Division is continuously following with the respective Government Departments 
for documents such as Aadhaar, PAN, etc. to be integrated with PSP system and to validate the 
authenticity of these documents at the respective source databases for strengthening the 
Passport Insurance process and elimination of fake documents.  
Further, DigiLocker has been successfully integrated with the Passport Seva 
Programme (PSP) system enabling citizens to submit various documents required for passport 
services through DigiLocker in a paperless mode. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 39 
The Committee are aware that the budgetary allocation for 2025-26 under ‘Aid to Latin 
American Countries’ is pegged at Rs. 60 crore. Following various announcement made 
by the Hon’ble PM during 2nd India-CARICOM summit in Georgetown in November 
2024, additional funds of Rs200 crore has already been requested during 2025-26. Being 
aware of the potential for significant growth in trade, investment, strategic partnership 
and developmental cooperation with Latin America and the Caribbean, and the need to 
tap the same, the Committee desire that the Ministry should actively pursue its request 
for additional funds in FY 2025-26 so that the commitments are honoured, projects/ 
programmes announced are implemented, thereby significantly enhancing India’s 
geopolitical presence in the region. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is currently undertaking various projects in LAC region like supply of SME 
machinery (maximum value USD 1 million) to CARICOM and SICA countries, supply of food 
grains to Suriname, supply of digital scoreboard to Jamaica, and Quick Impact Projects in 
Suriname and SVG.   

73 | P a g e 
 
Following various announcements made during the Second CARICOM Summit in 
November 2024 at Georgetown, Guyana, efforts are being made for their timely 
implementation. Additional funds will be sought at RE stage for the financial year 2025-26 on 
the basis of expression of interest received the CARICOM countries for their implementation.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 47 
The 37 Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) serve as vital instruments in projecting India’s 
rich and diverse cultural heritage through a wide array of activities, including dance, 
music, yoga, languages, food, festivals, history, and contemporary cultural narratives. 
However, the Committee note with concern that, despite the property for the ICC in 
Washington D.C. being acquired as early as 2013, renovation and operationalization have 
been delayed for several years, resulting in an escalating cost of US$ 441,581.91. 
Similarly, the acquisition of property for the ICC in Paris occurred in 2011, and although 
renovation work commenced in 2018, the project has incurred costs amounting to €2.8 
million thus far. 
The Committee are concerned by these prolonged delays and the significant cost overruns 
in the establishment of the ICCs in Washington D.C. and Paris. These delays reflect 
inefficiencies in project execution and are wholly unacceptable, especially given the 
strategic importance of these centres in advancing India’s cultural diplomacy. Such 
inefficiencies not only undermine the mission of cultural outreach but also result in 
unnecessary financial wastage. The Committee strongly urge the Ministry of External 
Affairs (MEA) to expedite the completion and operationalization of both centres, 
ensuring that any future delays are averted. Furthermore, the Committee underscore the 
urgent need to operationalize the Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre (TVCC) in Singapore. 
In addition, the Committee desire that they be kept informed of the progress made on 
these three centres every three months, ensuring full accountability and transparency 
throughout the process. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICCR operates 38 full-fledged Indian Culture Centres abroad. Additionally, cultural wings of 
the Indian Mission/Posts undertake cultural outreach activities. Hon’ble Prime Minister 
announced the establishment of Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre (TVCC) in Singapore on 
September 5, 2024. The Mission is currently in the process of identifying a suitable property 
to house the cultural centre. As regards the new cultural centre in Paris, which was announced 
by former EAM, Smt. SushmaSwaraj on June 2019 and was named as Swami Vivekananda 

74 | P a g e 
 
Cultural Centre (SVCC), the operationalization is at an advanced stage. The construction work 
is complete and work on ‘Indianisation’ (incorporating Indian cultural motifs in the building), 
installing of signage, etc. is underway. The Mission has sought necessary approvals from Local 
Municipal Authorities for starting activities at the Centre. The approvals are awaited. 
The renovations to the property in Washington DC were delayed primarily due to 
restrictions in local lawand divergences in tendering practices, compounded by Covid related 
lockdowns and resultant disruption in supply chains. The change in local building codes in 
2022 also adversely impacted the process. A Property Team (PMT) that had visited 
Washington (DC) in April 2024 recommended repurposing/selling the property due to certain 
locational disadvantage and structural deficiencies. The Ministry is examining this as well as 
other reasonable and prudent proposals regarding the future of the property. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 48  
 
The Committee are aware that the ICCR scholarship programme is a vital initiative in 
enhancing India’s soft power, promoting educational exchanges and fostering global 
cooperation. The Committee note that a total budget allocation of Rs. 80.50 crore 
including Rs. 80 crore for scholarships and Rs. 50 lakhs for educational exchanges has 
been provisioned for BE 2025-26. The Ministry has informed that 3960 scholarship slots 
have been awarded so far, with the highest number of scholarships granted to countries 
such as Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Kenya, and Tanzania. The Ministry 
has submitted that ICCR plans to increase the budget for scholarships and educational 
exchanges by 15% for the financial year 2026-27.  It is observed that the digitization of 
the scholarship process through the A2A (Admissions to Alumni) Portal has streamlined 
the application and admission process for foreign students, ensuring greater 
transparency, accountability, and efficiency. 
 
The Committee recommend a robust expansion of the ICCR scholarship program to 
better accommodate the increasing demand for educational opportunities, particularly 
from regions such as Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asia. The Committee endorse 
the proposed 15% budget increase for FY 2026-27, recognizing its necessity to address 
the rising costs of tuition fees and related charges, and urge the Ministry to ensure that 
this expansion also includes a greater number of scholarship slots. Additionally, the 
Committee emphasize the importance of expanding the pool of participating institutions, 
ensuring that both state and central universities are better represented while preserving 
the quality of education by adhering to high academic standards. 
 
  

75 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee for robust expansion of ICCR’s 
Scholarship programme to optimally accommodate the increasing demand, ICCR has already 
increased the total number of scholarship slots by adding 87 new slots in the current Acedemic 
year 2025-26 (two under Atal Bihari Vajpayee General Scholarship Scheme, 35 slots under 
India -Africa Maitri Scholarship Scheme and 50 slots under the newly launched QUAD STEM 
Scholarship Scheme), taking the total number of scholarships to 4047 slots from 3960.These 
new slots cater to countries from the global South, including Africa (Burundi, Comoros, 
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Madagascar, Rwanda, South 
Africa, Seychelles, Tanzania, Ghana, Uganda, and Zimbabwe) and South-East Asia 
(Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Timor 
Leste and Vietnam) in addition to countries in other regions such as Australia, Suva, Fiji, Japan, 
Republic of Marshall Islands, New Zeland, Port Moresby, Philippines, Bangladesh etc. ICCR 
also endeavors to re-allocate any unutilized slots under its schemes to students from other 
countries where there is a demand for them. 
ICCR appreciates the endorsement of the Hon’ble Committee for the proposed 15% 
budget increase for the financial year 2026-27 to run its 21 flagship scholarship schemes, in 
view of the rising costs of tuition fees and other related charges. 
As regards the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to expand the pool of 
participating institutions, ICCR is currently examining the feasibility of including new 
Universities/Institutions like IIT Jammu, South-Asian University (SAU), University of Science 
& Technology (Meghalaya), Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology (VNIT-Nagpur) 
etc. in ICCR list of institutions.  This is being done on the basis of transparent and specific 
criteria such as UGC accreditation, National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC 
rating, A and above) and National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF rating 1-100) to 
ensure the highest academic standards as well as the need to ensure balanced geographical 
representation of Central/State Universities. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/28/2025 dated 23.07.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
16December, 2025                                          Chairperson,            
25 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)               Committee on External Affairs 

76 | P a g e 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STATUS REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF PROJECT PROPOSALS UNDER 
INDIA-AFRICA FORUM SUMMIT [IAFS-I (2008); IAFS-II (2011) & IAFS-III (2015)] 
 
SN Project Name. Implementing 
Agency (IA) & Estimated Cost 
Details of MOUs/Agreements 
& 
Project Activities undertaken 
PROJECT STATUS 
 
1. Setting up of the India-Africa 
Institute of Foreign Trade 
(IAIFT) in Uganda. 
 
Implementing Agency : Indian 
Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) 
Estimated cost : 
Rs. 60.00 Crore 
(IAFS-I Project) 
 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
GoI-AU MOU for Pan- African 
Project for IAIFT signed on 
23.5.2011 (valid for 05 years 
from date of signature; may be 
extended by mutual consent; 
May be terminated by giving 
05 months prior written notice) 
Activities Undertaken : 
A 04-member IIFT delegation 
visited Kampala, Uganda 
during Jan 18-24, 2011 and 
submitted a Preliminary Report 
on the Project. The Draft 
Business Plan, Draft MOU and 
Budget proposals for the 
project were also submitted. 
Actual implementation not 
yet commenced. 
G/o Uganda has decided to 
dedicate 02 floors of new 
building for IAIFT at 
Uganda Management 
Institute (UMI). 
 
2. Establishment of India-Africa 
Diamond Institute (IADI) in 
Botswana. 
IA: Indian Diamond Institute 
(IDI), Surat Estimated budget 
: Rs. 19.00 Crore 
(cost revised during 
IAFS-III) 
(earlier approved figure was Rs. 
16.00 Crore in IAFS-I) 
(IAFS-I Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
GoI-AU MOU for Pan- 
African Project for setting up of 
IADI signed on 23/5/11. 
(valid for 05 years from date of 
signature; may be extended by 
mutual consent. May be 
terminated by giving 05 months 
prior written notice) 
Activities Undertaken : 
Proposed MOU/ Agreement 
was negotiated. A Botswana 
delegation visited IDI, Surat to 
discuss certain technical issues 
Actual implementation not 
yet commenced. 
After initial interest and 
activities, the implementing 
agencies from India and 
Botswana have not shown 
much enthusiasm. 

77 | P a g e 
 
relating to the MOU between 
IDI Surat and counterpart IA in 
Botswana. 
3. Setting up of 05 Food Testing 
Laboratories (FTLs) in 
African countries 
[Republic of Congo (ROC), 
Zimbabwe, Rwanda, Gambia & 
Nigeria] 
IA: M/o Food Processing 
Industries through ICRISAT, 
Hyderabad 
Estimated Budget : Rs. 50.00 
Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
MoFPI-ICRISAT MOU signed 
on 16.11.2012 (Valid for 03 
years). 
Extended MoA signed on 
24.11.15 (Validity extended for 
another 02 years). MoFPI can 
terminate by 30 days prior 
notice & ICRISAT by 60 days. 
[G-2-G MOU & I-2-I MOU 
signed for FTL in Zimbabwe, 
Rep. of Congo & Rwanda]. 
Activities Undertaken : 
Implementing Agency visited 
all 5 host countries. Country 
Agreement signed with regard 
to Congo, Zimbabwe and 
Rwanda. DPR and Business 
Plans were prepared for all 5 
centres. MoFPI subsequently 
transferred all the works back 
to MEA. 
Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. 
Implementing agency 
discontinued the Project 
implementation. MEA has 
short closed the FTL 
projects. 
4. Setting up of  05 Food 
Processing Incubation Centres 
(FPBICs) in African countries 
[Uganda, Cameroon, Ghana, 
Mali & Angola] 
IA : M/o Food Processing 
Industries through ICRISAT, 
Hyderabad 
Est.budget:Rs. 50.00 Cr. (Cost 
revised during IAFS-III) (Earlier 
approved figure was Rs.7.30 Cr. 
in IAFS-II) 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
MoFPI-ICRISAT MOU signed 
on 17.10.2012 for 05 FPBICs 
in African Countries. Extended 
MoA signed on 24.11.2015. 
Country Agreement signed for 
FPBIC in Ghana, Cameroon & 
Uganda (Angola dropped in 
IAFS-III). 
 
Activities Undertaken : 
Feasibility Studies were 
conducted for the FPBIC 
projects in Angola, Cameroon, 
Ghana & Uganda. DPR and 
Actual implementation not 
yet commenced. 
MoFPI transferred project 
work back to MEA due to 
other priority work of 
MoFPI. 

78 | P a g e 
 
Business Plans were prepared 
for FPBICs in Cameroon, 
Ghana & Uganda. 
G-2-G MOUs were signed with 
regard to projects in Uganda, 
Ghana & Cameroon. 
5. Setting up of India-Africa Food 
Processing Cluster in 
Mauritania 
IA: M/o Food Processing 
Industries; IL&FS is the Project 
Monitoring Agency) 
Estimated budget: Rs. 117 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / 
Agreement(s):NONE 
 
Activities Undertaken : NONE 
Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. 
Project could not 
implemented as Mauritania 
was not found suitable for 
the Food Processing Cluster.
6. Human Settlement Institutes in 
5 locations (DRC, Mauritania, 
Zambia Togo & Kenya) 
Building Material and 
Technology Promotion Council/ 
Ministry of HUPA. 
Estimated Budget : Rs. 20.00 
Crore 
(IAFS-I Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
NONE 
Activities Undertaken: Project 
already dropped for all other 
countries except Togo during 
IAFS-III. 
Actual implementation not 
yet commenced. 
Togo showed initial interest 
in the Project. 
7. Setting up India-Africa Civil 
Aviation Academy in Tunisia 
IA: Ministry of Civil Aviation 
Estimated budget : Rs. 250 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s):
NONE 
Activities Undertaken : Setting 
of India Africa Civil Aviation 
Academy was proposed during 
IAFS-II in Chad. However, 
during IAFS-III the location was 
shifted to Tunisia. An Indian 
delegation visited Tunisia and 
submitted report in May 2018 
recommending setting up of 
Civil Aviation Centre in Tunisia. 
It was decided that we need to 
take Africa centric perspective, 
which can impact Pan African 
Institute. In January 2020, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation was 
Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. Project 
is unlikely to be 
implemented in the current 
format. 

79 | P a g e 
 
requested to explore possibilities 
of other suitable country for the 
establishment of India-Africa 
Civil Aviation Academy. 
8. Setting up of India-Africa 
Textile Cluster in Ethiopia 
IA : Ministry of Textiles 
Estimated budget : Rs.315 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s):
NONE 
Activities Undertaken :
Ethiopia was identified for the 
project. The PMC for the project 
is to be selected/nominated. 
Actual implementation not 
yet commenced. 
M/o Textiles has tranferred 
the project to MEA. Project 
unlikely to be implemented 
in the current format. 
9. Setting up of 05 
Entrepreneurship 
Development Centres (EDCs) 
in African countries (Namibia, 
Rwanda, Zambia, Senegal & 
Gabon) 
IA: EDII, Gandhinagar 
Estimated budget : Rs.25.30 
Crore 
(Cost revised during IAFS-III, 
2015) (earlier approved figure 
was Rs. 24.00 Crore in IAFS-II) 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
Project for EDC in Rwanda is 
complete. G-2-G MOU for 
EDC in Zambia was signed on 
11/04/2018. (Validity upto 3 
years; can be terminated by 
advanced 6 months written 
notice). 
Project “EDC in Rwanda” 
was completed in 
November 2023. For 
remaining 04 EDCs, 
implementation has not 
yet commenced. EDC 
project for Namibia is 
being finalized for 
implementation. EDC 
projects in other selected 
African countries shall be 
considered thereafter. 
 
10. 
 
Setting up of 05 Centres for 
English Language Training 
(CELT) in African countries 
[Djibouti, Sudan, Mauritania, Togo 
& Central African Republic] 
IA: English & Foreign Languages 
University (EFLU), Hyderabad 
Est. budget : Rs. 20.41 Crore (Cost 
revised in IAFS-III) 
[Earlier approved cost  Rs. 15.00 
Cr. in IAFS-II) 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
NONE. 
Activities Undertaken : 
A team of EFLU, Hyderabad 
visited Djibouti & Sudan in 
October 2013 for Feasibility 
Study and submitted the 
Feasibility Study Report. 
Djibouti has not shown 
interest in the project. 
 
Actual implementation 
has not yet commenced. 
 
 
11. 
 
Setting up of Solar Multi Utility 
(SMU) Centres in African 
countries [Being implemented by 
TERI [Kenya, Ethiopia & Malawi] 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
NONE. 
Actual implementation 
not yet commenced. TERI 
did not take up the project.
 

80 | P a g e 
 
 IA: The Energy and Resources 
Institute 
Estimated budget :Rs. 87.90 lakh 
(IAFS-II Project) 
Activities Undertaken: A 
team of experts visited 
Kenya, Ethiopia & Malawi 
to conduct Feasibility Study 
for the project 
implementation. TERI has 
submitted the Feasibility 
Report for Ethiopia, Kenya 
& Malawi. 
12. 
 
 
Setting up of the India-Africa 
Institute of Educational Planning 
and Administration (IAIEPA) in 
Burundi. 
IA : National University of 
Educational Planning and 
Administration (NUEPA)] 
Estimated budget: Rs. 120 Cr. 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
Agreement between of Govt. 
of Burundi & NUEPA for 
Pan African Project on 
IAIEPA in Burundi signed 
on 14/10/2011. (Valid for 05 
years; can be terminated by 6 
months written notice). 
Activities Undertaken : 
A four member team of the 
NUEPA visited Burundi (Jan 
11-17, 2011 for Feasibility 
Study. NUEPA had 
submitted the Detailed 
Project Report for India-
Africa Institute of 
Educational Planning and 
Administration (IAIEPA) in 
Burundi (June 2017). 
Actual implementation 
has not yet commenced. 
The project could not be 
implemented due to non-
readiness of necessary 
infrastructure for the 
project and unstable 
political & security 
situation in Burundi. 
 
13. Setting up of India-Africa 
Institute of Agriculture and 
Rural Development (IAIARD) in 
Malawi 
IA: NABARD Consultancy 
Services (NABCONS)] 
Estimated budget : Rs. 92 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
MEA-NABCONS 
Agreement for setting up 
IAIARD in Malawi was 
signed on 02.04.2019 
[Project period: 36 months] 
[Agreement is valid till 
completion of project, Can 
be terminated by giving 03 
month notice]. 
Activities Undertaken : 
NABCONS had conducted 
the Feasibility Study for the 
project in Malawi (Jan 27-
Actual implementation not 
yet commenced. G2G 
MOU between India and 
Malawi could not be 
finalized due to variuos 
implementation and cost 
factors. 
 

81 | P a g e 
 
31, 2014) and submitted the 
Feasibility Study Report. 
14. 
 
Establishment of 08 India-Africa 
Regional Farm Science Centers 
in Africa (i.e. one for each of the 
08 RECs] 
[Ethiopia, Central African 
Republic, Liberia & Burundi ] 
IA: DARE/ Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) 
Estimated budget: 
Rs. 55.02 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
NONE 
Activities Undertaken : 
DARE/ICAR team visited 
Ethiopia during 28 Nov-01 
Nov 2013 for Feasibility 
Study on Farm Science 
Centre (FSC) in Ethiopia. 
DARE has submitted the 
Tour/ Deputation Report the 
project. Project propsoals 
also submitted for FSC in 
Ethiopia. 
Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. 
The project could not be 
implemented due to non-
finalization of 
Implementation 
modalities. 
 
15. 
 
 
Establishment of 08 India-Africa 
Agriculture Seed Production-
cum-Demonstration Centers in 
Africa (i.e. one for each of the 08 
RECs] [Togo, Rwanda, Republic 
of Congo & South Sudan ]IA: 
DARE/ Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) 
Estimated budget:Rs. 52.12 Crore 
 
(IAFS-II Project) 
 
MOU(s) / 
Agreement(s):NONE 
Activities Undertaken : A 
delegation from 
DARE/ICAR visited Togo 
during 4-5 December, 2013 
and inspected the lcoation at 
“Project for Rehabiliatation 
and Farming Land”, 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Govt. of Togo. Another 
Team visited Rwanda 
during November 2014 & 
inspected the location at 
Bugusera and found it 
suitable. DARE had 
submitted Project Proposals 
for ASPDC in Rwanda and 
Togo. 
Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. 
The project could not be 
implemented due to non-
finalization of 
Implementation 
modalities. 
 
16. Establishment of 05 India-Africa 
Barefoot Vocational Training 
Centers (BVTCs) by ‘The 
Barefoot College, Tilonia” 
(IAFS-II Project) 
Feasibility Study was 
conducted by the IA for 
BVTCs in Senegal, Liberia, 
Burkina Faso, Tanzania & 
South Sudan . MEA-IA 
Agreements were also 
signed for BVTCs in 2014. 
Project implementation 
did not take place. The 
Barefoot College, Tilonia 
(IA) has short closed the 
BVTCs projects. 
 
17. Establishment of 08 India-Africa 
Regional Material Testing 
MOU(s) / 
Agreement(s):NONE 
RMTL projects in Ghana, 
Cameroon & Kenya have 
 

82 | P a g e 
 
 
 
Laboratories for Highways in 
Africa (i.e. one for each of the 08 
RECs)[Uganda,Ghana,Cameroon
& Kenya] 
IA: IAHE, NOIDA/ MORTH 
Est.budget : Rs. 7.50 Crore 
(Cost revised during IAFS-
III)(earlier approved figure was 
Rs.5.6 Crore in IAFS-II) 
(IAFS-II Project) 
Activities Undertaken : 
RMTL project in Uganda is 
complete. 
not yet commenced.  
RMTL project in Uganda 
is complete. 
The RMTL projects in 
remaining 04 African 
countries were kept in 
abeyance due to non-
completion of the RMTL 
project in Uganda, 
considered as pilot project. 
 
18. Solar Electrification of 7500 
rural households in 15 African 
countries 
I [Mozambique, Namibia,Kenya, 
Tanzania(Zanzibar),South Africa, 
Malawi, South Sudan] 
II[Burkina Faso, Senegal, 
Cameroon, DRC,CAR, Botswana, 
Zimbabwe] 
IA: The Barefoot College, Tilonia 
Estimated budget 
: Rs. 25.00 Crore(Revised Cost 
during IAFS-III) 
(Earlier approved figure was Rs. 17 
Crore in IAFS-II) 
(IAFS-II Project) 
NONE Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. 
The IA has not yet 
submitted the detailed 
project proposal for solar 
electrification of 7,500 
rural households in 15 
African countries. 
Project has not been 
implemented till now and 
is unlikely to be 
implemented by Barefoot 
College, Tilonia. 
 
19. 
 
Setting up of Project Arrow (with 
a centralized monitoring system, 
workplace computer training 
centre and centralized control 
office) in Ghana 
IA: Department of Posts 
Estimated budget: Rs.2.60 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
NONE 
Activities Undertaken : A 
02-member Indian 
delegation from Department 
of Posts visited Ghana from 
March 17-21, 2014 to 
conduct the Feasibility 
Study for setting up a 
Project Arrow Post Office in 
Ghana. The Department of 
Actual implementation has 
not yet commenced. 
Department of Post has 
submitted the Feasibility 
Study Report. The 
MOU/Agreement is yet to 
be concluded. D/o Post is 
to respond to certain 
queries on the 
implementation modalities 
pertaining to the scope of 
 

83 | P a g e 
 
 
Posts had submitted the 
Feasibility Study Report 
(FSR). 
work and disbursement of 
funds for the project. 
20. Setting up of a Pan African 
University of Life and Earth 
Sciences (PAULESI) at 
University of Ibadan, Nigeria 
IA : Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education (DARE) 
Estimated budget: Rs. 500 Crore 
(IAFS-II Project) 
 
MOU(s) / Agreement(s): 
Partnership Memoire 
between AUC & GOI 
signed on 23/05/2013. 
“Valid till project 
completion; can be 
terminated by giving 03 
months advanced written 
notice.” 
Activities Undertaken : 
NONE 
Nigeria has not shown 
interest. 
 
 
21. Setting up of Apex Planning 
Organization and Training 
institute in Coal Sector in 
Mozambique. 
IA : Coal India Limited/Ministry of 
Coal 
Estimated budget : Rs. 385.00 
Crore (Cost revised during IAFS-
III) (earlier approved figure was 
Rs. 135.00 Crore in IAFS-II) 
(IAFS-I Project) 
MOU(s) / 
Agreement(s):NONE 
Activities Undertaken : 
NONE 
Commitment was initially 
made in IAFS-II in 2011. 
Subsequently, CIL 
considered Mozambique 
unsuitable. 
Project was not 
implemented and in 2018 
CIL requested to consider 
relieving it from the 
Project citing absence of 
business interest. 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
  

84 | P a g e 
 
APPENDIX- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-
26) HELD ON 16 DECEMBER, 2025 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 16th December, 2025 from 1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Director 
 3. Ms. Shanta Banerjee Datta - Deputy Secretary 
  
 Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3  Shri Vijay Baghel 
4   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
8  Shri Arun Govil 
9  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
10  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 Rajya Sabha 
11  Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
12  Dr. John Brittas 
13  Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
14  Dr. K. Laxman 
15  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
16  Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
17  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

85 | P a g e 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft reports:   
 (i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee on External 
Affairs (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs 
for the year 2025-26 and  
 (ii) xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx  
 
 4. The Chairperson, invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Reports. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports with minor 
modifications suggested by the Members.  
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 | P a g e 
 
APPENDIX- II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report)  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19, 21, 23, 24, 25. 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 49, 50 and 51. 
 Total- 35 
Percentage : 67.30% 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
Recommendation No. 22          
         Total- 1 
Percentage: 1.92 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos.   3,10, 14, 20, 34, 37, 38, 43 and 52              
Total- 09 
Percentage : 17.30 % 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation No.  6, 9, 17, 18, 39, 47 and 48,  
Total- 07 
Percentage: 13.46 % 
  
 