 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
INDIA’S ROLE AND PRESENCE IN THE ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC REGIONS 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
JULY 2026 /Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
14 
 

 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
India’s Role and Presence in the Arctic and Antarctic Regions 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 July, 2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 July, 2026 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
          JULY 2026 /Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

  
CONTENTS  
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024 -25) (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025 -26) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION (iv) 
REPORT 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
I India’s role and presence in Arctic and Antarctic: A Brief Overview  1 
(a) Arctic and Antarctic regions – Contrasting geographical features 1 
(b) Changing dynamics of Polar regions due to climate change 2 
(c) India’s influence in shaping global outlook in polar regions 4 
(d) Timelines of India’s presence and involvement in the polar regions 
(1920 – 2025) 
5 
(e) India’s association with International Polar Platforms 6 
(f) India’s contribution in polar research and climate change 7 
(g) Impact of Polar warming on Indian climate 10 
(h) Upcoming role of India in Arctic and Antarctic regions 12 
II Existing MEA set up dealing with Arctic and Antarctic regions 13 
III Himalaya: The ‘Third Pole’ 14 
 Research station in Himalaya 16 
IV Arctic warming – Challenges and Opportunities 16 
(a) Indian Arctic Programme  18 
(b) India in Arctic  19 
(c) Contribution of Indian Technology in development of Arctic  19 
(d) India’s presence in Arctic Governance 20 
(e) Arctic Policy 2022 23 
V India’s Relations with the Arctic States 28 
VI Engagement with Arctic nations 34 
VII India’s role in Arctic Council as a voice of Global South 38 
VIII Recent Developments in Arctic Geopolitics 39 
 Nuclear Safety 42 
IX Geoeconomic importance of Arctic 43 
X Outreach to indigenous people 46 
XI Indian narrative on Arctic 47 
XII Need for recognising Arctic area as a Quasi Global Common 49 
XIII Strategic importance of Antarctica  50 
 Achievements of Indian Antarctic Programme 51 
XIV Antarctic Treaty 52 
(a) Antarctica – ‘Global Common’ 56 
(b) India’s Scientific Journey in Antarctica 57 
XV Research station in Antarctica 57 
XVI Inspection of Research Stations in Antarctica 59 

 
XVII Tourism in Antarctica 60 
XVIII Capacity Building for Polar Research 62 
(a) Financial allocation for Polar research 64 
(b) Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR Convention) 
70 
(c) Antarctic Krill Fishing 71 
(d) Replacement of Maitri Station 73 
(e) Acquisition of Polar Research Vehicle (PRV) 75 
(f) National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) 78 
(g) Human Resource strength in NCPOR 79 
XIX Polar studies in educational institutions 81 
Part II 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 84-115  
 
 
       
APPENDICES 
 
1. Minutes of the Twenty Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 
23.07.2025 
116 
2. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 30.10.2025 121 
3. Minutes of the Twenty-First Sitting of the Committee held on 
21.07.2026 
125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
31. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
 
(ii) 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
9. Shri Navaskani K. 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
27. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
28. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi* 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
* Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha nominated to the 
Committee w.e.f. 03.06.2026. 
# Shri A.D Singh, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, retired on 09.04.2026 
@ Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha,  retired on 21.06.2026. 
 

 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik    –  Director  
3. Ms. Shanta Banerjee Datta             _ Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)   

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs (2025-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this      Fourteenth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India’s Role and Presence in the Arctic and Antarctic 
regions’. 
 2. The Committee selected the subject ‘India’s Role and Presence in the Arctic and 
Antarctic regions’ for detailed examination during the year 2024-25 and 2025-26. Briefing by 
the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Earth Sciences, on 
this subject, was held on 23 July, 2025. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of four 
experts on the subject namely, Dr. Rasik Ravindra  
 Secretary General, Society for the Geopolitics of Arctic, Antarctic & Himalayan Areas 
(SaGAA), Dr. Thamban Meloth, Director, National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research 
(NCPOR), Capt. (IN) Anurag Bisen (Retd.)  Senior Fellow, Vivekananda International 
Foundation (VIF) and Ms. Zerin Osho Director, Institute for Governance and Sustainable 
Development (IGSD) on 30 October, 2025 in accordance with Rule 331 (L) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 21 
July, 2026. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.  
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs, 
Ministry of Earth Sciences for placing material information as well as tendering evidence and 
views before the Committee. The Committee also express their thanks to Shri Milind Deora, 
MP(RS), and Sea Shepherd Global, an international non-profit marine wildlife conservation 
organisation, for furnishing valuable inputs in writing which was of great help in the 
examination of the subject. 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the assistance rendered to them 
by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
21  July, 2026                                                                                      Chairperson,                                
30 Asadha, 1948 (Saka)                              Committee on External Affairs 
      (iv) 

 
1 
 
Report 
Narration Analysis 
 
I India’s role and presence in Arctic and Antarctic: A Brief Overview  
Polar region are areas of significant importance for the entire world. 
Geographically, North and South Poles have huge differences which implies that our 
approach to both these areas have to be calibrated differently. With advancing 
technology, as well as the adverse impact of global climate change, access to these 
regions have become much easier. As a result opportunities and challenges have 
emerged from scientific, economic and strategic perspectives. India, despite being a 
tropical country, has been influenced by changes in the polar region and has also 
developed stakes because of our own scientific advancement and economic interests. 
India's overall approach has been a triad of science, economy and strategy. India’s 
Antarctic approach was evolved when India joined the Antarctic Treaty and set up 
research bases there. Similarly the Arctic policy was postulated in 2022 to give a broad 
strategic approach to the polar region, especially the Arctic region. In addition to the 
above, one of the key focuses now is to develop knowledge about various dimensions 
of the polar region and develop our competence from all perspectives. 
 
(a) Arctic and Antarctic regions – Contrasting geographical features 
 
1.1 Generally, the Arctic region is considered to be above 66 degrees North latitude.  
There are eight States who have territory in that region.  The Antarctic region usually 
refers to areas 60 degrees South latitude. Arctic and Antarctic regions represent nearly 
90% of the ice sheet of the planet which store 70% of fresh water resource. However, 
these two regions of earth have contrasting geographical significance. Arctic is a sea 
surrounded by landmass while Antarctic is a landmass surrounded by Ocean. There 
are indigenous people living in Arctic Region along with non-indigenous people while 
there is no permanent habitation in Antarctica. Since the Arctic coastal States have 
sovereign rights on their areas including the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and the 
rights over extended continental shelves under the United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Arctic is therefore distinct from Antarctica with no 
sovereign control of any nation.   

 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 While deposing before the Committee on 23 July 2025, the then Secretary 
West, MEA made following submission regarding India’s interest in Arctic and 
Antarctica: 
“India’s interests in engaging with these two regions emanates mainly from 
interconnection with climate. The climate interdependence also affects 
monsoon patterns, in which we have a deep interest. Besides, as the polar ice 
melts, it presents both new challenges and opportunities for all major players. 
It also impacts water availability, agriculture and consequently our economic 
security. If the Arctic trade routes open, we must consider what that would mean 
for India's opportunities, as well as those of other global players. The scientific 
and research collaboration opportunities that both these regions offer to all 
countries are significant. Furthermore, we need to assess how the geostrategic 
balance might shift, or remain the same. From a geostrategic perspective, in 
the Arctic, among the eight member States, seven are NATO members, Russia 
is not the member of it. This creates an interesting strategic dynamic.” 
 
(b) Changing dynamics of Polar regions due to climate change  
1.3 Polar areas provide a deep insight into the present global climate and 
predictions for future as the polar climate is warming up dramatically faster than 
elsewhere which affect the climate of the entire planet and having the largest 
accumulation of ice in the world, melting of ice here will increase the global sea level. 
There are three polar areas in the cryosphere of the earth: 
North pole 
South pole 
Himalayas 
1.4 The Committee have been informed that Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets 
have been losing mass over past 20 years and global sea levels rose 20 cm in past 
100 years. Arctic sea ice extent is declining at a rate of 13 % per decade. 


 
3 
 
1.5 Polar areas have been called the ‘Global barometer’. Rising temperatures are 
causing rapid environmental changes in the Arctic and Antarctic, including sea-ice 
loss, ice-shelf breakup, glacier retreat, permafrost thaw and ice sheet instability, with 
serious implications for global sea-level rise and climate changes.  
 
1.6 The Committee have been informed that 2040s will be a critical decade for polar 
regions since many studies have estimated that, by 2040s, the Arctic will lose its 
summer sea ice due to climate change. This would open up the polar sea route for 
commercial shipping traffic as well as increased opportunity for economic exploitation, 
including mining, fishing, and tourism as well as challenge of biosecurity and 
associated geopolitical confrontations. For Antarctica, 2048 marks an important year 
in the Antarctic Treaty, where any Consultative Party can request a review conference 
to discuss potential changes to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. However, the Antarctic Treaty or the Protocol does not have an expiry 
date.  
 
1.7 During the sitting of the Committee held on 30 October, 2025, a non official 
witness explained the problem of polar warming and its effects as under: 
“I would say that the Arctic and Antarctic regions are experiencing unprecedented 
environmental transformation due to accelerated climate change…The melting 
Arctic Sea ice is also affecting Indian monsoons. Several studies at the National 


 
4 
 
Centre for Polar and Ocean Research have clearly shown a link between changes 
in Arctic Sea ice and extreme rainfall in India. Similarly, recent studies show that 
changes in Antarctic are also connected to the Indian monsoon and rainfall 
patterns. Most importantly, the difference between Antarctic and the Arctic is that 
Antarctic ice is freshwater ice, which sits over land, similar to the Indian 
subcontinent. In fact, India and Antarctica were once connected. The land structure 
is similar, but the ice thickness can reach up to four kilometres in some areas, 
averaging about 2.5 to 3 kilometres. This makes Antarctica the most elevated 
continent on Earth. If the ice melts completely, it could raise global sea levels by 
60 meters. In contrast, Arctic ice is primarily sea ice, which is already sitting in the 
ocean and does not contribute to sea level rise. However, the Greenland ice, which 
is land ice, can lead to a sea level increase of about seven meters. Most modelling 
studies predict that the Arctic will be ice-free at least during the summer months 
before 2050 if current emission trends continue, and some studies suggest it may 
happen even faster.” 
 
 
1.8 Antarctica and Arctic have been a significant part of India’s foreign policy. The 
major aspect of this relation was India’s pursuit for scientific researches to understand 
the interconnectivity of polar climate and monsoon pattern. So far, policy focus has been 
on understanding the science behind monsoon system and conservation of pristine 
polar areas which are the backbone of earth which has been appreciated globally. India 
has played a constructive role in science and governance of Antarctica and sustainable 
development of Arctic regions. India aims to be a strategically important partner in 
Antarctic and Arctic affairs. However, rapid climate change, huge deposits of natural 
resources and geopolitical changes have led massive interest in these regions. 
Developments in these areas have great impact on India’s strategic, commercial, 
environmental and scientific interests and therefore calls for active Indian engagement 
in these regions. Under the current climate change and geopolitical scenario, India 
needs to increase its visibility and take up proactive  leadership role to establish it as a 
voice of global south. Keeping in view the growing importance of these regions, the 
Committee have examined the various aspects of India’s engagement in Arctic and 
Antarctic and are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
(c) India’s influence in shaping global outlook in polar regions 
 

 
5 
 
1.9 India understood the strategic importance of polar regions much before it set 
its foot there. In 1956, the Indian Delegation to the United Nations proposed that the 
‘Antarctic Question’ should be discussed at the eleventh UN General Assembly 
(UNGA), hinting that they favoured some form of trusteeship for the southern continent 
(United Nations 1956). India stated that claims to national sovereignty in Antarctica 
represented ‘outdated vestiges of European colonialism’ and expressed concern at 
the political consequences of the continuing sovereignty dispute. In particular, India 
raised fears that nuclear weapon testing in Antarctica could adversely disrupt global 
atmospheric systems and stop the monsoon.  
 
(d) Timelines of India’s presence and involvement in the polar regions (1920 – 
2025) 
 
 1920 : Svalbard Treaty: India (under British administration) became a party 
to the treaty, giving equal rights of access for scientific research and 
commercial activity on the Svalbard archipelago. After independence, India 
retained this legal status, giving it early legitimacy in the Arctic framework. 
 1977 : Department of Ocean Development formed, providing an institutional 
base for future expeditions. 
 1981 : First Antarctic Expedition: India launched its first voyage. 
 1983 : Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty: Gained full decision-
making rights in Antarctic governance by demonstrating active research. 
 1983 : Dakshin Gangotri Station established (later buried in ice, now serves 
as a supply base). 
 1989 : Maitri Station established in Queen Maud Land, Antarctica; became 
India’s permanent operational hub. 
 1997 : India joined CCAMLR. 
 2007 : First Indian Arctic Expedition to Svalbard, Norway. 
 2008 : Himadri Research Station established at Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard—
India became one of the 12 nations with a permanent Arctic station. 
 2010 :  Bharati Station established in Antarctica, a modern year-round 
facility. 
 2011 : India joined NySMAC (Ny-Ålesund Science Managers Committee). 
 2013 :  Arctic Council Observer Status granted (Kiruna Ministerial). 

 
6 
 
 2014 : IndARC moored observatory deployed in Kongsfjorden (first by an 
Asian nation). 
 2016 : Atmospheric Laboratory established at Gruvebadet, Ny-Ålesund. 
 2022 : India’s Antarctic Act passed - establishes permits, environmental 
safeguards, and compliance mechanisms domestically. 
 2022 : India’s Arctic Policy released: Six-pillar framework (Science, Climate, 
Economic Development, Connectivity, Governance, Capacity-building). 
 2023 : India at Arctic Circle Assembly: Presented Arctic Policy 
 2024 : The 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the 26th 
Committee for Environmental Protection was hosted in Kochi, India. 
 2024 : Maitri-II redevelopment project launched. 
 2025 : Arctic Circle India Forum: the first dedicated India-centered event 
under the Arctic Circle platform. 
 
(e) India’s association with International Polar Platforms 
 
1.10 India has been showing its sustained presence in Arctic and Antarctic by carrying 
out research and operational activities in and around their year-long stations, with a 
focus on critical scientific issues related to climate change and life in extremes, with 
dedicated projects having strong national and international cooperation. Some of the 
major milestones in our presence in the international forums include: 
 1983- India joined the Antarctic Treaty and became a Consultative Party. As 
a Consultative Party, India participates in the decision-making process 
regarding Antarctica's administration, scientific research, environmental 
protection, and logistical cooperation through the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings (ATCM). 
 1984- India became a member of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR) and held its vice-chairmanship from 2008-2012 and 2018-
2022. Further, many Indian scientists are active members of its various 
scientific working groups. 
 1986- India became party to the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) as a full member of the Commission and 
was entrusted the chairmanship during 1998-2000.  

 
7 
 
 1988- As one of the founding members of the Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), India has been playing a crucial role since its 
establishment in 1988. Indian scientists served as vice chair of COMNAP 
during 2008-2011, 2017-2020, 2024-2027, with its continuing commitment. 
 1997- India ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty in 1997, thus reaffirming its contribution to the conservation of the 
Antarctic environment.  
 2006- India became part of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS), the 
other member nations are China, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia and Thailand. 
AFoPS was established in 2004 to advance the polar research among 
countries in the Asian region through mutual cooperation. Also, India was 
entrusted with the chair of AFoPS during 2010-2012 and 2025-2026.  
 2008- India became a member of the Ny-Ålesund Science Managers 
Committee (NySMAC), an international body coordinating scientific activities 
at the International Arctic Research Base in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard. 
 2012- India became a member of the International Arctic Science Committee 
(IASC), with membership to its apex body, IASC Council, and part of its 
various Working Groups and Action Groups. 
 2013- India was granted Observer status to the Arctic Council, a high-level 
intergovernmental forum focusing on sustainable development, 
environmental protection, and other Arctic-related matters. India has also 
contributed to its various working groups. 
 2019- India joined the Svalbard Integrated Arctic Earth Observing System 
(SIOS), which is a regional observational system addressing Earth System 
Science (ESS) questions related to global change. 
 2019- NCPOR joined the University of the Arctic (UArctic) network. Currently, 
there are also a few other Indian Universities part of this network. 
1.11 Further, India is an active contributor to the Arctic Circle initiative led by Iceland 
and Arctic Frontiers initiative led by Norway as well as the initiatives led by Russia. 
 
(f) India’s contribution in polar research and climate change 
 

 
8 
 
1.12 With regard to the major contribution made by India in polar research and 
climate change, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated 
as under: 
“India has made significant contributions to the global scientific community, 
including polar research and scientific research on climate change. The major 
contributions are listed below: 
Antarctica:  
Set up three world-class research stations- Dakshin Gangotri, Maitri, and Bharati 
thereby extending the scientific footprint across the geographic regimes in the 
continent, including the South Pole.  
Completion of 44 annual scientific expeditions, including several international 
collaborative projects.  
In the Southern Ocean- 12 scientific expeditions have been undertaken that 
provided vital data on the role of the Southern Ocean in global circulation and 
carbon cycle. 
Established India’s first Ice Core Laboratory and undertook ice core drilling projects 
in Antarctica. 
Established an ocean - sea ice - ice shelf coupled numerical Regional Ocean 
Modelling System model, to understand the general ocean circulation, water mass 
exchanges, and heat transport for the continental margins of coastal Antarctica. 
Established the Prydz Bay Air-Sea-Ice Exchange Antarctic coastal observatory 
near the Indian Antarctic Station ‘Bharati’ to study air - ice - sea interaction in 
coastal Antarctica.  
Undertook drilling into the Antarctic ice sheet and developed extensive expertise in 
ice core research, to understand climate change and life in extreme conditions. 
Studied the variability and dynamics of Antarctic sea ice extremes and polynyas. 
 
Arctic:  
Established Indian research station Himadri at Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, Norway, 
where long-term atmospheric, oceanographic, biological and cryospheric 
monitoring are undertaken; 
Undertook multiple expeditions to the North Pole and the deep Arctic Ocean, 
including the Canadian Arctic; 
Launched regular winter expeditions to the Arctic from December 2023 as well as 
undertook an expedition to study the hydro - biogeochemistry of the East 
Greenland Shelf/ Denmark Strait;Formulated India's Arctic Policy 2022 and the 
Indian Antarctic Act 2022; 
Established an Atmospheric Observatory in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, Norway to 
continuously record atmospheric characteristics, viz. temperature, clouds, and 
precipitation at very high resolution; 
Installed an Oceanographic Mooring System in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard - IndARC 
Multisensor Mooring - to ensure year-round continuous physical and 
biogeochemical data at the climate - sensitive study region (Kongsfjorden); 
Enhanced the understanding of linkages between climate change in polar regions 
and the Indian summer monsoon.  
 
Himalayas: 

 
9 
 
 
Established Himansh station, India’s highest research base at 4000 m in the 
Himalayas,  
Set up a network of observational systems for monitoring the Himalayan glaciers. 
 
Associated initiatives:  
Improved understanding of the microbial loop activity in the Indian Sector of the 
Southern Ocean by linking bacterial diversity with phytoplankton and Dissolved 
Organic Matter/Particulate Organic Matter characteristics. 
Delineated the forcing factors and mechanisms driving variability in phytoplankton 
carbon uptake rates in the Indian Sector of the Southern Ocean. 
Established a dedicated National Polar Data Centre, a dedicated portal for various 
polar data and metadata collected by the Indian expeditions. 
Actively participating in international scientific conferences to share our research 
and established partnership with several international research centres and 
academic institutions.”  
 
1.13 Further, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written submission, stated as 
under: 
“India has made a significant contribution to the global scientific community, 
including polar research and scientific research on climate change. The major 
contributions are as follows: 
Constructed three world-class research stations in Antarctica – Dakshin Gangotri, 
Maitri, and Bharati and extended the scientific footprint across the geographic 
regimes in the continent, including the South Pole. Completed 44 annual scientific 
expeditions, including several international collaborative projects. 
Established the Indian research station Himadri in Arctic at Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, 
where the long-term atmospheric, oceanographic, biological and cryospheric 
monitoring is being carried out; participated in expeditions to the North Pole and the 
deep Arctic Ocean, including expanding to the Canadian Arctic. India has launched 
regular winter expeditions to the Arctic since 2023. 
Constructed the state-of-art Himansh station in Himalayas– India’s highest research 
base at ~4000 m – and established a network of observational systems for 
monitoring the Himalayan glaciers and emanating rivers. 
Undertook 12 scientific expeditions in southern ocean that provided vital data on 
the role of the Southern Ocean in global circulation and carbon cycle. 
Established India’s first Ice Core Laboratory and undertook many ice core drilling 
projects in Antarctica. 
Formulated India's Arctic Policy 2022 and the Indian Antarctic Act 2022. 
An Atmospheric Observatory established in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, to continuously 
record atmospheric characteristics, viz. temperature, clouds, and precipitation at 
very high resolution. 

 
10 
 
An Oceanographic Mooring System established in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard - IndARC 
Multisensor Mooring - to ensure year-round continuous physical and 
biogeochemical data at the climate-sensitive study region (Kongsfjorden). 
Enhanced the understanding of linkages between climate change in polar regions 
and the Indian summer monsoon.  
Established an ocean-sea ice-ice shelf coupled numerical Regional Ocean 
Modelling System (ROMS) model, to understand the general ocean circulation, 
water mass exchanges, and heat transport for the continental margins of coastal 
Antarctica. 
Established the Prydz Bay Air-Sea-Ice Exchange (PRAISE) Antarctic coastal 
observatory near the Indian Antarctic Station ‘Bharati’ to study air-ice-sea 
interaction in coastal Antarctica 
Undertook drilling into Antarctic ice sheet and developed extensive expertise in ice 
core research, to under the climate change and life in extreme conditions.  
Delineated the forcing factors and mechanisms driving variability in phytoplankton 
carbon uptake rates in the Indian Sector of the Southern Ocean.  
Established a dedicated National Polar Data Centre (NPDC), a portal for various 
polar data and metadata collected by the Indian expeditions. 
Research finds are disseminated through scientific publications and other outreach 
activities.” 
 
(g) Impact of Polar warming on Indian climate 
1.14 For India, polar warming has direct relevance as it can alter our monsoon 
behaviour, increase extreme weather events and contribute to sea-level rise that 
threatens coastal regions, ecosystems and livelihoods. Arctic warming can weaken 
and destabilize the Indian monsoon by altering jet streams and atmospheric 
circulation, leading to erratic rainfall, droughts, or floods. In this context, sustained 
polar research is crucial for understanding climate linkages, improving climate 
prediction, and strengthening India’s long-term resilience to climate change. 
1.15 While discussing India’s contribution in the climate change studies of polar 
regions, one of the experts submitted the following in his deposition before the 
Committee on 30.10.2025:  

 
11 
 
“If you look at India's engagement within the Arctic and Antarctic, it has an 
integrated approach because we are one country which works both in Antarctic, 
Arctic and Himalayas, which therefore have a significant impact on our societal 
relevance. The comparative studies between these regions also provide actually 
knowledge on the polar tropical climate linkages, especially with the Indian 
monsoons, the sea level rise and its coastal vulnerability. Polar amplification 
means the poles are warming enormously higher than the rest of the world. It is 
nearly three to four times higher than that. That has a feedback mechanism to the 
rest of the world, including the Indian monsoons. We are also working on the 
conservation of these fragile polar ecosystems and those life adaptations in those 
extreme environments… A large number of Himalayan hazards are actually 
related to thawing of land itself because it is becoming very unstable land...The 
changing climate also contributes to storm surges, with an increase in extreme 
weather events, such as cyclones in the Arabian Sea, which was never the case. 
We always used to see cyclones happening in the Bay of Bengal but now, we can 
see the situation happening in the Arabian Sea. Thus, small changes in sea level 
can have cascading effects.”.” 
 
 
1.16 During the sitting of the Committee held on 30.10.2025, a non official witness 
apprised the Committee that a study has been conducted on the relationship between 
Arctic Sea ice loss and the Indian southwest monsoon in which a distinct and 
measurable link has been found between Arctic Sea ice and the Himalayan system, 
particularly concerning summer monsoons. Elaborating further on this issue, the non 
official witness stated following: 
“There is a distinct and measurable link between Arctic Sea ice and the Himalayan 
system, particularly concerning summer monsoons… 
In the Kara Sea ice, when that decreases, which is in the Arctic, you see a sudden 
weakening of the tropical temperature gradient between the Arctic waters and the 
tropical waters that go up using the ocean currents… 
That is the exact bit we are studying because it is such a specific study to relate 
and also show causation and correlation between loss of Arctic Sea ice.  Of 
course, in the larger scheme of things, climate change matters. But we are trying 
to get into evidences because that is going to be really helpful in building up what 
India’s narrative should be, which I am going to speak about briefly… 
We are essentially looking at anywhere between three to four per cent GDP loss 
year on year, starting 2035, if averaged out for the two scenarios. And this is only 
and only for rain-fed agriculture. Climate change, as you said, Sir, the broader 
context of it.”  
 
1.17 When asked about any study being undertaken by the Government to assess 
the economic impact of teleconnection between rise in Arctic temperature and 
weakening of monsoons, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their post evidence written 
submission, stated as under: 

 
12 
 
“As on date, Government has not conducted any study on the economic impacts 
of teleconnection between rise in Arctic temperature and weakening of monsoons. 
Although the Institute for Governance & Sustainable Development (IGSD), a US 
based NGO, whose office in India has initiated a report on the economic impact 
of Arctic warming on India, the data needs a careful evaluation. Though there is 
credible evidence that Arctic sea-ice melt will intensify by the mid-21st century, 
the translation of this signal into regional rainfall changes over India and their 
subsequent economic impacts needs further examination.” 
 
1.18 However, the MEA, in their post evidence replies, informed the Committee as 
under: 
“Currently research is being done to establish direct linkages between rising 
temperature in the Arctic region with monsoon rain patterns. Economic impact of 
changing monsoon patterns are also being separately studied by relevant 
agencies. With the availability of greater granular data on teleconnection, more 
detailed assessment can be made on the monsoon patterns and its consequential 
impact on economic life of India.” 
 
(h) Upcoming role of India in Arctic and Antarctic regions 
1.19 Elucidating the role India looks forward to play in the governance of the Arctic 
and Antarctic, the Ministry of External Affairs in their written submission, informed the 
Committee that India envisions itself as a science-driven and environmentally 
responsible actor in both the Arctic and Antarctic. In the Arctic, it focuses on contributing 
research on climate, oceans and ecosystems, promoting sustainable development 
policies as an Observer in the Arctic Council and serving as a bridge between Arctic 
States and the Global South. In the Antarctica, India participates as a Consultative Party 
to the Antarctic Treaty System, operating permanent research stations and engaging in 
regulated, science-based resource management through the Convention for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). 
1.20 India’s tools of engagement have been through science diplomacy, rule-based 
engagement, diversified partnerships and inclusive multilateralism, energy 
cooperation and research opportunities. India’s interlocutors include State actors 
(Arctic coastal countries and other Observers), non-State actors (academia, NGOs, 
private sector) and multilateral fora (Arctic Council, Antarctic Treaty System, 
CCAMLR).” 
1.21 When asked by the Committee to furnish the roadmap or short term strategy 
for India’s presence and role in the two regions, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their 
written submission, stated as under:  

 
13 
 
“A multi prong approach has been rolled out in the short term to build our 
capabilities and to better understand impact on India due to various changes in 
the polar region. On the scientific side, more and more Indian universities are 
being encouraged to develop course content, and to undertake serious research 
by deploying scientists in our research stations in both the Poles. We have also 
increased our outreach to various foreign universities and research institutes that 
are active in polar research. We have also started increasing our participation in 
international events, which focus on scientific and strategic aspects related to the 
polar region. We have also started including discussions on polar issues in various 
International Strategic conferences hosted in India to develop our competence 
and articulate our point of view. One of the short term goals is to develop our own 
infrastructure, including platforms, such as icebreakers and ice class vessels to 
our own polar research vessel. Indian experts are also looking at opportunities 
and challenges, which might evolve when the polar sea routes become a reality 
in the coming decade. We have also started evaluating all the international 
agreements of importance, to which India can join, to develop our stakes.” 
                                                                     
1.22 In this regard the Ministry of Earth Sciences also informed in their written 
submission that the immediate strategy of the Ministry is to expand the scientific 
exploration and footprints across the Antarctic and Arctic region. In Antarctica, India is 
expanding its expeditions to different parts of Antarctica, beyond its limited logistic 
periphery around the Maitri and Bharati stations. In coming years, it is planned to join 
international initiatives like the Antarctic RINGS and Antarctic InSync programs, which 
will have a circum-Antarctic footprint. In the Arctic, we will undertake more 
oceanographic expeditions beyond the limits of Svalbard by collaborating with Arctic 
States or hiring ice-class vessels. Most importantly, the Ministry will initiate the 
acquisition of a Polar Research Vessel and construction of new Maitri station, after 
due approvals.  
 
II Existing MEA set up dealing with Arctic and Antarctic regions 
2.0 During their sitting held on 30 October  2025, the Committee were apprised that 
all countries which have a major presence within the Arctic region also have a Polar 
Desk or a Polar Ambassador, who ensures that their policies remain consistent with 
what happens in the world. India should also have such dedicated division and the 
Ministry of External Affairs should establish at least a Polar Desk to take up the matter 
relating to these areas more proactively. 
2.1 Emphasising the need for having a dedicated representative of the 
Government, a non official witness further stated following: 

 
14 
 
“…we are basically all scientists, you know. So, we look into that aspect more, 
actually, in climate change, those aspects more. But it would always be 
important to have somebody, you know, adding value in terms of this policy and 
strategic inputs.” 
 
2.2 The Committee raised a specific query on existing set up in the Ministry of 
External Affairs dealing with the polar areas. On this the MEA, in their post evidence 
written submission, informed that a focused and sustained approach is adopted, in 
consultation with the relevant Indian Embassies abroad and Government of India 
agencies/Ministries, to engage with the polar region. India’s engagement has seen a 
considerable surge in recent times, driven by India’s Arctic Policy: Building a Partnership 
for Sustainable Development released in 2022. The Polar Cell in the UNES (United 
Nations Economic and Social) Division of the Ministry handles all matters related to our 
engagement with the Polar region. The Division is headed by the Joint Secretary 
(UNES). The Division coordinates with all concerned with India's outreach and 
engagement as well as India’s participation in leading global policy platforms. 
 
2.3 When asked to furnish the details of the countries which have a dedicated polar 
desk/ambassador, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their post evidence replies, 
informed as under: 
“Over the years, countries are exploring institutionalised or dedicated 
mechanisms to handle polar related issues, including appointing a Polar/ Arctic 
Affairs Ambassador or a dedicated representative/ Committee/ desk to deal 
with the matter. All Arctic Council Member States have a Polar/ Arctic 
Ambassador along with a dedicated Polar/Arctic Affairs Desk or Department. 
Most Non-Arctic Observer States to the Arctic Council, including Japan, China, 
Singapore and South Korea, have Special Representative/Ambassador for 
Polar/ Arctic Affairs.” 
 
2.4 Further, when the Committee asked about any proposal to appoint a Polar 
Ambassador to represent India’s interests in the Arctic, the MEA, in their written 
submission, replied that currently, no such proposal is under consideration. 
 
2.5 In response to another query on the need for a dedicated desk in our country, 
the MEA informed that the Polar Cell in the UNES Division of the Ministry handles 
polar related issues in an exclusive manner. 
III Himalaya: The ‘Third Pole’ 

 
15 
 
3.0 The Himalayas are termed as the “Third Pole” of the earth which holds largest 
freshwater reserve outside poles and is equated with Arctic significance. Research 
programs being carried out in the Third pole stress climate similarities between 
Himalayas and the Arctic and the Antarctic regions. 
3.1 Elaborating on the importance of ‘Himalayas’ as the third pole and its global 
significance, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“There is a narrative that the Himalayas is considered as the “Third Pole,” in view 
of the large concentration of glaciers outside the polar regions. As per the 
estimates, it stores 12,000 km³ of ice. This is also the origin of some of the major 
river systems, including the Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra and Yangtze, 
supporting water security for over 1.5 billion people across South, Central, and 
East Asia. Seasonal glacier melt regulates river flows, which are crucial for 
agriculture, hydropower and drinking water. 
Studies indicate that the Himalayas play a vital role in global climate regulation, 
by acting as a heat sink and influencing the Asian monsoon system. Its glaciers, 
snow cover, and ecosystems affect regional and global climate patterns and 
biodiversity. With rising temperature, occurrence of natural hazards such as 
glacial lake outburst floods, landslides, and avalanches have increased.  
In addition, the Himalayan region also functions as a carbon sink and plays a 
critical role in soil conservation, water purification and sustains a unique Alpine 
flora and fauna. 
India has been undertaking scientific research as well as satellite imaging of the 
glaciers of the Himalayas in order to understand the climatic impact of melting 
glaciers in the Himalayas. Institutions like NCPOR, the Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology, and the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) have 
been in the forefront in this regard by focusing research on glacial retreat, snow 
cover changes, and climate modelling. India has also been working on water 
resource management and disaster mitigation strategies in the Himalayas to 
ensure sustainable development, regional cooperation, and global climate 
insights.” 
 
3.2 Highlighting the adverse effect of rising temperature in Himalaya, the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences inter alia stated following in their written submission:  
a. “The Himalaya has the largest concentration of snow and ice outside the 
Antarctic and Arctic regions. These mountains have profound influence 
on social, economic, cultural and demography of the Himalayan nations. 
Being a young mountain, it is fragile and hazard-prone, especially 
earthquakes. The Hindukush-Karakoram-Himalayan (HKH) region is 
known as the “Water Tower of Asia” and “Third Pole” for its significant 
snow and ice reserves which play an essential role in sustaining water 
availability.  
 
b. The mountain range's presence is crucial for the Asian monsoon and its 
glaciers are a vital water source for billions of people, making it a climate-

 
16 
 
sensitive region vulnerable to melting and shifts in weather patterns due 
to global warming. The Himalaya is warming much faster than rest of the 
globe, and thus affecting wind circulation, monsoon, and even storm 
tracks. Due to its unique geographic position and high altitude, it faces 
rapid changes in the weather patterns and ecosystem. Most of the 
Himalayan glaciers are retreating, and the retreat rates have accelerated 
in the past few decades, but the observed retreat are not regionally 
uniform. To understand the future sustainability of snow and ice field 
water resources in Himalaya, studies to quantify the snow-cover, ice 
pack and hydrological modelling. Retreat of Himalayan glaciers in many 
cases are also creating proglacial lakes, which expand as the glaciers 
are retreating, potentially increasing potential hazards such glacial lake 
outburst floods (GLOF). 
 
Research station in Himalaya 
 
3.3 Himansh is a dedicated high-altitude field station established in 2013, situated 
at 4080 m above mean sea level near Batal (about 100 km from Manali) in Lahaul-
Spiti valley of Himachal Pradesh. The NCPOR established this facility to support its 
various glaciological surveys, advanced warning system and water-level observation 
network in Chandra Basin. The station has three units which includes two units to 
accommodate eight persons at a time, one laboratory unit, and associated support 
systems. The station has necessary satellite communication facilities and the station 
and observational systems are powered by a 20 kw solar power system. 
3.4 Drawing similarity between Arctic and Himalayan studies, a non official witness 
further informed the following: 
“Our Arctic study also has relevance to what we study in Himalayas. A large 
number of Himalayan hazards are actually related to thawing of land itself 
because it is becoming very unstable land. Additionally, the changing climate 
exacerbates extreme rainfall, cloudbursts and other issues. This also has life 
implications, such as species distributions and the loss of sea ice habitats.” 
IV Arctic warming – Challenges and Opportunities 
4.0 The Arctic influences the weather and climate of the entire Northern Hemisphere, 
and the cool northern region helps to moderate the climate of the rest of the planet. Rise 
in global temperature and warming of Arctic has resulted in shrinkage of Arctic sea ice 
extent, declining at a rate of 13% per decade. Globally, the cost of Arctic warming are 
seen in following changes: 
 Heat Waves 
 Extreme winters 

 
17 
 
 Rising sea level 
 Food Security 
 Loss of wildlife 
 Thawing permafrost 
4.1 Change in Arctic climate and melting of ice will have following economic and 
socio-political impact: 
 Environmental pressures –  
 Loss of habitat/species 
 Increase in ocean acidification 
 Strengthening of waves resulting in coastal erosion 
 Change in ocean properties 
Economic impact –  
 Offshore exploration and extraction will benefit 13% Oil, 30% natural 
gas, & 20% natural gas liquids. However this will be accompanied by 
drilling, liquidation infra, transfer pipelines, fuel storage, etc.  
 Mineral deposits in Arctic such as Nickel, Copper, Platinum, diamonds, 
gold, lead, Zinc, etc. will be accessible but thawing permafrost and 
erosion is likely to increase challenges and increase costs for the 
industry. 
 Opening of new navigable routes will improve connections between the 
Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans, reducing shipping cost and thus 
benefitting fishing and mining industry. However increased number of 
vessels will endanger marine ecosystems. 
 Fishing will increase in these areas due to warmer climates, however 
harvesting sites will move upwards as mid latitude species will move 
further north. 
 Tourism will also increase due to longer summers and improved 
accessibility to ports, however simultaneously endangering the Arctic 
landscape, wildlife and ecosystems. 
Social impact –  
Change in way of life of polar natives, viz. traditional diet, means of transport, 
local economies, etc. 
Political impact –  

 
18 
 
Arctic governance will have to readjust with cooperation of global powers and 
involvement of non Arctic States as well. International effort will be needed for 
cooperation, especially oil spill pollution prevention, shipping regulation and 
fisheries management. 
 
(a) Indian Arctic Programme  
4.2 Indian Arctic Programme commenced in 2007. The Indian Arctic Programme 
studies climate change, its impacts, and adaptation strategies through interdisciplinary 
research in atmospheric and space sciences, marine and biological sciences, earth 
sciences and glaciology. NCPOR under MoES coordinates and implements India's 
Arctic research Program. NCPOR has been undertaking scientific studies on Arctic 
sea ice, ocean-atmosphere interactions and their tele-connections with the Indian 
monsoon, extreme weather events and coastal variability. Indian scientists are 
involved in continuous, long-term monitoring of Atmospheric and Oceanographic 
parameters in the Arctic. 
Arctic Research Station –‘Himadri’ 
4.3 Himadri, opened in 2008, is India’s sole Arctic research station located at the 
International Arctic Research base, NyÅlesund, Svalbard, Norway. Ny-Ålesund, one of 
the world’s northernmost year-round research communities, hosts institutions from over 
11 countries, with India maintaining a year-round presence since 2023. It is located at a 
distance of 1,200 kilometres from the North Pole. Unlike the Antarctic stations, Himadri 
station is a leased property belonging to Kings Bay AS, a company owned by the 
Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment. The station has laboratory facilities and 
accommodation for eight people at a time.  
Long term Observation mooring for Arctic Observation 
4.4 IndARC, India’s first multi-sensor moored ocean observatory, was deployed in 
the Kongsfjorden in 2014 to continuously monitor the ongoing rapid changes on a high 
resolution in the Arctic ocean waters even during the cold, inaccessible seasons. It 
measures different oceanic parameters such as temperature, salinity, chlorophyll, noise, 
CO2, water circulation, etc. which are used to understand the causes and changes in 
atmospheric and oceanic properties due to melting Arctic ice.  
Atmospheric laboratory 
4.5 India’s first atmospheric laboratory in Arctic was established at Gruvabadet, Ny-
Ålesund, in 2016.  This facility has sophisticated facilities to monitor atmospheric 

 
19 
 
conditions like clouds, precipitation, long-range pollutants, leading to excellent scientific 
findings.  
(b) India in Arctic  
 
4.6 India’s presence and growing role in Arctic is reflected in active participation of 
its scientists in several working Groups (WG) of Arctic Council such as Arctic 
Contaminants Action program (ACAP), Arctic Monitoring and assessment Prog 
(AMAP) and Sustainable development working Group (SDW) as also those of 
Internation Arctic Science Committee (IASC) e.g. Atmosphere WG, Cryosphere WG, 
Marine WG, Terrestrial WG and WG on Social and Human Science, contributing to 
international efforts to enrich data bank on these vital issues. 
4.7 Further, India has marked its presence in most of the international forum such 
as Arctic Circle, International Arctic Science Committee (IASC), Arctic Security 
Conferences organized by Fridtjof Nansen Institute (FNI), Arctic Science Summit 
Week (ASSW), U-Arctic, Svalbard Science Forum (SSF), Ny-Alesund Science 
Management Committee (NySMAC), Asian Forum on Polar Science (AFOPS) and 
Svalbard Integrated Arctic Earth Observing System (SIOS) etc.  
 
(c) Contribution of Indian Technology in development of Arctic  
 
4.8 Some of the most recent developments in India’s technological contributions to 
the Arctic's development are:  
 The joint NASA/ISRO (Indian Space Research Organization) Synthetic Aperture 
Radar (NISAR) satellite mission, launched in 2025, will provide new opportunities for 
the study of the Antarctic and Arctic. The NISAR satellite will provide crucial, high 
resolution radar data for monitoring Antarctic and Arctic ice dynamics, sea ice 
changes, glacier melt and permafrost, complementing optical data with its all-
weather capability to track the health of the cryosphere, sea level rise, and global 
climate impacts with frequent global coverage (every 12 days).  
 The IITM Earth System Model under the MoES has incorporated sea ice into its 
model, which is helping to predict Arctic sea-ice related changes to improve the 
weather/ climate predictions. 
 

 
20 
 
4.9 When asked in what ways ways India can leverage its technological competence 
in development of Arctic, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their post evidence written 
submission, stated as under: 
“India can leverage its technological competence to contribute meaningfully to 
Arctic development through a science-driven approach. Space-based capabilities 
from ISRO can support sea-ice monitoring, environmental change detection, 
climate observation, and safer Arctic navigation. India’s strengths in climate and 
Earth system modelling, supported by high performance computing, can improve 
understanding of Arctic processes and their linkages with global climate systems, 
including the Indian monsoon. Indigenous sensor technologies, autonomous 
platforms, drones, and ocean buoys can enable reliable observations in extreme 
Arctic conditions with minimal environmental impact. India can also adapt its 
expertise in renewable energy, energy storage, and micro-grid systems to 
support low-carbon power solutions for remote Arctic stations and communities. 
Additionally, data science and artificial intelligence can be applied to integrate 
satellite and in-situ data, enhance early-warning systems, and provide decision-
support tools. Together, these technologies position India as a trusted, 
innovation-driven, and environmentally responsible partner in Arctic 
development.” 
 
(d) India’s presence in Arctic Governance 
4.10 Arctic Council is the leading inter governmental forum promoting cooperation in 
the Arctic. It does not create legally binding obligation for members. The Arctic council 
has 8 Member, 6 permanent participants & 13 Observer States. India has an Observer 
Status in the Arctic Council since 2013.  
4.11 When India joined Arctic Council in 2013 as an Observer, it had already gained 
an impressive expertise of conducting meaningful science and participating in 
governance of a cold and harsh Antarctic continent for over three decades. With 
investigations already spread over two cryosphere regions of the world i.e. Antarctica 
and Himalaya, it was a natural step forward to include Arctic in the studies to have a 
comprehensive view of the changes taking place in the ice- covered regions of the 
earth as a whole. The inclusion of India among the select group of non-Arctic nations 
as Observer was a recognition of its scientific achievements in the Arctic domain within 
a short spell of period beginning 2007, when it launched its first Arctic Expedition and 
participated in International Polar Year. Regular scientific expeditions have been 
undertaken to Svalbard from 2008 onwards. 
4.12 During the sitting of the Committee held on 23 July 2025, representative of the 
MEA stated following:  
“In terms of the Arctic region, the governance structure or the cooperative 
structure that has evolved is in the form of Arctic Council which is not strictly an 

 
21 
 
inter-Governmental body but more of an international forum. This forum is unique 
in the sense that they also have something called ‘permanent observers’, which 
means that the indigenous population living in those areas are also included in the 
policy discussions that go on in the Arctic Council. The Arctic Council float from 
the competing claims, again which are partly taken care of by the UNCLOS, which 
is the UN Convention on Law of the Sea. So, that defines the territorial or 
sovereignty claims in that region. There are two interesting territories over there. 
One is the Svalbard archipelago and the other one is the Greenland, which has 
been in the news recently. The focus of the Arctic Council is more on the science 
and research. But as the ice melts, due to global warming, there is an increasing 
speculation about the extraction of the minerals/rare earth minerals, 
hydrocarbons, the opening of shipping routes, fishing, and other resources that 
may become available. So, there is a certain sense of contestation and interest in 
the region.”  
 
4.13 The Committee were given to understand that Arctic Council is the main 
mechanism of cooperation in the Arctic region. The current geopolitical tensions are 
creating a huge roadblock. India is an Observer to the Arctic Council and contributes to 
its various working groups. Since the Arctic Council consists of only eight Arctic States 
as its members, Observers can't meaningfully contribute to Council’s decision-making 
as they are not given certain privileges stated as under:  
 Exclude the Observers from the decision-making processes of Arctic Council 
 Limit their engagement to the level of Working Groups 
 Restrict their financial contribution 
 Research proposals only through an Arctic State or a Permanent Participant 
 Adherence to the Ottawa Declaration and the Rules of Procedure. Observers 
cannot undertake research directly amongst themselves.  
 
4.14 When asked about the exact role and responsibility of the Observer in the Arctic 
Council, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated that the 
primary role of an Observers in the Arctic Council is to participate in the work of the 
Arctic Council, where feasible and make relevant contributions, especially at the level 
of Working Groups. Observers can also propose projects through an Arctic State or a 
Permanent Participant but financial contributions from an Observers to any given 
project may not exceed the financing from Arctic States, unless otherwise decided by 
the Senior Arctic Officials. In meetings of the Council’s subsidiary bodies to which 
Observers are invited, Observers may, at the discretion of the Chair, make statements 
after the Arctic States and Permanent Participants, present written statements, submit 

 
22 
 
relevant documents and provide views on the issues under discussion. Observers may 
also submit written statements at Ministerial meetings. 
 
4.15 With regard to the contribution made by India since joining the Arctic Circle as 
Observer, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“Since joining the Arctic Council as an Observer in 2013, India has been actively 
contributing to various Working Groups of the Arctic Council namely, Arctic 
Contaminants Action Program, Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, 
and the Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna. Some of the projects include 
Geochemistry of mercury and emerging contaminants in the benthic realm of 
Arctic fjords and coastal waters of Svalbard; investigation of atmospheric aerosols 
and their characterization over the Arctic; long term monitoring of Arctic fjords for 
climate change studies; monitoring of Arctic Precipitation; integrated monitoring of 
Glaciers in the Svalbard, Arctic, etc. In addition, India has also been participating 
in various meetings organised by the Arctic Council Secretariat, physically as well 
as virtually. In addition, India also hosted the Arctic Circle India Forum 2025 in 
New Delhi.” 
 
4.16 When the Committee desired to know that to what extent India’s objectives in 
Arctic region has been affected due to its status as ‘Observer’ State, MoES, in their 
post evidence written submission stated as under: 
“India’s objectives in the Arctic are significantly constrained due to the fact that we 
are an Observer State in the Arctic Council. As per the Arctic Council rules, an 
Observer has no voting rights or direct role in decision-making, limiting its 
influence on Arctic governance and regulations. Further, any access to the 
resources will require collaboration with an Arctic State. However, scientific 
research and collaboration are largely unaffected, as opportunities for research 
are still open. Most importantly, the Observer status provide certain respect 
among non-Arctic States as it provides opportunities for closer ties with the Arctic 
Council States.” 
 
4.17 Further asked, if upgrading its status as Member would enable India to play a 
more active involvement in Arctic affairs, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their post 
evidence written submission, furnished following reply: 
“If we need to make a greater impact in the Arctic, a full membership would be 
crucial. However, the Arctic Council's rules of procedure do not have provisions to 
incorporate countries outside the Arctic Circle as members. All formal decisions of 
the Arctic Council and its subsidiary bodies require the consensus of the eight 
Arctic States, which is highly unlikely in the current geopolitical scenarios or in the 
near future. The current rules of the Arctic Council membership does not permit a 
Non-Arctic State to apply for membership to the Council. However, admission of 
India to Observer Status in 2013 has been crucial in orienting and directing our 
interests in the region. The Ministry of External Affairs, in coordination with 

 
23 
 
relevant GoI agencies/line Ministries, has been engaging on Arctic issues, through 
active participation and representation in relevant forums/platforms, both within 
and outside the region, as well as through the Indian Missions by offering 
facilitation in promoting India’s interests in the region.” 
 
4.18 The MEA, in their written submission further stated following on this issue: 
 
“The ‘Member State’ status in the Arctic Council is legally restricted to the eight 
nations with territory above the Arctic Circle. However, India continues to deepen 
its engagements with all the Member States and Observers of the Arctic Council, 
guided by the Arctic Policy (2022).” 
 
4.19 During the deliberations held on 30 October 2025, a non official witness 
presented the following viewpoint regarding the quest for membership of the Arctic 
Council: 
“Once we sign a document for getting the observer-ship, there is a certain mandate, 
there is a certain charter, which gives you certain rules. Among those rules, the first 
criterion is that you have to honour the sovereignty of the Arctic States and you will 
work within those mandates which are given to you. For example, he said that you 
cannot exceed 50 per cent of the partnership, you do not get the seat on the same 
table, you are not even a permanent participant member. All these things we have 
signed and we have signed knowing what are the conditions. Now, if you start saying 
that we do not want this, but we want this, it will be slightly going overboard. We 
have to move very cautiously, take support of all the Global South, Singapore, China 
and others. Then, possibly move a mandate within the observers like this charter is 
very old, it is more than 20 years old and requires some modification. Then, we can 
make a ground for India's elevated structure within the Arctic Council.” 
 
(e) Arctic Policy 2022 
 
4.20 India’s Arctic Policy 2022 aims to strengthen scientific exploration, understand 
climate change impacts, enhance economic cooperation with the Arctic region, prepare 
for changes in global shipping routes due to melting ice, strengthen international 
cooperation and build national capacities. It is built on six pillars: Science and Research, 
Climate and Environmental Protection, Economic and Human Development, 
Transportation and Connectivity, Governance and International Cooperation, and 
National Capacity Building.  
4.21 Regarding the tangible and intangible gains in short, medium and long term 
envisaged in the Policy, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, 
stated as under: 

 
24 
 
“India’s Arctic Policy envisions gains from scientific, academic and economic 
points of views. In the short to medium term, more Indian researchers and 
academic institutions will start actively involving themselves in polar science. This 
will enhance institutional capabilities in terms of access to technologies, 
equipment and resources. This in turn will result in more high quality research 
projects and improve our understanding of monsoon patterns and mitigating along 
with taking adaptive domestic measures to ensure food and livelihood security. In 
the medium and long term, it is expected that Indian business enterprises will get 
more actively involved in the north sea route as well as sustainable management 
of resources and energy, which might emerge due to thawing of sea ice in the 
Arctic region.”  
 
4.22 Asked to state the most important pillar of Arctic policy and how far it has 
succeeded in achieving the objectives in Arctic region, the Ministry of External Affairs 
in their post evidence written replies stated as under: 
“India’s approach to Arctic engagement has been primarily in the scientific 
domain, therefore the Pillar 1 ‘Science and Research’ as well as Pillar 2 ‘Climate 
and Environmental Protection’ are significant. Further, the climate change and its 
impact on Arctic sea ice melt as well as the teleconnection with the Indian 
monsoon and the threat to India’s outlying  islands has been clearly brought out 
in the policy. The melting of the ice also provides opportunities for harnessing the 
resource potential as well as the new shipping routes which need to be leveraged 
sustainably as elaborated in the Pillar 3 ‘Economic and Human Development’ as 
well as Pillar 4 ‘Transportation and Connectivity’. All these activities need to be 
undertaken through international cooperation with various nations as well as in 
adherence to the international regulations as brought out in the Pillar 5 
‘Governance and International Cooperation’. While enhancing our Arctic 
engagement, it is equally essential to build our capacities as brought out in Pillar 
6 ‘National Capacity Building’ which is also interlinked to the first five pillars. 
Therefore, all six (06) pillars of the policy are equally important and are interlinked 
with each other. Various activities are being undertaken by several stakeholders 
such as government, academia, scientists, researchers, business community 
towards fulfilling the objectives as laid out in the Arctic policy and thereby 
enhancing India’s overall engagement with the Arctic region. Thus, the Arctic 
policy has been the guiding document to progressively enhance India’s 
engagement with the Arctic region.”  
 
4.23 When asked whether any substantial gains, including broadening or change in 
India’s scientific research or operational activities and enhanced research 
infrastructure has been effected since adoption of the policy, the Ministry of External 
Affairs in their written submission, stated as under: 

 
25 
 
“The Arctic Policy has provided a right direction and focus on this important issue, 
especially among the scientific, academic and business communities. Some 
notable activities / impact has been: 
 Indian officials have started speaking in major Arctic related conferences in 
Arctic countries;  
 Arctic Circle India Forum meeting was organised in May 2025; 
 More Indian researchers and universities are showing interest to visit 
Himadri to undertake field research; 
 The number of research papers related to polar science is increasing; 
 India’s Arctic research station ‘Himadri’ at Svalbard is now hosting 
scientists even during Winters since December 2023; 
 In 2023, India undertook a maiden expedition at Canadian High Arctic 
Research Station; 
 A delegation from NCPOR conducted an expedition to Greenland in July 
2025;  
 During the India-Russia Summit in 2024, an MoU was signed between 
National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research, Goa as well as Arctic and 
Antarctic Research Institute, Russia; 
 Some of the Indian institutions have shown interest to join the UArctic 
network; 
 As part of national capacity building, University Grants Commission has 
launched four Massive Open Online Courses on Arctic studies which have 
witnessed more than 3000 registrations; 
 Process has also started to have India’s ice class vessels; and  
 Training institutes of sea farers have started developing programme to 
provide additional training to Indian seafarers to operate in polar waters.” 
 
4.24 Responding to the same query, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written 
submission, informed the Committee as under: 
“Since the adoption of India’s Arctic Policy in 2022, several measures have been 
taken with a Pan-Arctic perspective to broaden scientific research, enhance 
operational activities, and strengthen infrastructure related to India’s Arctic 
engagement as follows: 
(i) Expansion of Scientific Research Activities in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard 
India initiated Arctic Winter Expeditions since 2023 - 2024, which provides support 
to start new scientific themes on Space Science, Astronomy, and Astrophysics, 
and supports year-round monitoring. Now Indian researchers are present in the 
Arctic throughout the year including polar nights during winters. Since 2023, 
scientific studies have expanded beyond traditional disciplines such as glaciology 
and atmospheric sciences to include Climate change and monsoon linkages, 
Arctic biodiversity and microbial ecosystems, Permafrost and carbon cycle 
dynamics, Arctic marine pollution and plastics. Also, enhanced monitoring is 
achieved through increased use of climate models to study Arctic–tropical 
teleconnections and their impact on Indian weather patterns and utilising satellite 
remote sensing data for Arctic sea ice monitoring. 
(ii) Strengthening of Research Infrastructure 
India's Arctic research station Himadri, located in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, has seen 
upgrades in scientific equipment and communication systems. Efforts are 

 
26 
 
underway to enable remote access and data sharing from Himadri with Indian 
institutions. 
(iii) Arctic Ocean Expeditions  
Indian scientists have participated in collaborative scientific cruises in the Central 
Arctic Ocean in 2022 and 2023 in collaboration with the Norwegian Polar Institute. 
One of the important dedicated projects NCPOR has taken up is “East Greenland 
Shelf Expedition”, which explored the East Greenland Sea and Denmark Strait 
during July–August 2025.  
(iv) Canadian Arctic Expedition  
NCPOR organised the Indian expedition to the Canadian High Arctic in Cambridge 
Bay of Nunavut region in 2023 and 2024, facilitated through and agreement with 
the Polar Knowledge Canada   
(v) Increased International Collaboration 
India has scaled up scientific collaboration with Arctic nations through both 
bilateral and multilateral programs. India continues to actively engage with the 
Arctic Council (as Observer) and other polar science forums such as the 
International Arctic Science Committee (IASC), Asian Forum for Polar Sciences, 
Arctic Climate Forum, Svalbard Integrated Observing Systems, and Ny-Ålesund 
Science Managers Committee. 
(vi) Capacity Building and Outreach 
NCPOR has helped academicians to develop credit courses in universities, 
including MOOC courses on the Arctic under the aegis of UGC. NCPOR also 
organises the biennial National Conference on Polar Sciences (NCPS) to bring 
together polar researchers working across the Arctic, Antarctic, Southern Ocean, 
and the Himalayas from all over the country. The conference serves as a common 
platform to foster interdisciplinary discussions on various scientific and operational 
challenges. Awareness and outreach activities on the importance of Arctic 
research have increased through academic and public forums.” 
 
4.25 Further, dwelling on the positive outcome in enhancing India’s capacity after the 
adoption of Arctic policy, the Ministry of External affairs, in their post evidence 
submission, stated as under: 
“India’s Arctic Policy 2022 has laid a solid foundation to strengthen scientific 
capabilities, expand research networks, initiate academic courses, and build 
institutional capacity to study the Arctic region. It has significantly enhanced 
India’s role in international Arctic science and policy dialogues. The Arctic Policy 
has enabled increased scientific observatories and sustained research presence 
in Svalbard. There has been a substantial increase in scientific proposals to 
undertake studies in Arctic, from institutions across the country, revealing 
increased awareness and interests in Arctic. India has undertaken winter 
expeditions to Svalbard since 2023 for year-round presence in the Arctic region. 
The existing challenges emanate from restrictions on research activities as most 
part of the Arctic lies under the jurisdiction of sovereign states, limited access to 
the central Arctic Ocean for field observations, remoteness and logistic challenges 
in accessing the various Arctic Research Stations, while ensuring minimal adverse 

 
27 
 
environmental impact.  Many of these issues necessitate long-term approaches 
and are under consideration of relevant Ministries/ Government of India agencies.” 
 
4.26 In this regard the Ministry of Earth Sciences also, in their written submission, 
stated as under: 
“India’s Arctic Policy has laid a strategic foundation that has translated into 
measurable gains in scientific research, diplomatic outreach, institutional capacity, 
and climate preparedness. These developments mark a mature and forward-
looking Arctic engagement, well-aligned with India’s global climate commitments 
and national interests. The Arctic Policy has provided a formal framework for 
India’s engagement in the Arctic, enabling focused and long-term planning of 
Arctic research programs.” 
 
4.27 In response to a query on strategic road map to establish India as a major player 
in the development of the Arctic, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their post evidence 
replies, stated as under: 
“The objectives laid out in the Arctic policy summarises the plan/ roadmap for India’s 
Arctic engagement. Considering the limitations as an Observer to the Arctic Council, 
our focus has been to adopt a scientific studies-led, sustainability-focused, and 
partnership-driven approach to contribute meaningfully to the development of the 
Arctic. Deepening international collaborations through Arctic Council working 
groups, institutionalising bilateral cooperation and engaging with leading policy and 
political platforms on Arctic along with building skilled human capacity and 
leveraging space-based assets have been instrumental in this regard. We have also 
prioritized strengthening long-term Arctic observations, climate modelling, and 
research on Arctic–monsoon linkages, supported by advanced polar infrastructure 
and indigenous technologies.” 
 
4.28 Replying to a further query on coordination among various ministries involved 
such as External Affairs, Earth Sciences, Defence, Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests to align for a unified Arctic strategy and mechanism established 
to ensure regular communication and information sharing on Arctic-related 
developments, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated that 
the Arctic Policy is implemented by an inter-ministerial group ‘Empowered Arctic Policy 
Group’ chaired by Secretary, MoES. The group meets periodically to review the 
progress of various activities undertaken by relevant stakeholders. 
4.29 Asked about the need to include private sector also in the national policy for 
Arctic to promote collaborations for developing infrastructure and access the 
resources in the Arctic region, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written 
submission stated that India’s Arctic Policy has a multidimensional approach. Our 
engagements in the region have followed a multistakeholder framework. The necessity 

 
28 
 
of inclusion of the private sector is elaborately included in the Pillar 4 ‘Economic and 
Human Development’ in the Arctic Policy. 
4.30 When asked to what extent the Arctic policy has helped in forming 
collaborations between Indian and international institutes, the Ministry of External 
Affairs stated that India’s Arctic Policy has significantly strengthened collaborations 
between Indian and international institutes, particularly in scientific research, climate 
studies and capacity building. The policy has reinforced long-standing institutional 
partnerships led by the NCPOR with major Arctic research organizations in countries 
such as Norway, Russia, Germany, and Italy. Indian scientists actively collaborate at 
international research hubs like Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, benefiting from shared 
infrastructure and joint field campaigns. Most importantly, the Policy enabled the 
Indian efforts to expand beyond Svalbard, by exploring regions like Canadian Arctic, 
Central Arctic, East Greenland Sea, NE Greenland. It has also encouraged joint 
scientific projects, shared observatories, open data exchange, and co-authored 
publications in key areas including atmospheric aerosols, cryosphere–climate 
interactions, oceanography, biogeochemistry, and Arctic ecology. Additionally, 
strengthened academic linkages have enabled researcher training, joint PhD 
programs, and access to advanced polar instrumentation. Indian scientists are also 
contributing to shaping Arctic research priorities for the next decade through teams 
constituted by the International Arctic Science Committee. 
 
4.31 When asked whether India has taken steps to promote green energy initiatives 
in the region, given India’s expertise in solar and wind energy, the Ministry of External 
Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“India’s Arctic Policy recognises the role of renewables and microgrids for 
Arctic/sub-Arctic communities. India has a bilateral renewable energy Joint 
Working Group mechanism with Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. 
However, no specific projects in the Arctic region have been deliberated upon in 
these meetings. In addition, Denmark, Norway and Sweden are part of the 
International Solar Alliance, which provides a potential opportunity to collaborate 
on solar energy, if the stakeholders show interest. There is an ongoing 
conversation with Norway and Denmark on green shipping and a few such vessels 
have been constructed in India for European clients.”  
V India’s Relations with the Arctic States 

 
29 
 
5.0 India became an Observer to the Arctic Council in 2013. India maintains 
bilateral relations with all the eight States viz. Canada, Denmark (Greenland/Faroe 
Islands), Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, and the US who have territorial 
jurisdiction in the Arctic region. 
Russia 
5.1 India and Russia are cooperating in the Arctic region. In the context of the 
Northern Sea Route, there is a Working Group established with Russia to explore 
shipping cooperation. 
5.2 A query was raised on the steps taken to enhance bilateral cooperation with 
Russia in the Arctic under the India Russia Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade, 
Economic, Scientific, Technological and Cultural Cooperation (IRIGC-TEC) on the 
lines of similar mechanism set up between Russia and China in 2017. Responding to 
this, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their post evidence replies, stated as under: 
“India and Russia have established a Joint Working Group (JWG) on Northern 
Sea Route focusing on Arctic issues under the India-Russia Inter-
Governmental Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technological and 
Cultural Cooperation (IRIGC-TEC). Two Meetings of the JWG have been held 
so far in October 2024 and July 2025. Both sides have agreed to conduct a 
feasibility study to collaborate further on increasing cargo volume to 5 million 
tonnes through NSR by 2030. Joint investment in infrastructure projects in 
Arctic zone, constructing ice-class vessels in India and training Indian crews in 
Polar waters were also discussed.”  
 
5.3 Stressing on the need for research in Russian Arctic to better understand the 
polar science, a non official witness stated as under: 
“After having access to Svalbard, Greenland, Canada; India needs to work in 
Russian Arctic to have a wholesome idea of Arctic. The Arctic research station 
located in Chersky, Sakha in northeast Siberia is one of the world's three largest 
Arctic stations which conducts research in Arctic biology, geophysics, and 
atmospheric physics and being located on frozen Pleistocene sediments that 
offer an excellent site for permafrost research. Far Eastern Federal University 
is planning to open an Arctic campus at the research station. 
The Arctic is inextricably linked to global affairs. The expansion of NATO, 
Russia-Ukraine conflict and isolation of former has resulted in ending the Arctic 
Exceptionalism (High North-Low tension) and caused disruption of activities of 
Arctic Council. Under such conditions, India can play a constructive role in 
bridging the gap in the field of cooperation and assimilation of scientific data 
from different groups as no meaningful conclusion on Arctic issues can be 
drawn in absence of data from Russian Arctic that extends over more than 40 

 
30 
 
% of the Arctic. India needs to extend its research, especially in the field of 
Permafrost research by working in Russian Arctic Station.”  
 
5.4 When asked about plans to collaborate with Russians to extend research in 
Russian Arctic region, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their post evidence reply, 
stated as under: 
“Collaboration with Russia in the Arctic is desired for enhancing India’s 
engagement across the region in accordance with the Arctic Policy 2022. Since 
more than half of the Arctic coastlines lies within Russia, exploring the Russian 
Arctic is essential. A MoU between the National Centre for Polar and Ocean 
Research (NCPOR, Goa) and the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute 
(AARI, St Petersburg) was signed in 2024, and several meetings have been 
held since to advance the MoU. During the 23rd India-Russia Annual Summit 
held in New Delhi on 05 December 2025, both sides confirmed their readiness 
to intensify trade and investment cooperation in the Far East and the Arctic 
zone of the Russian Federation. During the Summit, a Memorandum of 
Understanding was signed between the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways, India and the Ministry of Transport of the Russian Federation on 
the Training of Specialists for Ships Operating in Polar Waters. The Program 
of India-Russia Cooperation in Trade, Economic and Investment Spheres in the 
Russian Far East for the period from 2024-2029 provides the necessary 
framework for further cooperation between India and the Russian Far East 
region, especially in the sectors of agriculture, energy, mining, manpower, 
diamonds, pharmaceuticals, maritime transport, etc. Both sides underscored 
the importance of holding regular bilateral consultations on Arctic related issues 
and welcomed the progress made in multi-faceted bilateral cooperation on the 
Northern Sea Route. NCPOR, Goa and the Shirshov Institute of Oceanology, 
Russian Academy of Sciences (IORAS), Russia have signed a Memorandum 
of Understanding to promote international academic cooperation and enhance 
effectiveness of joint research investigations in areas of mutual interest across 
the polar regions and ocean realms.” 

 
31 
 
5.5 During the deliberations held on 30 October, 2025, the Committee were 
apprised that in Arctic, India’s role has become slightly more critical after the conflict 
between the Russia and other Arctic States. Now, it has become Arctic 7 (A7) versus 
Russia. Since Russia occupies more than 50 per cent of the area of the Arctic, so, 
whatever data Russia collects is of huge importance. But it is not getting into the main 
data bank of the entire Arctic Council. So, that is a big problem now. The current 
scenario in the Arctic region is a stage for India because we have good relations with 
all the Arctic States and also with Russia, so we can have a bridging role where we 
can get access to the data, we can bring that data to the Council's working group data, 
and we can give a holistic view of the entire thing. We are one of the only countries 
which is working in Antarctic, Arctic and also Himalayas. All the cryosphere domain of 
the world, we have our stations there and we have our data over there. 
 
5.6 When a query was raised as to how India can act as a bridge between Russia 
and West to ensure cooperation in development of Arctic and prevent China in 
expanding its role in the region, the MEA, in their written submission stated as under: 
“India’s role and collaborations in the Arctic region include long standing 
strategic partnership with Russia and time-tested relations and scientific 
cooperation with other countries in the region. India has always maintained an 
independent foreign policy approach with all the countries and ensures that its 
engagements are not influenced by its relations with others. India continues to 
have close cooperation and collaboration with Nordic countries bilaterally as 
well as in a plurilateral format, including under the rubric of the India Nordic 
Summit.”  
 
5.7 Further, a non official witness stated the following regarding the opposition 
faced in attempts to collaborating with Russia: 
“We are very keen also to have this engagement with the Russians in Arctic. 
The only problem which we face is that when we do that, beyond a certain point, 
we have a very forceful pushback from the rest of the collaborators which are 
serious Antarctic, as well as Arctic players. For example, the NCPOR lost one 
of the important Antarctic project with British Antarctic Survey, UK because we 
still have strong logistic collaboration with Russia in Antarctica, because we still 
use their aircraft and airfields and so on. So, we do have issues, when you go 
very thick with Russia. Therefore it is important to balance.” 
 
5.8 In a written note furnished by a non official witness, following viewpoint has 
been expressed: 

 
32 
 
“India also can play a role in drawing a balance between the Arctic-7 and Russia 
to foster stability as also to provide an alternative to China, which claims itself 
as a “near Arctic State” citing its proximity and interests in new shipping routes.”  
 
5.9 When asked how India can project itself as an alternative to China, the Ministry 
of External Affairs, in their post evidence written replies, informed the Committee as 
under: 
“India, being an active Observer State to the Arctic Council, has been engaging 
with relevant stakeholders and has recently expanded its focus to include 
economic and human development, in line with our Arctic Policy 2022. India 
has been collaborating with all Arctic Council Member States and Non-Arctic 
Observer States to deepen and synergise our engagement in the region. These 
efforts are driven by the robust and long-standing diplomatic relations as well 
as India’s credibility as a scientific research-led player in the region.” 
 
5.10 Another query was raised with regard to Government strategy for engaging with 
Russia in view of the intense pressure on India to stop purchasing Russian oil and have 
any collaboration with it. The MEA in their post evidence written submission stated the 
following in this regard: 
“India’s engagement with Russia is guided by its longstanding Strategic 
Partnership and its national interests, including energy security and economic 
stability. Ensuring stable energy prices and secured supplies have been the twin 
goals of our energy policy. This includes broad-basing our energy sourcing and 
diversifying as appropriate to meet market conditions.” 
 
5.11 When asked about the strategy of the Government to manage the evolving 
geopolitical landscape and review the impact and role of India in the uncertain 
governance structure, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, 
stated as under: 
“India’s strategy is to remain focused on safeguarding its interests through 
multi-vector engagement. India is strengthening its scientific legitimacy through 
Himadri, IndARC, and polar expeditions. India will continue to engage with all 
the stakeholders and play a positive role to bring the attention of the 
international community on the need to work collaboratively on climate change 
and scientific advancement.” 
 
5.12 One of the non official witness also expressed following viewpoint during the 
deliberations: 
“We have to get involved and see that the balance is maintained between 
Russia and these Arctic States. We have to move very cautiously because this 
is a very tender stage where if you go only with Russia, you are antagonising 
all the seven Arctic States. In my perspective, we have to keep that in mind.” 

 
33 
 
5.13 Expressing similar views, another non official witness stated following while 
making presentation before the Committee: 
“India needs to be working on a tightrope here to balance multipolarity.  I think, 
being seen as siding with Russia may be in our greatest interest, but we also 
do have to manage our relations with the United States and the Europeans.  All 
of this needs to be done in the presence of Chinese capital injections.  So, over 
the last 12 years, the Chinese have invested about 10 billion dollars in Russian 
Arctic infrastructure whereas Indian investments do not even compare.  You 
also have about 20 per cent of Chinese ownership in the stakes of Yamal LNG 
and LNG 2 projects which are the largest two gas projects in the Arctic.” 
 
Norway 
5.14 India’s Himadri Station (2008) is hosted in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard (it is a 
sovereign territory under Norway). Norwegian Polar Institute has a cooperation 
agreement with NCPOR in joint research and provide logistic support. Norway has 
supported India’s scientific activities in the Arctic region as well as India’s participation 
in the Arctic Council. Several joint scientific research has also been undertaken as well 
as ongoing with Research / Academic Institutions of Norway.  
Nordic States (Finland, Sweden, Iceland, Denmark/Greenland) 
5.15 India engages with Nordic countries mainly through India–Nordic Summits 
(2018, 2022). Iceland engages through the Arctic Circle Assembly (Reykjavik), where 
India regularly participates. Scientific expeditions have also been undertaken in 
Greenland with the support of the Danish Government.  
5.16 Enlightening the Committee further about engagement with Nordic countries, a 
non official witness stated the following 
“We have good and balanced relation with both the Nordics and the United 
States, as well as with Russia. Presently, our relations with these countries 
have not conflicted, unlike the situation between Ukraine and Russia.  
We have already held two iterations of the Nordic summit. Therefore, we can 
pursue our own bilateral cooperation with these countries independently. It is 
not a zero-sum situation. We must have manpower pacts with both Russia and 
the Nordic nations to supply our skilled workforce.”  
 
5.17 Regarding steps taken for cooperation  between the Nordic countries and India, 
the Ministry of External Affairs, in their post evidence replies stated as under: 
 
“India and Finland are exploring cooperation for smooth flow of experts and 
specialists and discussions are also underway on cooperation in the area of 
Polar Science and Operations. Indian companies, including L&T, are 
cooperating with companies like METSO for mining cooperation. There is also 

 
34 
 
an agreement between Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI) and Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras (IITM) in 2022 focusing on cryosphere and 
aerosol research, urban climate resilience and skill transfer programs.”  
 
United States & Canada 
5.18 Cooperation with the US and Canada is mainly in scientific forums (Arctic 
Council working groups, Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, climate 
modelling). Recently, scientific expeditions have also been conducted in the Arctic 
region of Canada with the support of the Canadian Government. More activities are 
being planned for the future.  
VI Engagement with Arctic nations 
6.0 India needs to increase its engagement with Arctic States to have a more 
meaningful role in its affairs. In a written note submitted by a non official witness, 
following points have been emphasised for India’s role in the Arctic: 
“India has considerable opportunities to deepen its role in the Arctic: 
Economic and Strategic Opportunities 
We can expand our involvement by encouraging Indian industry to explore 
responsible avenues in rare earths, minerals, mining, shipping, maritime 
infrastructure and ports, in partnership with Arctic nations. 
Research and Multilateral Cooperation 
We should intensify multilateral scientific research on climate change and 
glacial dynamics, linking findings from the Arctic to our own Himalayan glaciers 
which are melting rapidly and serve as the source of major Indian rivers. 
We should also expand bilateral and multilateral engagement not only with the 
five Nordic nations, but also with the Canadian, Russian and American Arctic 
regions and strengthen ties with other friendly countries engaged in Arctic 
investment and research, such as Japan, South Korea, the UAE and 
Singapore.” 
 
 
6.1 Providing the details of scientific cooperation and agreements with the Arctic 
and other States, the Ministry of Earth Sciences stated as under: 
“On the scientific front, NCPOR has several MoUs with various international 
institutions like the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI, Norway), the Arctic and 
Antarctic Research Institute (AARI, Russia), Alfred-Wegener Institute fuer Polar 
and Meeresforschung (AWI, Germany) and the Polar Knowledge Canada 
(PKC, Canada) for cooperation in the Arctic region.  
Participation in joint cruises, field campaigns and projects: Indian researchers 
participated in Central Arctic Cruise expeditions with Norway. Indian 
researchers undertook a dedicated East Greenland Sea expedition in 2025 for 
better understanding the changes in the Arctic Ocean, using a vessel from 
University of Gothenburg, Sweden.  

 
35 
 
Participation in Arctic Council Activities and other relevant fora: As an Observer 
State to the Arctic Council, India participates in Council meetings and various 
working groups. India is also a Council member of the International Arctic 
Science Committee (IASC). India contributes regularly to the Arctic Circle 
meetings, a leading non governmental forum for Arctic cooperation and hosted 
the Arctic Circle India Forum in 2025 in New Delhi. India also participates in the 
Norway-led Arctic Frontiers meetings. Such forums focus on governance, 
climate science, and strategic cooperation. Such engagement underlines 
India's commitment to multilateral dialogue and inclusive governance.” 
 
6.2 Asked about the Government's strategy for protecting India’s geopolitical and 
economic interests in the region by actively engaging with various actors, the Ministry 
of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“India’s Arctic strategy, articulated in the India Arctic Policy (2022), is science-
driven, diplomacy-oriented, and sustainability-focused. Some of the areas of 
cooperation include to secure long-term interests in climate resilience, energy 
security, trade, and sea-route governance, while enhancing India’s role as a 
responsible global stakeholder. India continues to engage with all concerned 
stakeholders, including at political / official  levels as well as in the scientific / 
academic and business communities to promote our interest as well as our 
point of view.”   
6.3 Dwelling upon major challenges faced by India in Arctic region, the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences, in their post evidence submission, stated as under: 
“Since most part of the Arctic lies under the jurisdiction of sovereign States, 
access to Arctic land and coastal ocean needs support and collaborations from 
the Arctic Council nations. 
Many new restrictions have been brought by the Norwegian Government for 
undertaking research activities in Svalbard Arctic. Permission from Governor of 
Svalbard is required for any field activities, sometime which takes long time. 
Further, all research and monitoring activities on Svalbard needs to be carried 
out in accordance with the Norwegian Strategy for research and higher 
education in Svalbard, and any operational and development of infrastructure 
needs to be in accordance with the Research Strategy for Ny-Ålesund 
Research Station. These regulations strongly nudge us to use the common 
facilities and discourage individual station facilities like those of Himadri. Such 
regulations are regularly evolving, making it difficult to enhance our R&D 
activities in Svalbard. MEA may take up such increased restrictions we face for 
work in Svalbard with the Norwegian MFA.  
The Canadian Arctic field studies depend largely on the multiple approvals 
required from indigenous communities and associations, which are 
complicated. Another issue with accessing the Canadian High Arctic Station 
(CHARS) is the remoteness and logistic challenges, which delays 
establishment of research systems. Most importantly, there exists poor support 
system at the CHARS.” 
 

 
36 
 
Most important challenge is the sub-critical permanent manpower to undertake 
Arctic research and operations. Although there was a proposal to enhance the 
permanent scientific manpower when the India’s Arctic Policy was approved, 
the same was never approved. As a result, it is extremely difficult to expand our 
Arctic footprints when compared to other nations. 
The lack of a dedicated Polar Research Vessel (PRV) was identified as a critical 
challenge, limiting the expansion of research beyond Svalbard and restricting 
access to the wider Arctic Ocean. Although process of acquisition of a polar 
research vessel is now approved in-principle, the whole process will take about 
5 years’ time. Given this, the access to the central Arctic Ocean for field 
observations remains limited and dependent on collaborations with 
international partners who own ice-class research vessels.” 
 
6.4 Asked about initiative/leadership role India has taken to engage with countries 
such as Japan, South Korea, Singapore and UAE, etc. which are investing in 
development of infrastructure in Arctic region, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their 
post evidence submission, stated as under: 
“During participation in various Arctic events, the Indian delegations regularly 
interact with the key stakeholders, including from Japan, South Korea, 
Singapore and UAE. 
India hosted a session (which had participation from UAE) on ‘Role and 
Importance of Global South in the Arctic’ during the Arctic Circle Assembly-
2025. 
Singapore’s Special Envoy for Arctic Affairs Ambassador Sam Tan participated 
in the Arctic Circle India Forum, held in India in May 2025. 
There are ongoing collaborations with Japan in the area of science and 
technology, particularly marine and earth science & technology, polar research, 
glacial hydrology and atmospheric sciences by virtue of the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES), 
Government of India, and the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and 
Technology (JAMSTEC), signed in 2016 to promote cooperation in the field of 
marine and earth science and technology. The MoU was renewed in 2023, 
adding three new areas of collaboration:- Modelling of climate variability, 
Marine plastics and Glacial hydrology. A Memorandum of Cooperation 
(MoC) between the National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR), 
India and the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Japan was signed in 
2019 to promote collaboration in polar research. 
The Embassy of India in Seoul has been regularly engaging with the think-tanks 
and research institutions in the South Korea (ROK) which deals with the Arctic 
region including Korea Maritime Institute (KMI). Mission also plans to organise 
a conference on "Arctic Affairs" in collaboration with the KMI.  Separately, 
MoES also engages with the key stakeholders in the ROK which deals with the 
Arctic affairs. Delegates from MoES and NCPOR have participated in the 
"Arctic Partnership Week" organised by the KMI.” 

 
37 
 
 
6.5 When asked why India’s engagement/collaboration with Arctic countries has 
been relatively lower as compared to other Asian nations viz. China, Japan and South 
Korea, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their post evidence submission, stated as 
under: 
 
“While India’s Arctic engagement has improved significantly since the last 
decade, it is still not at par, especially with China, Korea and Japan. The most 
important reasons are: 
All these Asian nations have substantially increased the investment in funding 
and scientific manpower over the last decade; among these China and Korea 
invested 5-10 times higher than India in annual budget and scientific manpower. 
All these nations have dedicated polar ice-class research vessels that enable 
them to undertake multiple oceanic expeditions in Arctic Ocean. Countries 
collaborate with those who have significant assets and access to big funding as 
the single most important requirement in polar regions are logistic and scientific 
infrastructure. Currently, India don’t have a polar vessel and therefore, have to 
depend on other countries to support our oceanographic program. 
Some of these countries have dedicated Polar Ambassador or desks for polar 
engagement and facilitating collaboration.” 
 
6.6 In this regard, the Ministry of External Affairs, however, informed the Committee 
as under: 
“India’s engagement with the Arctic region has been consistent and 
multidimensional. Our interests in the region are guided by India's Arctic Policy: 
Building a Partnership for Sustainable Development released in 2022 and have 
seen a consistent upward trajectory. While the initial focus of India’s 
engagements was scientific research, the contemporary focus areas have 
evolved to include economic and geopolitical aspects. There is greater 
engagement of Indian think-tanks. Hence, country-wise comparisons may not 
be reflective of India’s strategy and long-term interests in the region.” 
 
6.7 Asked to furnish the details of efforts made to have more 
engagements/dialogues with other countries on activities in Arctic/political dialogues 
related to Arctic region, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their post evidence 
submission, stated as under: 
“India's approach to the Arctic region encompasses policy, multilateral and 
bilateral cooperation, as well as a scientific presence through increased 
engagement with multiple Arctic states. As an Observer State to the Arctic 
Council, India participates in meetings of the Council and various working 
groups. India is also a Council member of the International Arctic Science 
Committee (IASC). Apart from official meetings, India has been participating 
other multidisciplinary and multistakeholder meetings related to polar issues. 

 
38 
 
Such meetings are attended by officials from the Government [Indian Missions, 
MEA, NSCS (Polar Cell), Indian Navy etc.], as well as scientists, academia, 
think-tank, researchers and business representatives. Furthermore, the 
Government has been actively engaging with leading policy forums/ platforms 
through Indian Embassies in relevant countries as well as through scientific 
cooperation facilitated through NCPOR/ MoES. India is also exploring 
instituting dialogue/ cooperation mechanisms at bilateral or plurilateral level on 
polar issues.” 
 
6.8 A non official witness, during the testimony before the Committee, presented the 
following viewpoint with regard to India’s engagement with Arctic nations: 
“We must have greater collaboration between Asian observers on the Arctic. So, 
there are five of them and China, Japan and South Korea, they have trilateral on 
the Arctic. My recommendation is that India, Japan and South Korea also to have 
a trilateral on the Arctic because our positions are a little different from the Arctic 
Council countries since we are Observers because we have got different powers 
and different rights.” 
6.9 While giving a holistic view of India’s engagement in Arctic, the representative 
of the MEA informed the Committee during their sitting held on 23 July, 2025 as under: 
“If we try to summarise the engagement of India, it is expanding with 
stakeholders, not only in terms of individual countries but also other 
stakeholders. We are a consultative party at the Antarctic Treaty and an 
observer at the Arctic Council; plus, we have a bilateral collaboration on Polar 
Research with a number of Arctic Member States including especially the 
Nordics now. There are many other think-tanks and fora which are active in 
these Polar deliberations. For instance, the Arctic Circle, which is based in 
Iceland; Arctic Frontiers, which is hosted in Norway; and UArctic, a network of 
universities that operates out of Finland. In Russia, we have the International 
Arctic Forum, and there is also the Arctic Economic Council. In addition, there 
is the International Arctic Science Committee. India is expanding its 
engagement both with the member states, the countries themselves and with 
individual think tanks and NGOs. We are also seeing a growing interest within 
India among various think tanks and other stakeholders in understanding our 
role and becoming more active in this region.” 
VII India’s role in Arctic Council as a voice of Global south 
7.0 During the discussion with experts, a view was expressed before the 
Committee that India should lead the interests of ‘Global South’ in Arctic Council. While 
furnishing their views in this regard, the MEA, in their post evidence written replies 
stated as under: 
“India has always been committed towards addressing the needs and aspirations 
of fellow developing countries and has been constructively championing the 

 
39 
 
cause of holistic human-centric development of countries of the Global South. 
India’s approach of protection of global commons, including addressing maritime 
shipping concerns and enhancing connectivity and economic inter-linkages ipso 
facto is an articulation of perspectives of Global South. As an Observer in the 
Arctic Council, India represents the voice of the Global South in the Arctic region.” 
 
7.1 Further, asked to state in what ways India can be a leading voice of Global 
South in Arctic Council, the MEA in their post evidence replies stated as under: 
 
“India has undertaken several research projects which demonstrates linkages 
between climate change in the Arctic region to that with the tropical regions. 
These studies are valuable for the Global South in general. In addition, India 
will continue to articulate its interests in the Arctic Council, which are similar to 
that of other Global South countries.” 
 
7.2 In response to a query on changes needed to enable India to be actively 
engaged in Arctic affairs as a leading country of Global South, the MEA stated following 
in their written submission: 
“As an Observer nation in the Arctic Council, India has been engaging with 
relevant countries through both science-led cooperation as well as through 
consultations and dialogues at bilateral levels. These endeavours have enabled 
India to evolve its approach toward Arctic governance as a significant 
stakeholder. As the leading voice of the Global South, our engagements in the 
region can be instrumental in formulating a rules-based, inclusive and 
sustainable approach to Arctic governance that is rooted in scientific 
cooperation. India will continue to monitor changes, if any, are conceptualised 
or proposed in the governance of the Arctic Council and will get actively 
involved, keeping in view of its interests in the region.” 
 
VIII Recent Developments in Arctic Geopolitics  
8.0 During the deliberations with experts, the Committee have been informed that 
presently the maritime border of Bering strait is patrolled by both the US Coast Guard 
and Russian Border guard and together they ensure maritime safety in Bering strait. 
However, recent developments in Arctic has made the region vulnerable. Finland and 
Sweden are the new NATO Members. NATO held military exercise in 2024 wherein 
20,000 military personnel from 13 countries participated including 4,000 military 
personnel from Finland.  
8.1 Further, China is building a Polar silk route with the backing of Russia. When 
asked about India’s take on China building a Polar-Silk route with the backing of Russia 
and their Belt and Road Initiative, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written 
submission, stated as under: 

 
40 
 
“India has been closely monitoring evolving global geopolitics as well as 
activities in the Arctic region. It will work with partners to ensure that all activities 
in geographically fragile ecosystems are done in a science based manner with 
primary focus on environmental sustainability, with minimal negative impact on 
the environment. India will also strongly support rules based international order, 
specially in the maritime space, which is governed by established international 
conventions and agreements.”  
 
8.2 Asked to state the implications of increasing military activity in the north pole 
for India and its role as a balancing factor in the region, the MEA, in their post evidence 
written replies, stated as under: 
“India has been closely monitoring the geopolitical developments in the region 
to calibrate appropriate course of action. India’s Arctic Policy emphasises 
peace, stability and sustainable governance.”  
 
8.3 Speaking about renewed interest of USA in Arctic, a non official witness submitted 
before the Committee following: 
“The US for the longest time had not really considered the Arctic. There has 
been a sudden awakening to Arctic particularly in its relationships with 
Greenland... President Trump has also forced a deal with Greenland and is in 
the process of speaking to the Europeans about critical mineral deals from 
Greenland. In addition to that, the former Arctic Ambassador of the US is 
expected to take office again and it seems that there is going to be a very big 
announcement coming up between the Europeans and the Americans perhaps 
under the larger domain of the NATO on what the US Europe partnership on 
the Arctic looks like. There is also an increasing amount of interest from the UK 
on having a track II with India as another fellow observer country on the Arctic 
Council because the UK faces the UK-US gap which is a naval gap for them. It 
is a security concern. So, it seems that starting early next year, there will be 
some interest from the UK as well”.  
8.4 A non official witness during his presentation before the Committee informed 
that an Agreement was signed in 2017 on enhancing International Arctic Scientific 
Cooperation. However, much of the research and data sharing has been put on hold 
due to funding restrictions by Europe and US. Further, several field experiments 
shifted to the North American or European Arctic. No data is now available on 
permafrost research from Russia. Funding for international scientists at Russia's 
Science Station in Siberia and studying climate change in the Arctic has been stopped. 
Russia has also ceased funding of Arctic Council till resumption of normalcy and is 
promoting alternate mechanisms through BRICS.  
 

 
41 
 
8.5 When asked about any impact on the international collaborations pertaining to 
climate change in the backdrop of Russia Ukraine conflict, and if so, the response of 
India in this regard, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated 
as under: 
“India has taken a pragmatic approach in navigating these challenges. India 
continues to advocate for science as a bridge, promoting apolitical collaboration 
in areas like climate change, which affects all nations regardless of geopolitical 
divides.” 
 
8.6 Responding to the same query, the Ministry of Earth Sciences informed the 
Committee following in their written submission: 
“Due to the conflict, the seven Arctic Council member States paused formal 
cooperation with Russia in 2022. Several multinational Arctic research projects 
involving Russian institutions were suspended or scaled down, affecting 
fieldwork, data exchange, and logistical cooperation in the Arctic. 
 
India is expanding its Arctic research collaborations with countries such as 
Norway, Germany, Canada, Sweden, South Korea, and Japan to ensure 
continuity of research and reduce over-reliance on any single partner affected 
by geopolitical tensions.” 
 
 
8.7 Further asked to state the steps being taken, in coordination with other 
stakeholder Ministries and the Ministry of Earth Sciencess to ensure that the scientific 
research and projects continue in a collaborative manner despite the conflict in the 
region, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“India recognises the importance of maintaining continuity in international 
scientific collaboration, especially in critical areas such as climate change and 
polar research, even in the face of global geopolitical challenges. It must also 
be recognised that there is no active armed conflict in the Arctic region. India 
continues active engagement in multilateral forums such as the Arctic Council 
(as an Observer), the International Arctic Science Committee and others. It has 
also continued its ongoing scientific projects with different Arctic countries, 
including the operation of its Arctic research station, Himadri, at Svalbard. As 
mentioned above, Indian scientists and researchers continue to undertake new 
projects with partner institutes and researchers.”  
8.8 The Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written submission stressed the 
importance of international cooperation in sectors of oil spill pollution prevention, 
shipping regulation and fisheries management in the wake of Arctic Sea ice decline. 
 
8.9 In response to a query on India’s role in facilitating exchange of information 
between Russia and rest seven Arctic nations on climate change to enable adoption of 

 
42 
 
measures mitigating its effects, the MEA, in their post evidence written submission, 
stated as under: 
“Following the Russia-Ukraine Conflict, the Arctic Council entered a pause as 
a collective response from the seven other Arctic Member States, though some 
programmes that did not have Russian participation resumed in the summer of 
2022. Given India’s long-standing and multidimensional diplomatic relations 
with the Arctic Council Member States, including Russia, India has been 
leveraging its scientific expertise, interests in the Northern Sea Route and best 
practices in the domain of climate change to deepen our exchange with the 
States and coordinate regarding scientific/ research collaboration.” 
 
Nuclear Safety 
 
8.10 Unlike Antarctica where the Antarctic Treaty ensures ban on any nuclear 
activity, the Arctic does not have any such Treaty and is guided by CTBT of 1996. In 
this regard, when asked to state India’s stated position regarding nuclear safety and 
test explosions in the Arctic, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, 
stated as under: 
“India’s Arctic Policy (2022) emphasizes peace, stability, and sustainable 
governance. India maintains a voluntary, unilateral moratorium on nuclear 
explosive testing and meeting the basic obligation of the Comprehensive Test 
Ban Treaty. Also, India is a party to the Environmental Modification Convention, 
formally the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use 
of Environmental Modification Techniques. India has been advocating countries 
to act in a responsible manner, in accordance with their international obligations 
on nuclear issues.”  
8.11 Further asked to state India’s response on Russia’s withdrawal from the CTBT 
against the backdrop of the Russia-Ukraine conflict and any latest efforts made by 
India to sensitise the global community regarding the threat of nuclear weapons testing 
in the region, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated that 
India continues to express, at multilateral forums like the United Nations, its support 
for strengthening global non-proliferation architecture. 
8.12 Responding to a specific query on engagement with Russia diplomatically on 
the likely  resumption of activities by Russia at the nuclear test sites in Novaya Zemlya 
in the Arctic Ocean, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated 
as that India has been an advocate of nuclear non proliferation and expects all 
countries to act in accordance with their international obligation under international law 
and relevant international conventions and agreements.  

 
43 
 
IX Geoeconomic importance of Arctic 
9.0 As per many studies, it is estimated that, by the 2040s, the Arctic will lose its 
summer sea ice due to the impact of global warming. This could lead to increased 
shipping along the polar shipping routes as well as possible increase in exploration of 
mineral and hydrocarbon resources. Opening of new trade routes like Northern Sea 
Route would result in shortening the distance between Asia and Europe. However, 
exploitation of resources in this region has to be evaluated from environmental, 
commercial and technological perspectives before any study can be undertaken about 
its potential impact on global supply chain. 
 
9.1 In this regard, a non official witness stated that on strategic minerals, we must 
have arrangements with countries like United States has recently signed a pact with 
Japan on strategic minerals and they have signed with other countries including 
Pakistan. This is a long-term measure that we must have some pact signed with 
countries in the Arctic because they are extremely rich in strategic minerals.  
 
9.2 Asked to state the specific steps taken by the Government to advance India’s 
energy interests and exploration of rare earth minerals in the Arctic region with greater 
bilateral and multilateral engagements with all stakeholders, the Ministry of External 
Affairs, in their written submission, stated inter alia as under: 
“India’s Arctic Policy (2022) with an explicit pillar on “Economic & Human 
Development,” calls for responsible cooperation in resource/mineral exploration 
and related infrastructure. However, there is no international regulation on 
exploitation of mineral resources in the High Seas. The International Seabed 
Authority, which has been set up by the UN Convention on the Law of the Seas, 
is actively considering a regulation on mining in the High Seas.  
However, there are few intergovernmental discussions to secure critical 
minerals. These include,   
Minerals Security Partnership: India has become 14th member of the Mineral 
Security Partnership in June 2023. The other member countries include Arctic 
countries (U.S., Canada, Norway, Finland and Sweden). 
India-US Critical Minerals MoU (2024): In October, 2024, India and the US 
signed a new MOU to expand and diversify Critical Minerals Supply Chains, 
with the aim of leveraging the two countries’ complementary strengths to ensure 
greater resilience in the critical minerals sector.” 
 
9.3 During the course of their interaction with the experts, the Committee were given 
to understand that Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) and air-conditioning are the 

 
44 
 
two sectors that can grow fairly quickly in India with accessibility to critical minerals in 
the Arctic Region. The Committee were informed that Russia is severely restricted to 
access capital and technology and it is soliciting funding and technology, and that where 
India should actually step in to be an active partner. India may utilise its partnership with 
Russia to enhance its Arctic engagement through skilled workforce mobility, technology 
partnerships and institutional cooperation. Asked to respond on the above suggestion, 
the MEA, in their written replies, stated as under: 
“Russia’s Arctic Policy is comprehensive, which focuses on economic and social 
development of the region, security and strategic aspects as well as climate and 
environmental dimensions. The challenge of vastness of land, difficult climatic 
conditions, emerging technologies and sparse population has resulted in Russia 
engaging with other partners in the Arctic region. During the 23rd Annual Summit 
held in December 2025, India and Russia have signed an agreement on 
manpower mobility and orderly migration to promote safe and mutually beneficial 
migration between two countries. The MoU will have mutual benefits including in 
the Arctic region. India is also pursuing cooperation on various issues related to 
Arctic region with individual Nordic countries bilaterally and also under the 
broader India-Nordic regional partnership.”  
9.4 Arctic Warming has also given rise to strong possibility of future navigation 
through Arctic. For Arctic navigation, there are four routes: 
 Northern Sea Route (NSR) 
 North West Passage (NWP) 
 Transpolar Sea Route (TSR) 
 Arctic Bridge Route (ABR) 
9.5 The fastest and direct European route would be the Transpolar Sea Route 
(TSR) straight over the North Pole. However, at present, two main routes viz. Northern 
Sea Route (NSR)–along Russia’s northern coast, predominantly for journeys between 
Europe and Asia, and the North West Passage (NWP) through the Canadian 
Archipelago, as a route from the US East Coast to Asia are being focused. 
9.6 The melting ice in the Arctic is opening up NSR, offering India a shorter and 
more cost effective route between Asia and Europe which is crucial for India’s trade 
interests.  
 
9.7 When asked how India has devised strategy and used the opportunity to reduce 
shipping costs and time and foster economic ties with Arctic States, the Ministry of 
External Affairs, in their written submission, inter alia stated as under: 

 
45 
 
“… a proper study needs to be undertaken to understand whether this sea route 
will have any direct impact on cargo movement to and from India and Europe / 
Asia.”  
 
9.8 During the sitting of the Committee held on 30.10.2025, a non official witness 
stated following in his written submission: 
“On the geoeconomic front, India needs to join efforts in developing the new N-
S sea route as an alternative to the navigation route of Suez Canal. The new 
route will not only cut cruising time to one third but also avoid the problems 
faced due to Somali sea pirates and hence may become viable in spite of 
navigational hazards of icy waters. Though there may still be patches of sea ice 
during winter months but the Arctic Sea will become free of multiple year fast 
ice with the result that the ice class vessels may be able to meet the 
requirement of shipping and strong ice breakers may not be required. The 
Chinese container vessels have recently made several trips successfully 
through the Arctic Ocean, though in summer months. The disappearing sea ice 
and opening of this new ocean also creates a number of security challenges. 
Increasing human activity in the region will require creating a corresponding 
emergency response infrastructure, which is easier said than done.  The eight 
members of the Arctic Council (Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, 
Russia, Sweden, and the United States) had begun to address some of these 
problems through binding agreements, which cover the whole region and are 
specifically tailored to its geographic characteristics but recent conflict has put 
a stop to cooperation. India is keen to explore economic potential, such as the 
Chennai-Vladivostok corridor, which could offer faster access to Europe and 
integrate with the N-S Route.” 
 
9.9 When asked about Eastern Maritime Corridor (Chennai Vladivostok route) and 
advantage for Indian trade through this route, the MEA, in their post evidence replies, 
submitted as under: 
“The Chennai-Vladivostok Eastern Maritime Corridor is a sea route connecting 
port of Chennai with Vladivostok, a key port city in Russian Far East. It is a 
maritime link designed to enhance trade investment and connectivity between 
India and Russia, aligning with India’s Act East Policy. The Corridor is 
operational and was announced by the Hon'ble Minister of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways in November 2024. The Corridor benefits trade by reducing 
shipping time (from 40 plus to ~ 24 days), lowering costs, providing direct 
access to Russian Far East resources like coal, oil and boosting India’s energy 
security and enabling faster movement of goods like textiles machinery and 
fertilizers, strengthening India-Russia economic ties and diversifying trade 
routes.” 
 
9.10 Asked about any assessment made by the Government for shipping through 
northern sea route for Indian trade, the MEA in their post evidence written submission 
stated as under: 

 
46 
 
“A MoU in the Field of Development of Cooperation in Maritime Cargo 
Transportation in the Waters of NSR was proposed by the Russian side. 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways conveyed that the MoU may be 
considered after feasibility study. Both sides agreed to prepare the joint 
feasibility study and joint action plan for fixing and achieving the target indicator. 
India has also proposed to conduct a joint feasibility study for operationalising 
the Northern Sea Route (NSR) with Russian and Indian agencies. India 
expressed its keenness to work with Norway in Arctic navigation by 
collaborating on R&D in Arctic shipping, design and construction of ice-class 
vessels, and advancement of navigational technologies.” 
 
9.11 When asked about Chinese efforts to play an influential role in northern sea 
route, the MEA, in their post evidence submission, submitted following replies: 
“Russia and China have established a Sub-Committee for Cooperation on 
Northern Sea Route (NSR) in 2024. During the second meeting in 
October  2025, both sides approved the action plan for the further development 
of shipment along the NSR between them. The volume of container transport 
is growing and the cargo traffic along NSR is expected to grow. Russia is keen 
to diversify its partnership with other countries, including India in the 
development of NSR.”  
 
X Outreach to indigenous people 
10.0 Singapore is offering education, scholarships, and opportunities to indigenous 
people in the Arctic as part of their appeal for permanent participation in the Arctic 
Council. During the course of the sitting held on 30.10.2025, when the Committee asked 
about any such initiative taken by India, a non official witness apprised the Committee 
as under: 
“The indigenous people’s point, I will take your question first. This has been a 
very important strategy that has been increasingly adopted across the Arctic 
Council negotiations particularly the indigenous people creating almost as their 
own block, if you will, almost like a membership and a seat at the table and they 
are a very powerful grouping inside the Arctic Council. India has not yet done 
anything similar to what the Singaporeans have chosen to do. So, this is certainly 
going to be an important point of engagement which needs certain considerations 
from the Government. I think Indian foreign policy on the Arctic is like the lamp of 
foreign policy here. Arctic is the lamp of Indian foreign policy. There is a lot of 
thought that needs to be put into devising these particular strategies where we 
are not there yet.” 
 
10.1 When asked about any initiative taken by the Government on the lines of 
Singapore which is offering education, scholarships, and opportunities to indigenous 

 
47 
 
people in the Arctic as part of their appeal for permanent participation in the Arctic 
Council, the MEA, in their post evidence written submission stated as under: 
“The Indian Embassies have significantly expanded their public and cultural 
diplomacy. These measures aim to build long-term confidence with the local 
population and position India as a responsible stakeholder in the region. The 
Embassy of Norway organizes dedicated events, with particular focus on 
Tromsø (the Headquarters of the Arctic Council is located in Tromsø) including 
formal interactions with researchers and students to align India’s Arctic policies 
with local academic needs. India and Norway launched SAHAV, an open-
source digital tool for marine spatial planning. This has enabled India to 
demonstrate to the local Norwegian public that its Arctic involvement is focused 
on science-based, sustainable governance. The Embassy of India in Finland 
has proposed hosting a workshop that will highlight India’s role in the region. 
Similarly, suggestions to promote Yoga and benefits of the Indian system of 
medicine among indigenous populations living within the Arctic Circle is also 
being explored. Indian Missions in the region have been exploring possibilities 
for enhancing our cooperation with a multidimensional focus, including through 
organising specific events that cater to the local population.” 
 
10.2 Responding to the same query, the Ministry of Earth Sciences have submitted 
following in their post evidence written submission: 
“Not yet. However, providing opportunities and scholarships to indigenous people 
in the Arctic will not enable any change in the status from Observer to Member. 
As per the rules of procedure, all formal decisions of the Arctic Council and its 
subsidiary bodies require the consensus of the eight Arctic States.” 
XI Indian narrative on Arctic 
11.0 During the course of meeting with experts on the subject, the Committee were 
apprised that the Chinese narrative of ‘Third pole’ links Himalayas with Arctic, thereby 
validating its quest for Arctic Council Membership. There is a need to build an Indian 
narrative in the Arctic region as India has actively pursued scientific research in polar 
climate and contributed in understanding the complexities involved in climate linkage 
between Arctic and Himalayan region. In this regard, when the Committee desired to 
know that whether India is in a better position to contribute to Arctic affairs due to its 
work in Himalayas, the Ministry of External Affairs, stated as under: 
“As outlined in India’s Arctic policy, it mentions synergies in the studies in polar 
regions and the studies in the Himalayas. It also highlights that India's 
experience in the Himalayas can help in understanding the Arctic region. This 
has been acknowledged by many of the Arctic nations and other nations such 
as Japan and Korea. This has also been empirically proven by various studies. 

 
48 
 
Therefore, India has adopted a gradual stepwise approach towards our 
engagement, depending on the demands and requirements. India has been 
closely monitoring the geopolitical and geo-economic developments in the 
regions and is calibrating our approach based on our commitment to rules-
based international order.” 
 
11.1 Further, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their post evidence replies put forward 
the India’s role in the third pole as under: 
“India’s decades of Himalayan cryosphere research (glaciological and permafrost 
related) provide unique insights into the global climate system, directly linking the 
Third Pole with Arctic processes. Unlike narrowly strategic interpretations, India’s 
engagement is rooted in science, sustainability, and multilateral cooperation. This 
continuum—from Himalaya to Arctic to Antarctic—validates India’s role as a 
responsible stakeholder in polar governance and strengthens its contributions 
within the Arctic Council framework.” 
 
11.2 Asked to elaborate on the nature of the narrative India needs to build and the 
hindrances encountered in building that narrative, the MEA, in their written submission 
stated as under: 
“India is not an Arctic State. India’s Arctic narrative is distinct, credible, and 
future-oriented, rooted in its global responsibilities and national interests. The 
key elements include: Science & Climate Leadership, Sustainability & 
Responsible Stake holding, Global Commons Approach, Strategic Autonomy 
& Diversified Partnerships and Economic & Connectivity Interests. Since 
India’s first Antarctic (1981) and Arctic expeditions (2007), India’s knowledge 
and understanding of these issues are steadily improving. More and more 
stakeholders in India have started engaging on these issues in a more 
concerted manner. With the Arctic Policy of 2022, direction and focus has also 
been given to India’s approach. This will strengthen in the years to come. High 
costs, geographic distance, access to technology, low interest in Indian private 
sectors, etc are some of the challenges.”  
 
11.3 When asked whether the Government has formulated/proposed to formulate 
an Indian narrative of Arctic based on the scientific evidence of interrelation of Indian 
monsoon with Arctic climate change and its economic impact, the Ministry of Earth 
Sciences, in their written submission, stated as under: 

 
49 
 
“Yes, India’s narrative of Arctic has shaped up through its consistent scientific 
and strategic engagement in the region. India emphasizes that although the 
dramatic changes are happening in Arctic and Antarctica, the impact is much 
bigger in tropical island nations and coastal States, especially due to the non-
linear impact of sea-level rise and impact on extreme weather systems. 
Several observational, climatic, and modelling studies have shown a strong 
teleconnection between Arctic climate and Indian monsoon. Through an 
effective Arctic Policy, India positions itself as a bridge between developing 
nations and Arctic stakeholders, advocating for sustainability, cooperation, and 
equitable access. India’s Arctic narrative is about balancing scientific 
responsibility, climate awareness, and strategic opportunity.” 
 
11.4 The MEA also further made following submission in their post evidence written 
replies: 
“India’s Arctic Policy of 2022 brings forth the Indian perspective and narrative 
to the changes happening in the Arctic region. The body of scientific research 
undertaken so far has evoked greater interest in the academic and research 
community to study different aspects of Arctic climate change. With the 
availability of more research information, more precise economic impact 
studies can be undertaken in the future. These will be useful inputs for future 
policy formulation.”   
 
XII Need for recognising Arctic area as a Quasi Global Common 
12.0 Most of the resources in Arctic are within sovereign territories and declaring 
Arctic as being Global Commons is resisted by the Arctic countries. In this regard when 
asked to state the Government’s view on this, the MEA furnished the following written 
submission: 
“India is committed to a rules-based approach and envisions itself as a science-
driven and environmentally responsible actor in both Arctic and Antarctic. Our 
engagements, both at political and scientific levels, are guided by this approach 
as well as by sustainability- focused cooperation in the areas including energy 
security and sea-route governance. There are also established international 
regimes related to deep sea mining and fishing. India will engage constructively 
as per its obligations under such regimes.” 
 
12.1 When the Committee desired to know whether treating Arctic as a Global 
Commons has serious disadvantages, the MEA, in their written submission, stated as 
under: 
“Most of the Arctic region encompasses territories which are sovereign to the 
Arctic nations and is also inhabited by about 4 million people, out of which 
roughly 10 percent of the inhabitants are indigenous. There are sovereign 
rights for all States and UNCLOS  provides the legal framework for all ocean 

 
50 
 
and sea activities of nations, defining maritime zones (like territorial seas, 
EEZs, high seas) and allocating rights for resource use, navigation, and 
environmental protection.” 
 
12.2 However, during the deliberations held on 30.10.2025, a non official witness 
stressed on the need for rather treating it as ‘Quasi Global Commons’. In this regard, 
the Committee were informed as under: 
“Legally speaking, even Arctic is not a global commons, it does fall under the 
legal definition of a quasi global commons and a quasi-global commons is 
essentially part of the world, very good example of this would be the amazon 
forest. So, the amazon forest has been recognised as the lungs of the planet 
and despite the fact that it falls under the territorial claims of three different 
countries, there is an understanding both in common law and territorial 
domestic laws across those three countries that the preservation of these 
forests is so critical for the global good that it becomes a quasi-global 
commons which is essentially what the Indian foreign policy should also aim 
at, creating and opening up the Arctic to perhaps the legal understanding in 
legal interpretation of the region as a quasi-global common starting from the 
high seas, of course, without getting into territorial jurisdictions of the countries 
because there are conflicting claims on those territories as well.”  
 
XIII Strategic importance of Antarctica  
13.0 The Committee have been informed that Antarctica is the only continent that is 
beyond the purview of the UN and is governed by the Antarctic Treaty System. Antarctica 
having an area nearly five times of India and holding ice sheet as thick as 4.5 km at 
places, can lead to a potential sea level rise of 60 meters, if it melted entirely. Being a 
country of more than 11,000 km long coastline and multiple islands, any sea level rise 
will have significant economic and strategic impact on India. Melting of sea ice 
surrounding Antarctica and Arctic will also have significant impact on Indian Monsoon 
climate system. Strategically, a continuous Indian presence in Antarctica strengthens 
our role in international decision-making, enhances its credibility in polar governance, 
and ensures preparedness for future global discussions within the framework of the 
Antarctic Treaty. Indian Antarctic operations have also enabled technological 
advancement, logistics capability, and human resource development in extreme 
environments.  
13.1 Overall, Antarctica is strategically important for India as a platform for scientific 
leadership, diplomatic engagement, and responsible stewardship, reinforcing India’s 
commitment to global commons and its long term environmental and geopolitical 
interests. The Government of India has been consistently strengthening the expansion 

 
51 
 
of India’s polar program through a combination of infrastructure upgradation, new 
platforms, legal and data frameworks, and capacity building under the Polar Science 
and Cryosphere Research (PACER) sub-scheme of PRITHVI scheme of the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences, implemented through the National Centre for Polar and Ocean 
Research (NCPOR), Goa.  
Achievements of Indian Antarctic Programme 
13.2 Major achievements of Indian Antarctic programme are: 
 45 annual Indian Scientific Expeditions to Antarctica have been launched, 
involving more than 120 national / international institutions in these expeditions. 
 India has established three year-round research stations in Antarctica – Dakshin 
Gangotri, Maitri and Bharati – so far. These stations enabled Indian scientists to 
undertake scientific research, helping India to secure many important roles in the 
Antarctic governance and scientific leadership.  
 During the last four decades, India expanded its scientific and operational 
footprint across different geographic regimes in Antarctica, from 12°E to 76°E and 
from 69°S to 90°S (South Pole). 
 The Indian Antarctic Act was enacted in 2022 to provide a legal framework for 
India's activities in Antarctica, supported by the Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules 2023 to ensure the proper implementation of the Act.  
 Under the initiative of Integrated Atmospheric Observation Facility for Antarctica 
(IAOFA), infrastructure for clear-air atmospheric observatories have been 
established at Maitri and Bharati.  
 Ice core drilling in Central Dronning Maud Land revealed major climate shifts in 
Antarctica during the last 500 years that are tied to tropical and extra-tropical 
climate changes.  
 Completed the entire geological mapping of 20,000 km2 in Central Dronning 
Maud Land, Antarctica.  
 Discovered more than 75 new extremophile microbes, new to science. This has 
great significance for the life under extreme conditions and their applications in 
bioprospecting and drug discoveries.  

 
52 
 
 Population genetics study conducted on snow petrels in east Antarctica showed 
strong gene flow between disjunct populations spaced about more than 2500 km 
apart.  
 India’s research in the Schirmacher Oasis (Maitri) has yielded significant insights 
into its over 100 glacial lakes and 150 lakes in the Larsemann Hills (Bharati) of 
East Antarctica.  
 Provided leadership to Global South in Antarctica by supporting participation of 
Indian Ocean Rim countries in Indian Antarctic Expeditions – Malaysia, Mauritius, 
Bangladesh in the past and UAE during the current season (2025-26). 
 Major International and National Collaborative Projects were undertaken in 
Antarctica under Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (ISEA). 
 
13.3 Asked about any noticeable change in India’s role in Antarctica vis - a-vis other 
countries and measures taken to strengthen India’s position, the MEA in their post 
evidence written submission, informed the Committee that India has been consistent in 
its policy and role in Antarctic governance. During the last four decades, India’s role in 
Antarctica has evolved from basic participation to recognized leadership in Antarctic 
science, governance and operations, driven by the credibility built through sustained 
research at its stations. This long-term engagement has enabled India to assume 
leadership roles in key Antarctic research and operational committees, including SCAR, 
COMNAP, ATCM and its Committee for Environmental Protection. Indian experts have 
chaired/ contributed to the working groups and contributed to policy development, 
environmental stewardship, logistics coordination, and international cooperation. India 
also hosted the 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in 2024 at Kochi and 
also hosted and chaired the Annual General Meeting of Asian Forum on Polar Sciences 
(AFoPS) in Goa. 
XIV Antarctic Treaty 
14.0 The International Geophysical Year (IGY) during 1957-1958 and the participation 
of more than 67 countries led to large-scale international experiments focused on many 
unexplored regions, including Antarctica. This brought strong global attention to 
Antarctica to understand the mysteries of remote areas of earth. In addition, the inherent 
pressure built by India’s statement at the UNGA, made the claimant nations and other 
major players in Antarctica move quickly towards signing of the Antarctic Treaty on 1st 

 
53 
 
December 1959. India raised ‘Antarctic Question’ in the UN in 1956 for advocating its 
identification as an area of peace, free of any discord. The Indian stand probably infused 
the discussion of Article I (Peaceful uses) and Article V (Nuclear Activity) of the Antarctic 
Treaty, prohibiting nuclear explosion and disposal of radioactive waste. Originally there 
were 12 signatories to the Antarctic Treaty viz. Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, 
France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, UK, USA, USSR. Now there are 57 
States Party to the Treaty, of which 29 are Consultative Parties. 
14.1 India signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1983 and attained the status of Consultative 
Party in the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), which regulates all international relations 
concerning Antarctica. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) is the highest 
governing body of the Antarctic Treaty where decisions are consensus-based and thus 
India has a critical role to play. ATS is a set of three related agreements that regulate 
international relations with respect to Antarctica. India is a party to two of the agreements 
viz. the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid, 1991) and 
the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR, 
Canberra, 1980). India has not signed the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Seals (CCAS, London 1972) as no work has been done in this area.   
14.2 When the Committee desired to be apprised about the rights and obligations of 
the Consultative Party in the Antarctic Treaty and the contribution made by India as a 
Consultative party since joining the Antarctic Treaty, the Ministry of External Affairs, in 
their written submission, stated as under: 
“The Rights and Obligations of Consultative Party in Antarctic Treaty are the 
following: 
Consultative Parties take part in decision-making at the annual Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings, where all decisions are by consensus. 
Consultative Parties must demonstrate substantial scientific research (e.g., 
stations/expeditions), exchange scientific plans/results, allow inspections, use 
Antarctica only for peaceful purposes, and implement the 1991 Madrid Protocol 
(Environmental Impact Assessments, protection of flora/fauna, waste and 
marine-pollution controls; mining is prohibited).  
India’s contribution: 
India became a Consultative Party in 1983 and has sustained year-round 
science via Dakshin Gangotri (1983), Maitri (since 1989), and Bharati (since 
2012). 
India joined the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in 1984 and has 
been a member of CCAMLR since 1986.  
India also hosted the 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the 26th 
Committee for Environmental Protection at Kochi in May 2024.” 

 
54 
 
 
14.3 When asked about India’s participation in the decision making process under the 
Antarctic Treaty, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as 
under: 
“India participates as a Consultative Party in the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings and in the Committee for Environmental Protection, submitting 
papers, negotiating measures/resolutions by consensus, and working through 
CCAMLR on Southern Ocean conservation. In 2024, India hosted the 46th 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the 26th Committee for 
Environmental Protection and helped steer focused discussions on regulating 
tourism, biosecurity (including Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza), and greater 
use of renewables at Antarctic Research stations.” 
 
14.4 When asked about the strains, if any, in the Antarctic Treaty System and 
strategy proposed/adopted to address them, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their 
written submission, stated as under: 
“The Antarctic Treaty System faces strains from resource pressures, 
geopolitical rivalries, environmental vulnerabilities and governance 
challenges. Growing interest in mineral and hydrocarbon resources, the 
climate change impact, expanding human activity, and occasional disputes 
over fisheries and protection of biodiversity; all test the consensus-driven 
framework of the Antarctic Treaty System. These factors could potentially 
undermine environmental protection, the non-militarized status of Antarctica, 
and effective governance of the region. India addresses these challenges 
through a science-led and collaborative multilateral approach, with emphasis 
on research-based decision-making and strict compliance with the Madrid 
Protocol, and environmentally sustainable practices at its stations. India has 
been actively participating in the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, 
CCAMLR, and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, and has 
strongly advocated for Antarctica to remain a peaceful, cooperative, and 
ecologically protected global commons, while focusing on scientific and 
environmental issues.” 
 
14.5 A query was raised about the major areas of convergence and divergence 
amongst all parties in ATCM. While responding to the same, both the MEA and MoES, 
in their written submission, stated as under: 
“While the Antarctic Treaty is still considered to be a gold standard for many 
agreements, over the last few years, the geopolitical tensions between the 
parties are also casting shadows in ATCMs.  
Areas of Convergence: 
 All parties agree on the foundational principles outlined in the Antarctic 
Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. 
 Peaceful Purposes: Universal agreement that Antarctica shall be used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes, prohibiting military bases, weapons 
testing, and nuclear explosions or the disposal of radioactive waste.  

 
55 
 
 Freedom of Scientific Investigation: Strong consensus on the 
importance of scientific research and international cooperation, with a 
commitment to freely exchange scientific plans, data, and personnel.  
 Environmental Protection: General agreement on the need to protect 
the unique Antarctic environment and its ecosystems. This led to the 
adoption of the Madrid Protocol, which designates Antarctica as a 
natural reserve and bans all activities relating to mineral resources 
other than scientific research. 
 Sovereignty Neutrality (Article IV): Agreement to "freeze" existing 
territorial claims for the duration of the Treaty, allowing claimant and 
non-claimant states to cooperate without prejudice to their legal 
positions. 
 Compliance and Inspection: Acceptance of the robust inspection 
system, which allows any member State to inspect the research 
station/s of another member State.  
Areas of Divergence  
 One of the divergences amongst parties in the recent Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings (ATCM) was regarding granting the Emperor Penguin 
"Specially Protected Species" status, largely due to objections from China. 
 Mineral Resources: While mining is currently banned, some states are 
suspected of engaging in activities that could be interpreted as undeclared 
resource exploration under the guise of research. 
 Marine Protected Areas (MPAs): Establishing large-scale MPAs in the 
Southern Ocean has been a point of significant contention. 
 Tourism Regulation: The rapid growth of Antarctic tourism has raised concerns 
about environmental impacts and safety. While there is consensus on the need 
for regulation, parties diverge on the stringency and specifics of a legally 
binding framework versus non-binding guidelines. 
 Decision-Making Process: Since only Consultative Parties have voting rights, 
extensive debates over the criteria for achieving consultative status without any 
conclusion are delaying the decision making. This issue has exacerbated 
following the Russia Ukraine conflict.   
 Liability Regime: The Annex VI on Liability Arising from Environmental 
Emergencies, adopted in 2005, has yet to enter into force because not all 
Consultative Parties have approved it, highlighting ongoing disagreement on 
specific liability rules.” 
14.6 Dwelling on the need for expansion of ATS in the changing geopolitics, a non 
official witness stated the following: 
“Since 2014 no State Party has got elevated to Consultative status. Perhaps 
now is the time when more representation from countries that meet the Treaty 
requirements covered under Decisions 2 of 2017 can be encouraged even at 
the risk of losing dominance of select few.” 
 

 
56 
 
14.7 When asked about the role played by India in decision making process in the 
areas of divergence/disagreement, the Ministry of External Affairs furnished following 
written reply: 
“During the last four decades, India’s role in Antarctica has evolved from active 
participation to increased leadership in Antarctic governance and operations. 
India has played a crucial role in developing a comprehensive framework to 
regulate Antarctic tourism, aiming for an ambitious, flexible system that 
protects the environment while managing growing visitor numbers, focusing 
on environmental impact assessments, cumulative impacts, biosecurity, and 
compliance. It was initiated at the 46th ATCM held in 2024 at Kochi meeting, 
which brought all parties for committing to a robust, unified regulatory system 
to manage tourism's complex challenges in Antarctica, building on existing 
measures and international cooperation.” 
 
Antarctica – ‘Global Common’ 
 
14.8 During their interaction with subject experts, the Committee were apprised that 
while Arctic area has territorial sovereignty, therefore contest its treatment as ‘global 
common’, Antarctica has been treated as ‘Global Common’ as it is not under the 
jurisdiction of any country. In this regard, during the course of evidence held on 23 July 
2025, the representative of the MEA stated following: 
“In the Antarctic situation, earlier there were territorial claims. The Antarctic 
Treaty, sought to treat the continent as a global common, as a common 
heritage. It aims at non-militarisation of the continent, not having any mining 
etc. There is, of course, no indigenous population on that continent. Today, we 
have an estimated number of around 70 research stations from a very large 
number of countries who are operating there. In the ocean surrounding the 
continent, there is an interest in fishing, and, of course, there is also some little 
tourism that is starting on the Antarctic Continent. Between the two, it is 
relatively a settled status because it is a Treaty.” 
14.9 The Committee desired to know the policy measures adopted by the Indian 
Government to treat Antarctica as a Global common. Responding to the same, the 
MEA in their post evidence written replies, stated as under: 

 
57 
 
“The Antarctic region is uninhabited and not sovereign to any nation. The 
Antarctica is governed by the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) signed in 1959, 
an international framework ensuring Antarctica remains a peaceful, scientific 
reserve, banning military activity, mineral resource activities, nuclear tests, and 
radioactive waste disposal, while promoting cooperation and freezing territorial 
claims. India’s policy towards Antarctica is firmly anchored in the global 
commons approach of ATS and is also reflected in India’s initiation of the 
question of Antarctica in the UN General Assembly way back in 1956. Since 
then, India has become a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty in 1983, 
currently one of 29 parties with rights to govern Antarctica.  India is an active 
member and has been taking forward this narrative independently as well as 
through bilateral and multilateral platforms. India has consistently supported 
the freedom of scientific investigation, environmental protection, and 
international cooperation. Through its research programme and the 
establishment of permanent research stations, India adopts a science-led 
engagement.” 
 
14.10 Further, the MoES also stated following in their post evidence replies: 
“Since the Antarctic Treaty is the only governing mechanism for Antarctica, it 
is in India’s interest to treat Antarctica as Global Commons. Further, as 
resolved in Resolution D (2023) of 45 ATCM, the Antarctic Treaty or the 
Protocol does not have an expiry date. For any changes to be made to the 
Madrid Protocol, including potential modifications after end of its 50-year term 
in 2048, a unanimous agreement of all Consultative Parties will be required. 
Such a unanimity to support the territorial claims or stop treating Antarctica as 
Global Commons is highly unlikely in the foreseeable future. Therefore, India 
has consistently supported the freedom of scientific investigation, 
environmental protection, and international cooperation. Through its research 
programme and the establishment of permanent research stations, India 
exercises presence without claim, using science as the basis of engagement.” 
India’s Scientific Journey in Antarctica 
14.11 With a strong policy decision at the highest level, the first Indian Scientific 
Expedition to Antarctica was launched from Goa in 1981 with a 21-member team under 
the leadership of Dr. S. Z. Qasim, then Director of the National Institute of 
Oceanography, using a chartered Norwegian vessel ‘Polar Circle’. The first expedition 
was executed under the codename ‘Operation Gangotri’ which was intended to establish 
India’s presence in Antarctica and was initially largely kept under the wraps of the public 
eye. Since then, India has been an active proponent of Antarctic research and has 
established itself as one of the strong polar research nations in the international Antarctic 
scientific community.  
XV Research station in Antarctica 
15.0 There are currently 70 permanent research stations scattered across the 

 
58 
 
continent of Antarctica, which represent 30 countries from every continent on Earth. 
India established its first year-round Antarctic research station, ‘Dakshin Gangotri’ at 
coastal Dronning Maud Land in 1983 to undertake research activities. This was also the 
year when India joined the Antarctic Treaty System and was granted Consultative Party 
status. As Dakshin Gangotri was created for a quick abode of India in Antarctica and 
was built on the ice shelf, it got buried quickly by ice and was replaced by Maitri at 
Schirmacher Oasis, a stable ice-free land about 100 km inland from the coast that 
became operational in 1989. Since then, Maitri has been central hub of Indian scientific 
activities in Antarctica. To expand India’s footprint across Antarctica, India established a 
very modern research station, Bharati at Princess Elisabeth Land situated at about 2500 
km east of the Maitri station, in 2012. This station provided a unique opportunity to 
establish coastal marine observatories and also provided access to land areas that were 
connected with India during the geological past. 
15.1 Another important landmark in India’s scientific journey to Antarctica was the first 
Indian Scientific Expedition to the South Pole in 2010 when an 8-member team led by 
NCPOR undertook a 2300 km long traverse from India’s Maitri station to the geographic 
South Pole. Indian researchers also joined a Norway-led Central Arctic Expedition that 
undertook experiments in the North Pole in 2022. 
15.2 Currently, India is restricting the oceanographic mooring in the landfast ice 
regions of Prydz Bay near Bharati station. Due to the limited availability of ship time 
on MoES research vessels, NCPOR has been chartering different research vessels to 
implement Southern Ocean expeditions. 
15.3 During the deliberations held on 30.10.2025, an expert highlighted the following 
with regard to existing research station in Antarctica and need for its upgradation as 
under: 
“We have two stations in Antarctica. One of the stations is quite old and was not 
meant for modern times; it was just intended to provide shelter when we wanted 
to establish a presence in Antarctica and play a role in the Antarctic Treaty 
System. That need was addressed by having the Maitri station. Furthermore, 
Maitri happens to be one of the very strategically important areas within 
Antarctica. It is located in the region where most countries have research bases 
and is connected to air support from other continents. Therefore, it is an 
extremely important area that we need to continue to focus on. That is why we 
have a proposal with the Government, which has been approved in principle, to 
build a new station there.” 
XVI Inspection of Research Stations in Antarctica 

 
59 
 
16.0 Inspections of research station of other countries under the ATS are crucial for 
upholding the Treaty's core principles: peaceful use, scientific cooperation, and 
environmental protection, ensuring compliance while building trust and transparency in 
a region vital for global climate science. These inspections, though sometimes symbolic, 
build confidence, prevent misuse (like dual-use tech), and serve as a key mechanism 
for monitoring activities and promoting adherence to environmental protocols, even as 
new geopolitical interests emerge. Initially focused on demilitarization, inspections now 
heavily emphasize environmental stewardship, especially after the Madrid Protocol. 
Inspection reports commonly document training, medical capability, and emergency 
planning—helping identify gaps and spread good practices. These reports are tabled as 
ATCM papers and archived, contributing to institutional memory and continuous 
improvement. Modern inspections increasingly involve multiple countries, reducing 
costs and enhancing collaboration. 
 
16.1 A non official witness, in his presentation made before the Committee suggested 
following with regard to inspection of Indian research station in Antarctica: 
“Indian Station Maitri has been inspected by several Consultative Parties so far 
under the provisions of Antarctica Treaty. The Treaty and the Indian Antarctic Act 
too authorize India for the same. India has not made use of this provision to 
assert its rightful position. It is high time we conduct such an inspection of a few 
Antarctic facilities of other Parties”. 
 
16.2 Asked about inspection of research station of other countries done by India, the 
Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“India hasn’t conducted such inspection so far. The major reason for the same 
could be traced to cost involved as Antarctic stations are situated hundreds and 
thousands of kilometres apart and dedicated chartering of flights are required 
within the continent. Also, these inspections are conducted jointly by multiple 
countries and therefore, we need to identify the right partners. However, it is 
critically important to initiate the process in near future that will provide full 
access to stations, equipment, and vessels for designated observers.” 
 
16.3 Discussing the importance of the inspections, an expert informed the Committee 
as under: 
“We have also been proposing to the Government that India should carry out 
inspections of the Antarctic stations of other countries within Antarctica. It is 
because that actually shows your strength and we have a lot of countries visiting 
our stations and making reports. These reports can be sometimes bad or good, 
whatever it is, but that shows the strength of each of those nations.” 

 
60 
 
 
16.4 Indian Antarctic Act 2022 & Indian Antarctic Environmental Protection Rules 2023 
The Indian Antarctic Act 2022 provide for the national measures for protecting the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and gives effect to 
the Antarctic Treaty, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules 2023 ensure the proper implementation of the Indian Antarctic Act 2022 
to ensure compliance with the Antarctic Treaty System. 
16.5 The main objectives of the Indian Antarctic Act 2022 is to provide for national 
measures for protecting the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems and to give effect to the Antarctic Treaty, the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection (CEP) to the Antarctic Treaty and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. Major objectives of the Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules, 2023 are:  
 To implement India’s international obligations under the ATS  
 To regulate Indian activities in Antarctica through a permit-based system  
 To protect the Antarctic environment and dependent ecosystems 
 To ensure peaceful and scientific use of Antarctica 
 To provide enforcement, liability, and penalties 
XVII Tourism in Antarctica 
17.0 The Committee observe that Antarctic tourism has been growing. Even though 
there is consensus on the need for regulation, there are divergent views on legally 
binding framework versus non-binding guidelines. In this regard, the Committee desired 
to know the stand taken by the Government regarding some form of regulation on tourism 
in Antarctica so that the pristine environment is preserved in the region. Replying to this, 
the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“India supports rules-based regulation of tourism under the Antarctic Treaty 
System and has already put national permitting and enforcement in place 
through the Indian Antarctic Act 2022 and the Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules, 2023. India’s stance aligns with the Madrid Protocol and the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings guidance that Parties must control non-
governmental activities via domestic law.” 

 
61 
 
 
17.1 On being asked about the active role played by India in working with other nations 
for regulation of Antarctic tourism and outcome achieved so far, the Ministry of External 
Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“India has taken an active multilateral role, by hosting the 46th Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting and the 26th Committee for Environmental Protection in 
Kochi (May 20–30, 2024), where Parties agreed to develop a comprehensive 
and consistent framework for the regulation of Antarctic tourism. India 
facilitated the first-ever focused discussions on regulating tourism during this 
meeting.” 
 
17.2 When asked whether there is a need to engage with the tourism industry to 
improve India’s tourism to Antarctica, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written 
submission, informed the Committee as under: 
“While no treaty specifically regulates tourism in Antarctica, tourism is 
governed under binding provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System measures, 
national laws (Indian tourists need to obtain authorisation from NCPOR) and 
practices adopted by International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (a 
self regulated industry body). While tourism to the Antarctic, including Indian 
tourists, have increased over the years, there is also increasing concern on 
the environmental impact of such activities. In the 46th Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting in Kochi in 2024, this issue was considered and Parties 
agreed to develop a new comprehensive framework to regulate tourism and 
non governmental activities, including stricter control on large cruise vessels, 
cap on number of tourists, and designated tourism zone to protect fragile 
ecosystems. Hence, the focus of Indian tourism should be responsible and 
sustainable tourism, while recognising the fragile nature of the Antarctic 
ecosystem. Indian tourists and tour operators should be sensitised about these 
issues before they undertake any tourism activity in the Antarctic.”   
 
17.3 During the deliberations of the Committee, a non official witness informed that 
India took lead in advocating for ‘responsible tourism’ during the 30th ATCM held under 
its chairmanship in New Delhi. When the Committee asked about the challenges being 
faced in enforcing ‘responsible tourism’ in Antarctica and success achieved in this 
endeavour, the MEA stated following in their post evidence submission: 
“Enforcing responsible tourism in Antarctica faces major challenges from 
booming visitor numbers (about 1.1 lakhs during 2024-2025 season), diverse 
visitor motivations (from serious explorers to casual tourists), need for strong 
international cooperation, with issues including managing pollution (black 
carbon, grey water), preventing invasive species, protecting fragile ecosystems 
from foot traffic, and ensuring consistent regulation across self regulating 
operators. Antarctica's immense size and remoteness make comprehensive 
monitoring and enforcement extremely difficult and costly. The delicate balance 
between economic growth, public access, and environmental preservation 
remains a significant hurdle for the Antarctic Treaty System. One of the key 

 
62 
 
outcomes of the 46th ATCM hosted by India was Decision 5 (2024) on the 
Development of a Framework for the Regulation of Tourism and Other Non-
Governmental Activities in Antarctica. As per the decision, there is a plan to 
develop a robust, compliant, and adaptive framework to manage the increasing 
tourism and non-governmental activities while ensuring environmentally 
responsible practices. The 47th ATCM, Milan has taken this forward further and 
currently, the ATCM parties are working towards drafting the framework during 
the intersessional period.” 
XVIII Capacity Building for Polar Research 
18.0 India’s polar exploration has evolved steadily since the first launch of Antarctic 
expedition 1981 and has achieved an important milestone with the completion of 45 
Antarctic expeditions by 2025. Over the decades, the programme has significantly 
strengthened India’s scientific presence across the diverse geography of Antarctic and 
Arctic continents, developing significant expertise in scientific research and polar 
logistics.  
1. In response to a specific query on the major challenges involved in undertaking 
the scientific research, the MEA, in their written submission, stated as under: 
2. “Major challenges involved in undertaking the scientific research in polar 
regions include:  
• Logistical Difficulties and High Costs: The sheer remoteness of polar 
regions means that transportation of personnel, equipment, food, and 
fuel is a massive logistical undertaking and extremely expensive. Access 
is often limited by thick sea ice and specific seasonal "windows" for 
operations, which can be further disrupted by severe weather or 
changing climate conditions. 
• Harsh Environmental Conditions: Researchers face extreme cold, strong 
winds, and low humidity, which can lead to frostbite and hypothermia. 
The dynamic and unpredictable nature of the ice, including cracks and 
pressure ridges, poses physical safety risks and can cause significant 
delays to expeditions. 
• Technological Limitations: Equipment must be specifically adapted to 
withstand negative temperatures and harsh conditions; standard 
technology can fail or perform poorly. Power systems and data 
storage/transmission capabilities are also a constant concern, requiring 
specialized engineering solutions. 
• Human Health and Psychological Stress: The physical isolation and 
confinement for extended periods (especially during the long, dark winter 
months) can lead to psychological challenges such as sleep 
disturbances, mood decrements, interpersonal conflicts, and fatigue, a 
condition sometimes referred to as the "winter-over syndrome". 

 
63 
 
• Limited Observational Data and Funding: Historically, observational 
records in polar regions are relatively short due to the difficulty of year-
round data collection. Furthermore, research programs often face 
pressure from short-term funding cycles and competition for resources, 
which can strain finances and impact long-term data collection and 
career stability for early-career researchers.  
• Regulatory and International Coordination: Scientific activities must 
adhere to national and international regulations and treaties (such as the 
Antarctic Treaty's environmental protocols), which requires careful 
planning and significant international collaboration and agreement on 
safety standards and data sharing.” 
 
 
18.1 Further, the Ministry of Earth Sciences informed the Committee that Antarctic 
research is heavily constrained by complex and expensive logistics. In this regard, 
when asked about specific measures being taken to overcome the constraints, the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“Antarctica is a continent of extremes — geographically isolated, climatically 
hostile and far removed from any human habitation. India has maintained its 
presence there since 1981 through annual expeditions and year-round 
occupation of its stations. Even maintaining a minimum presence requires a full 
spectrum of logistical capabilities such as multipurpose icebreakers, 
helicopters, safe living structures, inland transport vehicles, specialised 
equipment and trained manpower. This makes Antarctic logistics inherently 
complex, interdependent and extremely expensive. 
 
Indian Antarctic Expeditions follow the international protocols and standard 
operating procedures. We deploy a chartered ice class vessel annually to 
supply fuel, provisions and logistic and life support systems. India have joined 
the DROMLAN (Dronning Maud Land Air Network) Consortium, allowing us to 
transport Indian expeditioners by air from Cape Town to the nearest Russian 
airfields closer to the Maitri and Bharati stations. This has enabled scientists to 
plan and fully utilise their time at disposal for experiments and sampling.  Most 
importantly, this air facility has enabled medical and emergency evacuation a 
reality.  
 
All supplies, including millions of litres of fuel, food, machinery, building 
materials and scientific equipment are transported by a multipurpose 
icebreaker vessel capable of carrying helicopters, heavy cargo and personnel.  
 
Helicopters, snow vehicles and field camp setups are used for reaching remote 
scientific sites. 
 
Both the stations are equipped with heating, renewable energy support, robust 
shelters and medical facilities to withstand severe weather and isolation for up 
to nine months at a time. 
Project Maitri-II for building a new, environmentally compliant and 
technologically advanced station has already been initiated. This facility will 

 
64 
 
incorporate state-of-the-art laboratories, energy-efficient systems, renewable 
energy integration, advanced waste management and modern living quarters 
designed for long-term, safe habitation. 
 
Additional ongoing and planned augmentation measures include: 
 
Renewable Energy Integration: Progressive installation of wind/solar hybrid 
systems to reduce dependence on fossil fuels and lower environmental impact. 
Advanced Communication Systems: High-speed satellite communication 
facilities for real-time data transfer and improved coordination. 
Enhanced Waste Management: Systems aligned with the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.” 
 
(a) Financial allocation for Polar research 
 
18.2 Budget for India’s polar scientific and operational activities is allocated as a 
Grant-in-Aid. The funding is channelled through the Polar Science & Cryosphere 
Research (PACER) sub-scheme, which falls under the umbrella scheme called 
PRITHVI Vigyan. The scheme is implemented by the National Centre for Polar and 
Ocean Research (NCPOR), which is the nodal agency responsible for conducting 
India’s annual scientific expeditions to the Antarctic and Arctic. Currently India 
maintains two research stations in Antarctica (Maitri and Bharti) and one in the Arctic 
(Himadri). All expenditures are exclusively dedicated to logistics, station maintenance, 
scientific research and capital investments in equipment and infrastructure. 
18.3 The allocation and utilization of funds for the previous three financial years are 
as follows: 
Year Budget Estimate (in 
Cr.) 
Revised Estimate (in 
Cr.) 
Actual Expenditure 
(in Cr.) 
2022-23 140.24 157 156.96 
2023-24 146 160 159.87 
2024-25 146 226.25 226.20 
2025-26 200 200 199.96 
2026-27 210   
 
18.4 The Committee have been informed that the major components of expenditure 
planned for the year 2026-27 include the Antarctic, Arctic, Southern Ocean, 
Cryosphere and Climate programme.  
18.5 As per the information provided by the Ministry of Earth Sciences, NCPOR does 
not engage in tourism-related activities. The expenditure incurred is purely for logistics, 

 
65 
 
station maintenance at Antarctica and research activity, along with capital investment for 
the purchase of scientific equipment and station infrastructure. 
 
18.6 Asked to furnish the total amount of funds utilised in polar research in Arctic 
and Antarctic regions, the MEA, submitted as under: 
“Most of the funds allocated for the polar expeditions are utilised for Antarctic 
expeditions, operations and hiring ice class vessel/aircrafts for supply of life-
saving essentials to two year-round stations in Antarctica. The entire Antarctic 
operations, station manning and management are exclusively handled by 
NCPOR and therefore, forms operationally the most challenging and 
financially expensive program among Indian initiatives in the poles. Compared 
to this, our Arctic activities so far are mostly restricted to Ny-Ålesund in 
Svalbard, with our research station, observatories and activities facilitated by 
Kings Bay AS, a company owned by the Norwegian Government. As an 
example, details of expenditure/actual utilization of funds for polar research in 
Arctic and Antarctic regions for the FY 2024-25 are given below:  
 
Financial Year Antarctica Expenditure Arctic Expenditure 
2024-25 190.41 Crores 17.53 rores 
 
Considering the increased expenditure related Antarctic operations like 
chartering polar vessels/aircrafts/helicopters and managing and maintaining 
the two year-round stations (Maitri and Bharati), we need to increase the outlay 
for Indian Antarctic Program. Further, our planned Pan-Arctic expansion across 
the Arctic Ocean necessitates a significant increase in the budget outlay for 
Indian Arctic Program. Since the bulk of budget outlay for polar program is 
utilised for the operational needs, unless there is a 30% increase in annual 
budget outlay under PACER sub-scheme of PRITHVI Scheme, we cannot 
increase our scientific and operational footprint across the polar regions. Most 
importantly, it is equally important to increase the core scientific/technical 
manpower to form nucleus of the multiple activities envisaged.” 
 
 
18.7 As per the submission of the Ministry of External Affairs, the current level of 
investment has secured India's place among the selected club of countries having 
round-the-year Antarctic stations for more than a year. Critical limitations for our 
presence in Antarctic includes, continued dependence on chartered ice-class vessel, 
which usually struggles with unpredictable sea ice. Our permanent station Maitri, 
which has operated since 1989, far exceeded its intended lifespan 10 years. Additional 
funds will facilitate enhancement of India’s role and presence in the Antarctic region.  
18.8 Three of the most critical and high-priority areas that need focus are: 

 
66 
 
New Antarctic station: Maitri Station, commissioned in 1989, has outlived its life 
and is beyond meaningful repair. It no longer supports modern laboratories and 
fails to meet the environmental standards of the Antarctic Treaty as well as of our 
own Antarctic Act, 2022. The station needs a full replacement. 
Dedicated Polar Research Vessel: Continued dependency on chartered ice-class 
vessels puts India at a huge disadvantage. These vessels are not easily available 
in the market, lacks scientific capabilities, and hinder our ability to conduct 
meaningful Arctic/Antarctic research. A dedicated ice-breaking research vessel is 
essential for our independent, pan-Arctic/pan-Antarctic missions. 
Scientific and technical manpower: A substantial increase in skilled personnel is 
fundamental to execute the expanded scientific and operational activities in the 
polar regions. 
 
18.9 In this regard, a non official witness also stated following in the testimony: 
 
“as per my calculations, for 2021, 2022 and 2023, the Arctic and Antarctic was 
under PACER. Their total allocation was Rs. 365 crore and out of which NCPOR 
was some figure which is extremely frugal. I mean Rs. 365 crore, after three years 
now is probably about Rs. 200 crore but it is extremely limited for undertaking our 
operations.”  
 
18.10 When asked about additional requirement of fund to enable India to enhance its 
role in the polar regions, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, 
stated as under: 
“India is actively enhancing its polar presence by expanding its scientific 
footprint beyond the current logistic periphery of its stations. This includes plans 
to join international initiatives like Antarctic RINGS and Antarctic Insync 
Programme, which would give us a circum-Antarctic reach, and undertaking 
Arctic expeditions beyond Svalbard through collaborations. Government has 
also initiated the acquisition of a Polar Research Vessel and construction of a 
new Maitri station. While annual budgetary allocations, cover existing 
expeditions. However, new strategic initiatives will require dedicated, additional 
funding to be accomplished.” 
 
18.11 Further asked about any engagement with various industries and private sectors 
in the country to bring about investment for various activities undertaken in the region 
especially related to tourism, connectivity, digital infrastructure, energy, etc. the Ministry 
of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 

 
67 
 
“So far, India’s engagement in the Antarctic has been largely State-driven, 
coordinated mainly through the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) and 
NCPOR. The focus has been on scientific research, logistics, and compliance 
with the Antarctic Treaty System rather than commercial or private-sector 
activities. However, the Government will be supportive of the private sector, 
especially industries as well as academic institutions which are interested in 
extending their footprint in the Polar region, which is in accordance with India’s 
international obligation.”   
 
18.12 In this regard, the Ministry of Earth Sciences further stated as under: 
 
“Considering the strategic and geopolitical nature of the polar research 
expeditions, interest from Indian private sector is non-existent. However, the 
recent Indian Antarctic Act 2022 has provisions that will enable tourist and 
Antarctic fishing activity permits from India for such activities, if they come 
forward.” 
 
18.13 Asked to furnish the details of the steps taken to augment research facilities in 
Antarctica, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“Necessary approvals are underway for three key initiatives: (i) Replacement of 
Maitri Station in Antarctica, (ii) Construction of a Polar Research Vessel and (iii) 
Increase in scientific and technical manpower. However, a dedicated fund 
allocation will be needed to accomplish them.”  
 
18.14 When asked about the major benefits obtained so far from the research studies 
carried out in Indian stations in polar areas along with the challenges encountered, the 
MEA furnished following reply in their post evidence submission: 
“Indian scientific expeditions to Antarctica, the Arctic and the Southern Ocean 
have enabled India to maintain a strong scientific standing in these remote 
regions of the planet and act as a currency of global influence. India's sustained 
presence and research efforts in Antarctica have secured its position as a 
Consultative Party under the Antarctic Treaty System and an Observer in the 
Arctic Council, thereby enhancing its global diplomatic standing and influence in 
polar governance. Operating research stations in extreme polar environments 
enabled the development of specialized infrastructure, technology and human 
expertise in cold-region engineering and logistics, which has spinoff benefits for 
other sectors. India's research in the polar regions has yielded significant 
benefits, primarily in enhancing the understanding of climate change and its 
impact on the Indian monsoon system and Himalayan glaciers, as well as 
providing geopolitical and strategic advantages. Indian studies have helped to 
establish a crucial link between climatic conditions in the Arctic/Antarctic and the 
Indian monsoon, which is vital for India's agriculture and economy. India's 
permanent research stations (Maitri, Bharati and Himadri) continuously monitor 
essential climate parameters, ozone concentration, aerosols, and greenhouse 
gases. This provides valuable data to global climate models, helping to 
understand the effects of global warming and rising sea levels. Indian scientists 

 
68 
 
have conducted extensive research on life in extremes of Antarctica and Arctic, 
discovering new species of cold-adaptive microbes with potential 
biotechnological applications. Systematic geological mapping of large areas in 
East Antarctica has also been completed, contributing to the understanding of 
the ancient history of the Indian subcontinent's continental break-up. The polar 
studies help scientists better understand glacial melt in the Himalayas (often 
called the "Third Pole"), which is the source of many perennial Indian rivers and 
are sites of increased hazards related to the defrosting due to the global 
warming. Long term atmospheric, cryospheric, and environmental observations 
have improved understanding of Antarctic and Arctic climate processes, thus 
offering insights relevant to the Indian monsoon. All such studies have led to 
about 35 PhDs at NCPOR on polar and ocean sciences.  
Enhancing the operational capabilities of India’s Antarctic research stations 
requires continuous maintenance and upgradation of infrastructure, 
strengthened logistical support for increasingly demanding programmes, and the 
sustained conduct of scientific observations in one of the world’s most remote 
and extreme environments. However, these efforts are constrained by several 
challenges, notably fixed budgets, cost overruns due to uncertainties of 
operations, and the inherently high costs associated with polar operations. 
Increasing the operational capabilities of the Himadri research station in Arctic 
also faces several financial and logistics challenges. High logistics and 
transportation costs for personnel, cargo, and emergency support significantly 
increase operational expenses. Dependence on international infrastructure, 
vessels, and services adds to recurring costs. Polar-grade scientific instruments, 
power systems, and safety equipment are expensive to procure and maintain, 
while extreme weather accelerates wear and replacement needs. Additional 
costs related to energy supply, communications, personnel training, medical 
emergencies further constrain the expansion of year-round operations and 
technological enhancement at polar stations. Most importantly, limited core 
scientific/technical manpower at NCPOR is creating huge hurdles to increase 
the operational and scientific activities in Arctic and Antarctica.” 
 
18.15 Another non official witness informed that increased investment in polar science 
and research will also open up the possibilities of generating revenue. In this regard, 
he submitted the following before the Committee: 
“One is the Monsoon Mission of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. Second is the 
Deep Ocean Mission. In the Deep Ocean Mission, there are two segments 
where we can prove immediate gains. One is the Convention of the Marine 
Living Resources, which gives us a power to go and search for the krills. Now, 
I think the Ministry is planning that this year onwards they will start expeditions 
for krill, taking away krill from the Indian Southern Ocean. Once that thing starts, 
possibly we will get quick returns because krill has a lot of demand. There is a 
lot of demand for krill as a protein. India does not have that market as such. 
This is one aspect. 
The Second is our involvement with the International Seabed Authority. If all of 
you know, India has already got some area for prospecting lease in the deep 
Indian Ocean, like China has some area. We have also asked for some lease 
and we have been proving that there are resources in the deep Indian Ocean 

 
69 
 
where we can get certain minerals, polymetallic minerals, cobalt minerals, and 
we are already exploring in those areas. I think within a couple of years, we will 
be able to prove to our own country that these resources are there, but the 
mining and the metallurgy is a different process. We can definitely prove that 
since you have given us this amount, we have given you these resources.” 
 
18.16 The Committee have been informed that growth and diversification of Antarctic 
resources and other commercial activities such as fishery and tourism bioprospecting 
weigh heavily on the minds of stakeholders. However, India has enacted Antarctic Act 
2022 and formulated Indian Antarctic Environmental Protection Rules, 2023 to protect 
the pristine environment of Antarctic while contributing to enrichment of scientific 
knowledge and sustainable development of the regions for the benefit of society. When 
the Committee asked about the stand taken by India in respect of commercial 
utilization of resources of Antarctica, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written 
submission, stated as under: 
“Through Indian Antarctic Act 2022 and Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules, 2023, India is committed to protect the Antarctica and 
enhance understanding about its response to the climate change at regional as 
well as global level. This is consistent with India’s commitment to the Antarctic 
Treaty System and associated environmental protocols. In fact the Act has 
provisions to give permits for commercial activities like tourism, being a 
peaceful activity. Further, under the Antarctic Treaty System, mineral resource 
(non-living resources) activities are prohibited indefinitely, except for scientific 
research, due to the Madrid Protocol (Environmental Protocol) of 1991. 
Although the current ban of mineral activities is for 50 years (until 2048), any 
changes to this clause also require unanimous consent to modify, making future 
mining also unlikely in the foreseeable future. Compared to this, fishery (living 
resources) exploration and exploitation is governed by the CCAMLR 
Convention (Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources) under the Antarctic Treaty System. The prime objectives of 
CCAMLR are the conservation of living resources of Antarctica while permitting 
sustainable levels of exploitation of resources, focusing on an ecosystem-
based approach to protect predators and the environment. India is a Member 
of CCAMLR and therefore, has the rights for sustainable exploitation of marine 
living resources in the Antarctic Treaty region (south of 60°S Latitude). Given 
the recent interest of some Indian companies in the Southern Ocean fisheries, 
framing of detailed regulations for the same under the Indian Antarctic Act 2022 
and in accordance with the CCAMLR norms is underway.” 
 
18.17 The Ministry of External Affairs also made following submission on this issue: 
 
“Through Indian Antarctic Act 2022 and Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules, 2023  a harmonious policy and regulatory framework for 
India’s Antarctic activities through well-established legal mechanisms has been 

 
70 
 
laid out. These facilitate India’s interest and pro-active involvement in the 
management of growing Antarctic tourism and sustainable development of 
fisheries resources in Antarctic waters. This is consistent with India’s 
commitment to the Antarctic Treaty System and associated environmental 
protocols. The Act has provisions to give permits for commercial activities like 
tourism, being a peaceful activity. Further, under the Antarctic Treaty System, 
mineral resource (non-living resources) activities are prohibited indefinitely, 
except for scientific research, due to the Madrid Protocol (Environmental 
Protocol) of 1991. Although the current ban of mineral activities is for 50 years 
(until 2048), any changes to this clause also require unanimous consent to 
modify, making future mining also unlikely in the foreseeable future. Compared 
to this, fishery (living resources) exploration and exploitation is governed by the 
CCAMLR Convention (Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources) under the Antarctic Treaty System. The prime objectives of 
CCAMLR are the conservation of living resources of Antarctica while permitting 
sustainable levels of exploitation of resources, focusing on an ecosystem-
based approach to protect predators and the environment. India is a Member 
of CCAMLR and, therefore, has the rights for sustainable exploitation of marine 
living resources in the Antarctic Treaty region (south of 60°S 
Latitude).  Therefore, the Indian Antarctic Act 2022 has no impact on India’s 
role in CCAMLR and future exploitation of living resources in the Antarctic 
Treaty region.” 
 
(b) Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR Convention) 
18.18 India has been a member of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) since 1985 and has consistently contributed to 
its conservation mandate. India has participated actively in deliberations to strengthen 
conservation measures and has hosted CCAMLR Working Group meetings in Kochi 
in 1998 and 2023. 
18.19 CCAMLR is the apex body for regulating fishing activity in the Southern Ocean 
in an environmentally sustainable manner. CCAMLR decisions and catch quotas are 
based on and backed by the findings of its Scientific Committee. CCAMLR is widely 
recognised for its science-based management approach, balancing conservation with 
sustainable use. Particular emphasis is placed on protecting keystone species such 
as Antarctic krill through precautionary harvest limits and strict monitoring. 
18.20 Regarding the conservation measures taken under the ambit of CCAMLR, the 
Ministry of External Affairs has informed that a key Conservation Measure (51-07) 
requiring krill catches to be spatially dispersed was not renewed at a CCAMLR annual 
meeting, as the Commission failed to reach consensus on this matter. The total catch 

 
71 
 
limit of 620,000 tonnes still applies, but without spatial allocation controls across the 
subareas of Region 48.1–48.4 (Atlantic Sector of the Southern Ocean). 
(c) Antarctic Krill Fishing 
18.21 Current krill harvest levels remain below 1% of estimated biomass. Fisheries in 
Antarctic waters are managed under an ecosystem-based, precautionary framework 
designed to ensure long-term sustainability. Furthermore, apart from fishing, the 
variability in krill biomass and availability is governed by multiple factors such as sea-
ice dynamics, oceanographic processes and broader climatic factors. Variability in krill 
availability observed in some regions is under scientific study and may be influenced 
by these factors. 
18.22 The Committee have been informed that India is preparing a facilitative 
administrative and policy framework to promote the participation of Indian entities in 
Southern Ocean fisheries in accordance with CCAMLR guidelines and measures. 
Given the above, urging India to suspend its ongoing initiatives solely in the interest of 
environmental sustainability risks is an over-simplification of a complex balance 
between ecological responsibility and socioeconomic progress of the country. 
18.23 Sea Shepherd Global, an International non-profit marine wildlife conservation 
organisation, has submitted as under: 
“Krill are a lynchpin species because they occupy a central role in the Antarctic 
food web, sustaining nearly all higher life in the Southern Ocean as they convert 
energy from phytoplankton into the vital food sources for polar megafauna. 
They are the key prey species for baleen whales and are responsible for 99% 
of the caloric intake of some species of penguins.  
Thus, a decline of krill reverberates across the entire marine ecosystem, 
threatening its stability with cascading effects, especially in a fragile region like 
Antarctica.  
The supertrawlers primarily target this foundational species to produce Omega-
3 health food supplements, despite the availability of alternatives. 
 Ancillary markets include the introduction of krill meal as a fish-feed additive in 
salmon aquaculture to give the flesh a pink hue, and its incorporation into pet 
food. In other words, supertrawlers dragging nets large enough to swallow a 
jumbo jet are taking the food of whales, seals and penguins from remote and 
vulnerable ecosystems, so it can be fed to dogs and cats at home.  
Alarmingly, the density of krill around the Antarctic Peninsula—where much of 
the fishing effort is concentrated—may have declined by as much as 80% since 
the 1970s. Researchers believe that this precipitous drop in krill abundance is 

 
72 
 
also affecting populations of Adélie and chinstrap penguins, whose numbers 
have fallen by 42% and 68%, respectively, over the past forty years.  
A 2023 peer-reviewed study found that krill availability is also limiting and 
affecting the reproductive rates of humpback whales, specifically naming 
“continued ocean warming and increased fishing” as responsible for a reduction 
in krill populations, likely impacting the whales. Pregnancy rates for humpback 
whales in the Western Antarctic Peninsula dropped from 86% in 2017 to 29% 
in 2020 following reduced krill availability.  
Last year, a critical conservation measure requiring the krill catch limit to be 
dispersed over a wider geographical area, and aimed at reducing the risk of 
local depletion, was not renewed at the annual meeting of the Commission for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the 
regulatory authority that manages the fishery. The lapse of this longstanding 
conservation framework without a replacement plan has heightened concern 
for krill populations, particularly around the Antarctic Peninsula.  
Similarly, a proposal supported by the Republic of India to create a marine 
protected area around the Antarctic Peninsula was blocked by the People’s 
Republic of China PRC and the Russian Federation, as any conservation 
measure proposed at CCAMLR requires consensus from all members for 
adoption. 
 As crucial conservation measures are either overturned or blocked, and as 
krill—and the wildlife that depend on it—continue to decline, the krill fishing 
industry is expanding. The PRC recently licensed a newly-constructed 15,255-
ton, 138-meter krill supertrawler that is set to become the largest fishing vessel 
operating in Antarctic waters.” 
18.24 When asked, whether any licensing decisions are under consideration and how 
such decisions would align with India's conservation commitments and diplomatic 
engagement within the Commission, including positions previously taken by India on 
this issue, the Ministry of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under: 
 “India has remained a non-fishing member of CCAMLR despite being 
eligible to participate in regulated fisheries. Recently, several 
entrepreneurs based in Mumbai have approached MoES expressing 
interest in harvesting toothfish and krill in Antarctic waters. In this 
context, India is carefully examining the possibility of licensing a few 
vessels under strict regulatory and scientific oversight. Any such vessels 
would function partly as research platforms to strengthen scientific 
understanding of Antarctic marine ecosystems. Decisions regarding 
pilot-scale licensing would be guided solely by scientific considerations 
and remain subject to periodic review, with ecosystem conservation as 
the foremost priority. 
 To enable Indian industry’s participation in Antarctic fishing, the Ministry 
of Earth Sciences is preparing the legal provisions for licensing and 
monitoring of vessels. Efforts are underway to publish the Indian 

 
73 
 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (Fishing Authorization) Rules, 2026, 
under the Indian Antarctic Act, 2022.” 
18.25 Further, asked to elaborate the coordination mechanism between the Ministry 
of Earth Sciences and the Ministry of External Affairs, particularly in view of the 
diplomatic efforts associated with advancing Marine Protected Area proposals, the 
Ministry of External affairs, furnished following written reply: 
“The formulation of the aforementioned fishing authorization regulations is 
being overseen by the Committee on Antarctic Governance and Environmental 
Protocol (CAG-EP), which is chaired by the Secretary, MoES. The Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA) is one of the members of CAG-EP .” 
(d) Replacement of Maitri Station 
 
18.26 There are an estimated number of around 70 research stations from a very large 
number of countries who are operating in Antarctica. China has set up five research 
stations in Antarctica, the latest being added in 2024. The Committee were given to 
understand that the Maitri Station, built in 1989, has outlived its life and also not 
consistent with the stringent environmental rules under the Antarctic Treaty as well as 
the Indian Antarctic Act 2022. Therefore, the Committee desired to know the specific 
challenges in maintaining a research station in Antarctica, and how does the new station 
aim to overcome these. Responding to this, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their 
written submission, stated as under: 
“Maitri station was initially designed for 10 years of operational lifespan, and 
has already outlived its lifespan and completed 35 years. Despite ongoing 
maintenance efforts, the station’s safety risks, marked by scattered makeshift 
structures and failing systems, fall short of Antarctic extreme weather and 
environmental standards. The station’s structural integrity, waste management, 
and sewage treatment systems have been flagged in numerous reports, with 
calls for urgent remediation.  
 
Proposed new station (Project Maitri II) will address the structural degradation, 
environmental compliance, energy inefficiency and limited scientific capacity of 
the current facility. The new station will incorporate modern living and laboratory 
spaces, energy efficient, advanced communication systems and enhanced 
logistic support infrastructure, ensuring year-round functionality and better 
working and living conditions for the scientific community.  
 
Building up a new robust, state-of-the-art station compliant with environmental 
norms and international protocols shall not only strengthen our long-term 
scientific presence by supporting advanced research activities but also 

 
74 
 
strategically place India amongst the selected group of countries seasoned in 
Polar affairs.” 
 
18.27 Further asked about the status of new research station, the MEA, submitted 
following in their post evidence written replies: 
“India is planning to replace the existing Maitri Research Station with a newly 
designed Maitri-II Station in Antarctica. The DoE has accorded in-principle 
approval for Project Maitri-II at an estimated cost of ₹2,150 Crore. Due to the 
extremely narrow window of access during Antarctic summers, and the need 
for getting the comprehensive environmental evaluation necessitated by the 
Committee of Environmental Protocol under the Antarctic Treaty, the project 
will be implemented over a six-year period (2026–27 to 2031–32). The 
architectural and design Consultant for Project Maitri-II has already been 
identified through a Global Design Competition. 
The new station will significantly enhance India’s ability to conduct 
multidisciplinary scientific research in Antarctica. The new Maitri-II Station is 
conceived as a state-of-the-art, year-round research hub that will significantly 
elevate India’s scientific capability in biology, earth sciences, glaciology, 
atmospheric sciences, climate studies and long-term environmental monitoring. 
The upgraded station will feature modern laboratories, advanced ice-core 
storage and processing systems, a dedicated biological and microbial research 
suite and expanded atmospheric observation facilities. A stronger and more 
dependable logistic backbone will ensure uninterrupted scientific operations 
throughout the year. These enhancements will greatly expand the scope, 
precision, continuity and international relevance of India’s Antarctic research, 
enabling the country to contribute high-quality data and cutting-edge findings to 
global polar science for decades to come.” 
 
18.28 When asked why the Maitri Station continued to remain operational despite 
outliving its utility for many years, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written 
submission, stated as under: 
“It is true that Maitri station has outlived its life, but still it is maintained to provide 
the required infrastructure to continue the basic research. Considering that 
construction of a new Antarctic station is a long and protracted process, the 
Maitri station is being used until it is replaced by new station.”  
 
18.29 Asked about the steps being taken to replace Maitri Station and the estimated 
timeline by which Maitri Station is proposed to be decommissioned, the Ministry of Earth 
Sciences, in their written submission, informed the Committee as under: 

 
75 
 
“As the nodal agency for this project, NCPOR has completed the following 
preliminary steps towards project: 
 
Potential site for Project Maitri II has been finalised and high-resolution 
topographic maps of the have been generated by the Survey of India. 
The specifications of the proposed Maitri-II station. 
A Global Design Competition to select the best functional design of Maitri II station 
was conducted. 
 
Based on the above exercise, a proposal from NCPOR through the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences for a plan programme towards the Project Maitri II is submitted to 
the Department of Expenditure for an in-principle approval.  
 
No decision has been made yet on the decommissioning of the existing Maitri 
station. Since the construction process will require about 5 Antarctic seasons, we 
need to maintain it till the complete transfer to the new station. Considering the 
extreme challenges involved in dismantling Antarctic stations, following stringent 
Antarctic environmental norms, it is desired that the main part of the Maitri station 
is used as specialised observatories.  A decision on the same will be undertaken 
in due course of time by a duly constituted committee.” 
 
18.30 A query was raised on feasibility of having floating Research station in Arctic 
and Antarctica. Replying to the query, the MEA, in their post evidence written 
submission, stated as under: 
“India currently does not plan to have a floating research station in the polar 
regions. A floating station is cost-intensive and requires a dedicated set-up for the 
transport of personnel when the polar sea is frozen and requires teams to be 
rotated year-round, requiring dedicated air logistics. Currently, there are only 
experimental facilities available internationally.  
The idea of floating research stations is experimental in nature and is designed to 
drift across the Arctic ice, enabling continuous monitoring of a rapidly changing 
environment. A new floating Arctic research station, designed by Tara Ocean 
Foundation based in France, called Tara Polar Station is expected to be ready by 
2026, which is designed to drift with the Arctic sea-ice for long-term climate 
studies, focusing on sea ice, clouds, and food webs, which will use renewable 
energy, and features labs and a "moonpool" for sampling, offering a mobile, year-
round polar observatory. However, such floating research stations are not feasible 
to maintain without an exceptional financial and logistics support system.” 
 
(e) Acquisition of Polar Research Vehicle (PRV) 
18.31 Lack of a dedicated and ice class vessel is identified as a critical bottleneck for 
implementing dedicated scientific and operational activities during Indian Antarctic 
Expedition. In the absence of dedicated polar vessels, the Antarctic programme remains 

 
76 
 
dependent on annual chartering of foreign vessels for logistics and expedition support. 
This reliance not only places recurring pressure but also introduces uncertainties in 
availability of specialised vessels and scheduling, thereby affecting expedition planning 
and execution. The lack of a dedicated polar research vessel is also identified as a 
critical hindrance for the expansion of Arctic exploration beyond Svalbard and restricting 
access to the wider Arctic Ocean, which is the most important and strategic region in 
Arctic. One major setback for Indian polar exploration was the disruptions from the 
COVID-19 pandemic which affected fieldwork and research continuity in both Antarctica 
and Arctic. Since Antarctic stations can’t be shut down as there are people from the 
previous expedition who needs to be evacuated and the critical lifesaving systems of 
stations also needed to be continued. This huge set back was managed by sending a 
dedicated expedition vessel following quarantine protocols all the way from Goa to 
Antarctica. In Arctic, it was impossible to send any expeditions for two years due to 
stringent protocols of Norway for the Svalbard archipelago. This has created a vacuum 
in observational data as most systems could not be maintained on time. It took 
exceptional efforts and planning to repair and make the systems function after the 
situations became normal. Medical emergencies in Antarctica has given many 
challenges to Indian Antarctica Program, which was managed with lots of planning and 
collaborations with other stations and in some cases by medical evacuations, which 
added a layer of operational complexity. It is proposed that Indian Air Force may 
establish expertise to undertake emergency landing and take-off in Antarctica for such 
emergencies. 
18.32 Asked about the objectives of the PRV, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their 
written submission, informed as under: 
“The major objectives of the Polar Research Vessel (PRV) are as follows: 
A Polar Research Vessel will be an ideal platform for the Indian Polar and ocean 
fraternity for undertaking scientific research and logistic operations in the Polar 
regions, protection of India's strategic interests in the global framework of nations 
operating in Antarctica, the Arctic and the tropical seas. The vessel would be the 
platform for the researchers to carry out Polar research and help the Ministry 
develop better programmes and implement Polar Research, Southern Ocean 
Expeditions, and research activities in other unexplored Ocean Areas. The vessel 
shall also provide logistical support to Indian Antarctic Research stations.” 

 
77 
 
18.33 When asked to state the challenges in manufacturing or acquiring PRV by India, 
the Ministry of Earth Sciences informed as follows: 
“Challenges involved in manufacturing a Polar Research Vessel (PRV) are:  
 Lack of expertise and experience in building an ice-class vessel in the 
country requires reputed shipyards to collaborate with established global 
shipyards.  
 Extremely limited availability of experienced shipyards in India with 
potential capability of building such a complex vessel. 
 Tie-ups between Indian shipyards with foreign shipyards capable of 
building polar vessels need to be enhanced. 
 Specialised steel requirements that needs to be imported (high-strength 
and low-alloy (HSLA) steel e.g. NV E36/EH36/DH36). 
 Availability of advanced propulsion systems and machinery for polar 
operations. 
 Lack of experience in design and winterization of shipboard systems for 
polar (sub-zero temperature) operations.  
 Lack of “maritime cluster" within the country where specialized 
components (sensors, reinforced propellers, and polar-grade 
electronics) are manufactured/available in close proximity, which might 
lead to significant supply chain delays.” 
 
18.34 Further asked about the time frame within which the PRV is proposed to be 
acquired, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, informed in their written submission that the 
proposed timeline for the project is 5 years (2025-26 to 2029-30) at an estimated cost 
of (including the escalations) Rs. 2685.16 Cr. As regards cost escalation, the Secretary 
MoES stated following during the course of evidence held on 23 July, 2025: 
“Of course, we are going one step ahead and two steps back in Polar 
Research Vessel. Why is it so? When we estimated earlier, it was about Rs. 
400 crore. We went for tendering process and other things. Finally, it has 
come to a very big amount. Then again, we re-tendered and again there was 
an approval process. It has gone back and forth. Then finally it was told that 
it has to be made in India, and unfortunately the ship hull cannot be made in 
India because it is having unique things. Then we discussed with the 
Shipping Ministry. In the last week only, in-principle approval has been given 
by the Finance Ministry because it has escalated to more than Rs. 2,300 
crore… Already design is there. Now we only have to go for identifying the 
shipyard within India. Only hull portion will be helped by other country.” 
18.35 Keeping in view the delay in acquiring PRV, the Committee asked the reasons 
for not going for a hired ship or buying a second hand PRV. Responding to this, the 
Secretary, MoES further stated the following: 
“Sir, we have to build our own. When we have a station, I think it is imperative 
that we have to build, but simultaneously we will hire it… Research ship is made 
in India in many of the shipyards. Only the hull is not made in India because it 

 
78 
 
has to break the ice. For that, workmanship is required rather than the 
machinery.” 
18.36 Explaining the need for owning icebreaker research ship, a non official witness 
submitted before the Committee as under: 
“We cannot do multiple domain science because we are basically cargo ships, 
as my colleague has told. If we take old junk ships, there are very few countries 
those who can build the ice-class vessels.”  
18.37 However, during the deliberations on the matter, he further explained the 
constraints as under: 
“there is a difference between icebreaker and ice-class ships. The ice-class 
ships are okay, and you can go up to one-meter thick ice or one year of ice. 
There is also a question of multi-year ice and one-year ice. One-year ice is 
okay, for example, summer ice of the Arctic, and ordinary ships can go in four 
months and maybe the strengthened ships can go in for a couple of more 
months but during the winter they cannot go. You have to have an icebreaker. 
Making an icebreaker is very difficult because of the technology for the hull. Hull 
is the main thing that is required in the icebreaker ships… That technology is 
not available in India, that is preventing us from going for the manufacture of 
icebreakers.” 
 
(f) National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) 
18.38 The Government of India created the Department of Ocean Development (DOD) 
in 1981, immediately after the successful completion of the first Indian Antarctic 
Expedition, to focus on ocean development activities. To provide a dedicated institutional 
support to the Antarctic expeditions, the DOD created the Antarctic Study Centre in 1998 
as an attached office in Goa. The same was elevated and dedicated to the nation in the 
year 2000 as an autonomous institution, named the National Centre for Antarctic and 
Ocean Research (NCAOR). In 2006, the DOD was elevated to a Ministry, known as the 
Ministry of Ocean Development. Later that same year, the Ministry underwent 
reorganisation and the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) was created, incorporating 
various institutions of Earth System Sciences under its jurisdiction for effective 
integration of both service-oriented and basic research institutions. Further, with the 
strong expansion of scientific activities to the Arctic, Southern Ocean and Himalayas, 
the NCAOR was renamed as National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR). 
The NCPOR is responsible for planning, coordinating and executing India's Polar 
programs in Antarctica, Arctic and the Southern Ocean. Towards this mammoth initiative, 
NCPOR operates two year-round stations in Antarctica (Maitri and Bharati), a station in 
Svalbard, Arctic (Himadri), and a high-altitude station in the Himalayas (Himansh). While 
scientific research is the guiding light of NCPOR, conducting science in polar regions 
and managing polar expeditions involve complex logistics, operations and liaisoning with 
multiple institutions, making the NCPOR a truly “Indian Gateway to the Polar Regions”. 

 
79 
 
18.39 The NCPOR activities encompass polar expeditions and frontline research 
activities in the remote and challenging regions of the Antarctic, Arctic, Himalayas, and 
Southern Ocean through dedicated logistic operations and undertake state-of-the-art 
surveying, mapping, and exploring non-living resources in the deep seas within the vast 
expanse of the Indian Ocean.  
(g) Human Resource strength in NCPOR 
S
l
. 
N
o
.
Sanctioned/
Filled 
Scientists Scientific/
Technical 
support 
Administrative 
    Group A Group B&C Group D 
1. Sanctioned 56 08 03 22 09 
2. Filled 54 08 03 22 09 
 
18.40 On being enquired about the details of manpower available at various levels in 
NCPOR and whether the current strength is adequate for undertaking research in polar 
science, the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their post evidence written submission 
informed the Committee as under: 
“NCPOR being the dedicated institution for the entire polar activities of the 
country, the manpower allotted to NCPOR is woefully inadequate due to the 
following reasons: The NCPOR (National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research) 
was originally established in 2000 as NCAOR (National Centre for Antarctic 
Ocean Research) to manage the Antarctic program. At that time, NCAOR was 
handling only one research station (Maitri) in Antarctica and had no activities in 
Arctic, Southern Ocean or Himalaya. Through the last 25 years, the activities 
have grown several folds as another Antarctic research station (Bharati) was 
added in 2012, situated about 2500 km away from Maitri, adding several layers 
of complicated logistics. Again, initiated expeditions to Arctic and established 
many facilities in Svalbard since 2007, initiated Southern Ocean program since 
2004, Himalayan glaciological studies in 2013 and a new station (Himansh) in 
high Himalayas in 2016 and many new responsibilities of deep-sea exploration 
entrusted to NCPOR. However, no any significant addition in manpower 
happened, except 13 posts sanctioned under the Deep Ocean Mission in 2022. 
Currently, on top of the ever expanding activities in Antarctica, Arctic, Southern 
Ocean and Himalaya, NCPOR is responsible for conducting detailed exploration 
activities for hydrothermal sulphide mineral exploration in the mid-Indian Ocean 
Ridges as per the contract signed between the International Seabed Authority 

 
80 
 
(ISA) and Government of India. This has led to significant constraints at NCPOR 
to undertake serious scientific contributions in polar exploration as most scientists 
are getting bogged down by the operational activities. A proposal for an additional 
77 permanent posts, including 53 scientists has been submitted to MoES, which 
is under consideration with DoE. Sanction of these posts will be critical for 
undertaking adequate scientific research and logistic operations in polar regions.” 
18.41 When a query was raised about the shortfall in the infrastructural and human 
resource with NCPOR for carrying out polar expeditions and scientific research, the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“The polar programmes are steadfastly supported by the Government since their 
inception, enabling NCPOR to expand its activities across the Antarctic, Arctic, 
Southern Ocean and Himalayas. However, considering the exceptional 
challenges faced by the polar regions in a warming climate requiring a significant 
increase in scientific and operational activities, with a substantial increase in 
scientific and technical manpower. Two of the most critical and high-priority areas 
that need focus are: 
Replacement of Maitri Station in Antarctica – Maitri Station, built in 1989, has 
outlived its life and is beyond meaningful repair. The station facilities do not allow 
any modern laboratories and are also not consistent with the stringent 
environmental rules under the Antarctic Treaty as well as the Indian Antarctic Act 
2022. 
Construction of a Polar Research Vessel - The availability of an ice-class vessel 
is a critical requirement for any countries that have meaningful scientific activities 
in the Antarctic and Arctic. Currently, we manage the Antarctic supplies using ice-
class vessels hired through global chartering process. However, there is a huge 
dearth of available vessels in the market, putting the Indian Antarctic Program at 
a huge disadvantage. Further, such supply vessels don’t have facilities for 
oceanographic surveys and sampling. Most importantly, to be an important player 
in Arctic, we must have a polar research vessel with ice-breaking capacity to 
navigate and undertake Pan-Arctic studies. 
Substantial increase in scientific and technical manpower is required to undertake 
scientific and operational activities in multiple domains of polar regions. Currently, 
NCPOR has subcritical core manpower.”  
18.42 Regarding the shortage of manpower at NCPOR, an expert submitted before the 
Committee as under: 
“More than the budget, what the NCPOR really needs is adequate manpower. 
We are working with a very critical manpower. I will give you examples. If I am 
wrong, Dr. Thamban can correct me. For our Arctic operations, we just have three 
or four people. For our Himalayan operations, we have only two people for more 
than 12 glaciers in which we are operating and monitoring. You cannot have the 

 
81 
 
entire Himalayas covered with two people where we have 9,000 glaciers. The 
manpower is critical or rather subcritical. It is related with the sanction strength of 
the Institute, which is restricted to 55 or so.” 
18.43 On being questioned further about the adequacy of the financial allocation for 
various Projects undertaken under the aegis of NCPOR, the Ministry of External Affairs, 
in their written submission, further submitted: 
“it is necessary to substantially increase funding support to exploration activities 
in polar regions. Most importantly, immediate investments are desired for 
acquiring of a polar ice-class vessel and a new station in Antarctica to replace the 
outlived Maitri station.” 
XIX Polar studies in educational institutions 
19.0 Another query was raised about the measures taken to promote participation by 
Indian academic Institutions in research activities of Arctic and Antarctic areas. In this 
regard, the Ministry of Earth Sciences apprised the Committee following: 
“Under the Indian Antarctic and Arctic Programme, more than 120 organizations 
and universities have been facilitated to undertake scientific projects in polar 
regions. This has significantly enhanced the national level capacity in polar 
exploration. NCPOR annually invites scientific research proposals under 
identified thematic areas for studies in both Antarctica and the Arctic. These calls 
are open to researchers affiliated with recognised academic and research 
institutions across the country and are widely publicised through national 
newspapers, website, and official social media platforms to ensure broad 
outreach and transparency. This extensive outreach has led to increased quality 
and quantity of scientific proposals for implementation in Antarctica and Arctic. 
Most importantly, two universities— Cochin University of Science and Technology 
(CUSAT) and Mahatma Gandhi University (MGU)—have established centres of 
excellence in polar studies in consultation with NCPOR. Further, the University 
Grants Commission (UGC) offers specialized Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOC) on polar studies through the SWAYAM platform, supported by MoES. 
There are three primary MOOC courses frequently offered in the January and 
July semesters. Such inclusive capacity building within the country has expanded 
the participation of Indian academic Institutions in research activities of Arctic and 
Antarctic areas.” 
 
19.1 The Committee have been apprised that inclusion of Polar science in the 
educational curricula will further strengthen our capacity to undertake research and 
studies in this area. A non official witness submitted following in this regard: 
“Optimising, operationalising six pillars of Arctic policy, I would say the most 
important pillar as of now would be, there is a pillar called capacity building. We 
need to build Indian capacities on the Arctic for which we need to start from the 
grassroots. So, we must have Arctic and Antarctica included in our secondary, 
primary and senior secondary syllabus. UGC has started a programme which 
is called SWAYAM. So, if you undertake SWAYAM, it is an online portal. For any 

 
82 
 
under-graduate student and post-graduate students, you can take forty lectures 
and get four credits in your under-graduate or post-graduate programme. But 
this needs to be started at a lower level as well and we also need to provide 
employment opportunities to the students who are taking Arctic and Antarctic 
studies. So, there also, I would request the Committee to actually recommend 
that in capacity building, we must have a greater thing.  
We must set up some Arctic Chair, we must have Department of Arctic studies 
in some universities.” 
 
19.2 The Committee have been informed that at national level, conferences on Polar 
sciences (NCPS) have been organized consecutively in 2021, 2023   and 2025 to give 
platform to young and early career scientists to showcase their findings and research 
results. Seminars and conferences on science and geopolitics of Arctic-Antarctic 
(SaGAA) by private think tanks, involving international speakers, have also been held 
since 2011 biennially. 
19.3 Asked to give a brief on input by think tanks to enable the Government in 
understanding and strengthening India’s role and presence in the region, the Ministry 
of External Affairs, in their written submission, stated as under:  
“Some think tanks engaged, include Science and Geopolitics of Arctic and 
Antarctic, Vivekanand International Foundation, Manohar Parrikar Institute of 
Defence Studies and Analyses and Observer Research Foundation. These 
think tanks conduct regular conferences, events, etc. on the Arctic related 
issues, which include participation of diverse groups of stakeholders. Their 
deliberations and reports help all stakeholders, including governmental 
stakeholders to better understand issues under consideration. This will also 
help India to calibrate its presence internationally on these issues and engage 
with relevant international interlocutors.”  
 
19.4 International and national collaborations provide a platform where collaborators 
can share their strengths and complement their challenges and limitations with the 
strengths of their counterparts. Indian Antarctic Program is a multi-institutional and multi-
disciplinary program in which more than 130 institutions/ universities from India and 
abroad have contributed so far.  
19.5 During the last decade, India has been striving to enhance its international 
collaborations in Antarctica (and also in other Polar and ocean realms) with Norway, 
Japan, Belgium, Sweden UK, USA and other countries that are actively involved in polar 
research, through which new insights in Antarctic research can be unlocked. Towards 
this goal, it has recently signed or renewed several Memorandum of Understanding with 
several international institutions. Recently, India has signed an MoU with the United Arab 

 
83 
 
Emirates (UAE) to mentor its fledgling polar research activities. Further, under the 
neighbourhood-first policy, India has helped researchers from Bangladesh and Mauritius 
to undertake Antarctic expeditions as part of the Indian Scientific Expeditions to 
Antarctica. All these reveal India’s increasing clout among countries involved in polar 
scientific research. 
 
  

 
84 
 
Part II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. Overview of India’s role and presence in ArcƟc and AntarcƟc  
 The CommiƩee note that ArcƟc region is considered to be above 66 
degrees North LaƟtude, and the AntarcƟc region usually refers to areas 60 
degrees South laƟtude.  The two regions represent nearly 90% of the ice sheet 
of the planet and store 70% of fresh water source. While ArcƟc is a sea 
surrounded by landmass, AntarcƟca is a landmass surrounded by Sea.  ArcƟc 
Coastal States have sovereign rights on their areas including Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) and the right over extended conƟnental shelves under UN 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Antarctica has no sovereign 
control of any nation.  The CommiƩee note that ArcƟc and AntarcƟc regions 
have a very important role in global climate system. These areas have been the 
hotbed of scienƟﬁc researches. MelƟng of land ice in Greenland in the ArcƟc 
has been predicted to cause rise in sea level by about seven metres while 
melƟng of land ice in AntarcƟca can cause the sea level to rise by 
approximately 60 metres, which will put our coastal areas under grave danger. 
The CommiƩee have been informed by the experts that most modelling 
studies predict that the Arctic will be ice-free at least during the summer months, 
before 2050 if current emission trends continue, and some studies suggest it 
may happen even faster. Poles are warming enormously higher than the rest of 
the world, three to four times higher than global average. The CommiƩee 
further note that while the warming trend has aggravated the temperature and 
rainfall ﬂuctuaƟons globally, it has also opened up the hitherto untouched 
polar areas for further exploraƟon. The changed scenario in the polar regions 
has given rise to the possibility of navigaƟng the poles, exploring its resources 

 
85 
 
and uƟlizing these areas for strategic advantages. The CommiƩee also note 
that India has been a leading country for scienƟﬁc researches in these regions 
and has supported protecƟon of its prisƟne environment. However, with the 
promise of new avenues and a desire to control, all the major powers of the 
world are increasingly drawn towards the polar regions. The CommiƩee note 
from the informaƟon provided by the Ministry of Earth Sciences and the 
Ministry of External Aﬀairs that India’s ArcƟc Policy 2022 and AntarcƟc Act 
2022 govern India’s Policy and Governance framework in Polar Regions. The 
CommiƩee also note that India’s tool of engagements have been science 
diplomacy, rule-based engagement, diversiﬁed partnerships, inclusive 
mulƟlateralism, energy cooperaƟon and research opportuniƟes. Considering 
that many broader strategic and economic capabiliƟes are sƟll evolving, the 
CommiƩee are of the view that India needs to evolve a long-term policy which 
will take into consideraƟon various emerging challenges and enable India to 
play a prominent role in the Polar regions.  
  
2.  Need for focussed scienƟﬁc research to miƟgate the impact of polar ice 
melt on India 
 
 The CommiƩee observe that India has been an early parƟcipant in 
scienƟﬁc pursuit in polar regions due to its keen interest in understanding the 
relaƟon between Himalayan, polar climate and monsoon. Though India is a 
tropical country, its climate, especially monsoon system, is greatly inﬂuenced 
by the dynamics of polar climate.  They note that changes in ArcƟc Sea ice have 
been found to be associated with extreme rainfall in India.  The CommiƩee 
note from the submission of experts that thawing of arcƟc permafrost releases 
signiﬁcant amounts of carbon dioxide and methane stored in the frozen soil, 

 
86 
 
leading to hazards such as accidents on unstable roads and building collapses 
and a large number of Himalayan hazards are actually related to thawing of land, 
which is becoming very unstable. The changing climate is also contributing to 
storm surges, with an increase in extreme weather events, such as cyclones in 
the Arabian Sea, which we used to see before in the Bay of Bengal.   Most of the 
Coastal regions in India are in vulnerable situation because even a few 
centimetres of sea level increase can lead to a substantial land loss. Thus, small 
changes in the sea level can have cascading effects. MelƟng of ice in the ArcƟc 
and the AntarcƟc regions has been predicted to cause rise in the sea level 
which will put our coastal areas under grave danger. The CommiƩee are glad 
to note that India has played a key role in making AntarcƟca a common asset 
for the humanity and supporƟng it as an area of peace which ulƟmately got 
reﬂected in the AntarcƟc treaty. India became a party to the Svalbard treaty in 
1920 giving equal rights of access for scienƟﬁc research and commercial 
acƟvity on the Svalbard archipelago in ArcƟc and became a ConsultaƟve Party 
to the AntarcƟc Treaty in 1983. They ﬁnd that India played an important role 
in polar research and acƟvely parƟcipated in all the internaƟonal endeavours 
for dealing with related issues. While appreciaƟng India’s vision as science-
driven and environmentally responsible actor in both the ArcƟc and AntarcƟc, 
the CommiƩee are of the opinion that translaƟng this vision into reality will 
require a lot of eﬀorts to develop its indigenous capability for more intense 
scienƟﬁc research and devising eﬀecƟve measures to minimise the impact of 
climate change. It may be menƟoned here that India is one of the countries 
working in AntarcƟca, ArcƟc and Himalayas, with Research StaƟons having 
data of the three regions. This places India in a posiƟon to give a holisƟc picture 
of the enƟre cryosphere, such as eﬀects of climate change, impact of glacial ice 
melt on Indian Monsoon and rise in the sea level, etc.  Keeping in view the fact 
that small changes in the sea level can endanger our coastal regions, it is 

 
87 
 
necessary that we take acƟve interest in scienƟﬁc research to understand the 
impact of polar ice melt on India. This would require sustained scienƟﬁc 
research, establishment of more monitoring staƟons with state-of-the-art 
infrastructure, promoƟon of comparaƟve studies of ArcƟc, AntarcƟc and 
Himalaya to understand global teleconnecƟons and development of advanced 
climate modelling, etc. The CommiƩee recommend that Ministry may acƟvely 
look into the issues and apprise them of the progress made. 
They further note that the Indian research is sƟll facing challenges such as 
restricƟons on research acƟviƟes due to most of the ArcƟc territory lying under 
the jurisdicƟon of sovereign States, limited access to the central ArcƟc Ocean 
for ﬁeld observaƟons, remoteness and logisƟc challenges in accessing the 
various ArcƟc Research StaƟons, while ensuring minimal adverse 
environmental impact, etc. As underlined by the Ministry of External Aﬀairs, 
many of these issues necessitate long-term approaches and are under 
consideraƟon of relevant Ministries and Government of India agencies. In this 
regard, the CommiƩee would like to urge the Ministry of External Aﬀairs to 
take up the maƩer with the relevant Ministries within the Government of India 
agencies, and Member countries of the ArcƟc Region for removal of various 
restricƟons on research acƟviƟes.  
 
3. The CommiƩee note that India’s ArcƟc policy has laid a solid foundaƟon 
to strengthen scienƟﬁc capabiliƟes, expand research network, iniƟate 
academic courses and build insƟtuƟonal capacity to study the ArcƟc. However, 
the CommiƩee have been informed by the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MOES) 
that many new restricƟons have been brought by the Norwegian Government 
for undertaking research in Svalbard region of ArcƟc, such as permission from 
the Government of Svalbard for any ﬁeld acƟviƟes, rules and restricƟons 

 
88 
 
imposed by Norwegian Strategy for Research and Higher EducaƟon in Svalbard 
and Research strategy for Ny-Ålesund Research staƟon. The MOES has further 
stated that such regulaƟon is making it diﬃcult for them to enhance R&D 
acƟviƟes in Svalbard. Taking note of the Prime Minister’s recent visit to Norway 
and the warm relaƟonship between the two countries, the CommiƩee, desire 
that the Ministry may take up the maƩer with the Government of Norway to 
address the issue of increased restricƟons faced by the MOES in Svalbard to 
conduct various R&D acƟviƟes.   
 
4.  Dedicated Polar Ambassador 
 The CommiƩee note that as far as the polar areas are concerned, Polar 
Cell in the United NaƟons Economic and Social (UNES) Division of the Ministry, 
headed by Joint Secretary (UNES) has been given the responsibility for 
handling all maƩers related to India’s engagement with the polar region.  This 
division takes care of India's outreach and engagement as well as India’s 
parƟcipaƟon in global policy plaƞorms. They further note that with regard to 
the polar regions, focused and sustained policy approach is adopted aŌer due 
consultaƟon with the Indian Embassies abroad and Government of India 
agencies/Ministries. However, as informed by the Ministry of External Aﬀairs, 
many countries are exploring insƟtuƟonalized or dedicated mechanisms to 
handle polar related issues, including appoinƟng a Polar/ ArcƟc Aﬀairs 
Ambassador or a dedicated representaƟve/ CommiƩee/ desk to deal with the 
maƩer. In view of the CommiƩee, this shows the increasing importance being 
aƩached to polar regions by the other countries of the world. The CommiƩee 
note that the lack of a Polar Ambassador, has also been highlighted by the 
experts dealing with polar maƩers who emphasized having exclusive 
ambassador to align our policy with all other countries taking interest in polar 

 
89 
 
areas. Taking note of the fact that all ArcƟc Council Member States and most 
Non-ArcƟc Observer States including Japan, China, Singapore and South Korea 
have Polar/ ArcƟc Ambassador along with a dedicated Polar/ArcƟc Aﬀairs Desk 
or Department, it is imperaƟve that India also has such an ambassador at a 
level equivalent to other countries exclusively to deal with polar regions. 
CreaƟng such a posiƟon will not only help India project the importance given 
to these regions in its foreign policy architecture but will also help put across 
its policy stance in relaƟon to polar areas/ pursue polar diplomacy in a more 
eﬀecƟve manner. The CommiƩee, therefore, recommend the Government to 
consider appoinƟng a polar ambassador for polar engagement and facilitaƟng 
collaboraƟon.  
5. Third Pole: The Himalaya connecƟon and India’s signiﬁcance as a leading 
polar research naƟon 
   The CommiƩee note that the Himalayas has been oŌen referred to as 
the ‘Third pole’. It holds 12,000 km³ of ice and has largest concentraƟon of 
glaciers. Like polar regions, the Himalayas also have a major inﬂuence on global 
climate apart from funcƟoning as a carbon sink and playing a criƟcal role in soil 
conservaƟon, water puriﬁcaƟon, etc. The CommiƩee ﬁnd that various research 
insƟtutes such as NaƟonal Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR), the 
Wadia InsƟtute of Himalayan Geology, ISRO, etc. have been undertaking 
extensive research to understand the climaƟc impact of melƟng glaciers in the 
Himalayas as it is not only the freshwater source for billions of people but also 
is an important source for their livelihood and economy due to its direct 
connecƟon with monsoon and rainfall variaƟons which, of late, has been 
greatly aﬀected by warming of the mountains. The importance of Himalayas 
can be seen from the fact that it has the largest concentraƟon of snow and ice 
outside the AntarcƟc and ArcƟc Regions.  It signiﬁcantly impacts global climate 

 
90 
 
by inﬂuencing weather paƩerns, acƟng as a water tower of Asia, and 
contribuƟng to regional and global temperature regulaƟon.  Keeping in view 
India’s signiﬁcant contribuƟons to global scienƟﬁc community in polar 
research and the important role played by India in understanding the impact 
of global warming, the CommiƩee feel that India has a crucial role in any 
discourse on polar regions. The CommiƩee, therefore, are of the view that the 
Government should pursue its polar diplomacy to project India as one of the 
leading naƟons involved in polar research and development and parƟcularly 
highlight the contribuƟon of Himalayan glaciers and rivers as a source of 
freshwater and its vast repertoire of medicinal wealth which has great value 
for humanity.  In this regard, the CommiƩee urge the Government to 
signiﬁcantly enhance our operaƟonal and scienƟﬁc engagement.  The 
CommiƩee further urge the Government to take a leadership role in some 
major internaƟonal programme, such as the UN Decade of AcƟon for 
Cryospheric sciences (2025-34), InSync IniƟaƟve (2027-30) and 5th 
InternaƟonal Polar year, etc. 
6. Membership of the ArcƟc Council 
 The CommiƩee note that even though India was an original signatory to 
the Svalbard Treaty, 1920 and undertook the ﬁrst ArcƟc expediƟon in the year 
2007, India joined ArcƟc council as ‘Observer’ in the year 2013. They further 
note that the status as ‘Observer’ is respected among non-ArcƟc States as it 
provides opportuniƟes for closer Ɵes with the ArcƟc Council States. However, 
there are several limitaƟons on Observer countries as they cannot take part in 
decision making process or make ﬁnancial contribuƟon or undertake research 
in the ArcƟc directly. The CommiƩee are happy to note that as an Observer 
State, India has been acƟvely parƟcipaƟng in several Working Groups (WG) of 
ArcƟc Council and various InternaƟonal Forums.  The CommiƩee note that 

 
91 
 
ArcƟc council is composed of eight ArcƟc Member States (Canada, Denmark, 
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and USA),  Permanent ParƟcipants 
(ArcƟc indigenous groups) and 13 Observer States  (France, Germany, 
Netherlands, Poland, Spain, UK, India, China, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, 
Italy and Switzerland).  Keeping in view the diverse areas of work being taken 
up by India and adding to the knowledge about the region, the CommiƩee are 
of the opinion that full-ﬂedged membership of the council will allow India to 
be more acƟvely engaged and be a representaƟve of the Global South.  They 
also note from the submissions of the Ministries of External Aﬀairs and Earth 
Sciences that though full membership of the ArcƟc council is crucial to make a 
greater impact, the ArcƟc Council's rules of procedure do not have provisions 
to incorporate countries outside the ArcƟc Council as members. In this regard, 
keeping in view India’s potenƟal to play a more eﬀecƟve role in the region, the 
CommiƩee feel that the need for India to have a voice in the governance and 
decision-making process in ArcƟc Council has never been more pressing as at 
present due to the direct linkage between the change in ArcƟc climate and 
climate condiƟon in India. The CommiƩee are, therefore, of the view that the 
Government should take up the maƩer of ‘member’ status whenever there is 
a review of the Council. Further, as stated by the MEA, India should conƟnue 
to further deepen its Ɵes with the ArcƟc naƟons and other Observers to play a 
leading role in the development of the ArcƟc region and seek their support to 
work as a Member of the Council in future. 
7. ArcƟc Policy 2022 
 The CommiƩee are glad to note that the ArcƟc Policy, 2022 has 
beneﬁƩed Indian scienƟsts to explore north polar areas beyond Svalbard, like 
Canadian ArcƟc, Central ArcƟc, East Greenland Sea and North Eastern 
Greenland.  The CommiƩee note that India’s ArcƟc policy, 2022 is based on six 

 
92 
 
pillars viz. Science and Research, Climate and Environmental ProtecƟon, 
Economic and Human Development, TransportaƟon and ConnecƟvity, 
Governance and InternaƟonal CooperaƟon and NaƟonal Capacity Building. 
Further, India’s policy approach has been focused on adopƟon of a scienƟﬁc 
studies-led, sustainability-focused, and partnership-driven approach to 
contribute meaningfully to the development of the ArcƟc. However, evolving 
landscape of the ArcƟc due to rapidly changing climate has brought the 
geopoliƟcs of this area into the centre stage. In the changing geopoliƟcs of this 
area, major powers have shown a keen interest to secure their strategic,  
economic, and energy needs. Therefore, to maintain its supremacy as a 
dominant science based player with acƟve presence in the region since long, 
the CommiƩee recommend that the ArcƟc policy should be expanded to 
include ‘GeopoliƟcs and Strategy’ as another guiding factor to establish India 
as an important power in the ArcƟc. 
8. India- Russia relaƟons in the context of ArcƟc region 
 The CommiƩee note that Russia is a major ArcƟc State with more than 
half of the ArcƟc coastline within its boundary which is sƟll unexplored. 
Discussions on joint investment in infrastructure projects in ArcƟc zone, 
construcƟon of ice-class vessels in India and training the Indian crews in Polar 
waters are being discussed between India and Russia. They further note that 
during the 23rd India-Russia Annual Summit, both the countries have 
commiƩed to intensify trade and investment cooperaƟon in the Far East and 
the ArcƟc zone of the Russian FederaƟon. A Memorandum of Understanding 
has been signed between the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, India 
and the Ministry of Transport of the Russian FederaƟon on the training of 
Specialists for Ships OperaƟng in Polar Waters besides MoU between NCPOR 
and the Shirshov InsƟtute of Oceanology, Russian Academy of Sciences (IORAS) 

 
93 
 
to promote internaƟonal academic cooperaƟon and enhance the eﬀecƟveness 
of the joint research invesƟgaƟons in areas of mutual interest across the polar 
regions and ocean realms. While the steps taken to form stronger partnership 
with Russia are a welcome move, taking this partnership at the next level may 
not be an easy task considering the present crisis in Ukraine and the aƩempt 
by some countries to isolate Russia. NoƟng the policy stance adopted by the 
Government to pursue an independent foreign policy approach with all the 
countries and its engagements without geƫng inﬂuenced by its relaƟons with 
others, the CommiƩee recommend that diplomaƟc channels should be used 
to impress the other countries on the need for taking Russia on board to work 
in the ArcƟc area which is experiencing drasƟc climate change, the 
repercussions of which, will be not limited to only ArcƟc but will be faced 
across the globe. The CommiƩee also urge the Ministry to explore the 
possibility of accessing Russian ArcƟc Research StaƟons for beƩer 
understanding of connecƟon between polar warming, ice melt in the ArcƟc 
and its impact on the Himalayas.   
9. India’s engagement with ArcƟc naƟons 
 The CommiƩee note that India has been engaging with ArcƟc countries 
to secure its interest in climate resilience, energy security, trade and sea-route 
governance, while remaining commiƩed as a responsible global stakeholder. 
However, being an Observer State in the ArcƟc Council, a lot of challenges are 
sƟll hindering its eﬀorts in this regard. The CommiƩee feel that collaboraƟon 
and engagement with the ArcƟc States should be pursued more intensively to 
enable India to achieve its goal. However, they ﬁnd that India’s Ɵes with the 
ArcƟc naƟons have not been as strong as other Asian naƟons such as China, 
Japan, South Korea and the UAE due to ﬁnancial, logisƟcal and policy issues 
viz. lower capacity to invest, lack of adequate number of scienƟﬁc manpower, 

 
94 
 
absence of a dedicated polar research vehicle, absence of a polar ambassador 
or dedicated desks for polar engagement, etc. In this regard, while appreciaƟng 
the Ministry’s submission that India’s engagement in the ArcƟc region has seen 
a consistent upward trajectory and more partnerships are being formed at 
poliƟcal, economic, scienƟﬁc and insƟtuƟonal level, the CommiƩee are of the 
view that there is an urgent need to give a further push to India’s polar strategy. 
As the ArcƟc is going to be the potenƟal area which will see a major contenƟon 
for power and hegemony, immediate steps are needed to strengthen bilateral 
and mulƟlateral Ɵes in this region, along with reinforcement of ﬁnancial and 
infrastructural capaciƟes of Indian insƟtuƟons. The CommiƩee are of the view 
that India needs to expand its scienƟﬁc, logisƟcal and operaƟonal capaciƟes in 
order to have an important leadership role in the Polar Regions. The 
CommiƩee, therefore, recommend the Government to take necessary steps in 
this regard and apprise them of the progress made. 
10. Role as a leader of Global South 
 The CommiƩee have been informed by the Ministry of External Aﬀairs 
that India has always been commiƩed towards addressing the needs and 
aspiraƟons of fellow developing countries and has been construcƟvely 
championing the cause of holisƟc human-centric development of countries of 
the Global South. The CommiƩee are of the view that India’s membership in 
key internaƟonal polar scienƟﬁc and operaƟonal bodies provide an excellent 
opportunity for India to represent the voice of the Global South in these 
bodies. The CommiƩee further note that NaƟonal Centre for Polar and Ocean 
Research (NCPOR) is currently helping the UAE to undertake scienƟﬁc acƟviƟes 
in AntarcƟca and has already supported countries such as Bangladesh and 
MauriƟus to parƟcipate in the Indian AntarcƟc ExpediƟon. Further, as the 
leading voice of the Global South, India’s commitment for holisƟc and human-

 
95 
 
centric development of all the countries in the Global South is truly 
commendable. The CommiƩee hope that the Government will adopt a suitable 
strategy to further strengthen its role as a representaƟve of the Global South 
advocaƟng their collecƟve interests in the ArcƟc and the AntarcƟc Regions. 
11. Quadrilateral agreement with Japan, South Korea and Singapore 
 The CommiƩee have been informed by an expert that China, Japan and 
South Korea have a trilateral agreement on the ArcƟc. Accordingly, the expert 
has suggested that India, Japan and South Korea may also have trilateral 
agreement on the ArcƟc. The CommiƩee note that MOU had been signed 
between India and Japan in 2016 to promote cooperaƟon in the ﬁeld of marine 
and earth science and technology, which was renewed again in 2023, by adding 
three new areas of collaboraƟon viz. modelling of climate variability, marine 
plasƟcs and glacial hydrology.  A Memorandum of CooperaƟon (MOC) between 
the NaƟonal Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR), India and NaƟonal 
InsƟtute of Polar research (NIPR) Japan was signed in 2019 to promote 
collaboraƟon in polar research. No such memorandum has been signed 
between India and South Korea. However, India is engaging with the key 
stakeholders in South Korea which deals with the ArcƟc aﬀairs. Taking note of 
the suggesƟon of the experts, the CommiƩee are of the view that there should 
be greater collaboraƟon among ArcƟc Council Observer naƟons in  
Asia viz. India, Japan, South Korea and Singapore to pursue their interests in 
the ArcƟc region. The CommiƩee, therefore, recommend the Government to 
have a quadrilateral agreement among India, Japan, Singapore and South 
Korea so as to enhance our collecƟve voice in the ArcƟc Council in which the 
four countries are Observers.  
12. ArcƟc geopoliƟcs 

 
96 
 
 The CommiƩee have been informed by an expert during the 
examinaƟon of the subject that there has been a renewed interest of the 
United States to increase its presence in the ArcƟc. Further, United States is the 
only Country having a naƟonal strategy on the ArcƟc. The CommiƩee have also 
been informed by the expert that two third of the Russia’s Strategic deterrence 
is based in the Kola peninsula. A military exercise was held in 2024 by NATO 
wherein 20,000 military personnel from 13 countries parƟcipated including 
4,000 military personnel from Finland. The conﬂict in Ukraine has further 
complicated the situaƟon in the ArcƟc region. The CommiƩee further note that 
due to the conﬂict, the seven ArcƟc Council member States which are all 
members of NATO had paused formal cooperaƟon with Russia in 2022, 
aﬀecƟng ﬁeldwork, data exchange and logisƟcal cooperaƟon in the ArcƟc. No 
data is now available on permafrost research from Russia, which covers more 
than 40% of the ArcƟc. The CommiƩee are of the view that the ArcƟc is 
inextricably linked to global aﬀairs and India has an important role to play in 
it. The CommiƩee, therefore, recommend India to play a more construcƟve 
and acƟve role in bridging the gap between the ArcƟc States and Russia for 
promoƟon of scienƟﬁc research, global peace and harmony.   
13. ExploitaƟon of ArcƟc mineral resources 
 The CommiƩee have been informed by an expert that the ArcƟc 
contains about 30 percent of the world’s undiscovered natural gas and 13 
percent of oil. It has some of the biggest known deposits of gold, coal, gypsum, 
nickel and diamonds. Greenland alone possesses about one fourth of the 
world’s rare earth resources. Regarding the requirement of criƟcal minerals in 
India, from the submissions made before the CommiƩee, it is observed that 
criƟcal minerals required for two sectors, viz. AcƟve PharmaceuƟcal 
Ingredients (API) and Air condiƟoners (ACs) are stated to be available in the 

 
97 
 
ArcƟc. The CommiƩee are of the view that the demand for ACs in India is going 
to be colossal with global warming. It has to be produced in mass and can no 
longer be treated as luxury items. Since both pharmaceuƟcals and the 
manufacturing of air condiƟoning appliances have a huge market in India and 
will only grow in the near future, it is important that India enters into 
partnerships/agreements for the assured supply of these criƟcal minerals. 
They ﬁnd that India has joined the Mineral Security Partnership in June 2023 
as its 14th member which include ArcƟc countries such as the US, Canada, 
Norway, Finland and Sweden. Further, a new MOU has been signed with US in 
October, 2024 to expand and diversify criƟcal minerals supply chains. While 
fully agreeing with the views of the Ministry that the exploitaƟon of resources 
in this region has to be evaluated from environmental, commercial and 
technological perspecƟves before any study can be undertaken about its 
potenƟal impact on the global supply chain, the CommiƩee recommend that 
supply of mineral resources for API and Air condiƟoning appliances, including 
other criƟcal mineral resources should be an important component of 
diplomaƟc dialogue/engagement with ArcƟc naƟons.  
14. Northern Sea Route and Eastern MariƟme Corridor 
 The CommiƩee note that the melƟng of Polar ice in ArcƟc Region is 
opening up various opportuniƟes. One area where India can parƟcipate is the 
development of the Northern Sea Route. The ArcƟc navigability has given rise 
to the prospects of a trade boost in the coming years.  India and Russia have 
formed a Joint Working Group on the Northern Sea Route (NSR) to develop 
shipping through the ArcƟc route.  Both countries have agreed to conduct a 
feasibility study to collaborate further on increasing cargo volume to 5 million 
tons through the NSR by 2030.  The NSR can be a very cost eﬀecƟve route for 
India as compared to exisƟng navigaƟon route of the Suez Canal.  The 

 
98 
 
CommiƩee observe that the new route has the potenƟal to oﬀer many beneﬁts 
such as reducƟon in cruising Ɵme to one third, avoiding problems of Somali 
sea pirates and is hence viable in spite of the navigaƟonal hazards of icy waters, 
halƟng the pressing need for strong ice-breakers, as by 2040, ArcƟc Sea will 
become free of mulƟple year fast ice which will be navigable by ice class 
vessels, etc. as informed by a non-oﬃcial witness. They note that Chinese 
container vessels have recently made several trips successfully through the 
ArcƟc Ocean, though, in the summer months. However, they note that 
increasing human acƟvity in the ArcƟc will require the creaƟon of a 
corresponding emergency response infrastructure, which is easier said than 
done. In this regard, the CommiƩee ﬁnd that the iniƟaƟve taken by the eight 
members of the ArcƟc Council to address some of these problems through 
binding agreements, has been halted due to the recent conﬂict in Ukraine. The 
CommiƩee further note that India has already started using the Chennai-
Vladivostok Eastern MariƟme Corridor since November, 2024 and its trade has 
been beneﬁƩed by reducƟon in shipping Ɵme from 40 plus to 24 days, lowering 
costs, providing direct access to the Russian Far East resources like coal and oil, 
boosƟng India’s energy security and enabling faster movement of goods like 
texƟles, machinery and ferƟlizers. NoƟng that further development of 
shipment along the NSR is being acƟvely considered between India and Russia, 
the CommiƩee recommend the Government to pursue the same which will 
greatly beneﬁt  both the economies as well as strengthen further bilateral Ɵes 
between them.  In this regard, the CommiƩee suggest the Ministry to expedite 
the feasibility study between the two countries to increase the cargo volume 
to 5 million tons through the NSR by 2030. 
15. Outreach to indigenous people 

 
99 
 
 The CommiƩee note that India has been very acƟvely contribuƟng to 
ArcƟc science since long. India has also organised dedicated events for locals, 
holding interacƟons with students and researchers, promoƟng  yoga and the 
Indian system of medicine, etc. They ﬁnd that Singapore has been oﬀering 
educaƟon, scholarships, and opportuniƟes to the ArcƟc indigenous people 
who are permanent representaƟves in the ArcƟc Council to advance their 
interests in permanent parƟcipaƟon. Though they observe from the 
submission by the Ministry of Earth Sciences that helping the indigenous 
populaƟon will not enƟtle permanent membership, the engagement with 
ArcƟc ethnic groups is important to advance friendly Ɵes and have a 
meaningful role in ArcƟc governance. The CommiƩee are of the considered 
view that the Ministry should explore taking such iniƟaƟves for the beneﬁt of 
the ArcƟc indigenous groups which will enhance India’s posiƟon in the holisƟc 
development of the region. 
16. Need for an Indian narraƟve on ArcƟc 
The CommiƩee note that China is deﬁning itself as a ‘near ArcƟc State,’ and is 
taking various steps, such as building the Polar Silk Route as part of their Belt 
and Road iniƟaƟve and invesƟng in ArcƟc Shipping Lane, building strategic 
partnership with Russia, etc. to increase its role and presence in the ArcƟc 
Region. The CommiƩee are of the view that to increase India’s role in the ArcƟc 
region, there is an urgent need to build a strong narraƟve on the ArcƟc. The 
CommiƩee have been informed by an expert that 90 percent of the resources 
in the ArcƟc are conﬁned within the sovereign control of the ArcƟc States. 
Besides, there is United NaƟons ConvenƟon on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) 
which provides the legal framework for all ocean and sea acƟviƟes of naƟons, 
deﬁning mariƟme zones (like territorial seas, EEZs, high seas) and allocaƟng 
rights for resource use, navigaƟon and environmental protecƟon. In view of 

 
100 
 
the above, the CommiƩee are concerned that the ArcƟc, which has been seen 
as part of Global Commons has not been treated as such, when it comes to the 
sharing of resources. However, considering that India has been a signiﬁcant 
contributor in polar research and has established its scienƟﬁc linkage with 
Himalayas giving a wholesome view of the cryosphere of the world, its impact 
on Climate change and its eﬀect on the Global South, there is a need for India’s 
conƟnuous presence in the ArcƟc for scienƟﬁc research to enhance this 
understanding. The CommiƩee further express their agreement with the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences submission that in contrast to the strategic 
consideraƟons of others, India’s claim to be an important stakeholder in the 
polar areas is based on science, sustainability and mulƟlateral cooperaƟon and 
the same needs to be further propagated to enable appreciaƟon of India’s 
eﬀorts and the acceptance of its leadership in ArcƟc aﬀairs. The CommiƩee are 
of the considered opinion that Indian narraƟve of the ArcƟc needs to be 
formulated at the earliest to enhance India’s leadership posiƟon in polar areas 
of the world and project the Indian narraƟve of the ArcƟc in every plaƞorm to 
ﬁrmly establish its stake.  The urgency for developing an Indian narraƟve on 
the ArcƟc can be understood from the submission of an expert that by 2070, 
the Indian GDP rate may fall by over 15% due to increase in temperature 
aƩributable to the ArcƟc.  
17. ArcƟc – Quasi Global Commons 
Having observed that ArcƟc, as opposed to AntarcƟca, is spread over the 
territorial jurisdicƟon of eight States which, therefore, results in not being 
treated as ‘Global Commons’ in terms of sharing of resources, the CommiƩee 
ﬁnd that there is sƟll a need to recognize its special role. As submiƩed by a 
non-oﬃcial witness, ArcƟc, like Amazon forest, is an area of the earth which is 
crucial for our existence. Just as the Amazon forest, sprawling over territorial 

 
101 
 
jurisdicƟon of three diﬀerent countries has been recognised as the ‘lungs of 
the planet’, protecƟon of which is so criƟcal for the whole world that in the 
common law and territorial domesƟc laws of countries of the Amazon, it has 
become a quasi-Global Commons, ArcƟc region also needs to be protected 
since it is the backbone of global climate system, requiring its protecƟon for 
the common good of humanity. Taking note of the fact that India has 
commiƩed itself to a rule based, environmentally sustainable and science 
driven approach, the CommiƩee recommend that the Government further 
pursue this aspect in its diplomaƟc engagements in the ArcƟc region. 
18. Extension of AntarcƟc Treaty System  
  The CommiƩee note that the AntarcƟc Treaty was signed in December 
1959 by 12 countries and came into force in 1961. India signed the AntarcƟc 
Treaty on 19th August 1983 and soon thereaŌer received consultaƟve status on 
12th September 1983. Since 1959, 46 more countries have signed the Treaty 
which today has 59 State parƟes. 29 countries, including India, have the status 
of ‘ConsultaƟve Party’ with voƟng rights in the meeƟngs of the AntarcƟc Treaty 
ConsultaƟve MeeƟngs (ATCM), where 29 non-consultaƟve parƟes are invited 
to the meeƟng but do not have the voƟng rights. The CommiƩee have been 
informed by an expert that since 2014, no State party has been elevated to 
ConsultaƟve Party status. The CommiƩee note that extensive debates over the 
criteria for achieving ConsultaƟve Party status without any conclusion are 
delaying the decision making due to the current geopoliƟcal scenario. In this 
regard, the CommiƩee are glad to note that India has been making eﬀorts to 
reach consensus for granƟng ConsultaƟve status to countries that fulﬁl the 
criteria. The CommiƩee endorse the view of the expert that more countries 
that meet the treaty requirements may be included in the AntarcƟca Treaty 
system so as to make it more inclusive and democraƟc. 

 
102 
 
 19. India’s leadership role in AntarcƟca  
 The CommiƩee note that AntarcƟc is the only conƟnent that is beyond 
the purview of the UN and is governed by the AntarcƟc Treaty system. AŌer 
joining the AntarcƟc Treaty System in 1983 as a ConsultaƟve Party, India’s role 
has evolved from basic parƟcipaƟon to recognised leadership in ArcƟc science, 
governance and operaƟons. India has launched 45 annual Indian scienƟﬁc 
expediƟons to AntarcƟca involving more than 120 naƟonal /internaƟonal 
insƟtuƟons. Due to our long-term engagement in the region, India has 
assumed leadership roles in key AntarcƟc research and operaƟonal 
commiƩees, including Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and its CommiƩees for environmental 
ProtecƟon. The CommiƩee are glad to note that as early as 1956, India had 
raised the ‘AntarcƟca QuesƟon’ in UN, and the stand taken by India probably 
infused discussion on ArƟcle I (Peaceful Use) and ArƟcle V (Nuclear AcƟvity) of 
the AntarcƟc Treaty, prohibiƟng nuclear explosion and disposal of radioacƟve 
waste.  The importance of AntarcƟca for a country like India can be seen from 
the fact that AntarcƟca has an area nearly ﬁve Ɵmes that of India and holding 
ice sheet as thick as 4.5 km at places, can lead to a potenƟal sea level rise of 
60 meters, if it melted enƟrely. This will have serious economic and strategic 
implicaƟons for India with a coastline of more than 11,000 km. The CommiƩee 
are aware that while the ArcƟc area has territorial sovereignty, AntarcƟca has 
been treated as a ‘Global Commons’ as it is not under the jurisdicƟon of any 
country. The AntarcƟc Treaty, which governs AntarcƟca, does not have any 
expiry date.  Any modiﬁcaƟon in the Madrid protocol which prohibited mining 
of mineral resources (non-living resources) indeﬁnitely, except for scienƟﬁc 
research, will also require unanimous agreement of all the ConsultaƟve ParƟes 

 
103 
 
and this will come up aŌer the end of the 50 year term in 2048. In view of the 
above, the CommiƩee recommend that India conƟnue to promote AntarcƟca 
as Global Commons and also acƟvely represent the voice of the Global South 
by conƟnuing to support the freedom of scienƟﬁc invesƟgaƟon, environmental 
protecƟon and internaƟonal cooperaƟon. The CommiƩee also desire that India 
may conƟnue to provide leadership to the Global South by supporƟng their 
parƟcipaƟon in Indian AntarcƟc ExpediƟons. 
20. As a consultaƟve member of the AntarcƟca Treaty with voƟng rights, 
where decisions are based on consensus, India has a criƟcal role to play in 
AntarcƟc Treaty System (ATS). The need for leadership role in the ATS has never 
been more demanding in view of diverse interests emerging in the region. The 
CommiƩee note that while there is convergence among all parƟes in AntarcƟc 
Treaty ConsultaƟve MeeƟng (ATCM) on areas such as use of AntarcƟca for 
peaceful purpose, freedom of scienƟﬁc invesƟgaƟons, environmental 
protecƟon, sovereignty neutrality, compliance and inspecƟons of research 
staƟons of another Member State; there are areas of divergence which could 
potenƟally undermine environmental protecƟon, the non-militarised status of 
AntarcƟca and eﬀecƟve governance of the region.  The CommiƩee note that 
divergence oŌen stems from diﬀering naƟonal prioriƟes, economic interests 
and diﬀering interpretaƟon of the Treaty’s principles. Some of these include 
granƟng ‘specially protected species’ status to the Emperor Penguin largely 
due to objecƟons from China, engaging in acƟviƟes by some States that could 
be interpreted as undeclared resource exploraƟon under the guise of research, 
establishing large scale Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean, 
tourism regulaƟon, etc. The CommiƩee observe that India has strongly 
advocated for AntarcƟca to remain a peaceful, cooperaƟve, and ecologically 
protected Global Commons, while focusing on scienƟﬁc and environmental 

 
104 
 
issues. While appreciaƟng the above posiƟon of the Government, the 
CommiƩee urge the Ministry of External Aﬀairs to take a more proacƟve role 
and address the above challenges by engaging with various member States 
through diplomaƟc channels so that AntarcƟca conƟnues to remain a 
demilitarised, peaceful zone for scienƟﬁc research and to promote 
internaƟonal cooperaƟon. 
21. InspecƟon of Research StaƟons 
 The CommiƩee note that under the ATS, a robust inspecƟon system has 
been sƟpulated which allows any member State to inspect the research 
staƟon/s of another member State. The inspecƟons provide a mechanism to 
ensure monitoring of acƟviƟes and research to curb dual use technology and 
promote adherence to environmental protocols. Through these inspecƟons, 
informaƟon on training, medical capability and emergency planning, etc. is 
documented helping to idenƟfy gaps and disseminate good pracƟces. The 
CommiƩee note that there is convergence of all parƟes in the AntarcƟc Treaty 
consultaƟve meeƟngs with regard to allowing any member State to inspect the 
research staƟons of another member State. Accordingly, Indian ‘Maitri’ StaƟon 
has been inspected by several ConsultaƟve ParƟes so far under the provisions 
of the AntarcƟc treaty. However, the CommiƩee note that such inspecƟons, 
usually carried out jointly with other countries, have not been undertaken by 
India so far due to the costs involved as AntarcƟc research staƟons are situated 
hundreds and thousands of kilometres apart and dedicated chartering of 
ﬂights is required within the conƟnent. Taking note of the submission by the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences that it is criƟcally important to iniƟate the process 
in the near future that will provide full access to staƟons, equipment, and 
vessels for designated observers, the CommiƩee recommend the Government 
to take early acƟon by addressing the issue of resource crunch and engage with 

 
105 
 
partner countries for conducƟng joint inspecƟons. Considering that India has 
not made use of this provision to assert its righƞul posiƟon, the CommiƩee 
urge the Ministry to take necessary measures and start inspecƟng the research 
staƟons of other member States starƟng with the research staƟons of those 
consultaƟve parƟes which   have already visited the Maitri StaƟon.   
22. Responsible Tourism in AntarcƟca  
 The CommiƩee observe that there were 1.1 lakh tourists visiƟng 
AntarcƟca during the year 2024-25. The CommiƩee note that the rapid growth 
of AntarcƟc tourism has raised concerns about environmental impacts and 
safety. While there is consensus on the need for regulaƟon, there is divergence 
of views among the parƟes in the ATCM on the stringency and speciﬁcs of a 
legally binding framework versus non-binding guidelines. Some of the major 
challenges in enforcing responsible tourism are, increasing numbers of visitors, 
managing polluƟon (black carbon, grey water), prevenƟng invasive species, 
protecƟng fragile ecosystems from foot traﬃc, regulaƟon of self-regulaƟng 
operators, comprehensive monitoring and enforcement across the vast 
conƟnent, etc. They further note from the submission of the expert that India 
took a lead role in raising the concept of ‘responsible tourism’ during the 30th 
ATCM held under its chairmanship in New Delhi.  They also observe that ﬁrst-
ever focused discussions on regulaƟon of tourism were held during the 46th 
AntarcƟc Treaty ConsultaƟve MeeƟng and the 26th CommiƩee for 
Environmental ProtecƟon held in Kochi in 2024.  However, they noƟce that 
while no treaty speciﬁcally regulates tourism in the AntarcƟca, tourism is 
governed under the binding provisions of Antarctic Treaty System measures, 
national laws (Indian tourists need to obtain authorisation from NCPOR) and 
practices adopted by International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (a 
self regulated industry body).  As decided during 46th ATCM, a framework is 

 
106 
 
being draŌed to develop a robust, compliant and adapƟve framework to 
manage the increasing tourism and non-governmental acƟviƟes while 
ensuring environmentally responsible pracƟces. While appreciaƟng the 
Government’s eﬀorts in taking a lead role for sustainable tourism in AntarcƟca, 
the CommiƩee recommend that India should make eﬀorts for arriving at 
consensus for a legally binding agreement for regulaƟon of tourism in 
AntarcƟca. The CommiƩee further desire that since Indian tourists need to 
obtain authorisaƟon from NCPOR to visit AntarcƟca, Indian Tour Operators and 
tourists visiƟng AntarcƟca may be properly sensiƟsed about the fragile nature 
of the AntarcƟc ecosystem, before they undertake any tourism acƟvity, so as 
to promote responsible and sustainable tourism.  
 
23. Need for enhancing funds for India’s polar research programme 
 The CommiƩee note that the polar research programme is being 
undertaken through Polar Science & Cryosphere Research (PACER) sub-scheme 
under PRITHVI Vigyan.  NaƟonal Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) 
is the nodal agency responsible for conducƟng India's annual scienƟﬁc 
expediƟons to the AntarcƟc and ArcƟc. Though the AntarcƟc operaƟons are 
most challenging and ﬁnancially expensive programme, the amount allocated 
for the purpose does not reﬂect the same. As informed by the Ministry of 
External Aﬀairs, there is a serious requirement to increase the annual budget 
outlay by at least 30% under PACER sub-scheme of the PRITHVI Scheme in 
order to increase scienƟﬁc and operaƟonal footprint across the polar regions. 
During the year 2026-27, an amount of Rs. 210 crore has been allocated under 
the PACER scheme, reﬂecƟng an increase of only Rs. 10 crore from the previous 
year. The CommiƩee note that the polar research programme has enabled us 
to not only enhance our diplomaƟc stature and inﬂuence in polar governance, 

 
107 
 
but also develop experƟse in cold region engineering, enable discovery of cold 
adapƟve microbes which have applicaƟon in biotechnology, improve 
understanding the impact of climate change on the Indian monsoon system 
and agriculture and gathering of data for global climate models to understand 
the warming trends, etc. They also observe that India plans to join 
internaƟonal iniƟaƟves like AntarcƟc RINGS and AntarcƟc Insync Programme, 
which would give us a circum-AntarcƟc reach and undertaking ArcƟc 
expediƟons beyond Svalbard through collaboraƟons. The CommiƩee note that 
due to paucity of funds, challenges such as high logisƟcs and transportaƟon 
costs for personnel, cargo and emergency support, high recurring costs on 
hired vessels and internaƟonal infrastructure, ability to invest in expensive 
Polar-grade scienƟﬁc instruments, power systems, and safety equipment, high 
wear and replacement costs due to extreme climate condiƟons, have aﬀected 
operaƟons in both ArcƟc and AntarcƟc research staƟons, limiƟng our capacity 
to conduct year-round operaƟons and research.  The CommiƩee are of the 
considered opinion that conƟnuous low allocaƟon will hamper the progress of 
scienƟﬁc endeavours and thereby aﬀecƟng our diplomaƟc inﬂuence in these 
regions. The CommiƩee, therefore, recommend the Government to increase 
the budgetary outlay under the PACER scheme for eﬀecƟve year round 
operaƟons of our research staƟons and to enable us to take up acƟviƟes with 
partner countries on equal fooƟng.  
24. ExploitaƟon of marine resources of AntarcƟca 
 The CommiƩee note from the submission made by Sea Shepherd Global 
that due to growing ﬁshing, the density of Krill around the AntarcƟc Peninsula 
may have declined by as much as 80% since the 1970s, aﬀecƟng populaƟons of 
Adélie and Chinstrap penguins, whose numbers have fallen by 42% and 68% 
respecƟvely, over the past forty years. This also has likely impacted the whales 

 
108 
 
pregnancy rates for humpback whales in the region from 86% in 2017 to 29% 
in 2020.  As Krill conƟnues to decline, its ﬁshing industry is expanding.  The 
CommiƩee note from the informaƟon provided by the MEA that Commission 
for the ConservaƟon of AntarcƟc Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) is the 
apex body for regulaƟng ﬁshing acƟvity in the Southern Ocean in an 
environmentally sustainable manner, and its decisions and catch quotas are 
based on and backed by the ﬁndings of its scienƟﬁc CommiƩee. India has been 
a member of the CCAMLR Commission since 1985 and acƟvely parƟcipated in 
deliberaƟons to strengthen conservaƟon measures. However, despite being a 
Member of CCAMLR with the rights for sustainable exploitaƟon of marine 
living resources in the AntarcƟc Treaty region (south of 60°S LaƟtude), India 
has not so far started any ﬁshing acƟvity in the region.  The CommiƩee further 
note that for Krills, the total catch limit of 620,000 tonnes has been ﬁxed, but 
a key ConservaƟon Measure (51-07) requiring krill catches to be spaƟally 
dispersed was not renewed at a CCAMLR annual meeƟng, as the Commission 
failed to reach consensus on this maƩer.  The CommiƩee further note the 
growing aƩenƟon surrounding the expansion of AntarcƟc krill ﬁshing at a Ɵme 
when conservaƟon safeguards under the CCAMLR have weakened, and 
proposals to establish Marine Protected Areas, supported by India, remain 
pending adopƟon. AntarcƟc krill consƟtute a foundaƟonal component of the 
Southern Ocean food web, sustaining whales, penguins, and other marine 
species, and underpinning ecosystem stability. The issue, therefore, carries 
ecological, governance, and diplomaƟc implicaƟons. India has played a 
construcƟve role within the Commission, including formally supporƟng and co-
sponsoring proposals in 2021 for Marine Protected Areas in East AntarcƟca and 
the Weddell Sea, reﬂecƟng its commitment to science-based conservaƟon. It 
has, however, come to the CommiƩee’s aƩenƟon that India may now be 

 
109 
 
considering parƟcipaƟon in krill ﬁshing operaƟons, including through the 
issuance of licences. In this regard, the Ministry of Earth Sciences is preparing 
the legal provisions for licensing and monitoring of vessels to enable Indian 
industry’s parƟcipaƟon in AntarcƟc ﬁshing, and eﬀorts are underway to 
publish the Indian AntarcƟc Marine Living Resources (Fishing AuthorizaƟon) 
Rules, 2026, under the Indian AntarcƟc Act, 2022. FormulaƟon of the ﬁshing 
authorizaƟon regulaƟons is being overseen by the CommiƩee on AntarcƟc 
Governance and Environmental ProtecƟon (CAG-EP), chaired by the Secretary, 
MoES in which the Ministry of External Aﬀairs is one of the members. As the 
AntarcƟc krills occupy a central role in the AntarcƟc food web, sustaining 
nearly all higher life in the Southern Ocean, the CommiƩee are of the view that 
allowing commercial exploitaƟon of marine ﬁshing in AntarcƟca may further 
threaten the already vulnerable marine ecosystem. However, taking note of 
the Ministry’s submission that urging India to suspend its ongoing iniƟaƟves 
solely in the interest of environmental sustainability risks consƟtuƟng an over-
simpliﬁcaƟon of a complex balance between ecological responsibility and 
socioeconomic progress of the country, the CommiƩee desire that Indians may 
parƟcipate in AntarcƟc ﬁshing, with due evaluaƟon of the environmental risks, 
in line with India’s commitment for sustainable development. Further, keeping 
in view the objecƟve of sustainable development of ﬁsheries resources in 
AntarcƟc waters, the CommiƩee recommend that the Government 
conƟnuously pursue the development of Marine Protected Areas in East 
AntarcƟca and the Weddell Sea, and renewal of ConservaƟon Measures (51-
07) for enforcing spaƟal allocaƟon controls across the sub areas of the region 
to promote environmentally sustainable exploitaƟon of marine resources. 
25. Replacement of Maitri staƟon in AntarcƟca 

 
110 
 
 The CommiƩee observe that there are two Indian research staƟons 
‘Maitri’ and ‘BharaƟ’ in AntarcƟca. While Maitri was built on a stable ice-free 
land at Schirmacher Oasis and is operaƟonal since 1989, another very modern 
research staƟon, ‘BharaƟ’ has been established at Princess Elisabeth Land 
situated at about 2500 km east of the Maitri staƟon, in 2012. The CommiƩee 
were given to understand that the Maitri StaƟon, built in 1989, has exceeded 
its intended  lifespan of 10 years, and has therefore outlived its life and is  no 
longer consistent with the stringent environmental rules under the AntarcƟc 
Treaty as well as the Indian AntarcƟc Act 2022. The CommiƩee have been 
informed by the Ministry of Earth Sciences that the staƟon’s structural 
integrity, waste management, and sewage treatment systems have been 
ﬂagged in numerous reports, with calls for urgent remediaƟon. The proposed 
new staƟons (project Maitri II) will address the structural degradaƟon, 
environmental compliance, energy eﬃciency and the limited scienƟﬁc capacity 
of the current facility. This will signiﬁcantly enhance India’s ability to conduct 
mulƟdisciplinary scienƟﬁc research in AntarcƟca and enable the country to 
contribute high quality data and cuƫng-edge ﬁndings to global polar science 
for decades to come.  The new staƟon Maitri II is proposed to be built near the 
exisƟng Maitri staƟon because this area is connected to air support from other 
conƟnents and also most countries have research bases here. The proposal has 
been accorded in-principle approval by the Department of Expenditure at an 
esƟmated cost of ₹2,150 Crore. The project will be implemented over a period 
of six years (2026–27 to 2031–32) due to the extremely narrow window of 
access during AntarcƟc summers, aŌer comprehensive environmental 
evaluaƟon necessitated by the CommiƩee of Environmental Protocol under 
the AntarcƟc Treaty. The CommiƩee note that the architectural and design 
consultant for project Maitri – II has already been idenƟﬁed through a Global 

 
111 
 
Design CompeƟƟon. The CommiƩee recommend expediƟous construcƟon of 
a new Maitri staƟon that will not only strengthen our long-term scienƟﬁc 
presence, but will also strategically place India amongst the select group of 
countries in polar aﬀairs. 
 
26. AcquisiƟon of Polar Research Vehicle (PRV) 
 The CommiƩee note that India needs to have ice class Vessels or Polar 
Research Vessels (PRV), as such high-end vessels are required to conduct 
operaƟons in the polar Regions – the ArcƟc, the AntarcƟc and the Southern 
Ocean. The CommiƩee have been informed by an expert that while all our 
Asian counterparts acƟve in Polar Region such as China, South Korea and 
Japan, possess mulƟple research vessels, India depends on chartered research 
vessels. The CommiƩee note that in the absence of dedicated polar vessels, 
the AntarcƟc programme remains dependent on annual chartering of foreign 
vessels for logisƟcs and expediƟon support. This reliance not only places 
recurring pressure on operaƟons but also introduces uncertainƟes in 
availability of specialised vessels and scheduling, thereby aﬀecƟng expediƟon 
planning and execuƟon. The lack of dedicated polar research vessel is also 
idenƟﬁed as iniƟal hindrance for the expansion of ArcƟc exploraƟon beyond 
Svalbard and restricƟng access to wider ArcƟc Ocean, which is the most 
important and strategic region in the ArcƟc. They note that both in ArcƟc and 
AntarcƟca, scienƟﬁc research was disrupted during COVID pandemic as 
observaƟonal data were halted due to lack of Ɵmely maintenance of most of 
the systems. They ﬁnd that this has also aﬀected our medical evacuaƟons as in 
the absence of our own ship, such emergencies required planning and 
collaboraƟons with other staƟons. However, now, it is proposed that Indian Air 
Force may develop experƟse to undertake emergency landing and take-oﬀ in 

 
112 
 
AntarcƟca in such exigencies. The CommiƩee note that an in-principle 
approval was obtained from the Department of Expenditure for the acquisiƟon 
of a PRV at an esƟmated cost of Rs. 2329.40 crore in July 2025. During the 
evidence, the CommiƩee have been informed by the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
that while the design of the ship has been completed, they are in the process 
of idenƟfying the shipyard within India to build the ship. The ship will be made 
in India, however, collaboraƟon with other countries will be required only for 
the hull porƟon, as India currently does not have the experƟse to build the 
hull. The CommiƩee ﬁnd that the proposal started with a cost esƟmate of Rs. 
400 Crore which has now increased to more than six Ɵmes due to non-
ﬁnalizaƟon of the project. Keeping in view the requirement of polar research, 
it is high Ɵme that a polar research vehicle is manufactured at the earliest as 
the programme has already suﬀered huge Ɵme and cost overruns. Considering 
that there is huge shortage of ice class vessels for hiring, which is seriously 
aﬀecƟng India’s Polar research and scienƟﬁc acƟviƟes, the CommiƩee fully 
endorse the view of the experts that acquisiƟon of Polar Research vessels with 
ice breaking capacity is a criƟcal requirement for undertaking both scienƟﬁc 
and logisƟcal acƟviƟes in ArcƟc and AntarcƟc regions and hope that it shall be 
completed in a Ɵme bound manner. 
 
27. Manpower strength of NaƟonal Centre for Polar and Ocean Research 
(NCPOR) 
NaƟonal Centre for Polar and Ocean Research is the main insƟtuƟon for 
planning, coordinaƟon and execuƟon of India’s polar research programme. It 
operates the two research staƟons viz. Maitri and BharaƟ in AntarcƟca, 
Himadri in the ArcƟc and Himansh in the Himalayas. The CommiƩee ﬁnd that 
this insƟtuƟon has been entrusted with the responsibility for complex 

 
113 
 
planning, arrangement of logisƟcs and execuƟon of scienƟﬁc expediƟons and 
research with a strength of only 56 scienƟsts sancƟoned along with only eight 
technical support staﬀ. They note that only 54 scienƟsts are currently handling 
all the acƟviƟes of NCPOR which, as admiƩed by the Ministry of Earth Sciences, 
is woefully inadequate with manifold increase in acƟviƟes under the purview 
of NCPOR.  NCPOR undertakes research and expediƟons not only to AntarcƟca 
but also to the ArcƟc and Himalayan research staƟons along with many other 
new responsibiliƟes such as deep-sea exploraƟon, detailed exploraƟon 
acƟviƟes for hydrothermal sulphide mineral exploraƟon in the mid-Indian 
Ocean Ridges, etc. They note that request for an addiƟonal 77 permanent 
posts, including 53 scienƟsts is under consideraƟon of the Department of 
Expenditure. They are parƟcularly astonished to note that a very few scienƟsts 
are looking aŌer Indian scienƟﬁc operaƟons in ArcƟc and only two scienƟsts 
are engaged to see operaƟons in the  Himalayas where there are 9000 glaciers. 
The CommiƩee note that the manpower requirement at NCPOR which is ‘India 
Gateway to the Polar Regions’ is at criƟcal level.  In this regard, the Department 
of Expenditure may be urged to grant necessary approval for creaƟon of 
addiƟonal 77 permanent posts, including 53 scienƟsts for undertaking 
adequate scienƟﬁc research and logisƟc operaƟon in Polar regions. Keeping in 
view the serious need for strengthening manpower strength of NCPOR, the 
CommiƩee recommend the Government to take early acƟon in the maƩer to 
enable NCPOR to undertake its work more eﬀecƟvely.  
The CommiƩee would further like to emphasise the need for giving 
incenƟves to polar studies and research by providing research fellowships and 
grants to PhD scholars for undertaking research and other training 
programmes so that more young scholars are encouraged to pursue ArcƟc 

 
114 
 
studies and to specialise in polar and cryosphere sciences, creaƟng a steady 
pool of skilled manpower in the long term. 
Including Polar studies in educaƟonal curriculum and promoƟng wider 
discussion 
 
28. The CommiƩee note that under the Indian AntarcƟc and ArcƟc 
Programme, more than 120 organisaƟons and universiƟes have been 
facilitated to undertake scienƟﬁc projects in polar regions.  Cochin University 
of Science and Technology (CUSAT), and Mahatma Gandhi University (MGU) 
have established Centre of Excellence in Polar studies.  Further, the University 
Grant Commission (UGC) oﬀers specialised massive open online courses on 
polar studies through the SWAYAM System, supported by MoES.  The 
CommiƩee note that ArcƟc and AntarcƟc studies have been included in Under 
graduate and Post graduate programmes as a credit-based incenƟve. They ﬁnd 
from the views submiƩed by experts that apart from such incenƟves, there is 
a further need to provide employment opportuniƟes to the students who are 
taking ArcƟc and AntarcƟc studies. Taking note of the fact that capacity 
building in polar research and polar science, including adaptability to the new 
possibiliƟes in the wake of changing landscape, is necessary for India to retain 
its leadership role, the CommiƩee are of the view that creaƟng awareness 
about relevance of the polar areas is the need of the hour. They, therefore, 
recommend the Government to explore further expansion of studies in this 
area from the lower level to help develop interest in polar areas at younger 
age. They would like to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard at the 
earliest.  
 

 
115 
 
29. The CommiƩee observe that NaƟonal Conference on Polar sciences 
(NCPS) have been organized in the years 2021, 2023 and 2025 to give plaƞorm 
to young and early career scienƟsts to showcase their ﬁndings and research 
results. Further, private think tanks are also organising seminars and 
conferences including internaƟonal speakers to help discuss the polar maƩers. 
The CommiƩee are of the view that the conferences and seminars should be 
held regularly to enable exchange of informaƟon and adopƟon of suitable 
measures for addressing scienƟﬁc and operaƟonal challenges in polar regions. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                         Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
21  July, 2026                                                                       Chairperson,                                
30 Asadha, 1948 (Saka)             CommiƩee on External Aﬀairs 
  

 
116 
 
Appendix- I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 23 JULY, 2025 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 23 July 2025 from 1600 hrs. to 1725 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 53, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor- Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
3   Shri Arun Govil 
4  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
5  Shri Navaskani K. 
6  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
7  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
8  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
9  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
10  Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
11  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
12  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
13  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
14  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
15  Shri Naveen Jindal 
  
 Rajya Sabha 
16  Dr. John Brittas 
17  Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
18  Dr. K. Laxman 
19  Ms. Kavita Patidar 
20  Shri A. D. Singh 
21  Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narayan Singh 
22  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
23  Shri Rajeev Shukla 

 
117 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
  
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. No Name of the Officer Designation 
1.  Shri Tanmaya Lal Secretary (West) 
2.  Shri Srinivas Gotru Joint Secretary (UNES) 
3.  Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parl. & 
Coord.) 
4.  Shri Dharmendra Singh Deputy Secretary (UNES) 
MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES 
Sl. No Name of the Officer Designation 
1.  Dr. M.Ravichandran Secretary 
2.  Shri D. Senthil Pandiyan Joint Secretary 
3.  Dr. Vijay Kumar Scientist 'G' 
4.  Dr. Thamban  Meloth Director, NCPOR 
5.  Dr. Vandana Chaudhary Scientist 'G', 
6.  Dr. Aparna Shukla Scientist 'F' 
7.  Shri Keshav Kumar Director (Parliament) 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Earth Sciences to 
the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing by the 
representatives of the two Ministries on the subject ‘India’s Role and 

 
118 
 
Presence in the Arctic and Antarctic Regions’.  In view of India’s Arctic 
policy 2022, Indian Antarctic Act 2022, Indian Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Rules of 2023 etc.,  the Chairperson requested the 
representatives of the two Ministries to brief the Committee on geopolitical 
aspects of Arctic and Antarctic region and role of India in scientific 
explorations, collaboration with the countries in these regions, availability 
of adequate talent pool to carry out scientific research and polar 
expeditions, sovereignty disputes in Antarctica and its impact on India, 
threat of nuclear weapon testing in the region, international cooperation in 
Arctic areas against the backdrop of Ukraine conflict, etc. Thereafter, he 
drew the attention of all the representatives of the two Ministries to 
Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha pertaining to 
maintaining the confidentiality of the proceedings and Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
3. The Secretary (West), Ministry of External Affairs then made a 
power point presentation highlighting inter alia diverse geographical 
expanse of Arctic in the North Pole and Antarctic in the South pole; 
Svalbard Treaty of 1920 which was signed by India in 1920, Arctic Council 
comprising of eight Member States viz. Russia, Canada, Sweden, 
Finland, Denmark, Norway, United States, Iceland, 13 Observer States 
including India, and Permanent Observers (indigenous population), 
functioning of Arctic council, etc. With regard to Antarctic Region, the 
Committee have been informed that the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 
1961 by 12 member states. Today, there are 58 member states consisting 
29 consultative parties and 29 non consultative parties. The consultative 
party takes part in decision making. The Antarctic Treaty basically aims at 
retaining this continent as a zone of peace and no military activity and at 

 
119 
 
the same time, facilitate international collaboration in science and 
technology. India became a consultative party in 1983.  
4.  Highlighting the differences between the Arctic and the Antarctic, the 
Committee were also informed that the Arctic has indigenous population 
in the region and the focus of Arctic Council is more on science and 
research.  However, due to global warming there is an increasing 
speculation about the extraction of the minerals including rare earth, 
hydrocarbons, opening of shipping routes, fishing, and other resources. 
With regard to Antarctic region, the Committee have been informed that 
the Antarctic Treaty sought to treat the continent as a global common, as 
a common heritage. Today, there are around 70 research stations from 
various countries in the region. The Committee were also informed of the 
growing engagements of India with the Arctic Region, unique role of India 
as a polar research nation; Indian research studies in Arctic, Antarctic and 
Himalayan region which is considered as ‘third pole’, impact of polar ice 
melts on climate pattern, etc. 
5. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
briefed the Committee on the importance of the three poles, Artic, 
Antarctic and Himalaya which act as global barometer, effects of global 
warming on Polar regions, global climate tipping points in polar regions 
and its future impacts, geological connection between India and 
Antarctica, research station/laboratories set up by India at three polar 
regions viz. Himadri at Svalbard, Himansh at Lahaul Spiti and two stations 
Maitri and Bharti in Antarctica, loss of Dakshin Gangotri in 1983, logistic 
challenges of transporting man and material to Antarctica, science 
diplomacy, etc.  
6. Members of the Committee raised various queries on issues, such 
as budgetary allocation for maintaining the research stations, delay in 

 
120 
 
procuring Polar Research Vehicle (PRV), territorial demarcation and 
exclusive economic zones in Arctic and Antarctic regions, regulation of 
tourism, conflicting territorial claims in Arctic and Antarctic region, 
geopolitical influence and India’s role in governance model of Arctic and 
Antarctic region, global climate regulation under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), regulation of 
shipping routes under the provision of United Nations Convention on Laws 
of the Sea(UNCLOS) and its validity in deciding territorial claims, strategy 
and plan to increase India’s footprints, availability of rare earth minerals 
and other resources, polar silk route of China, impact of climate change 
on our coastal regions, India’s Arctic Policy,  etc. The Secretary of the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences apprised the Committee about issues, such as 
teleconnection between Arctic ice melt and extreme rainfall in India, 
building Indian narrative of making Arctic region as a global common, 
regulation of tourism in Antarctica, science diplomacy as a basic tenet of 
India’s policy in Arctic and Antarctic region. Secretary, MoES also 
informed the Committee about the six pillars of India’s Arctic policy viz. 
science and research; environmental protection and climate; economic 
and human aspects; transport and connectivity; governance and 
international cooperation, including geopolitics and strategy; and national 
capacity building, etc. 
7. The representatives responded to the queries of the Members. The 
Chairperson then thanked the representatives for giving valuable and 
insightful inputs on the subject and giving important information on mostly 
unknown parts of the world. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the sitting has been kept on record. 

 
121 
 
Appendix- II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2025-26) HELD ON 30 OCTOBER,  2025 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday 30 October, 2025 from 1130 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in 
Samanvay ‘3’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Arun Govil 
2. Shri Naveen Jindal 
3. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
4. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
5. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
6. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
8. Shri Raghav Chadha 
9. Dr. K. Laxman 
10. Shri A. D. Singh 
11. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Shanta Banerjee Datta - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESS 
 
Sl. No. 
Name of the Experts/Non official Organisation 
1. Dr. Rasik Ravindra Secretary General, Society for the 
Geopolitics of Arctic, Antarctic & Himalayan 
Areas (SaGAA). 

 
122 
 
2. Dr. Thamban Meloth Director, National Centre for Polar and 
Ocean Research (NCPOR),Ministry of Earth 
Sciences. 
3. Ms. Zerin Osho Director of India Program, Institute for 
Governance & Sustainable Development 
(IGSD). 
4. Captain (IN) Anurag Bisen (Retd.) Senior Fellow, Vivekananda International 
Foundation. 
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members and the experts to the sitting 
of the Committee convened to hear their views on the subject ‘India’s Role and 
Presence in the Arctic and Antarctic Regions’. Thereafter, he informed the Committee 
that interaction with experts will be the concluding discussion as the Committee 
already took the oral evidence of the Ministries of External Affairs and Earth Sciences 
on the above mentioned subject. Then, inviting attention to the letter received from 
Shri Milind Deora, Member of Parliament from Rajya Sabha, and also a member of 
Arctic Circle wherein India role in Arctic region and measures required for deeper 
engagement in Arctic area has been highlighted, the Chairperson stated that the 
Committee desire to be further enlightened by the views of the experts on various 
issues and aspects involved in examination of this subject.  
 
3. Taking note of the geopolitical and economic significance of the Arctic and 
Antarctic regions, the Chairperson requested the experts to present their views and 
suggestions on the impact of rising temperature of polar regions on Indian monsoon, 
agriculture and trade, exploitation of resources, future military build up in the area,  
India’s strategic role in geopolitics of this region, India’s participation in international 
institutions related to Arctic and Antarctic areas and polar governance, operational 
facilities and capabilities of Indian institutions involved in polar research and need for 
higher budgetary allocations, etc. Thereafter, the Chairperson drew the attention of the 
witnesses to Direction 55(1) and Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings and treating evidence tendered 
before the Committee as public.  
 

 
123 
 
4. At the outset, Dr. Rasik Ravindra, Secretary General, Society for the Geopolitics 
of Arctic, Antarctic & Himalayan Areas (SaGAA) briefed the Committee inter alia on 
significant role played by India in the Antarctic and Arctic regions, research stations in 
Antarctica, role of India in Antarctic governance as a consultative member state of 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Committee (ATCM), policy making and scientific 
research in Antarctica, articulation of principle of ‘responsible tourism in Antarctica’ 
during the first ATCM chaired by India, participation of India in the scientific platforms 
like Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Convention on Managers of 
National Antarctic Programme (COMNAP) and Asian Forum for Polar Science 
(AFoPS), etc. 
 
5.  Then, Dr. Thamban Meloth, Director, National Centre for Polar and Ocean 
Research (NCPOR) briefed the Committee about the global tipping points, most critical 
tipping points situated in Arctic and Antarctic regions, tele connection between Arctic 
ice melts and Indian monsoon, integrated approach of India towards Arctic and 
Antarctic areas, connection between polar amplification (faster rise in temperature of 
polar areas) and sea level rise resulting in coastal vulnerabilities, challenges of 
operating research stations in both north and south pole, (two in Antarctica) which are 
2500 kilometers apart, proposed establishment of a new research station in Antarctica, 
geographical linkages between India and Antarctica, release of carbon dioxide and 
methane due to melting of Arctic permafrost and consequent hazards such as building 
collapse and unstable roads, emergence of new shipping routes, exploration of living 
and non living resources, etc. 
6. The Committee were further briefed by Capt. Anurag Bisen, Senior Fellow, 
Vivekananda International Foundation about governance of Arctic by eight Arctic 
States who are members of Arctic Council, observer status of India in the Arctic 
Council where by participation in Arctic Council and International Arctic Science 
Committee is allowed only through Working Groups, India’s role in Arctic post conflict 
between seven member States and Russia, halt in sharing of data between Russia 
(having 40% area of Arctic) and other Arctic States, India’s potential in bridging the 
gap in information sharing about entire cryosphere as it is the only country having 
research stations in all the polar areas of the world including Himalayas, etc.  

 
124 
 
7. The Committee further heard the views of Ms. Zerin Osho, Director, the Institute 
for Governance & Sustainable Development (IGSD) who informed about the IGSD 
study regarding data and evidence of climate change linkages associated with rise in 
temperature in polar areas and associated economic challenges facing the country. 
She further apprised about the relation between loss of Arctic sea ice and increased 
flooding in Western, Central and Southern India, impact on yield losses of staple crops 
of India, which are part of rain fed agriculture, fall in GDP growth rate due to rain fed 
agricultural loss including labour loss, etc.   
8. During the course of the briefing, Members raised several queries which inter-
alia included air connectivity between North and South Pole research stations 
operated by India, possibility of setting up floating polar stations, adequacy of 
budgetary support, polar research vehicle, need to have a Polar Desk or a Polar 
Ambassador, exploration of rare earth minerals, environmental threat due to increase 
traffic through northern sea route, militarization of Arctic, acquiring of icebreakers, 
repercussions of polar warming on Indian agriculture and economy, expansion of 
membership of Arctic Council, initiative taken to engage with the indigenous population 
in Arctic who are permanent participants in the Arctic Council, India’s response to force 
projection in Arctic, support to new members of the Antarctic treaty, mitigation 
measures needed to protect coastal population, need for more international 
collaborations, establishment of continuous monitoring systems, observatories, 
research vessels, field stations and state of the art systems, need for substantial 
increase in scientific and technical manpower, need to take leadership role in major 
international programmes, etc. 
9. The representatives responded to the queries of the Members. The 
Chairperson then thanked them for valuable and insightful inputs on the topic.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
A verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
  

 
125 
 
Appendix- III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2025-26) HELD ON 21 JULY 2026 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 21 July 2026 from 1630 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Director 
 2. Ms. Shanta Banerjee Datta - Deputy Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the subject 
‘India’s Role and Presence in the Arctic and Antarctic Regions’.  
 Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
4   Shri Arun Govil 
5  Shri Naveen Jindal 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
8  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
9  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 Rajya Sabha 
10  Dr. John Brittas 
11  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
12  Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narayan Singh 
13  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

 
126 
 
 4. The Chairperson, invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report with minor 
modifications suggested by the Members.  
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report by incorporating 
the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 