 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
09 
 

 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2025 
          Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO. - 178      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
INTRODUCTION 
REPORT 
PART - I : NARRATION ANALYSIS 
CHAPTER 1 INDIA BANGLADESH RELATIONS:AN OVERVIEW 
Historical Context 
Bilateral and Diplomatic Engagement 
Recent Developments 
Regional Cooperation and Multilateral Frameworks 
1-24 
CHAPTER 2 SECURITY AND BORDER MANAGEMENT 
Border Security 
Role of Bordering States 
25-31 
CHAPTER 3 ECONOMIC AND TRADE RELATIONS 
Bilateral Trade 
Infrastructure Development and Connectivity  
32-41 
CHAPTER 4 CULTURAL DIPLOMACY AND PEOPLE -TO-PEOPLE 
ENGAGEMENT 
Role of Culture and People to People ties 
Visa and Consular Cooperation 
42-47 
CHAPTER 5 WATER SHARING AND RIVER DIPLOMACY 
Water Sharing Arrangements 
Climate Change and Environmental Concerns 
Climate change impact 
48-52 
PART-II 
             RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE                        53-80 
 
 APPENDICES  
Appendix I Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 11 December 
2024 
81-82 
Appendix II Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee held on 26 March 
2025 
83-84 
Appendix III Minutes of the Twenty-Third Sitting of the Committee held on 27 June 
2025 
85-86 
Appendix IV Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 4 August 
2025 
87-89 
Appendix V Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 16 December 
2025 
90-91 
 ANNEXURES  
Annexure A India Bangladesh Map 92 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
31. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
9. Shri Navaskani K. 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Dr. John Brittas 
24. Shri Raghav Chadha 
25. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
28. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
29. Shri A. D. Singh 
30. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
31. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar                      –  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik                        –  Director  
3. Dr. Smita Singh                                 – Assistant Committee Officer 
  
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         I, the Chairperson of the Committee on External Affairs (202 5-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship.’ 
2.  The Committee  selected the subject ‘ Future of India -Bangladesh Relationship ’ for 
detailed examination during 2024 -25 and 2025-26. Briefing by the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs on the subject was held on 11  December, 2024. Thereafter, the 
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 26 
March 2025 and 04 August 2025. Further, the Committee heard the views of four experts on 
the subject namely, Shri Shiv Shankar Menon (former National Security Advisor), Lt. General 
Syed Ata Hasnain (Retd), Ms Riva Ganguly (former Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs) 
and Dr Amitabh Mattoo (Dean & Professor, School of International Studies, JNU) on 27 
June, 2025 in accordance with Rule 331 (L) of the Rules of Procedure and Con duct of 
Business in Lok Sabha 
3.   The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 16 
December 2025. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
4.   The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
experts/non-official witnesses for placing material information as well as tendering evidence 
and views before the Committee. 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the assistance  
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee 
6.  For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
16 December, 2025                                                                                 Chairperson,                                
25 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                             Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

Page | 1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INDIA-BANGLADESH RELATIONS: AN OVERVIEW 
 
India and Bangladesh share a deep -rooted and multifaceted relationship, 
shaped by historical, cultural, geographical, and strategic factors. The bilateral ties, 
which began with India’s crucial role in Bangladesh’s liberation in 1971, have evolved 
into a strong and comprehensive partnership. From trade and connectivity to security 
and water-sharing, the two nations have developed mechanisms for cooperation that 
underscore their interdependence.  From a foreign policy perspective Bangladesh is at 
the intersection of two extremely important pillars of India’s Foreign Policy: Act East 
and Neighbourhood First. Moreover, Bangladesh holds strategic significance in the 
context of India’s broader Indo-Pacific Strategy, given its pivotal location in the Bay of 
Bengal. 
1.2 During testimony before the Committee on 1 1 December 2024, the Foreign 
Secretary articulated India’s special relationship with Bangladesh by stating as under: 
“…this is a relationship that has long been characterized by shared history and 
sacrifices, by cultural and linguistic bonds, by a very strong and close people -
to-people connect, and a multitude of other commonalities.  Bangladesh has 
also for a very long time been a top priority for us towards forging a stable, 
peaceful and prosperous South Asia…” 
 
1.3 When asked about India’s broad approach towards Bangladesh, the Ministry 
stated that India supports a democratic, stable, peaceful, progressive and inclusive 
Bangladesh. With this objective, India aims at further strengthening relations with 
Bangladesh in the political, security, economic, strategic and cultural fields. India views 
Bangladesh as an important neighbour and development partner in South Asia. 
Maintaining security along the long border with Bangladesh and addressing issues of 
mutual concern remain our top priority. Our overall approach to strengthening and 
deepening relations with Bangladesh is people-centric and people-oriented. 
 
1.4 During deliberations on 27 June 2025, one of the experts described the evolving 
situation in Bangladesh as under: 

Page | 2 
 
“India faces its greatest strategic challenge in Bangladesh since the Liberation 
war of 1971.  While the challenge in 1971 was existential, a humanitarian and 
a birth of a new nation, the latter was of a graver, a generational discontinuity, 
a shift of political order, and a potential strategic realignment away from India.  
The event was marked by collapse of A wami League dominance, the surge of 
youth-led nationalism, the re -entry of Islamists and intensifying Chinese and 
Pakistani influence  collectively marked a turning point …if India fails to 
recalibrate at this moment, it risks losing strategic space in Dhaka not to war, 
but to irrelevance.” 
1.5 The Committee are however happy to note that the situation in Bangladesh will 
not descend into chaos and anarchy due to some very strong fundamental characters 
of Bangladeshi society and polity.  The first is that the Bangladeshi identity is not solely 
religious, it has a strong cultural and linguistic Bengali identity.  Secondly, Bangladesh 
has a mass based political parties with a tradition of old democratic or semi-democratic 
politics.  And thirdly, a professional and a modern army which has refused to fire on 
its own people. 
1.6 Considering the important role played by India in the liberation war  of 1971, 
and close historical, cultural and economic ties shared between India and Bangladesh, 
the recent development in Bangladesh merits special consideration of the Committee.  
In view of the above, the Committee have selected the subject ‘The future of India-
Bangladesh relationship’ for detailed examination and report.  
I. HISTORICAL CONTEXT 
1.7  India-Bangladesh bilateral relations rest on a historical foundation on the values 
of shared sacrifices and martyrdom during the liberation of Bangladesh in 1971. India 
was one of the first countries to recognize Bangladesh as an independent country in 
1971. Since then, the two countries have witnessed significant evolution and 
transformation in their domestic polities as well as in the bilateral relationship. 
 
1.8  When asked about the major milestones or turning points in the historical 
evolution of bilateral ties and historical milestones, the Ministry stated that there has 
been a progressive strengthening and deepening of India -Bangladesh bilateral ties 
since 1971 when the Liberation War of Bangladesh was supported by India in a whole 

Page | 3 
 
of government effort. The successful conclusion of the Land Boundary Agreement in 
2015 resulted in settling the issue of enclaves and adverse possessions in addition to 
demarcating the land boundary. Settlement of maritime boundary in 2015 and signing 
of Ganga Water Treaty in 1996 are major instances of our approach going beyond the 
principles of reciprocity in fostering friendly relations between the two countries. Over 
the last decade, India has become one of Bangladesh ’s largest trading partners, and 
the two countries have steadily worked on enhancing connectivity, including road, rail, 
and river routes. Trade has grown steadily, and India has also provided lines of credit 
and grants for infrastructure and development projects in Bangladesh which have all 
been important turning points in the history of bilateral ties.  Furthermore, Indi a’s 
engagement with Bangladesh has extended to development assistance, with India 
providing substantial lines of credit and grants for infrastructure and development 
projects. These initiatives have not only strengthened economic ties but also cemented 
India’s role as a critical development partner for Bangladesh. 
1.9 Based on the response submitted by the Ministry the major milestone in India 
Bangladesh ties can be identified as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page | 4 
 
1.10 The Committee wanted to know the manner in which the legacy of the 1971 
Liberation War has shaped contemporary diplomatic relations between the two 
countries. In a written submission, the Ministry stated that the historic events of 1971 
as well as shared linguistic and cultural ties underpin the diplomatic and people -to-
people relations between India and Bangladesh. In 2021, India and Bangladesh 
celebrated the 50th anniversary of Bangladesh’s independence, marking a momentous 
milestone in bilateral relations. The anniversary year also coincided with the 50th year 
of the India-Bangladesh friendship, during which both Nations undertook several joint 
celebrations, memorial events, and strengthened bilateral ties.  
1.11 Further, both countries also commemorated the Vijay Diwas on 16 December 
2024 by organizing reciprocal visits of veterans of armed forces from both countries 
in line with our long -standing tradition. India’s continuous engagement with 
Bangladesh in this context ho nors the spirit and legacy of the Liberation War of 
Bangladesh and aims at ensuring that the sacrifices and martyrdom of 1971 are not 
forgotten. Both India and Bangladesh have prioritized remembering and celebrating 
the contributions of the Muktijoddhas (f reedom fighters) of Bangladesh. India has 
supported the war veterans through various initiatives, such as providing scholarships 
for their children and offering medical treatment up to INR 8 lakh for the veterans and 
their families.  
1.12 On being asked about the impact of the legacy of India's role in Bangladesh’s 
liberation on present-day interactions , the Ministry stated that India’s role in 
Bangladesh’s liberation continues to remain a symbol of solidarity, mutual respect, 
and shared va lues. The relationship has since become multi -dimensional, involving 
trade & economic cooperation, development partnership, connectivity, defence and 
culture. The legacy of 1971 continues to foster goodwill, and this has contributed to a 
sense of historica l brotherhood, notwithstanding vested interests that have been 
wanting to create a negative narrative. There are annual commemorations like the  
Victory Day  (December 16) where India's involvement is acknowledged by the 
Government in Bangladesh. At the same  time, given the diversity of opinion that is 
natural in a large country as well as completing political compulsions, there are 

Page | 5 
 
multiple views regarding the Indian role, relative contribution and influence during the 
Liberation war. 
1.13 During his testimo ny before the Committee on 4 August 2025, the Foreign 
Secretary reiterated the importance of the 1971 legacy by stating as under: 
“Regarding the question on the legacy of 1971, I know this is a concern that is 
close to the hearts of several Members of this distinguished Committee and we 
have had the opportunity to discuss this earlier, what I would like to say is that 
our role in Bangladesh's liberation remains a symbol of solidarity between the 
two countries and also of mutual respect and shared values bet ween the two 
countries. Even as the relationship is becoming more multidimensional and 
there is a new generation that is growing up in Bangladesh, we have no doubt 
that the legacy of 1971 will continue to foster goodwill and reinforce the sense 
of historical brotherhood between our two countries. We do have to tackle the 
vested interests that would like to pursue a counter -narrative to the spirit of 
1971, but we continue to do our part, especially through annual celebrations 
and commemorations of Victory Da y, 16th December, where India's 
involvement is acknowledged by the Government of Bangladesh. Even last 
year, even after the events of 5th August, 2024, we were able to actually 
conduct these events as well. We naturally have to take into account the 
diversity of opinion in any given country, the political compulsions at a particular 
point in time, but we will continue to highlight the spirit of 1971 as a very 
important issue in the bilateral relationship.” 
 
II. BILATERAL AND DIPLOMATIC ENGAGEMENT 
1.14 India and Bangladesh have developed a robust and structured diplomatic 
architecture, underpinned by over 40 structured bilateral mechanisms. These 
platforms facilitate dialogue, resolve issues, and promote cooperation across a wide 
spectrum of sectors including political relations, security, trade, energy, connectivity, 
and people -to-people exchanges. The institutionalized nature of this engagement 
reflects the depth, maturity, and strategic significance of the relationship. 
 
1.15 At the apex of this framework is the Joint Consultative Commission (JCC), co-
chaired by the External Affairs Minister of India and the Foreign Minister of 
Bangladesh. It provides overall political and strategic direction to the partnership. 
Complementing this, the Foreign Office Consult ations, led by the Foreign Secretaries 

Page | 6 
 
of both countries, serve as a platform for comprehensive discussions on the full 
spectrum of bilateral matters. Sector specific initiatives between India and Bangladesh, 
cover the breadth of bilateral cooperation including Security and Border Management, 
Connectivity, Trade and Commerce, Water Resources, Power and Energy, 
Development Co -operation and people -people ties. These mechanisms operate at 
various levels : Ministerial, Secretary -level, and Technical  facilitating sustained 
dialogue, confidence -building, and resolution of sector -specific issues. Notable 
mechanisms include the Home Secretary -level talks (security and border 
management), the Commerce Secretary -level meetings (trade facilitation) and the 
Joint Rivers Commission (water sharing), many of which meet annually or biannually.  
 
1.16 Significant outcomes from these engagements include the resolution of the 
Land Boundary Agreement, operationalization of cross-border power linkages, 
improved coordination on Border issues, and enhanced Trade and Connectivity 
initiatives. These forums enable continuous engagement, timely resolution of 
concerns, and sustained momentum in bilateral cooperation.  
1.17 The l ist of institution al mechanisms established between both countries is 
placed below: 
S. No. Institutional Mechanism  Level 
1.  Joint Consultative Commission External Affairs Minister 
2.  Foreign Office Consultations / Meeting of Foreign 
Secretaries 
Foreign Secretary 
3.  Home Secretary Level Talks (HSLT) Secretary 
4.  JWG on Security and Border Management  Joint Secretary, MHA 
5.  DG Level Talks (DGLT) between BSF and BGB Director General 
6.  DG level talks between Narcotics Control Bureau, 
India and Department of Narcotics Control, 
Bangladesh 
Director General 
7.  Police Chiefs’ Dialogue NIA  
8.  Joint Boundary Working Group (JBWG) Joint Secretary, MEA 
9.  Joint Boundary Conference  Surveyor General  

Page | 7 
 
10.  Boundary Conference between Mizoram Sector and 
Bangladesh 
Director, Survey of 
India  
11.  Joint Task Force on Fake Indian Currency Notes  Joint Secretary 
12.  DG Level Talks between DRI and CIID, Bangladesh  Director General  
13.  Army to Army Staff Talks - 
14.  Navy to Navy Staff Talks (NNST) - 
15.  Air Force to Air Force Staff Talks (AFST) - 
16.  Coast Guard to Coast Guard High Level Talks (HLT) - 
17.  Annual dialogue at the level of Defence Secretary Defence Secretary  
18.  Tri Services Staff Talks - 
19.  Joint Rivers Commission (JRC) Joint Secretary 
20.  Technical Level Meeting of JRC Commissioner (FM) 
21.  Joint Committee on Sharing Waters of Ganges Joint Secretary 
22.  JWG Meeting on India - Bangladesh Cooperation in 
Power Sector 
Joint Secretary 
23.  JSC Meeting on India - Bangladesh Cooperation in 
Power Sector 
Secretary  
24.  Joint Working Group on Cooperation in Renewable  
Energy  
Joint Secretary 
25.  Joint Committee on Peaceful uses of Nuclear Energy  Joint Secretary 
26.  JWG on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Joint Secretary 
27.  JWG on Health Cooperation Joint Secretary 
28.  India-Bangladesh Joint Agriculture Working Group Joint Secretary 
29.  JWG meeting on India Economic Zones (IEZ) Joint Secretary 
30.  Commerce Secretary Level Talks Secretary 
31.  Joint Group of Customs Joint Secretary 
32.  Joint Working Group on Fisheries  Joint Secretary 
33.  Joint Working Group on Trade Joint Secretary 
34.  Subgroup on LCS/ICP infrastructure  Chairman LPAI  
35.  Joint Committee on Border Haats Joint Secretary 
36.  Joint Shipping Committee Joint Secretary 
37.  Shipping Secretary Level meeting Secretary 

Page | 8 
 
38.  JWG Meetings on Sub -regional Cooperation on 
Water & Power and Trade & Connectivity between 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal (BBIN) 
Joint Secretary 
39.  Standing Committee under Protocol on Inland water 
Transit and Trade (PIWTT) 
Chairman IWAI  
40.  Inter-Governmental Committee on ACMP  Joint Shipping 
Committee 
41.  Inter Government Railway Meeting (IGRM) Member (Traffic), 
Railway Board  
42.  JWG on Conservation of Sunderbans Joint Secretary 
43.  Dialogue on Trans Boundary Elephant Conservation  Director  
44.  Consular Dialogue Joint Secretary (CPV)  
45.  LOC Review Meeting Joint Secretary (DPA-I) 
 
1.18 When asked about the manner in which these mechanisms of high-level visits 
and bilateral dialogues have contributed to strengthening bilateral ties, the Ministry 
stated that both countries have enjoyed a high level of political comfort across the 
spectrum of different governments in India over the last 15 years. High -level visits 
and bilateral dialogue have provided an opportunity to take stock of the relationship 
and give political direction in advancing the ties in line with pr iorities and interests of 
both countries. The warmth shared by the leaders during high -level visits has been 
useful in resolving bottlenecks in the relationship. 
 
 1.19 The Committee specifically wanted to know  about the most successful 
diplomatic initiatives between India and Bangladesh in the last decade . The Ministry 
responded that in the last decade, India and Bangladesh have achieved considerable 
success in a range of diplomatic, economic, and security initiatives. The Land Boundary 
Agreement, progress on water sharing with MoUs on Kushiyara and Feni, enhanced 
economic cooperation including settlement of bilateral trade in INR, road, rail, air and 
internet connectivity, and joint counter terrorism efforts have been key pillars in 
strengthening the relationship. Access to Chittagong and Mongla ports for transit cargo 
from northeastern India to rest of India via Bangladesh was operationalized in 2023. 
Significant connectivity initiatives like Agartala -Akhaura rail link, commencement of 

Page | 9 
 
cruise services, expanding trains and bus services, and opening of more land ports for 
customs and immigration have facilitated easier movement of goods and people. 
Additionally, India-Bangladesh power and energy cooperation has grown substantially, 
with India supplying 2 650 MW power to Bangladesh through cross -border 
transmission links. India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline and Maitree Super Thermal 
Power Plant built under India ’s concessional financial assistance have also been 
instrumental in enhancing energy security of Bangladesh. 
1.20 Successful outcomes from high-level exchanges are enumerated as follows:  
 Land Boundary Agreement between India and Bangladesh: India and 
Bangladesh signed the LBA in 2015 settling the long pending issue of boundary 
settlement with the exchange of enclaves. Both countries have also settled the 
maritime boundary in 2015.  
 Restoration of railway link between Haldibari (India) and Chilahati 
(Bangladesh). ‘Mitali Express’ as the third cross-border passenger train service 
connecting Dhaka to New Ja lpaiguri through Haldibari -Chilahati rail link was 
flagged off on 1 June 2022.    
 India-Bangladesh Friendship pipeline: 131 km pipeline for supply of 1 million 
Metric Tonne Per Annum High Speed Diesel (HSD) has been constructed from 
Siliguri Marketing Terminal of the Numaligarh Refinery Ltd (NRL) in India to the 
Parbatipur depot of the Bangladesh Petroleum Corporation (BPC).  
 There are five bus services between India and Bangladesh including on the 
Kolkata–Dhaka and Dhaka–Agartala routes.  
 Commencement of c ruise services between both countries in 2019. World ’s 
longest river cruise “Ganga Vilas” passed via India -Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) 
route in its journey from Varanasi to Dibrugarh through Bangladesh in 2023.  
 The Agreement on the Use of Chattogram and Mongla Ports (ACMP) was signed 
in 2015. Customs Notification to operationalise the movement of cargo using 
these routes to Northeast announced in April 2023.  
 Second Addendum on Protocol on Inland Water Transit an d Trade between 
India and Bangladesh was signed in May 2020 adding Sonamura - Daudkhandi 

Page | 10 
 
stretch of Gumti river (93 Km) as IBP route No. 9 & 10 in the Protocol and 
connecting Tripura through the inland waterways.  
 Commencement of container and parcel train services between India and 
Bangladesh since July 2020.  
 Four Integrated Check Posts (ICP) have been operationalized after 2014. These 
are ICP Petrapole (WB), ICP Sutarkandi (Assam), ICP Dawki (Meghalaya) and 
ICP Srimantapur (Tripura).  
 Inauguration of second cargo trade gate at ICP Petrapole. This is an integrated 
infrastructure at the border which will reduce waiting time of goods, especially 
perishables, at ICP Petrapole. About 40% of India -Bangladesh bilateral trade 
passes through ICP Petrapole. 
 Sub-regional connectivity in energy sector by tripartite agreement between 
Nepal, Bangladesh and India has been a landmark agreement.  
 
1.21 During the sitting of the Committee on 27 June 2025, one of the non -official 
witnesses suggested that the joint demarcation process under the LBA should be 
brought to full completion to ensure long-term clarity and stability along the boundary. 
When asked about the current status of demarcation, the Foreign Secretary, during 
his deposition before the Committee on 4 August 2025, informed that: 
“... The boundary demarcation has been largely completed along the length of 
the boundary which is close to 4,100 km. There are a few very small patches 
that remain largely in the Sunderbans area where due to very difficult terrain 
and the marshy nature of the terrain over there, we have yet not been able to 
complete it.” 
 
III. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
1.22 The Committee have been informed that the current situation in Bangladesh is 
complex and evolving. There is uncertainty regarding the schedule of democratic 
elections. The political events of August 2024 have created significant instability and 
uncertainty with incidents of violence, attacks and intimidation of minorities, tribal 
communities, media groups, intellectuals, journalists, academicians, etc., becoming 

Page | 11 
 
the norm. Concerns have been raised about human rights issues, including restrictions 
on freedom of speech and assembly. The political in stability has led to social unrest 
and protests in various parts of the country. Rising inflation and economic slowdown 
have also led to increased economic hardship. The economy has been experiencing a 
slowdown due to various factors, including the global economic downturn. The 
country's foreign exchange reserves have been declining, raising concerns about the 
country's ability to finance imports. Inflation has been on the rise and ready -made 
garment workers have been on strike disrupting industrial production. Violent clashes 
between different factions of political parties and youth have also disrupted normal 
functioning.  
1.23 During their testimony before the Committee on 26 June 2025 two of the non-
official witnesses, characterized the current situation as India ’s greatest strategic 
challenge in Bangladesh since 1971. Further, in his written submissions , one of the 
experts/non official witness   highlighted five drivers of the current challenge: 
generational discontinuity, collapse of the 1971 consensus, rise of new political forces, 
rise of Islamic radicalism and strategic realignment with China and Pakistan. 
1.24 Some of the Committee Members also raised issues relating to political asylum 
of Sheikh Hasina. In response the Foreign Secretary clarified the  Government’s 
position before the Committee on 11 December 2024 by stating as under: 
“... I did make the point in my conversations in Dhaka that it is not just a 
question of modern Indian history, but if you look at India civilizationally, what 
we have don e when we were faced with this situation is something we have 
done throughout our history – traditional or modern. Anybody who has sought 
our assistance at a moment of existential crisis, we have opened our doors for 
them and this situation was no different.  
Does her presence in India have an impact? I should like to think that it does 
not. And I was very clear in sharing this with my Bangladesh interlocutors that 
her presence in India does not constrict our space for acting towards 
Bangladesh. If it had, then  I would not have been in Dhaka day before 
yesterday to discuss the full gamut of our cooperation with them.  
Should she be making the statements that she is making? She is making these 
statements by accessing her private communication devices that she has access 
to. Government of India does not provide her with a political platform or any 

Page | 12 
 
political space to undertake political activity from Indian territory. That is a basic 
cardinal principle that we have exercised with regard to other people who are 
in similar situations in India. We do not promote the practice of politics from 
our territory aimed against a third country.” 
 
A. Impact on Bilateral Relations 
1.25 With regard to the impact of recent developments on broader bilateral relations, 
the Ministry stated that India has made every effort to insulate bilateral relation from 
the impact of recent political developments. To that end, India has continued 
interactions with the Interim Government and are also supportive of the aspirations 
of the people of Bangla desh. While communicating our support, the Government of 
India have underlined that our policies are people -oriented and not aimed at any 
particular political dispensation.  
1.26 When the Committee specifically enquired whether there has been any 
significant departure in Indian policy and approach towards Bangladesh following 
recent developments, the Ministry stated that India’s approach continues to be based 
on constructive engage ment. We have engaged with the Interim Government at all 
levels and have conveyed our commitment to further strengthening bilateral ties. This 
was reiterated during the visit to Dhaka of Foreign Secretary Shri Vikram Misri in 
December 2024. As evidence of this, a new gate at Petrapole land port was 
operationalized in October 2024 and a tripartite agreement for transmission of 40 MW 
of power from Nepal to Bangladesh through the Indian grid has been entered into for 
the first time.  
1.27 The Committee enquired the reason India was not able to foresee the current 
political crisis in Bangladesh d espite multiple media reports . In a written submission 
the Ministry stated that the Government of India regularly monitors developments in 
Bangladesh as a priority. In the elections held on 7 January 2024, the Awami League 
led by Sheikh Hasina won 224 of the 300 elected seats. However, the turnout was 
only about 40%. Both with regard to the popularity of the party and developments 
thereafter, there is no mistaking facts/trends which speak for themselves. The 
Government remains engaged with all stakeholders, including the opposition parties 

Page | 13 
 
in Bangladesh to secure our national interests. However, as a matter of policy, the 
Government does not interfere in the interna l political process or with the will and 
choices of the Bangladesh people. 
1.28 Responding to the queries about India’s approach towards relationship with 
Bangladesh in recent times, the Foreign Secretary during the Sitting of the Committee 
on 4 August 2025 stated as under: 
“I want to begin by saying that there is no change in our overall approach in 
relations with Bangladesh following the events of August, 2024 and that policy 
can be summed -up by saying that we remain interested in a constructive, 
pragmatic, mutually -beneficial, and forward -looking relationship with 
Bangladesh. Having said that, we have engaged with the interim Government 
on several issues of strategic interest to us as well as issues related to the 
regional security. We, of course, have co ncerns arising from increased 
extremism, attacks on minorities, and the overall bilateral environment.” 
 
1.29 The Committee also wanted to learn about the outcome of the Foreign Office 
Consultations in Dhaka in December 2024. During the Foreign Office Consultations in 
December 2024, the Foreign Secretary highlighted India ’s support for a democratic, 
stable, peaceful, progressive and inclusive Bangladesh and reiterated India ’s 
willingness to build a positive and constructive relationship with the interim 
government based on mutual trust & respect and mutual sensitivity to each other ’s 
concerns and interests. During the visit, it was agreed to continue the engagement 
through relevant official bilateral mechanisms for various areas of cooperation. Such 
bilateral meetings have been held recently and continue to be scheduled in the coming 
months such as the Inter-Governmental Railway Meeting, Joint Group of Customs and 
DG Level Talks between BSF and BGB. Our concerns regarding attacks on minorities 
have also been acknowledged to some extent by the interim government subsequent 
to the FOC.   
1.30 The high-level engagement between the two countries during the past one year 
i.e. 2024-25 is enlisted below: 
 

Page | 14 
 
S. 
No 
High Level 
Engagement 
Date Place; Occasion 
1. Hon’ble PM-Sheikh 
Hasina, Former PM 
08 June, 2024 New Delhi, To attend the 
Swearing in ceremony of Hon ’ble 
Prime Minister. 
2. Hon’ble PM -Sheikh 
Hasina, Former PM 
21-22 June, 
2024) 
 
New Delhi; State Visit of Prime 
Minister of Bangladesh to India 
 
3. EAM-Md. Touhid 
Hossain,  Foreign 
Affairs Advisor 
24 September 
2024 
New York, On the sidelines of 
UNGA 
4. Foreign Secretary ’s 
Meetings with Chief 
Advisor, Foreign 
Affairs Advisor and 
Foreign Secretary 
09 December, 
2024 
Dhaka; Foreign Office 
Consultations 
5. EAM-Md. Touhid 
Hossain,  Foreign 
Affairs Advisor 
16 February, 
2025 
Muscat; On the sidelines of the 8th 
Indian Ocean Conference 
6. Hon’ble PM -Prof 
Mohammed Yunus, 
Chief Advisor 
04 April, 2025 Bangkok; On the sidelines of the 
6th BIMSTEC Summit meeting 
 
1.31 With regard to recent developments, during the deposition on 4 August 2025, 
the Foreign Secretary also apprised the Committee about the notable developments 
in the electoral and political landscape of Bangladesh. A new Political party was 
founded by the student leaders named the National Citizen Party. At the same time, 
the previously banned party the Jamat -e-Islami had its electoral registration 
reinstated, which will enable it to participate in the upcoming ele ctions. The Interim 
Government had imposed a ban on the Awami League and it remains barred from the 
electoral participation for now. Continuing ban on the Awami League will obviously 
call into question the inclusiveness of any future elections in Bangladesh. 
1.32 During the testimony on 1 1 December 2024, the Foreign Secretary reiterated 
the intention of the Government to engage with the Bangladeshi side by stating as 
under: 

Page | 15 
 
 “I would just like to highlight the engagement that we have had with the 
Government led by Professor Yunus, not just for the record but also for the 
purpose of pointing out, or addressing, or responding to this concern in certain 
areas that we may not have recognised the Government or afforded legitimacy to 
the Government. Distinguished Members are aware that the Government does not 
go around giving out certificates of legitimacy to Governments abroad or political 
formations abroad. We indicate our engagement or we indicate our intent through 
engagement. And with the interim Government of Bangladesh, that engagement 
has been in evidence since day one. The Prime Minister was, in fact, the first world 
leader to congratulate the Chief Adviser upon his assumption of office. He reached 
out to him …The Prime Minister congratulated Professor Yunus . He had a very 
cordial telephone conversation with him. He then invited him to participate in the 
3rd Voice of Global South Summit that was held on the 17 th of August online. 
Subsequently, in late September, the External Affairs Minister met with his 
counterpart the Foreign Affairs Advisor Mohammad Touhid Hossain in New York, 
and it was there that a decision was taken that we would also look at engaging 
through the institutional mechanisms that we have” 
  
1.33 As regards the Ministry ’s assessment of India -Bangladesh relations, it 
submitted that d espite the challenges of a motivated and negative narrative of 
Bangladesh, cooperation under official bilateral mechanisms has continued along with 
various people-to-people initiatives being undertaken to forge a stronger relationship 
between the people of both countries. Bilateral trade has been moving in both 
directions with a major portion of the exports from India being essential commodities 
to Bangladesh which is cru cial for inflation management in the country. Our support 
to the people of Bangladesh through medical visas and development cooperation 
projects has also been continuing. The current state of India -Bangladesh relations is 
evolving in line with our mutual interests and priorities.  
1.34 The Committee also enquired whether in the opinion of the Ministry there exist 
any areas of tension in strengthening diplomatic engagements. In a written reply the 
Ministry illustrated that  along with challenges arising along a shared border, an 
increased extremist rhetoric including distortion and peddling of anti -India narrative 
continue to be addressed through sustained diplomatic engagement. The tendency to 
address bilateral issues through  media rather than through official mechanisms 
provides vested interests in Bangladesh an opportunity to distort facts that feeds into 
a wrong narrative. This has been countered by putting out facts proactively in public 

Page | 16 
 
and countering media distortions where they exist. In the course of past few months, 
tensions have been witnessed but have been handled diplomatically through regular 
engagement. 
 
1.35 In the past, India enjoyed good relations with Bangladesh. When asked about 
key factors that contributed t o these positive ties, and the manner in which we can 
apply those lessons in the current political and diplomatic climate, the Ministry stated 
that India and Bangladesh share a relationship that is founded on the shared sacrifices 
of the Liberation War of 1971, shared linguistic, literary, and cultural traditions, and 
close people-to-people ties.  Building on these factors,  India remains committed to 
working with Bangladesh on issues that benefit the people of both nations.   India 
believes in building strong  people-to-people connections and economic inter -
dependencies, which remain the bedrock of the relationship. 
 
1.36 The ties have been further enhanced through trade and investments, increased 
connectivity and support for public welfare projects based on th e priorities of the 
Government of Bangladesh. These were based on mutual interest and respect for each 
other’s sensitivities. Both countries benefited from robust cooperation on cross-border 
security and countering extremism and terrorism that contributed towards enhancing 
regional stability. In the field of development cooperation, India extended over USD 8 
billion in Lines of Credit and offered grant assistance in  supporting connectivity, 
infrastructure, energy, and capacity -building projects in Banglades h.  Further, the 
Government continues to engage with Bangladesh within  regional mechanisms such 
as BBIN and BIMSTEC  to align bilateral co -operation with broader regional 
aspirations.  
 
1.37 While challenges exist in the present political context, the Government of India 
remains engaged with all democratic stakeholders in Bangladesh across the political 
spectrum.  
 

Page | 17 
 
1.38 Further, one of the experts during testimony before the Committee on 27 June 
2025 expressed the view that the situation is not hopeless because of three main 
factors and it is not Pakistan with whom differences are beyond repair. 
1. Bangladesh’s identity is not solely religious; it has a strong cultural and 
linguistic Bengali identity. 
2. Bangladesh has mass based political parties with a tradition of semi 
democratic politics. 
3. Bangladesh Army is not the Pakistan Army and has refused to fire on its 
own people. 
 
1.39 The Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry has explored the idea of 
creating a strategic communication body to handle anti -India narratives and 
perceptions, particularly in countries like Bangladesh. The Ministry of External Affairs 
responded that it remains the nodal body for addressing perceptions and narratives in 
Bangladesh through coordinated efforts involving other Ministries and agencies. Based 
on reports and inputs, including of trends in social media, correct facts are 
disseminated, and misperceptions addressed by publicity in social media, mainstream 
print and  AV media and through official mechanisms. These efforts are aimed at 
addressing misinformation on issues such as water sharing, flood data sharing, border 
security issues and incidents, and sensitivities involving shared culture, language and 
religion. On  all such issues, the Government expeditiously issues clarifications as 
necessary. Furthermore, inter-ministerial consultations are held to deliberate on cross-
cutting issues, ensuring a unified and calibrated; whole of government approach; to 
matters of national interest. 
 
1.40 About the major challenges in the India -Bangladesh relationship today, and 
how is the Indian government addressing them, the Ministry stated that the major 
challenges in India -Bangladesh relationship revolve around areas like illega l 
immigration, radicalization and extremism, regional security and extremist rhetoric 
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. These are sought to be 
addressed through cooperation with the Bangladesh government and dissemination 
of facts . The Government of India also remains concerned about the attacks on 

Page | 18 
 
minorities in Bangladesh. This has been taken up at different levels. Additionally, 
border security issues, including cross-border trafficking, drug smuggling and human 
trafficking remain significant challenges that are being addressed through mechanisms 
created for the purpose. There are also challenges posed by the activities of foreign 
adversarial actors which we are addressing through increasing our linkages and 
creating a larger constituency of stakeholders in a bilateral relationship.  
1.41 Among the issues between India and Bangladesh is also the sharing of river 
waters, particularly the Teesta River, which is being addressed through 
institutionalised mechanisms for discussion of water issues. The Indian government 
has been addressing these issues through diplomatic dialogue, increasing border 
surveillance, economic cooperation, and regional partnerships. The emphasis on 
people-to-people ties, cultural diplomacy, and mutual economic benefits has helped 
manage tensions. Through multilateral forums and regional security cooperation, India 
is seeking to engage Bangladesh on matters of mutual security and regional stability. 
 
B. Protection of Minorities and Human Rights Concerns 
1.42 In light of recent incidents of attack on minorities and religious places, when 
asked about the manner in which the Ministry has communicated its concerns, it 
responded that they closely follow developments in Bangladesh on the issue of 
minorities. The expectations of the Government of India regarding the need to ensure 
safety and protection of Hindus and all other minority communities in Bangladesh have 
been conveyed and reiterated to the authorities of the Interim Government of 
Bangladesh on various occas ions including at the highest level. External Affairs 
Minister too had raised the issue of attacks on minorities in his address to the 
Parliament on 6 August 2024. Our High Commission in Dhaka continues to monitor 
the situation closely and engages with the  Bangladesh authorities as required. 
Concerns regarding attacks on minorities were reiterated to Bangladesh side during 
visit of Foreign Secretary to Dhaka on 9 December, 2024.  
1.43 India’s expectations regarding the need to ensure safety and protection of 
Hindus and all other minority communities in Bangladesh have been conveyed and 
reiterated to the authorities of the Interim Government of Bangladesh on various 

Page | 19 
 
occasions, most recently during EAM’s bilateral meeting with Foreign Affairs Adviser 
of Bangladesh on the sidelines of 8 th Indian Ocean Conference in Muscat. In his visit 
to Bangladesh on 9 December 2024, Foreign Secretary also raised the matter with the 
concerned authorities in Bangladesh. Subsequently, on December 10, 2024, the 
Government of Bangladesh announced that 70 people had been arrested in 88 cases 
related to attacks against minorities. The Government of India has consistently 
reiterated that the Government of Banglad esh takes concrete steps to protect the 
rights of minorities, ensure their political and social inclusion, and promote a culture 
of tolerance and coexistence. The Government of Bangladesh has not only not 
acknowledged the systematic persecution of minoriti es but has also sought to 
downplay the scale and nature of violence against the Hindus since August 2024. Chief 
Adviser Md. Yunus along with other Advisers term the reports of atrocities against 
minorities in Bangladesh as media exaggeration and have tried to justify them as not 
communal but as ‘political killings’ of the Awami Leaguers.  
1.44 On 12 January 2025, the Office of Chief Adviser released a Press Statement 
that police investigation has found that over 98% of attacks on minorities from a total 
of 1415 incidents that were verified between 4 -20 August, 2024 were “politically 
motivated” and “did not have any communal agenda ”. While there have been some 
arrests, serious actions against perpetrators of the violence has not yet been taken, 
even as incidents of attack on minorities and their places of worship continue to be 
reported in Bangladesh. The Government of India is continuously monitoring the 
situation with regard to the security and safety of minorities in Bangladesh. We have 
repeatedly called upon the interim Government of Bangladesh to bring to justice the 
perpetrators of killings, arson and violence against minorities, including Hindus. 
1.45 As regards the response of the Government of Bangladesh, the Ministry stated 
that the Interim Government has sought to downplay incidents of attack on minorities, 
calling them politically motivated and as media exaggerations. We have clearly shared 
our expectations with the Interim Government for the safety and security of all 
minorities, including Hindus. India continues to remain engaged with the Bangladesh 
side for the safety, security and welfare of Hindus and other minorities in Bangladesh.  
 

Page | 20 
 
1.46 The Committee desired to know about specific diplomatic measures taken to 
address the protection of minority rights in Bangladesh, the Ministry stated that it  
closely follows developments in Bangladesh on the issue of minorities. The 
expectations of the Government of India regarding the need for Bangladesh to ensure 
the safety and protection of Hindus and all other minority communities in Bangladesh 
have been conveyed and reiterated to the authorities of the Interim Government on 
various occasions including at the highest level. Our High Commission in Dhaka 
continues to monitor the situation closely and engages with the Bangladesh authorities 
as required.  
1.47 On being asked about the outcomes of the diplomatic steps, the Ministry stated 
that India has conveyed to Bangladesh in clear terms including at the highest level, 
its e xpectation that the Government of Bangladesh would ensure the safety and 
security of minorities, including by thoroughly investigating the cases of atrocities 
committed against them. Till 18 May 2025, 2446 attacks against minorities have been 
reported. After FS raised the issue with Bangladesh side during the FoC, 70 arrests 
have been made and 88 cases have been filed in December 2024 with regard to 
attacks against minorities. Till January 2025, police investigations have been able to 
verify 1254 incidents,  of which over 98% incidents were deemed to be political in 
nature. Our High Commission in Dhaka continues to monitor the situation closely and 
engages with the Bangladesh authorities as required.  
1.48 As regards the impact of domestic political and social issues in Bangladesh, 
such as the treatment of minorities, on bilateral relations , the Ministry replied that 
India has continued to engage with Interim Government on all issues of interest which 
include border security, treatment of minorities etc. Issues of mutual interest between 
the two countries are resolved bilaterally through constructive discussions.  
IV. Regional Cooperation and Multilateral Frameworks 
1.49 The Ministry stated that Bangladesh plays a key role in India's broader strategic 
vision for both South Asia and the Indo -Pacific region, largely due to its geographic 
location, economic potential, and shared security interests. India seeks to enhance 
connectivity across South Asi a, and Bangladesh plays a critical role in regional 

Page | 21 
 
transport and energy links. Projects like the India-Bangladesh rail and road links, and 
energy cooperation (including cross-border electricity supply), are crucial for regional 
integration. Bangladesh’s location in the Bay of Bengal makes it strategically important 
for India's broader Indo -Pacific strategy, which emphasizes stability, security, and 
prosperity of the region. India has been working to increase engagement with 
countries in the Indo-Pacific, and Bangladesh, as a key regional partner, plays a role 
in this larger vision. 
 
1.50 When the Committee enquired about specific strategic and security interests 
link India and Bangladesh in the larger regional context , in a written submission the 
Ministry submitted that t he strategic and security interests of India and Bangladesh 
are influenced by the broader regional context of changing geopolitics of the Indian 
Ocean. Both countries have a shared interest in confronting threats from extremist 
groups operating in the region, including those with links to transnational terrorist 
networks. The border between the two countries presents challenges related to illegal 
immigration, smuggling, and cross -border crimes. Combating these challenges in 
addition to having secure maritime routes in Indian Ocean is crucial for maintaining 
vital trade and economic links. Bangladesh is also geographically located at the centre 
of South Asia’s convergence with South East Asia and its strategic location can play a 
role in ensuring access of the sea to the landlocked northeastern part of India.  
1.51 Beyond bilateral engagement, our regional cooperation groupings such as the 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation or 
BIMSTEC has also offered a promising avenue to deepen connectivity, boost trade, 
and enrich cultural and people to people exchange with Bangladesh. Regarding the 
role of regional organizations like (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
(SAARC), the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) play in shaping the India-Bangladesh relationship, the Ministry 
submitted that Bangladesh is a member of several regional forums like SAARC (South 
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation), BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for 
Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation), and the Indian Ocean Rim 
Association (IORA). India and Bangladesh have enjoyed a warm and cordial 
relationship in these multilateral and  regional forums and have enjoyed each other ’s 

Page | 22 
 
support in candidatures and policy positions. Bangladesh hosts the BIMSTEC 
Secretariat in Dhaka and is a strategic partner of India under Connectivity and Trade 
Pillars of BIMSTEC. Bangladesh is going to assum e the presidency of BIMSTEC once 
Thailand passes it over and is crucial for achieving tangible progress on regional 
cooperation under BIMSTEC.  
1.52 As regards collaboration between India and Bangladesh towards addressing 
shared concerns like climate chang e, maritime security, and piracy in the regional 
context, the Ministry stated that both countries have recognized the urgency of climate 
action and are working together on initiatives like the "India -Bangladesh Green 
Partnership." This partnership focuses on areas such as disaster risk reduction, climate 
change adaptation and sustainable development. India and Bangladesh have been 
strengthening their maritime security cooperation through sharing intelligence and 
information on maritime threats, such as pira cy, smuggling, and illegal fishing; and 
conducting joint patrols in the Bay of Bengal to enhance maritime security and combat 
illegal activities. India and Bangladesh are actively participating in regional initiatives 
to combat piracy, such as the Combined Maritime Forces (CMF). Their partnership in 
patrolling and surveillance in the Bay of Bengal is key to ensuring free and secure sea 
lanes, which are essential for trade and regional stability. Bangladesh has also joined 
the Disaster Risk Reduction and Man agement Pillar of the Indo -Pacific Oceans 
Initiative (IPOI) to cooperate under the umbrella of disaster management. 
  
1.53 On increasing cooperation through SAARC and BIMSTEC, the Foreign Secretary 
during the meeting of the Committee on 11 December 2024 stated as under: 
“…We have made it very clear to anybody and everybody in SAARC who is 
coming up to us with proposals for reviving it that we cannot have dialogue 
and terrorism go on at the same time. Until Pakistan changes its policy of cross-
border terrorism as an instrument of State policy, there is no possibility of going 
forward with SAARC. 
I did make the point also that BIMSTEC does pretty much everything 
that SAARC does and then some other things and since the organisation is 
headquartered in Dhaka, it would be useful if Bangladesh takes it forward. I 
must say that there was no pushback against it….” 
 

Page | 23 
 
1.54 On the Committee’s specific query about how India plans to strengthen bilateral 
cooperation with Bangladesh in the face of regional geopolitical shifts, including 
China’s growing influence in South Asia, the Ministry submitted that India’s relationship 
with Bangladesh is independent of its relationship with third countries. The 
Government will continue to monitor developments having a bearing on India ’s 
national interests and will take all necessary measures to safeguard them. 
1.55 China’s increasing presence in Bangladesh, especially through infrastructure, 
military cooperation, and port developments, has been of concern. On being asked 
about the situation regarding the Mongla Port and Lal monirhat Airbase, the Ministry 
responded that the Government remains watchful of Chinese presence in Bangladesh 
and the nature and implications of Chinese projects under implementation.  With 
regard to Mongla port, Bangladesh signed a government -to-government agreement 
with China in March 2025 to implement a USD 370 million expansion project at Mongla 
Port. India has been ahead of the curve by financing a key rail connectivity project, 
the Khulna–Mongla railway line, to enhance the port ’s connectivity to the hinterland, 
which has been completed. Further, India has an Agreement with Bangladesh on the 
Use of Chattogram and Mongla Ports (ACMP)  for transit access, to secure our 
interests.  Regarding development of Lalmonirhat airbase with Chinese assistance,  in 
a press briefing on 26 May 2025, the Director of Military Operations of Bangladesh 
Army clarified that there are currently no plans to upgrade the airstrip for military 
use.   
 
1.56 When asked about the strategic implications of these developments on India, 
particularly in relation to the Siliguri Corridor, the Ministry stated that the Government 
continues to monitor developments having a bearing on India’s national interests and 
takes all necessary measures to safeguard them.  
 
1.57 While tendering evidence before the Committee on 1 1 December 2024, the 
Foreign Secretary stated as under: 
“…there are a number of infrastructure -related projects that are underway in 
Bangladesh. Again, I would point out that these are not an outcome of the 5 th 
August events. China has had presence in Bangladesh for quite some time. 
Chinese projects have been present in Bangladesh for quite a long time… They 

Page | 24 
 
have also made contact with the new authorities. I think there was a question 
earlier about the visit by the Jamaat -e-Islami to China. So, the Chinese are 
engaging all sections of opinion in Bangladesh ...” 
   
1.58 In testimony before the Committee on June 27, 2025, one of the non -official 
witnesses emphasized the potential of leveraging sub -regional groups by stating as 
under: 
“…  I do feel Sub -Regional Groups can be leveraged. The BIMSTEC, with the 
help of ADB, has come up with something called the ‘Master Plan’ on transport 
connectivity for the entire region, which includes Myanmar and Thailand. I think 
that is a very good conne ctivity, that is a very good Master Plan.  All the 
countries are on-board on that Master Plan. Even if there are difficulties in the 
bilateral relations, I think, using the platform of BIMSTEC, connectivity projects 
can be taken forward.” 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 25 
 
CHAPTER 2 
BORDER SECURITY AND MANAGEMENT 
 India shares its longest international border with Bangladesh , stretching 
approximately 4096 km, making it the fifth longest border in the world. This extensive 
boundary traverses diverse and challenging terrains - mountainous regions, dense 
forests, and vast riverine systems - adding layers of complexity to effective 
management and security. This border also touches five states of India: Tripura, 
Mizoram, Meghalaya, West Bengal and Assam underscoring the critical importance of 
maintaining a stable and cooperative relationship with Bangladesh for regional 
security. The Government of India recognizes that the stability and prosperity of 
Bangladesh direc tly impact the security and socio -economic development of its 
northeastern states. Consequently, sustained engagement at the government -to-
government level is a cornerstone of India ’s strategy to protect its security interests 
and ensure that strategic con cerns are effectively addressed by Government of 
Bangladesh. 
 
I. Border Security  
2.2 Border fencing remains a key component of India ’s security strategy. On 
boundary fencing, the Foreign Secretary said on 11 December 2024: 
“As regards Bangladesh, of the 4096 kms nearly 3231 kms is already fenced. 
About 689 kms remains to be fenced. 174 km of this area is pending  that is 
riverine areas, therefore not liable to be fenced or it is not feasible to fence this 
area. May be, about 690 kms or 700 odd kms is an area where fencing can be 
done. These are areas where local authorities need to acquire land to enable 
fencing to be done. It is because these are also populated areas in certain 
cases.” 
2.3 On the issue of border security, duri ng the Committee ‘s deliberations on 26 
March 2025, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs further stated: 
“In view of the deteriorating internal security situation, we feel an increased 
need for bolstering the security of our shared border. Therefore, border fencing 
has become an even more important area for us. We are, therefore committed 
to completing the border fencing with Bangladesh. Hon. Members would be 

Page | 26 
 
aware that the India Bangladesh border is nearly 4,096 kms long. It is the fifth-
longest border in the entire world. Nearly, 3232 kms of this border is fenced. 
There is between 650 kms. and 700 kms. of the border that remains to be 
fenced and is under discussion and various stages of preparation and survey 
work in order for us to be able to fence this border. About 175 odd kms. is very 
difficult in so far as terrain is concerned and we have to find technical solutions 
for that.” 
 
2.4 The India -Bangladesh border presents unique challenges owing to its varied 
terrain, which includes mountainous and riverine regions. When asked about primary 
challenges in managing the India -Bangladesh border, the Ministry stated that  illegal 
migration, smuggling, cross-border terrorism and border disputes remain significant 
concerns, compounded by difficult terrain and political sensitivities across India -
Bangladesh border.  The topography of the India -Bangladesh border being 
mountainous as well as riverine adds to the difficulty of managing the border. Lack of 
employment and livelihood opportunities in the communities at the border makes them 
prone to resorting to crimes like smuggling and illegal migration. These challenges 
provide opportunities for cros s-border movement of anti -social elements that are 
being checked through increased vigil of the Border Security Force (BSF).  
 
2.5 Regarding the effectiveness of the cooperation between India and Bangladesh in 
addressing security challenges, such as terror ism, insurgency, and cross -border 
crimes, the Ministry stated that  both countries cooperate in areas like intelligence 
sharing, border management, and countering cross-border terrorism, which has been 
a significant concern for India. India has worked with Bangladesh on joint operations 
against terrorism and extremist activities. Border guarding forces from both countries 
have a long-standing practice of joint patrols, especially in areas like riverine regions 
where border security is difficult. Regular meet ings, border talks, and joint working 
groups are established to address border disputes, manage humanitarian concerns, 
and maintain peace along the border. To prevent miscommunication or accidental 
escalation, the Border Security Force (BSF) and Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB) have 
direct communication lines (hotlines) to address issues like cross -border firing or 
border violations in real time and also share details of hideout camps of insurgent 
groups with each other. 

Page | 27 
 
2.6  The Committee specifically enquire d about the role played by the Border 
Security Force (BSF) in this cooperation, and scope for improvements needed in border 
management mechanisms. In a written reply, the Ministry submitted that BSF plays a 
crucial role in protecting the India-Bangladesh border as it is primarily responsible for 
guarding and securing the 4,096 Km border between the two countries. It is 
responsible for conducting patrols and monitoring along the border to prevent illegal 
crossings and overseeing the construction and maintena nce of border fences and 
pillars. BSF also plays a role in curbing cross -border smuggling of goods like drugs, 
weapons, livestock, and contraband. BSF coordinates with Indian intelligence agencies 
to track and prevent cross -border terrorism and the movemen t of militants or 
extremists from Bangladesh into India. BSF also plays a role in facilitating border trade, 
particularly through designated trade zones where goods flow between India and 
Bangladesh.  
2.7 The use of enhanced fencing and surveillance infras tructure, such as drones, 
motion sensors, cameras, and satellite surveillance, which is under implementation 
will contribute to the BSF’s ability to monitor large sections of the border remotely, 
and help identify illegal crossings or suspicious activities , especially in areas where 
physical patrolling is challenging.  
 
2.8 Enumerating the specific measures that have been taken to address cross -
border security issues, the Ministry submitted that  the Government is undertaking a 
comprehensive approach in dealing with cross-border security issues with Bangladesh 
in coordination with State Governments of northeastern States, border guarding 
agencies, central investigative agencies and law enforcement authorities. As a result 
of the Government’s actions, 14 terrorists affiliated with Ansarullah Bangla Team (a 
wing of Al Qaeda in Indian Subcontinent) have been arrested by State Government of 
Assam since December 2024 in joint operations with police and state agencies. Several 
illegal Bangladesh nationals have been detained by the northeastern states, and 
narcotics amounting to 12,300 kg have been seized owing to high security alert at the 
borders in recent months. The increased surveillance by border guar ding forces has 
resulted in hindering cross-border criminal activities.   

Page | 28 
 
2.9 With regard to collaboration on counter -terrorism efforts, particularly in 
tackling extremist groups with transnational links, the Ministry stated that India and 
Bangladesh cooperate through intelligence-sharing mechanisms to track and combat 
terrorist activities, especially those involving cross -border terrorism. Both countries 
have been regularly engaging through relevant bilateral mechanisms to share 
actionable intelligence for collaboration on counter -terrorism and extremism. Border 
Security Force from India and the Border Guard Bangladesh have regularly 
coordinated to monitor movements along the border and prevent infiltration by 
terrorist groups. Additionally, they've worked together to prevent the use of the border 
for trafficking arms, drugs, and other illicit materials. The two countries have also 
worked on legal frameworks to make it easier to track and prosecute terror financing, 
money laundering, and related crimes. 
2.10 On the Committee’s query whether there exist specific bilateral mechanisms 
or task forces to share intelligence and coordinate on counter terrorism operations, 
the Ministry replied that discussions to cooperate in counter terrorism are undertaken 
through the Joint Working Group on Security and Border Management led by Ministry 
of Home Affairs, DG Level Talks between BSF and BGB, Joint Task Force on fake 
currency and other relevant mechanisms. 
2.11 The Committee were keen to know how has the security cooperation between 
India and Bangladesh evolved in response to regional security challenges, including 
the situation in Myanmar and other areas of instability in South Asia. The Ministry 
responded that both countries work together on issues like border security and refugee 
management, particularly concerning displaced populations from conflict areas of 
Myanmar. Ensuring stability in these areas reduces the risk of social unrest and 
humanitarian crises spilling over into neighbouring regions. India and Bangladesh  
collaborate through intelligence sharing related to security threats in the region 
including mass movement of people. India has assisted Bangladesh in providing 
facilities for displaced population from Myanmar who have sought refuge in 
Bangladesh. 

Page | 29 
 
2.12 Further, there is active cooperation between various agencies of both countries 
working jointly to combat illicit drug trafficking, fake currency, and human trafficking, 
among other issues. This includes the regular meetings of bilateral institutional 
mechanisms such as the Joint Working Group on Security and Border Management 
led by Ministry of Home Affairs, DG Level Talks between BSF and BGB, and the Joint 
Task Force on fake currency.   
2.13 While tendering evidence before the Committee, the Foreign Secreta ry on 4 
August 2025 also added as under: 
“With regard to security cooperation between the two countries, as I said, we 
have engagement largely on the security issues between the BSF and the BGB, 
and the two forces engage in, quite apart from border managem ent and 
countering cross-border terrorism, intelligence cooperation, and we have, in fact, 
worked through joint operations against terrorism and extremist activities. The 
DG-BSF and DG-BGB-level talks are useful in this regard, and we will continue to 
take this forward.” 
 
2.14 The security of India’s northeastern states is intricately linked to developments 
along the Bangladesh border. When asked about the ramifications of the current state 
of India-Bangladesh relations on the Northeast region of India, the Ministry responded 
that t he Government is aware of the security implications for India ’s northeastern 
states, given the geographical proximity and existing cross -border connectivity and 
trade linkages with Bangladesh. While ensuring security, the Governme nt is keen to 
foster economic growth in the Northeastern region and has made efforts to enhance 
connectivity of Northeastern states to the rest of the states of India and also with the 
broader region.  Even as local developments are monitored closely, bila teral issues 
pertaining to security and border management, trade and connectivity with the 
Northeast States are discussed with Bangladesh through high-level engagements and 
also through relevant bilateral institutional mechanisms.  
 
II. ROLE OF BORDERING STATES 
2.15 On the Committee’s specific query about the role played by state Governments, 
particularly those bordering Bangladesh in influencing India ’s diplomatic approach 

Page | 30 
 
toward Bangladesh, the Ministry stated that  there are five Indian states bordering 
Bangladesh – West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. These states 
have a bearing on India ’s diplomatic approach toward Bangladesh due to their 
geographic proximity, cultural ties, and cross -border socio -economic 
interdependence. While foreign po licy remains the prerogative of the Union 
Government, these states are being consulted for their views/concerns on relevant 
bilateral issues.  
2.16 The Foreign Secretary during the testimony on 4 August, 2025 further added: 
“On the significance of relations with Bangladesh for the States that border 
Bangladesh, it is of high priority for us. We worked with the Ministry for the 
Development of North -East Regions. On these, I have personally spoken 
individually to the Chief Secretaries of all of these States to keep them posted 
vis-à-vis Bangladesh and what the impacts of those actions might be. For those 
States, we also have within the Ministry of External Affairs, a State ’s Division 
which undertakes the task of regular coordination wherever it is nece ssary 
including on trade related matters.” 
2.17 Regarding the mechanisms to integrate the perspectives of State Governments 
into national foreign policy, the Ministry stated that there are various formal 
mechanisms for State Governments to convey their vie ws/priorities regarding policy 
making process concerning Bangladesh. The North Eastern Council (NEC) facilitates 
coordination between Northeastern states and the Central government, including on 
matters impacting cross -border relations with Bangladesh. The  NITI Aayog ’s Sub -
Group of Chief Ministers (SSM) mechanism provides a structured platform for states, 
including those bordering Bangladesh, to contribute to national policy formulation, 
including aspects of regional connectivity and cross -border cooperatio n. India and 
Bangladesh have established the mechanism of DC -DM meetings to discuss localized 
issues of importance. Further, on specific issues that have a trans -boundary linkage, 
the concerned State Governments are consulted.  
2.18  In states like West Bengal and Assam, illegal migration from Bangladesh is a 
significant issue. On being asked about the manner in which s tate governments 
manage this complex issue, especially in ensuring that illegal migration is dealt with 
humanely, legally and without underm ining India's security concerns , the Ministry 

Page | 31 
 
responded that  the matter of detection and deportation of illegal Bangladeshi 
nationals/foreigners’ nationals staying in India are dealt by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. The powers of identification and deporta tion of illegally staying foreign 
nationals including Bangladeshi nationals had been delegated to the State 
Government and Union Territory Government Administrations under Section 3(2)(c) 
of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (Section 7(2)(c) of The Immigration and Foreigners Act, 
2025). Union Mini stry of Home Affairs (MHA) acts in concert with relevant State 
governments and Union territories to identify and deport illegal Bangladeshi nationals. 
2.19 The Committee further enquired about the number of Bangladeshi nationals 
who have immigrated to India in the past decade. In a written submission the Ministry 
stated that the subject matter is not dealt with by MEA. However, the matter of 
verification of nationality of suspected Bangladeshis in detention in India is dealt by 
MEA. 2369 cases are awaiting nationality verification by the Government of 
Bangladesh. 
2.20 As regards the trends in immigration from Bangladesh, and how does India 
manage cross-border migration with respect to both legal and illegal immigration, the 
Ministry responded that the subject matter is not dealt with by MEA. However, within 
the subject matters dealt by the MEA, the Government seeks to effectively manage 
the border, support infrastructure development, and legal immigration (visits) through 
continued bilateral cooperation with Bangladesh.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 32 
 
CHAPTER 3 
ECONOMIC AND TRADE RELATIONS 
 India and Bangladesh share a robust economic and trade relationship that has 
witnessed significant growth over the past decade. Bangladesh is India’s biggest trade 
partner in South Asia and India is the second biggest trade partner of Bangladesh in 
Asia. India remains one of the largest export destinations for Bangladeshi goods, 
particularly raw cotton, rice, and agricultural products, alongside electrical machinery, 
automobiles, and industrial chemicals.  
 
I.   Bilateral Trade 
3.2  India-Bangladesh bilateral trade has registered a substantial increase in the last 
10 years. A table outlining the trend of imports, exports and overall trade is reproduced 
below: 
(Values in US $ Million)     
Financial 
Year 
Export Export 
Growth 
% 
Import Import 
Growth 
% 
Total Trade Growth  
% 
2014 - 2015 6,451.47  621.37  7,072.84  
2015 - 2016 6,034.94 -6.46 727.15 17.02 6,762.09 -4.39 
2016 - 2017 6,820.11 13.01 701.68 -3.50 7,521.79 11.23 
2017 - 2018 8,614.35 26.31 685.65 -2.29 9,299.99 23.64 
2018 - 2019 9,210.06 6.92 1,044.80 52.38 10,254.86 10.27 
2020 - 2021 9,691.56 5.23 1,091.66 4.48 10,783.22 5.15 
2021 - 2022 16,156.37 66.71 1,977.93 81.19 18,134.30 68.17 
2022 - 2023 12,215.85 -24.39 2,021.24 2.19 14,237.09 -21.49 
2023 - 2024 11,065.87 -9.41 1,844.76 -8.73 12,910.63 -9.32 
2024 - 2025 11,455.99 3.53 2,005.43 8.71 13,461.43 4.27 
 
3.3  During the sitting of the Committee on 1 1 December 2024, the Foreign 
Secretary mentioned the tripartite power sharing agreement between Inda, 
Bangladesh and Nepal to emphasize sub -regional energy cooperation. He stated as 
under: 

Page | 33 
 
 
“… in order to promote sub-regional energy cooperation, a tripartite power sale 
agreement has also recently been signed between India, Bangladesh and 
Nepal, which has facilitated for the first time ever cross-border transmission of 
40 MW of electricity from the hydropower plants of Nepal to Bangladesh 
through the Indian grid. This landmark agreement symbolizes our commitment 
to embark on a new era of energy cooperation in the region between India and 
its neighbouring countries.” 
 
3.4  Despite the robust trade relations, several challenges hinder the seamless 
growth of India -Bangladesh trade. When enquired about  the primary challenges 
hindering further economic cooperation , the Ministry responded that  the trade 
between India and Bangladesh has been hindered by infrastructural limitations and 
imposition of tariff and non -tariff barriers like port restrictions and import duties by 
the Government of Bangladesh. Import restrictions on commodities like orange s, 
vulcanized rubber, bovine meat, frozen meat by Bangladesh have hindered economic 
cooperation. Bangladesh enjoys duty -free, quota -free access for a majority of its 
exports to India. The infrastructural limitations and movement of a large part of the 
trade through roadways increases per unit cost of goods transported between both 
countries. Land ports between India and Bangladesh also suffer from high congestion 
and last-mile connectivity issues with lack of access roads, warehouses and proper 
plant and animal quarantine facilities.  
3.5 Regarding steps being taken to enhance bilateral trade between India and 
Bangladesh, the Ministry submitted that measures to resolve tariff as well as non-tariff 
barriers and streamlining trade between both countries are di scussed under relevant 
bilateral mechanisms. The two countries are also discussing a Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership Agreement (CEPA) which will provide a framework of economic cooperation 
as Bangladesh graduates from LDC status in 2026. Trade between India and Bangladesh 
denominated in INR started in July 2023. Efforts of Government of India are focused on 
removing bottlenecks in flow of bilateral trade and enhance opportunities of 
strengthening trade through connectivity and infrastructure up-gradation.  

Page | 34 
 
3.6  On being asked about the impact of this change on trade relationship between 
India and Bangladesh , the Ministry stated that Bangladesh is India ’s largest trade 
partner in South Asia. In FY 2024 -25, the total bilateral trade is reported to be USD 
12.86 billion with India exporting USD 11.06 billion and Bangladesh exporting USD 1.8 
billion of goods. Bangladesh has enjoyed a duty-free quota free access to Indian 
markets for most of its goods under the SAFTA Trade Agreement owing to its LDC 
status. This has offered a comparative advantage for its products. We are undertaking 
inter-ministerial discussions to redefine the bilateral trade relationship post the LDC 
graduation.  
3.7  Explaining the reasons for strong balance of trade in favour of India, the Foreign 
Secretary in his initial briefing to the Committee on 1 1 December 2024 stated as 
under: 
“With regard to trade and connectivity, Bangladesh is indeed India ’s largest 
partner in South Asia and India is Bangladesh’s second largest trade partner in 
Asia. In financial year 2023-24, the total bilateral trade was 12.9 billion dollars, 
of which India exported 11.06 billion dollars and Bangladesh exported 1.84 
billion dollars. The balance of trade is strongly in favour of India. In normal 
circumstances, this might be a cause of concern and grievance for the country 
on the other side. 
However, we have pointed out from time to time that a lot of the import 
basket from India for Bangladesh comprises components and interim goods 
and products that go into finis hed articles and finished exports out of 
Bangladesh. So, essentially, they eventually contribute to Bangladesh’s overall 
export earnings. The other large component of that import basket from India 
is made up by essential commodities which Bangladesh author ities need in 
order for their own inflation management efforts. This is something that we 
have continued to point out to them.” 
3.8 The Committee further wanted to know h ow bilateral trade can be boosted 
through enhanced connectivity, including road, rail,  and port projects . In a written 
submission, the Ministry stated that  economic cooperation between India and 
Bangladesh through initiatives like trade, infrastructure development (including ports 
and railways), and energy projects strengthens the broader c onnectivity within the 
region. Economic prosperity leads to stability, reducing the chances of conflict and 
promoting collaborative growth. For instance, India-Bangladesh connectivity projects, 

Page | 35 
 
such as the inland waterway agreement, and the running of more freight trains would 
serve to enhance trade and foster a community of stakeholders in Bangladesh. Up -
gradation of road infrastructure connecting the border trade points to major trading 
centers will also ease logistics costs leading to increased bilateral trade. For enhancing 
trade through railways, e nhancing of container train service, development of rail -
based inland container depots, digitization for the simplification of procedures for 
seamless customs facilitation and encouraging private sector partic ipation both in 
creating infrastructure and managing logistics operations could serve as catalysts.  
3.9 Participation in regional trade agreements, such as South Asian Free Trade Area 
agreement (SAFTA), BBIN Motor Vehicle Agreement (MVA), and Bay of Benga l 
Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), has 
significantly contributed to the liberalization of trade between India and Bangladesh. 
The Ministry stated that  India’s participation in SAFTA has been instrumental in 
providing duty-free, quota-free access to almost 98% of the goods from Bangladesh. 
This liberalized trade regime has provided enhanced opportunities to Bangladesh for 
exporting goods to India. BBIN MVA is currently under finalization and is expected to 
streamline cargo movement between its participating countries. Currently, goods 
bound from Bangladesh to Nepal and Bhutan and vice -versa have to undergo trans -
shipment at designated land ports. Once BBIN is operationalized, it will allow for 
seamless movement of ve hicles in the region contributing to increasing trade flows. 
BIMSTEC offers a broader platform for economic collaboration among South and 
Southeast Asian countries. India ’s active role helps to promote trade facilitation, 
connectivity, and economic integration with Bangladesh as a key partner.  
3.10 One of the main concerns raised by the Committee is the dumping of Chinese 
fabrics by Bangladesh in India and Bangladesh joining Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP). In this regard, the Foreign Secretary during the sitting 
of the Committee on 11 December 2024 stated as under: 
“It is a very real concern and from time to time the Directorate General of 
Foreign Trade also takes action on these issues. One point which I mentioned 
during my discussions with Bangladesh authorities was that we have taken note 
of the statements that some people in the current regime have made about the 

Page | 36 
 
possible intention of Bangladesh to join RCEP.. It is because essentially that will 
imply a free trade area between China and India. Given that Bangladesh has 
more or less free access to the Indian market , 98.50 per cent of their goods 
enter duty-free, tariff-free into India. So, that will come under a cloud. We have 
made that position quite clear to them.” 
 
II. Infrastructure Development and Connectivity 
3.11  Over the last few years, infrastructure development and connectivity 
cooperation has become a central tenet of the India-Bangladesh bilateral partnership. 
The definition of connectivity has also been extended to go beyond physical 
connectivity to include energy and digital connect ivity. Given their geographic 
proximity and shared socio -economic interests, connectivity initiatives have evolved 
from being mere physical linkages to becoming comprehensive frameworks for 
economic integration, regional stability, and people -to-people con tact. For India, 
enhanced connectivity with Bangladesh provides vital access to the Northeastern 
States, the Bay of Bengal, and key trade routes in Southeast Asia, while for 
Bangladesh, it offers opportunities for increased trade diversification, investmen t 
inflows, and access to India’s markets and technological capabilities. 
3.12   Consequently, several connectivity channels have been established between the 
two countries including rail links, bus routes, inland waterways, and sea ports for trade 
and transport. Connectivity between India and Bangladesh has also been mutually 
beneficial because of robust trade ties.  The cross-border connectivity projects have 
enhanced movement of goods and passengers between both countries and facilitated 
easier delivery of services to people of both countries. Connectivity acts as a catalyst 
for furthering people -to-people relations by giving easier access to people and 
enhancing understanding of each other’s culture and values.  
A. Development Assistance 
3.13  Bangladesh has been a recipient of robust developmental aid in form of grants 
and loans from the Government of India for its infrastructure and economic 
development. Close to 10 billion USD has been committed by the Government of India 
in form of developmental assistance to Bangladesh. 

Page | 37 
 
3.14   The budgetary allocation as well as utilization under the head ‘Aid to 
Bangladesh’ for past five years 
Financial Year Allocation  
(INR in  crores) 
Utilization  
(INR in crores) 
2020-21 125 178 
2021-22 300 218 
2022-23 170 133.80 
2023-24 130 157 
2024-25 120 53 (till December 2024) 
2025-26 120 - 
 
3.15 The development assistance provided by India to Bangladesh has been 
centered around building cross -border connectivity, including power and energy 
connectivity, infrastructure up gradation of railways, roadways and ports, development 
of IT parks and building energy resilience in Bangladesh through green energy. High 
Impact Community Development Projects (HICDPs) constitute an active pillar of India’s 
development assistance. Government of India has funded 79 HICDPs including 
construction of student hostels, academic buildings, skill development and training 
institutions, cultural centres, and orphanages etc. in Bangladesh and another 16 HICDPs 
are being implemented, with all the projects amounting to over USD 50 million.  
3.16  The status of cross-border connectivity LoC projects is given below:   
Rail Projects (EPC: Engineering, Procurement and Construction) 
S. 
No. 
 Project Name Project Cost 
(USD 
million) 
Current Status 
1 Khulna Mongla Railway Line Project 378.92 Completed 
2 Dhaka-Tongi Joydebpur Railway Line 
Project 
301.10 40% physical 
completion 
3 Kulaura Shabhazpur Railway line Project 78.10 55% physical 
completion 
4 Khulna-Darshana Railway Line Project 312.48 Tendering Underway 
for EPC 
5 Parbatipur Kaunia Railway line Project 120.41 Tendering Underway 
for EPC 

Page | 38 
 
6 Bogra to Saheed M Monsur  Ali Station 
(Sirajganj) Railway Line project 
379.29 Tendering Underway 
for EPC 
Road and Highway projects 
S. 
No. 
Project Project Cost 
(USD million) 
Current Status 
1 Procurement of 500 Trucks for BRTC 8.79 Completed 
2 Procurement of Double Decker & Single 
Decker Buses for BRTC 
46.61 Completed 
3 Improvement of Ashuganj River Port Sarail 
Dharkhar Akhaura Land Port Road as 4 
lane Natinal Highway 
354.73 Ongoing 
4 Widening of Ramgarh to Baraiyarhat Road 
Project 
80.06 Ongoing 
Shipping Projects  
S. No. Project Project Cost 
(USD million) 
Current Status 
1 Ashuganj Inland Container River Port 
Project 
86.49 Tendering Underway 
for EPC 
2 Upgradation of Mongla Port Project 530 Tendering Underway 
for EPC  
Power and Energy Projects  
S. No. Project Project Cost  
(USD) 
Current Status 
1 Evacuation Lines at Rooppur Nuclear Plant  1.01 billion   90% completed  
 
3.17 The following major projects have been completed in the last ten years: 
 India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline 
 Maitree Super Thermal Power Plant 
 Agartala-Akhaura Rail Line 
 Khulna-Mongla Rail Line 
 Maitri Bridge over River Feni  
 
3.18 Highlighting the significance of connectivity cooperation, the Foreign Secretary 
on 11 December 2024 made the following submission before the Committee: 

Page | 39 
 
“Bangladesh has been the recipient of very robust developmental aid in the 
form of grants and loans by the Government of India for its infrastructure 
development at uniquely concessional terms, and close to US$10 billion have 
been committed by the Government of India in the form of developmental 
assistance to Bangladesh...Through our development partnership, we have 
focused on enhancing connectivity, including rail, road and inland waterways 
between the two countries, building power and energy facilities in Bangladesh, 
such as power plants and pipelines, the Maitri Super Thermal Power Plant, a 
1,320 MW power plant which has been built in Khulna with Indian assistance, 
is operational and is supplying electricity to the Bangladesh grid. Similar 
examples of completed development projects are the Khulna-Mongla Rail Line 
and the Agartala-Akhaura Rail Line. We have also provided locomotives, buses, 
ambulances, brake vans, wagon cars to augment transport and infrastructure 
capacity in Bangladesh… 
Over the last several years, the c onnectivity cooperation has also become a 
central tenet of India -Bangladesh bilateral relations. For us, we believe that 
connectivity is of shared mutual benefit and in particular it helps us improve 
our own access to the Northeastern States. Several connectivity channels have 
been established between the two countries including rail links, bus routes, 
inland waterways, seaports. There are five cross -border bus services that are 
functioning and there are three passenger train services by the name Maitri, 
Bandhan and Mitali. “ 
3.19  The Committee were keen to know the manner in which India and Bangladesh 
are collaborating on infrastructure development, especially in sectors like 
transportation, energy, and water management . The Ministry stated that  both 
countries have collaborated for infrastructure development through provision of loans 
and grants for upgradation of railways, restoration of pre -1965 rail links such as 
Haldibari-Chilahati, roadways, Maitri Bridge over river Feni, development of land ports 
and energy connectivity. Around USD 4.5 billion of the Indian LoC portfolio of USD 7.8 
billion has been committed to Bangladesh for railway connectivity and infrastructure 
up-gradation. Cooperation in power and energy sector is crucial with major proj ects 
like a cross-border pipeline and a thermal power plant built under India’s concessional 
assistance. Both countries are also undertaking joint dredging of Jamuna and 
Kushiyara rivers under grant assistance from Government of India for maintaining 
navigability in the rivers for trade and commerce under the Protocol on Inland Water 
Trade and Transit Agreement (PIWTT) signed between both countries.  

Page | 40 
 
3.20 The Committee also enquired w hether new initiatives are being discussed or 
planned to improve connectivity through ports and waterways. The Ministry responded 
that both countries are discussing up-gradation of Mongla Port and enhancing inland 
waterways connectivity through operationalizing Route no. 5 & 6 from Maia (Indian 
side) to Sultanganj (Bangladesh si de). This waterway route will shorten the travel 
distance between India and Bangladesh to a large extent and will provide more 
opportunities for export of construction aggregates from Pakur in India to Bangladesh.  
3.21  As regards collaboration between th e two countries  in emerging sectors like 
technology, renewable energy, and digital infrastructure, the Ministry stated that India 
has a robust technology ecosystem, particularly in fields like information technology, 
software development, and artificial in telligence. Collaboration in these areas could 
boost innovation in both countries by knowledge sharing. Indian tech firms can 
collaborate with Bangladeshi start-ups to enhance skill-building programs and create 
a tech ecosystem. Both countries have been en gaged in reciprocal visits of Startup 
delegations.  
3.22  India and Bangladesh can also collaborate on solar power, wind energy, and 
hydro power initiatives. Transnational energy grids that link renewable sources across 
the two countries can help both nations optimize their renewable energy potential and 
ensure stable power supply. With India’s growing renewable energy capacity, 
Bangladesh can benefit by importing clean energy, particularly during peak demand 
times. Both countries are also collaborating on improving their digital infrastructure 
and connectivity through UPI and Rupay Card.   
3.23 Over the issue of impact of political developments in Bangladesh on India ’s 
ongoing development assistance projects, the representatives of MEA stated as under: 
“..with regard to development assistance projects, we had faced a bit of 
difficulty in the immediate aftermath of the 5 th August incidents when, on 
account of the developing security situation, many of our personnel working on 
development projects were forced to return to India. They have now largely 
gone back but the security situation is still fraught in some places, and we are 
seeking assurances from Bangladesh authorities for the provision of security at 
project sites and for Indian project personnel working on these projects. But 
more importantly, most recently, a team went to Dhaka to discuss our 

Page | 41 
 
concessional finance projects. We did a review bilaterally with the Bangladesh 
authorities and also to come to a mutually agreed roadmap for taking forward 
these projects.” 
3.24 Regarding the review of development assistance projects, the Foreign Secretary 
during the sitting of the Committee on 11 December 2024 stated as under: 
“On the question of review of development assistance and re -evaluation of 
projects, etc., I would like to say that even before the events of 5 th August 
happened, we were undertaking an internal review of a lot of our development 
cooperation projects. This was a generic exercise being carried out because we 
did realize that our LOC portfolio needed to be given a once -over. There were 
many instances where lines of credit had been extended some time back, but 
contracts had not been taken up.So we were, in any case, doing a review of 
the LOC projects. In that context, our review of projects in Bangladesh is 
ongoing. We intend to complete all the projects that are currently onstream 
and maybe nearing completion or may have been completed substantially. 
There are certain projects which have not started for quite some time, despite 
the line of credit agreement having been signed some time ago. We might 
review those projects. We have also told the Bangladesh authorit ies that we 
will be happy to discuss these projects with you in case you want to review 
these projects.” 
 
B. Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) Motor Vehicles Agreement 
3.25 The Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) Motor Vehicles Agreement initiative 
holds significant potential for regional economic growth. The Committee enquired 
about the major hurdles that have been identified in implementing this initiative, and 
how can India help accelerate its success . In a written reply the Ministry st ated 
that the BBIN sub -regional grouping between India, Nepal, Bangladesh and Bhutan 
aims to facilitate the seamless movement of goods, people, and services through safe 
and economically efficient road transport in the sub-region and to further help regional 
integration.  The BBIN Motor Vehicles Agreement (MVA) was signed in June 2015. For 
the implementation of the agreement, the countries are yet to sign the required 
Protocols for Movement of passenger vehicles and cargo vehicles. India has been 
facilitating the BBIN discussions, which are under progress.  

Page | 42 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
CULTURAL DIPLOMACY AND PEOPLE-TO-PEOPLE ENGAGEMENT 
 
 India and Bangladesh share enormous cultural and civilization commonalities. 
The history of India and Bangladesh is intertwined with centuries of shared cultural, 
political, and social developments. The partition of Bengal in 1947 and the subsequent 
independence of Bangladesh in 1971 were significant milestones that shaped their 
contemporary identities. 
I. ROLE OF CULTURE AND PEOPLE TO PEOPLE TIES 
4.2 Regarding the  role played by culture in cementing ties between India and 
Bangladesh the Ministry stated that  the cultural connection between India and 
Bangladesh is rooted in a shared history. Language, literature, music, and art, 
including films, serve as major cultural threads connecting the two countries. Both 
India and Bangladesh take immense pride in their shared literary heritage through 
personalities like Rabindranath Tagore and Nazrul Islam. In contemporary culture, 
Bengali films fro m both countries serve as connecting links. Cultural celebrations, 
especially around Bengali festivals like Durga Puja, Poila Boishakh (Bengali New Year), 
and Eid also offer opportunities for cultural exchange. Culture played a significant role 
in linking the people across the border during the Liberation War of 1971 and 
continues to do so. 
4.3 When asked about the role of institutions like the Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) and Bangladeshi cultural organizations in promoting bilateral cultural 
diplomacy, the Ministry stated that  the Indian Cultural Centre in Dhaka facilitated by 
ICCR and cultural organizations present in Bangladesh such as Shilpkala Academy play 
an important role in celebration of common cultural links between the two countries. 
The training programs at Indian Cultural Centre include Yoga, Kathak, Manipuri dance, 
Hindi language, Hindustani classical music. The cultural programs of renowned artistes 
of India and Bangladesh also contribute in promotion of people-to-people contacts. A 
dance troupe from Bangladesh named Guadiya Nritya Academy has also been 

Page | 43 
 
nominated to participate in the 10 th International Dance and Music Festival being 
organized by ICCR at Mahakumbh Mela. In addition to this, several dance troupes from 
both countries participate in festivals and dance workshops regularly. 
4.4 As regards the  specific initiatives taken by India to enhance cultural 
exchanges and cooperation with Bangladesh , the Ministry stated that  cultural 
exchanges, through events such as art exhibitions, music concerts, film festivals, and 
academic collaborations, have been a vital part of India -Bangladesh relations. These 
events have been organized by the  Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). 
Government of India has also launched a Youth Delegation program inviting youth 
from diverse disciplines to visit India for increasing engagement with the youth from 
Bangladesh. A 100 -member delegation as a pa rt of this program visited India in 
February 2024, wherein they toured prominent sites of academic/cultural interest in 
New Delhi and other Indian cities. 
4.5  The Committee wanted to know about specific programs or initiatives being 
considered to strengthen cultural and educational exchanges with Bangladesh to 
improve people-to-people ties. The Ministry responded that India and Bangladesh, as 
neighboring countries, are bound by shared historical and geographical linkages. The 
bilateral relations are enriched by cooperation on cultural, educational, and people-to-
people exchanges. The Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre in Dhaka plays an important role 
in the celebration of common cultural links between the two countries. Its training 
programs include Yoga , Kathak and Hindustani classical music courses. In addition, 
the cultural programs of renowned artists of India and Bangladesh contribute in the 
promotion of people -to-people ties. A musical evening was held at Indian Cultural 
Centre in Dhaka to mark the 53rd anniversary of ‘Maitri Diwas’ on 06 December 2024.   
4.6  Further, as an important youth connect initiative, India launched the 
Bangladesh Youth Delegation campaign in 2012 to attract the best of Bangladeshi 
talent, from various disciplines, to visit India. In its last edition, a 100 -member 
delegation visited India in 2024, wherein they toured prominent sites of 
academic/cultural interest in New Delhi and other Indian cities, and called on Hon’ble 
President of India. So far, more than 850 Bangladeshi y outh from diverse disciplines 
from across Bangladesh have visited India as part of this programme.  

Page | 44 
 
4.7  A nine-member Bangladeshi dance troupe, ‘Kolpotoru’, participated in the ‘Bali 
Yatra Festival 2024’ held in Cuttack (Odisha). Sahitya Akademi of India honoured 
Rajshahi University’s Prof. Shafiqunnabee Samadi with Premchand Fellowship for his 
contributions to comparative literature in Bangla and Hindi. ‘Priyo Maloti’, a feature 
film from Bangladesh participated in International Film festival of India in Goa (Nov 
20-28, 2024), under the ‘Cinema of World’ section. Two Bangladeshi groups consisting 
of 10 dancers and 3 artisans traveled to India to participate in the 38 th Surajkund 
International Crafts Mela 2025 held in Faridabad, Haryana from 07 -23 Feb 2025.  A 
Bangladeshi cultural group participated in the 10th India-International Dance & Music 
Festival organized by ICCR (22 -23 Feb 2025). Bangladesh youth and cultural groups 
have been facilitated to visit India in the last year, under various BIMSTEC initiati ves 
as well.   
4.8  On the Committee’s further query about the way in which both countries are 
working to increase people -to-people interactions through educational exchanges, 
tourism, and cultural programs , the Ministry stated that  Government of India has  
constantly worked to increase people-to-people interactions with Bangladesh such as 
increasing educational exchanges through provision of scholarships and tourism 
through gratis visas. Our Mission and Posts in Bangladesh had been issuing a large 
number of visas to Bangladesh nationals till July 2024. In 2023, 1.6 million visas were 
issued to Bangladesh nationals, more than 70% of which comprised tourism visas. In 
March 2021, India announced 1000 “Suborno Jayanti Scholarships ” for Bangladeshi 
students and i n February 2022, a dedicated website was launched for desirous 
Bangladeshi students wanting to study in premier Govt of India educational institutes, 
including the IITs and NIITs, and pursue under -graduate, post -graduate and 
M.Phil/PhD courses. So far, mor e than 900 scholarships have been awarded to 
Bangladesh students from 2022-2024. In addition, under the Muktijoddha scholarship 
scheme, 24,018 scholarships have been provided to wards of war veterans. Border 
Haats have been established on the border with Bangladesh in Meghalaya and Tripura 
for promoting localized trade among people living along the border area.  
4.9  In addition to cultural exchanges, Human resource development and capacity 
building is a key component of India’s development cooperation efforts in Bangladesh 

Page | 45 
 
through its several ongoing training programs and scholarships. Through programs 
like the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) and ICCR scholarships, 
India has contributed to the capacity building of Bangladeshi professionals India has 
been providing training to Bangladeshi officials from civil services, police, judiciary, 
another professionals, at various premier training institutes in India. The Committee 
desired to know about the number of Bangladeshi students that have been granted 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) scholarships over the past 10 years along 
with its impact on bilateral relations. The Ministry informed that a total of 3058 
scholarships have been  provided to Bangladeshi students over the past ten years. 
Around 500 scholarships are being processed for the academic year 2025 -26. The 
scholarships provided by ICCR have been useful in strengthening our people-to-people 
relations and providing opportunities to Bangladesh students to better know and 
understand India.  
4.10 When asked about h ow can Indian Technical and Economic Cooperat ion 
(ITEC) courses and ICCR scholarships be further expanded to strengthen people -to-
people ties with Bangladesh , the Ministry stated that  human resource development 
and capacity building remain central pillars of India ’s development cooperation with 
Bangladesh, reflected through a range of ongoing training programmes and 
scholarship initiatives. Flagship schemes such as the Indian Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (ITEC) courses and the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
scholarships continue to  enjoy wide recognition among Bangladeshi students and 
professionals. Notwithstanding the prevailing political situation, the substantial 
number of applications received for ICCR scholarships for the academic year 2025–26 
underscores the deep-rooted interest and goodwill for India’s educational and training 
initiatives. The allocation of scholarships and identification of target beneficiaries are 
periodically reviewed in close coordination with concerned Ministries ensuring that the 
programmes remain responsive to evolving needs and sectoral priorities.  
4.11 Given its geographical proximity and cultural similarities, the state of West 
Bengal plays a crucial role in fostering stronger cultural links with Bangladesh. The 
Committee specifically asked about the  role West Bengal can play in cultural 
engagement with Bangladesh. The Ministry stated that given shared linguistic heritage 

Page | 46 
 
and deep cultural linkages, the bordering States, including West Bengal, are well 
placed to play an active role in fostering cultural engagement. The value of people-to-
people linkages in strengthening bilateral ties is recognized and  various initiatives in 
this regard, including exchanges under the India -Bangladesh Cultural Exchange 
Programme, joint celebrations of Bhasha Dibash, and cooperation in literary, musical, 
and academic forums have been encouraged by the Government. The India -
Bangladesh Vijay Diwas 2024 celebrations were held in Kolkata and Dhaka on 16 
December 2024, underlining the shared history and mutual contribution dur ing the 
1971 Liberation war. 
 
II. VISA AND CONSULAR COOPERATION 
4.12  The facilitation of visas and consular services constitutes one of the most visible 
and impactful aspects of India –Bangladesh people -to-people engagement. With 
geographic proximity, shared cultural heritage, and extensive interpersonal linkages, 
movement across the border remains a vital dimension of bilateral relations. As per 
the Ministry the number of visas issued by India to Bangladeshi nationals over the 
past five years are given below: 
Year Number of visas issued 
2020 3,51,327 (Covid 19 year) 
2021 2,80,545 (Covid 19 year) 
2022 12,21,823 
2023 16,02,163 
2024 10,73,157 
 
4.13  Following the events of 5th August, 2024 visa services were significantly scaled 
down, and consular personnel were withdrawn from Bangladesh. When asked about 
the current status regarding the easing of visa restrictions and the resumption of 
consular services, the Ministry informed that  Bangladesh still remains among one of 
the major visa operations over seas for India. Among the visas currently issued, 
medical visas have been prioritized, accounting for approximately 80% of the total 

Page | 47 
 
volume. As of now, around 1500 visas are processed every day by Indian Missions 
and Posts in Bangladesh; the visa numbers c an be reviewed based on the security 
situation in Bangladesh in consultation with the concerned GOI Ministries. 
4.14  As regards the current visa issuance, the Foreign Secretary further added on 4 
August 2025: 
“Visas continue to be issued to Bangladesh nationals. Currently we are issuing 
somewhere between 1,250 and 1,500 visas per day. The bulk of these visas, the 
vast bulk of these visas is aimed at students and medical categories, patients 
needing medical care in India. Of course, this number is reduce d from what it 
was before the events of August last year but that is on account of prevailing 
circumstances and our continuing concerns with regard to the security of our visa 
facilities. 
4.15  However, despite these temporary restrictions, India has made deliberate efforts 
to keep essential visa categories open, particularly medical visas. One of the most 
sensitive issues arising from the recent developments has been the reduction in 
medical visa issuance to Bangladeshi citizens. India remains a major hub for medical 
tourism. Elaborating on the factors behind this reduction, and steps being taken to 
address the resulting strain on bilateral relations, the Ministry stated that the reduction 
in the issuance of visas is owing to security considerations. Bangladesh still remains 
among one of the major visa operations overseas for India. Among the visas currently 
issued, medical visas have been prioritized, accounting for approximately 80% of the 
total volume. Further easing of the number of visas will be undertaken in consultation 
with concerned Ministry after taking various factors into consideration.   
4.16  With the growing influence of countries like China in the medical sector i n 
Bangladesh, the Committee wanted to know about the strategies being adopted to 
counter this influence and strengthen India ’s position as a preferred partner in 
healthcare and medical treatment without compromising our security concerns . The 
Ministry stated that the Government is monitoring such developments closely. While 
medical visas continue to be issued, in case of need, the same will be considered in 
the context of the security situation. 
 

Page | 48 
 
CHAPTER 5 
WATER SHARING AND RIVER DIPLOMACY 
 
Water sharing is a cornerstone of the bilateral relationship between India and 
Bangladesh, with both nations relying on the vast network of trans -boundary rivers 
that flow between them. When asked the Ministry provided details about the various 
water sharing disputes between the two countries  and the same can be represented 
in the following map: 
 
 5.2   India and Bangladesh share 54 trans boundary rivers and have signed a water 
sharing treaty on Ganga River, and MoUs for withdrawal of water from Feni and 
Kushiyara rivers. Discussions are ongoing between both sides to finalize more water 
sharing treaties on Teesta, Manu, Khowai, and Dharla rivers. Any contentious issues 
with respect to water sharing are discussed in relevant bilateral institutional 
mechanisms. 
 


Page | 49 
 
I. Water Sharing Arrangements  
5.3 Regarding existence of a comprehensive framework for bilateral cooperation on 
water management, the Ministry stated that  India and Bangladesh have a 
comprehensive bilateral framework for water management, anchored by the Indo -
Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission (JRC), established in 1972. The JRC serves as the 
principal institutional mechanism for coordination to maximize benefits from common 
river systems, formulation of flood control works, formulation of proposals on flood 
forecasting, cyclone warning and irrigation projects. The Technical Level Meeting 
(TLM) of JRC  serves as a platform for experts from both India and Bangl adesh to 
engage in detailed discussions. The last meeting of JRC at Ministerial level was held in 
August 2022 in New Delhi. Joint Committee under the Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 
monitors the flows and implementation of the treaty, sharing an annual report to both 
the Governments. 
5.4 Elaborating the role played by the Joint River Commission (JRC) addressing 
water-related disputes and ensuring mutual benefit, the Ministry stated that  the 
mechanism of JRC has been useful in addressing issues related to water s haring and 
ensuring mutual benefit. Regular meetings of JRC at technical level have provided a 
direction to discussing issues of water -sharing and towards achieving agreeable 
outcomes in most cases. Due to the successful conclusion of discussions under JRC , 
India and Bangladesh have expanded their cooperation in flood forecasting and 
warning, sharing of hydrological data for shared rivers and continued engagement on 
water related issues. 
5.5 On being asked the Ministry also provided a brief overview of the Ganga Water 
Treaty signed between Indian and Bangladesh in 1996. The Ganga Water Treaty of 
1996 is a bilateral agreement between India and Bangladesh that governs the sharing 
of waters from the Ganga River at the Farakka Barrage for a period of 30 years. Signed 
on December 12, 1996, the treaty allocates specific quantities of water to each country 
during the dry season (January to May) based on a formula outlined in the Annexure 
I of the treaty.  
 

Page | 50 
 
5.6   As regards the key implementation mechanism outlined in the Treaty the Ministry 
submitted that the Annexure I of the treaty outlines a water sharing formula for the dry 
season (January to May). If availability at Farakka is less than 70,000 cusecs:  50:50 
split (Subject to the condition that India and Banglad esh shall receive 35,000 cusecs 
of water in alternate three 10 -day periods during the period March 11 to May 10). If 
availability is between 70,000 and 75,000 cusecs: Bangladesh receives 35,000 cusecs, 
India gets the rest. If availability is 75,000 cusecs or more:  India receives 40,000 
cusecs, Bangladesh gets the rest.  
 
5.7   Further, a Joint Committee is established under the Treaty to monitor daily flows 
at the feeder canal in Farakka  and the navigation lock at Hardinge Bridge (the point 
within Bangladesh where flows are monitored), submitting annual reports to both the 
Governments. The Joint Committee meeting is held thrice an year, the latest iteration 
was held in Dhaka in May 2025. Any difference or dispute if not resolved in the Joint 
Committee is referred to the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission.  
5.8  The Ganga Water Treaty between India and Bangladesh is set to expire in 2026. 
When asked whether the Ministry has initiated discussions on the renewal or revision 
of this treaty, it submitted that the bilateral discussions on the renewal of the Ganga 
Water Treaty are yet to commence. Inter -ministerial discussions to formulate 
Government of India ’s views have been held with participation of all relevant 
stakeholders from the Government of India and concerned State governments, 
including West Bengal and Bihar.  
5.9   The Committee also wanted to know the manner in which India and Bangladesh 
can strengthen their cooperation on trans boundary water issues, particularly 
concerning shared rivers like the Teesta, Ganges, and Brahmaputra. The Ministry 
responded that strengthening cooperation between India and Bangladesh on trans -
boundary water issues, particularly shared rivers like the Teesta, Ganges (Padma), and 
Brahmaputra (Jamuna), requires a multifacete d approach that emphasizes 
collaboration, transparency, and long-term sustainability. Given the significance of these 
rivers for agriculture, drinking water, and overall economic development, the JRC has 
continued to widen its scope for resolving issues th rough mutual consent. High-level 
consultations between Indian and Bangladeshi officials ensure that both sides remain 

Page | 51 
 
engaged and committed to resolving issues related to water management, including 
emergency plans for floods or droughts. Both countries also continue to collaborate 
on climate adaptation strategies such as flood management and riverbank erosion 
control. 
5.10 The Committee further enquired about the key challenges related to 
management and sharing of trans-boundary rivers between India and Bangladesh. In 
a written submission, the Ministry stated that the key challenges in managing and 
sharing trans-boundary rivers with Bangladesh stem from the need to balance National 
water security con cerns with regional development and ecological sustainability . 
Discussions on water sharing agreements between India and Bangladesh have to 
confront several challenges such as water availability in the shared basin due to climate 
change, increasing demands  for irrigation, drinking water, industrial use, electricity 
generation, growing urbanization and legal frameworks of relevant stakeholders. India 
has always expressed willingness to continue discussions with Bangladesh under the 
relevant structured dialogue mechanisms.  
5.11 During testimony before the Committee on 27 June 2025, one of the non-official 
witnesses suggested a way forward when she stated:  
“On the water issue, actually there are 54 shared rivers between India and 
Bangladesh. So, we do not have to really get stuck only with Teesta and Ganga. 
We can do micro-projects in other rivers. We can do recharging of water and share 
our own technical experience with Bangladesh on how to rejuvenate our common 
rivers. I think, these are steps which can e asily be taken. The big concern of 
climate change that we have as a region will also be addressed. All river water 
discussions should not get stuck on sharing of water in dry season. It is a very 
sensitive issue, but I think, we can proceed in an out of bo x manner in dealing 
with the rivers through border-related projects.” 
 
II. Addressing Climate Change and Environmental degradation 
5.12 As climate change increasingly affects river flows and rainfall patterns, both 
India and Bangladesh face growing environmental challenges, particularly in coastal 
and flood-prone regions. The Sundarbans, a vast mangrove delta shared by both 

Page | 52 
 
countries, is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, including rising 
sea levels, increased salinity, and loss of biodiversity. 
5.13 Given the shared environmental challenges in regions like the Sundarbans and 
the growing impact of climate change on both India and Bangladesh, the Committee 
were keen to learn how Indian State Governments, particularly West Bengal, 
collaborating with Bangladesh to address ecological concerns in these critical regions. 
In a written reply the Ministry stated that acknowledging the shared ecological 
vulnerabilities of the Sundarbans and the increasing impacts of climate change, India 
and Bang ladesh have established the India -Bangladesh Joint Working Group on 
Conservation of the Sunderbans.  The meeting provides a platform to discuss a number 
of important issues which include bio-diversity mapping and to develop baseline data 
to better understa nd the ecosystem; Water quality monitoring and siltation trend 
analysis of the rivers terminating in the Sunderbans region; sharing of intelligence on 
smuggling activities etc. Indian State Governments especially West Bengal Government 
provides critical inputs to the Central Government, which in turn coordinates bilateral 
cooperation with Bangladesh.  
5.14 With increasing risks of floods and droughts in the region, when asked about 
joint initiatives are being explored between India and Bangladesh for better flood 
control, water resource management, and mitigation of natural disasters, the Ministry 
stated that since the establishment of the Indo -Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission 
(JRC) in 1972, India and Bangladesh have engaged in collaborative efforts to manage 
their shared water resources, particularly concerning flood control and disaster 
mitigation. A cornerstone of this cooperation has been the sharing of flood data since 
1972. Both sides also engage in need-based expansion of shared data for mitigation 
of natural disasters. Expansion of co -operation on Flood forecasting and warning is 
discussed under the JRC framework between both the sides.  
 
 
 
 

Page | 53 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Overall Approach to relationship with Bangladesh 
1. The Committee recognize that India and Bangladesh share a 
relationship unparalleled in the South Asian region, rooted in shared 
history, language, culture, and sacrifices. Over the past five decades, this 
relationship has evolved into  a comprehensive and multifaced partnership 
encompassing political, security, economic, and cultural dimensions. Major 
milestones such as the Land Boundary Agreement (2015), maritime 
boundary settlement (2015), and Ganga Water Treaty (1996) have been 
instrumental in building mutual trust and institutionalizing cooperation. 
The Committee also note that Bangladesh occupies a pivotal position in 
India’s foreign policy architecture, lying at the intersection of the 
Neighbourhood First, Act East, and Indo -Pacific strategies. India ’s 
development cooperation, capacity -building initiatives, and cross -border 
connectivity projects have further consolidated Bangladesh ’s role as a key 
strategic and development partner.   
The Committee remain cognizant of the recent political developments 
in Bangladesh which have introduced new complexities into the bilateral 
relationship. The Committee express concern over the prevailing instability 
following the events of August 2024, which have been marked by incidents 
of violence, restrictions on democratic freedoms, growing radicalisation of 
certain sections of the society,  attacks on minority communities , etc. The 
Committee note that the Government of India has adopted a calibrated 
policy of non -interference in Bangladesh ’s internal political processes, 
while maintaining constructive engagement with the Interim Government 
and other democratic stakeholders.  The Committee also note India ’s 
overall approach to its  relationship with Bangladesh has remained 
unchanged following the events of August 2024. India continues to pursue 
a constructive, pragmatic, mutually -beneficial and forward -looking 

Page | 54 
 
relationship with Ba ngladesh, engaging with the interim Government of 
Bangladesh, engaging with  several issues of strategic interest as well as 
regional security.  The Committee also recognize  that there has been a 
sincere attempt by the Government of India to continue mainta ining a 
cordial relationship with the new dispensation in Bangladesh . Such high-
level engagements includes Indian Prime Minister’s congratulations to Prof. 
Yunus and invit ing him to participate in the 3 rd Voice of Global South 
Summit held in August 2024; meeting between External Affairs Minister and 
Foreign Advisor of Bangladesh in New York on the sidelines of UNGA  in 
September 2024 and in Muscat in February 2025; visit of Foreign Secretary 
of India to Bangladesh on 9  December 2024.  The most recent and hi ghest 
level of meeting between the two countries was held on 4 April 2025 
between Hon ’ble Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi and Chief 
Advisor of Bangladesh, Prof. Mohammed Yunus at Bangkok on the sidelines 
of the 6 th BIMSTEC Summit meeting.  Given these ongoing efforts,  the 
Committee are hopeful that the bilateral engagement between the two 
countries will continue to grow. 
The Committee urge the Government to continue advocating a 
democratic, stable, peaceful, people-centric, forward-looking and inclusive 
Bangladesh, firmly anchored in the spirit of 1971 and mutual respect. The 
Committee further recommend that the Government should maintain 
sustained diplomatic engagement with all political, social, and civil society 
stakeholders in Bangladesh to foster an environment of trust and dialogue. 
Such engagement should be complemented by Track II and Track 1.5 
diplomacy, involving Parliamentary exchanges , think tanks, academia, 
media, and cultural organizations, to strengthen people -to-people 
connections and counter misperceptions. The Committee also desire that 
India should leverage all forms of soft power to bridge gaps and continue 
to proactively engage with media, civil society, and  various organizations 
in Bangladesh  to address the anti -India narrative and counter 
misinformation on sensitive issues.  

Page | 55 
 
Supporting Democratic Processes 
2. The Committee note with concern the evolving political situation in 
Bangladesh since August 2024, p articularly the uncertainty surrounding 
democratic elections, political violence  and the  rise of extremism. While 
India has consistently emphasized its commitment to a constructive and 
pragmatic relationship, these developments have strained certain aspect s 
of bilateral ties, particularly in terms of security cooperation and people-to-
people relations. The Committee observe that India ’s response to 
Bangladesh’s internal political developments has remained diplomatic and 
non-interventionist.  The Committee n ote that India ha s reaffirmed its 
commitment in a democratic, stable, peaceful and inclusive Bangladesh and 
to that end India has been a strong supporter of a participatory and 
inclusive election process in Bangladesh, viewing it as a necessary step to 
restoring political stability.  
The Committee commend the quiet diplomacy of the Indian 
Government during the period of  such rapid and transformative change.  
While respecting the sovereignty of Bangladesh and refraining from 
interfering in its domestic politics, the Committee desire that India should 
continue to support Bangladesh’s democratic processes, encouraging free, 
fair, and inclusive elections.  
 
Attacks on Minorities 
3. The Committee express serious concerns over the continuing attacks 
on minorities in Bangladesh following the events of August 2024. The 
attacks on places of worship, cultural institutions, and individuals have 
severely impacted the  social fabric of Bangladesh and strained bilateral 
relations. While the Government of India has consistently conveyed its 
concerns to the Interim Government of Bangladesh, the lack of concrete 
measures to address these issues, combined with attempts by th e 
Bangladeshi authorities to downplay the incident s as ‘political killings ’, 

Page | 56 
 
remains troubling. The Committee note that till 18 May 2025, 2446 attacks 
against minorities have been reported.  It was only after India raised the 
issue with the Bangladeshi side during the Foreign Office Consultations that 
70 arrests have been made and 88 cases have been filed till December 2024.  
In the considered view of the Committee, the Ministry of External 
Affairs should continue to prioritize the protection of minoriti es in 
Bangladesh as a core element of its diplomatic engagement, urging the 
Bangladeshi authorities to take swift and effective action to safeguard the 
rights and security of all minority communities and to bring perpetrators of 
violence to justice.  
 
Release of prisoners with record of terrorism and extremist violence 
4. The Committee express concern over the release of prisoners charged 
with terrorism and extremist violence, as well as the escape of  convicted 
extremists and terrorists during jail breaks amid the chaos in Bangladesh 
during July and August 2025.  The  Committee have been informed that 
these individuals are now fomenting anti-India sentiments and narratives 
in Bangladesh. The Committee note that this poses a  risk of further 
instability and law and order challenges with implications for India’s North 
East. The Committee desire that India should maintain vigilance in 
monitoring their activities  and also engage with the Bangladeshi side to 
ensure that such developments do not negatively impact in ternal security, 
particularly in the Northeast region. 
 
Stay of  Sheikh Hasina in India 
5. The Committee note that the stay of former Prime Minister of 
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina in the country and India ’s approach in this 
regard is guided by its civilizati onal ethos and humanitarian tradition of 
offering refuge to individuals facing circumstances of grave distress or 

Page | 57 
 
existential threat.  The Committee have also been informed that the 
Government of India do not provide her with a political platform or any 
space to undertake political activity from Indian territory.  The Committee 
also note that while extending such humanitarian consideration, India has 
strictly adhered to the principle that no political activity is directed against 
any other country from our territory. The Committee recommend that the 
Government shou ld continue to uphold its principled and humanitarian 
approach, consistent with India’s values and international responsibilities, 
while ensuring that such situations are managed with due sensitivity. The 
Committee have taken note of the Bangladesh Governm ent’s extradition 
request following the pronouncement of a death sentence on Sheikh Hasina 
in absentia, and urge the Government to keep the Committee apprised of 
its consideration of the matter. 
 
Recognition and preservation of the 1971 legacy 
6. The Commi ttee observe that the 1971 Liberation War remains the 
moral and historical foundation of India-Bangladesh relations, symbolizing 
shared sacrifices and solidarity. The Committee are glad to know that India 
has supported the war veterans through various init iatives, such as 
providing scholarships for their children and offering medical treatment 
upto INR 8 lakh for the veterans and their families. Even after the event of 
August 2024, both countries commemorated the Vijay Diwas on 16 th 
December 2024 by organising reciprocal visits of veterans of armed forces 
from both countries in line with our long-standing tradition. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note the emergence of revisionist narratives 
and diminishing awareness, particu larly among younger generations who 
may not have directly experienced the events of 1971 regarding India’s role 
in Bangladesh’s liberation. Underscoring the centrality of the 1971 legacy 
in India-Bangladesh relations, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should undertake proactive measures to preserve and promote this 
historical partnership through strategic public diplomacy.  The Committee 

Page | 58 
 
are of the view that India should continue to engage with Bangladesh and 
take various measures to ensure that the sacrifices and martyrdom of 1971 
are not forgotten.  The Committee are hopeful that the legacy of 1971 will 
continue to foster goodwill between the two countries. 
 
Strengthening Bilateral and Diplomatic Engagement 
7. The Committee note that India and Bang ladesh benefit from an 
extensive diplomatic architecture comprising over 40 structured 
mechanisms operating at the Ministerial, Secretary, and technical levels.   
At the apex of this framework is the Joint Consultative Commission (JCC), 
co-chaired by the External Affairs Minister of India and the Foreign Minister 
of Bangladesh.  This is followed by Foreign Office Consultation s led by the 
Foreign Secretaries of both the countries.  Sector specific initiative s cover 
the breadth of bilateral cooperation includ ing security and Border 
management, connectivity, trade and commerce, water resources, power 
and energy, development cooperation and people -people ties.  The 
Committee acknowledge the significant outcomes from these engagements 
including the resolution of the Land Boundary Agreement, 
operationalization of cross -border power linkages, enhanced border 
management coordination, and expansion of trade and connectivity 
initiatives. T he Committee recommend that India should continue to 
leverage and strengthen these mechanisms, ensuring regular engagement 
through Joint Consultative Commissions, Foreign Office Consultations, 
Home Secretary, Commerce Secretary level talks, Joint Rivers Commissions, 
etc. for timely resolution of concerns.  The Committ ee hope that 
institutionalized dialogue will help address emerging challenges, dispel 
misinformation, and consolidate bilateral gains, even amid regional 
uncertainties. 
 
 

Page | 59 
 
Completion of Land Boundary Agreement and Border Demarcation 
8. The Committee note th at the Land Boundary Agreement (LBA) 
between India and Bangladesh, signed in 2015, was a landmark 
achievement that resolved one of the most complex and long -pending 
issues in bilateral relations through the exchange of enclaves and 
rationalization of the l and boundary. Alongside, the maritime boundary 
settlement concluded in the same year further strengthened mutual trust 
and laid the groundwork for a more stable and cooperative border 
management framework. However, the Committee note that residual 
demarcation challenges, particularly in difficult terrain such as the 
Sundarbans, remain unresolved.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should expedite the completion of the residual 
boundary demarcation in a time -bound manner so as to consolidate the 
gains achieved through the Land Boundar y Agreement and contribute to 
more effective border management.  The Committee are of the view that 
timely completion of the remaining sectors has become even more 
important in view of the prevailing situation in Bangladesh. 
 
Strategic Communication Body to counter Anti-India Narratives 
9. The Committee observe persistent misinformation and anti -India 
rhetoric in certain sections of Bangladeshi media and digital platforms have 
created perception challenges. The Ministry of External Affairs has informed 
that it remains the nodal body for addr essing perceptions and narratives 
through coordinated efforts involving other Ministries and agencies. 
Recognizing the growing influence of digital narratives, the Committee 
suggest that the MEA should establish a dedicated Strategic 
Communication and Perc eption Management Unit within the External 
Publicity & Public Diplomacy (XPD) Division which would coordinate with 
relevant Ministries such as Home, Defence, and Information & Broadcasting 

Page | 60 
 
to monitor, analyze, and disseminate factual information, counter a nti-
India propaganda, and enhance India’s soft power. 
 
Leveraging Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) 
10. The Committee recognize that beyond bilateral engagement, regional 
cooperation groupings, particu larly the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -
Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) offer a promising 
avenue to deepen connectivity, boost trade, and enrich cultural and people 
to people exchange with Bangladesh. With the BIMSTEC Secretariat  
headquartered in Dhaka  and Bangladesh having taken over the chair of 
BIMSTEC for the next one year, the Committee view this as a timely 
opportunity for both the countries to strengthen diplomatic and technical 
cooperation. The Committee are given to understand that the BIMSTEC , 
with the help of Asian Development Bank, has come up with a ‘Master Plan’ 
on transport connectivity for the entire region, including Myanmar and 
Thailand.  The Committee recommend that India should extend full 
diplomatic and technical support to Bangladesh during its presidency and 
work closely towards implementing the BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport 
Connectivity with assistance from the Asian Development Bank (ADB).  The 
Committee may be kept apprised of all the developments in this regard. 
 
Monitoring growing Chinese influence 
11. The Committee observe with concern the increasing Chinese footprint 
in Bangladesh, particularly in infrastructure development, port expansion, 
and defence cooperation, including the Mongla Port project and 
Lalmonirhat airbase.  The Committee note that Bangladesh has signed a an 
agreement with  China in March 2025 to implement a USD 370 million 
expansion project at Mongla Port.  The Committee also note that 
Lalmonirhat Airbase is being developed with Chinese assistance  although 

Page | 61 
 
the Director of Military Operations of Bangladesh Army  has stated th at 
there are currently no plans to upgrade the airstrip for military use.  The 
Committee also note th e recent visit of  Jammat-e-Islami Party to China , 
which clearly indicates its broad engagement with various factions  in 
Bangladesh, further solidifying its  presence. Additionally, the Committee 
are concerned to know that a submarine base ha s been built by China at 
Pekua, capable of accommodating eight submarines when Bangladesh has 
only two. With regard to other infrastructure projects, the Committee have 
been informed that China has been present in Bangladesh for quite some 
time and is not necessarily an outcome of recent political development.  The 
Ministry has informed the Committee that to enhance port’s connectivity to 
hinterland India has financed and completed a key rail connectivity project, 
the Khulna-Mongla Railway Line.  India has also signed an agreement with 
Bangladesh on the use of Chattogram and M ongla Ports for transit access 
to secure our interests . While recognizing Bangladesh’s sovereign right to 
pursue diverse partnerships, the Committee emphasize the importance of 
safeguarding India’s strategic and security interests, especially concerning 
the Siliguri Corridor and the Bay of Bengal region.  In this regard, the 
development of Lalmonirhat Airbase with Chinese assistance, which is just 
15 kms from the international border , is a matter of concern to the 
Committee. 
The Committee recommend that the Government closely monitor the 
activities of foreign powers in Bangladesh, considering that any attempt by 
unfriendly countries to establish a military foothold in Bangladesh would 
pose serious security risks for our country.  The Committee further urge the 
Government to leverage India ’s comparative advantage in de velopment 
cooperation to strengthen trust and reinforce India ’s position as 
Bangladesh’s most reliable partner. 
 
 

Page | 62 
 
Border Management 
12. The Committee note that India shares its longest international border 
with Bangladesh, stretching approximately 4096 km,  making it the fifth 
longest border in the world. This border runs through the five Indian states 
of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura and West Bengal, encompassing  
diverse terrains including mountainous, forested, and riverine areas. The 
Committee recogn ize that such diverse topographical conditions pose 
unique challenges for effective border management and security, especially 
for the Northeastern states. The Committee note that India has worked 
with Bangladesh on joint operations against terrorism and e xtremist 
activities. Border guarding forces from both countries have a long-standing 
practice of joint patrols, especially in areas like riverine regions where 
border security is difficult. Regular meetings, border talks, and joint 
working groups are estab lished to address border disputes, manage 
humanitarian concerns, and maintain peace along the border. The Ministry 
has informed the Committee that sustained bilateral engagement between 
the governments of the two countries remains a cornerstone of India ’s 
border management strategy. However, the Committee note that the 
deteriorating internal situation in Bangladesh during the past one year has 
necessitated heightened security preparedness along the shared border.  
The Committee are hopeful that the current challenges in bilateral 
relations between the two countries since August 2024 will not have an 
adverse impact on the established and ongoing cooperative mechanisms 
between the two countries for ensuring border security and management.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India should 
continue to pursue constructive bilateral engagement with Bangladesh on 
all border -related issues, ensuring that evolving political and security 
developments in Bangladesh do not undermine joint mechanisms for border 
management.  
 

Page | 63 
 
Border Fencing 
13. The Committee note that out of the total 4096 kms of India -
Bangladesh border, approximately 3231 have been fenced while about 864 
km remain unfenced due to difficult terrain and riverine conditions. The 
Committee have been informed that while fencing is feasible for about 689 
kms, approximately 175 kms present significant challenge due to its 
difficult terrain. Issues such as  the bilateral agreement s which restrict 
construction within 150 yards of the  India-Bangladesh boundary and land 
acquisition hurdles further complicate the process. 
Recognizing that effective border management is vital for national 
security, regional stability, and socio -economic development, the 
Committee recommend that the Government of India prioritize completion 
of the remaining fencing work by engaging with Bangladesh , expediting 
processes of technical design, feasibility studies, and land acquisition. The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Home Affairs, in 
coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and state governments, 
should adopt innovative engineering and technological solutions such as 
floating fences, laser-based intrusion detection systems, and smart sensors 
in difficult riverine and populate d sectors, where conventional fencing is 
impractical. 
 
Challenges in Border Management 
14.  The Committee observe that while significant progress has been 
made, strategic focus remains required to address persistent challenges 
such as illegal migration, sm uggling, radicalization and cross border crime 
along the India -Bangladesh border. The Committee also note that socio -
economic vulnerabilities, particularly lack of livelihood opportunities, make 
border communities susceptible to illegal cross border activi ties. The 
Committee acknowledge the pivotal role played by the Border Security 
Force (BSF) and the Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB) in maintaining border 

Page | 64 
 
security through joint patrols, coordinated intelligence sharing, and hotline 
communications.  Appreciating the vital role played by the Border Security 
Force (BSF) in safeguarding the border and maintaining stability along one 
of the longest international boundaries in the world, the Committee 
recommend that the coordination between BSF and BGB be further 
strengthened through institutionalized mechanisms such as regular 
Director General-level talks, joint task forces, and sector-level coordination 
mechanisms on counter -terrorism, narcotics, human trafficking, fake 
currency, and other transnational crimes. 
In addition, the Committee also feel that the Government should 
prioritize deployment of advanced modern surveillance tools such as 
drones, thermal cameras, motion sensors, and satellite -based systems to 
enhance real-time monitoring and deterrence. In addi tion, a multi-agency 
coordination framework involving State Governments, central intelligence 
and investigative agencies, and law enforcement authorities be developed 
to ensure prompt detection and action against cross -border crimes. The 
Committee further emphasize that effective border management must go 
beyond physical security, and adopt a humane people -sensitive approach 
incorporating socio -economic development initiatives and community 
engagement along the border to reduce local vulnerabilities to smug gling, 
illegal migration, and cross -border crimes.  In addition, the Committee 
would like the Government to consider implementing Border Area 
Development Programme in border areas to help reduce border crimes and 
improve social environment in the border areas. 
 
15. The Committee note that the developments in Bangladesh have huge 
security implications for the Northeast region of India. The Committee note 
that the Border Security Force from India and the Border Guard of 
Bangladesh have regularly coordinated to monitor movements along the 
border and prevent infiltration by terrorist group. The Committee 
recommend that India should continue to engage with the concerne d 

Page | 65 
 
authorities in Bangladesh and develop an appropriate intelligence sharing 
mechanism to track and combat terrorist activities . It is of utmost 
importance that Bangladesh do es not become a safe haven for various 
insurgency groups operating in Northeast region of India.  
 
Coordination between Centre and bordering States  
16. The Committee recognize that the security, stability, and economic 
development of India ’s northeastern states are intricately linked with 
effective management of the India -Bangladesh border. The Ministry has 
apprised the Committee that the prevailing situa tion in Bangladesh has 
direct implications on the security of India ’s Northeastern region. In 
response, Government of India is undertaking a comprehensive approach 
in dealing with cross border security challenges in coordination with State 
Governments of N orth Eastern States, border guarding agencies, central 
investigation agencies and l aw enforcement.  As a result of the se efforts, 
14 terrorists affiliated with Ansarullah Bangla Team (a wing of Al Qaida in 
Indian subcontinent) have been arrested by State G overnment of Assam 
since December, 2024 in joint operation with police and state agencies.  The 
Committee have also been informed that several Bangladeshi nationals 
have been detained and narcotics amounting to 12,300 kg have been 
seized, owing to heightened security at the border in recent months. 
The Committee are of the considered view that enhanced 
coordination between various Ministries will help in formulating plans for 
economic growth in the North Eastern region.  Stressing the importance of 
a holist ic and coordinated approach, the Committee urge closer 
coordination among the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry for the Development of North East Regions and the 
governments of border states to address interconnected issues s uch as 
illegal migration, smuggling, drug trafficking, and infiltration by extremist 
groups. The Committee further recommend that India should engage 

Page | 66 
 
proactively with Bangladesh on managing potential refugee inflows and 
humanitarian challenges, including those emanating from Myanmar, to 
ensure that responses remain consistent with India ’s security and 
humanitarian obligations. 
 
Centre-State Coordination 
17.  The Committee note that five Indian states bordering Bangladesh - 
West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram play an important 
role in shaping India ’s approach towards Bangladesh, owing to their 
geographic proximity, cultural ties, and cross -border socio-economic 
interdependence. While acknowledging that foreign policy formulation 
remains the prerogative of the Union Government, the Committee 
emphasize that state governments should be regularly consulted on 
matters affecting bilateral relations and b order management. The 
Committee note the existence of coordination mechanisms such as North 
Eastern Council (NEC), NITI Aayog ’s Sub-Group of Chief Ministers (SSM) 
and the States Division of MEA. The Committee desire that the above 
mechanisms may function more proactively.  
 The Committee suggest that existing structured inter -governmental 
dialogue mechanisms and the States ’ Division of MEA be revitalized as a 
proactive interface between the MEA and relevant state governments, 
holding regular consultations on matters concerning Bangladesh. 
Tackling illegal migration 
18. The Committee note that illegal migration from Bangladesh continues 
to remain a matter of serious concern, particularly in the border States of 
West Bengal and Assam. The Committee are aware t hat while the 
detection, identification, and deportation of illegal Bangladeshi nationals 
fall within the purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs and respective State 
Governments under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (now the Immigration and 

Page | 67 
 
Foreigners Act, 2025), the Ministry of External Affairs plays an important 
role in facilitating nationality verification and repatriation of Bangladeshi 
nationals detained in India. The Committee note that a total of 2,369 cases 
of suspected Bangladeshi nationals is presently awaiting nationality 
verification by the Government of Bangladesh.   
 The Committee recommend that a dedicated bilateral mechanism or 
joint working group be established between India and Bangladesh to 
monitor the progress of nationality  verification and re patriation.  The 
Committee hope that this would help in expediting the verification process.  
The Committee also urge that humane treatment and due legal process be 
ensured for all detained individuals, in accordance with India ’s 
constitutional safeguards and international obligations, while maintaining 
robust national security measures to preven t illegal migration.  The 
Committee note that continued diligence is essential to ensure that Indian 
nationals are not deported to Bangladesh in error. 
 
Strengthening overall bilateral economic and trade relations 
19. The Committee note that India and Bangladesh share a robust and 
multi-dimensional economic and trade relationship that has witnessed 
substantial expansion in the past decade. Bangladesh continues to be 
India’s largest trading partner in South Asia, while I ndia is Bangladesh ’s 
second largest trading partner in Asia. The Committee observe that bilateral 
trade between the two countries has seen significant growth over the past 
decade, from USD 7.07 billion in 2014-15 to over USD 13.46 billion in 2024-
25, with India exporting USD 11.45 billion and Bangladesh exporting USD 
2.0 billion in goods. This results in a trade surplus for India. However, much 
of Bangladesh ’s imports from India consist of components and interim 
goods that contribute to Bangladesh’s export earnings as well as essential 
commodities that help Bangladesh to manage inflation.  

Page | 68 
 
   The Committee observe that the t rade between India and 
Bangladesh, denominated in INR since July 2023 , is an aspect that may 
continue to grow in mutually beneficial areas such as trade, connectivity, 
energy cooperation, etc. The signing of the tripartite power -sharing 
agreement among India, Bangladesh, and Nepal for cross -border 
transmission of power marks a significant milestone in sub-regional energy 
cooperation, sy mbolizing the growing interdependence and mutual trust 
between the nations. At the same time, the Committee observe that despite 
the positive trajectory of bilateral trade, several structural impediments 
continue to constrain the full realization of the trade potential between the 
two countries. These include infrastructural bottlenecks, imposition of tariff 
and non-tariff barriers like port restrictions and import duties by the 
Government of Bangladesh, congestion at land ports, high dependence on 
road transport, and inadequate last -mile connectivity to key trading 
centres. The Committee also note that deficiencies in warehousing 
facilities, quarantine arrangements, and digital trade infrastructure add t o 
the overall transaction costs and affect the competitiveness of trade 
between the two nations. 
The Committee recommend that the Government of India should 
intensify engagement with the Government of Bangladesh to modernize 
and upgrade infrastructure at key border trade points through expansion of 
Integrated Check Posts (ICPs), improvement of road, rail, and inland 
waterways connectivity, establishment of modern logistics and 
warehousing facilities, running of more freight trains, etc . The Committee 
further recommend that greater emphasis should be placed on digital trade 
facilitation, including electronic data interchange systems, online customs 
clearance, and simplified trade documentation.  
 
 
 

Page | 69 
 
Dumping of Chinese goods into India 
20. The Committee note wi th concern the reported issue of dumping of 
Chinese goods, particularly fabrics, into India through Bangladesh under 
the cover of preferential market access provisions available to Bangladesh 
under the South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA). The Committee are  of the 
view that such practices distort fair competition, undermine India ’s 
manufacturing sector, and create asymmetries detrimental to domestic 
industry. The Committee also take note of the apprehensions regarding 
Bangladesh’s potential accession to the Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership (RCEP), which will imply free trade between Bangladesh and 
China. The Committee concur with the Government’s assessment that such 
a development could indirectly facilitate preferential entry of Chinese goods 
into the Indian market through transshipment or value-addition loopholes, 
thereby adversely affecting India’s trade interests. 
The Committee recommend that the Government of India convey its 
reservations to Bangladesh at the highest diplomatic and trade policy  
levels, underlining the implications of such actions on the integrity of the 
bilateral trading framework. The Committee further recommend that the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, in coordination with the Ministry of 
External Affairs, adopt stringent rules-of-origin verification mechanisms to 
ensure that preferential trade access under SAFTA or any future CEPA is not 
misused by third-country exporters. 
 
Bangladesh’s graduation from LDC Status and future trade architecture 
21. The Committee take note of Bangladesh’s impending graduation from 
the category of Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in 2026 and recognize 
that this development will have significant implications for bilateral trade. 
The Committee observe that Bangladesh currently enjoys duty -free and 
quota-free market access to India for nearly all products under SAFTA as 
part of its LDC benefits. Upon graduation, Bangladesh will cease to qualify 

Page | 70 
 
for several preferential treatments which could affect its export 
competitiveness and alter the existing trade dynamics. 
The Committee appreciate that both countries have initiated 
negotiations on a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) 
to establish a forward -looking framework for trade and investment 
cooperation post-graduation in line with India’s Neighbourhood First policy. 
The Committee, therefor, recommend that the Government of India should 
expedite the conclusion of CEPA negotiations well before the end of 2026 
to ensure continuity, predictability, and stability in the bilateral economic 
relationship.  As India has a much larger economy, the Committee are of 
the view that the CEPA should include provisions for continued preferential 
treatment for select sectors of the Bangladeshi economy, while also 
safeguarding India ’s domestic interests and  providing a balanced 
framework for long-term cooperation.  
 
Development Partnership  
22. The Committee note that infrastructure development and 
connectivity cooperation have emerged as a cornerstone of India -
Bangladesh bilateral relations, encompassing not only physical connectivity 
through rail, road, and waterways, but also energy and digital linkages. 
India has extended developmental assistance of nearly USD 10 billion to 
Bangladesh in the form of Lines of Credit and grants for projects spanning 
infrastructure, energy, and community development. While acknowledging 
the tangible progress achieved through initiatives such as the completion 
of the Maitree Super Thermal Power Plant, the Khulna -Mongla, Agartala-
Akhaura Rail Lines, India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline and Maitri Bridge 
over Feni, the Committee express concern that certain projects continue to 
face delays owing to tendering constraints, procedural bottlenecks, and 
security-related constraints in project areas.  

Page | 71 
 
The Committee further observe th at these connectivity initiatives 
have yielded mutual dividends, facilitating trade expansion, improving 
access to regional markets, strengthening people -to-people contact, and 
contributing to broader regional stability and economic integration.  The 
Committee are pleased to know that recently a n Indian delegation visited 
Dhaka to discuss concessional finance projects , leading to development of 
a mutually agreed  roadmap to advance these projects.  Ongoing projects 
include Dhaka-Tongi Joydepur Railway line, Kulauru Shabhazpur Railway 
line, widening of Ramgarh to Baraiyarhat Road, evacuation lines at Rooppur 
Nuclear Plant, etc.  Tendering is also underway for various Engineering 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) projects, such as Khulna -Darshana 
Railway line, Parbatipur Kaunia Railway line, Bogra to Saheed M Mousur Ali 
Station Railway line, Ashugang Inland Container River Port Project, 
upgradation of Mongla Port Project, etc.   
While recognizing the fact that Bangladesh has been the recipient of 
robust developmental aid from the Government of India , the Committee 
concurs with the Ministry’s view that improved connectivity brings mutual 
benefits such as enhancing trade, regional integration and improved access 
to the  North Eastern states.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take all necessary steps for timely 
completion of the major ongoing projects in Bangladesh. 
 
23. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is undertaking 
an internal review of various developmental projects , including  in 
Bangladesh.  The Committee note that there have been instances where 
projects have not commenced despite the extension of  the line of credit.  
The Committee note that during the Foreign Office Consultation, both sides 
expressed a desire to continue the ongoing cooperation on developmental 
partnership projects. 

Page | 72 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External 
Affairs should undertake a comprehensive review and rationalization of the 
existing Line of Credit portfolio to identify high-impact, viable projects and 
prioritize their timely completion. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the outcome of this review exercise  within three months . The Commi ttee 
further suggest that the Government should proactively publicize 
successful development partnership initiatives through strategic 
communication and outreach efforts, thereby enhancing India’s image as a 
reliable development partner and reinforcing its  soft power among the 
people of Bangladesh. 
 
Bangladesh-Bhutan-India-Nepal (BBIN) Motor Vehicles Agreement 
24. The Committee note that the Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) 
Motor Vehicles Agreement, signed in 2015, represents a strategically 
significant sub -regional initiative aimed at facilitating the seamless 
movement of goods, people, and services across borders, thereby fostering 
deeper economic integration in South Asia.  The Committee, however, 
observe with concern that the implementation of the Agreement has been 
impeded by delays in the finalization of the protocols for the movement of 
passenger and cargo  vehicles.  The Committee note that BBIN MVA is 
currently under finalisation and is expected to streamline cargo movement 
between its participating countries viz Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and 
Nepal.  Currently, goods bound fr om Bangladesh to Nepal and Bhut an and 
vice-versa have to undergo transhipment at designated land ports.  Once 
BBIN is operationalized, it will allow for seamless movement of vehicles in 
the region contributing to increasing trade flows.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India 
should intensify its diplomatic and technical engagement with the 
Governments of Bangladesh, Nepal, and Bhutan to expedite the finalization 
and adoption of the pending Protocols. The Committee also desire that 

Page | 73 
 
India may take the lead and co nsider extending capacity-building support 
and technical assistance to partner countries for harmonizing transport, 
customs, and regulatory frameworks, to ensure operational preparedness. 
 
Cultural Ties and Shared Civilizational Heritage 
25. The Committee note that India and Bangladesh share profound 
civilizational, linguistic, and cultural affinities, rooted in centuries of shared 
history, literature, and artistic expression. This shared heritage, reflected 
through figures such as Rabindranat h Tagore and Kazi Nazrul Islam, 
people-to-people ties and through common festivals, music, and cinema 
continues to serve as a bridge of goodwill and understanding between the 
two countries. The Committee observe that initiatives such as joint cultural 
festivals, literary collaborations, and youth exchange programmes have 
contributed to strengthening of mutual empathy, preserving the spirit of 
the 1971 Liberation War, and the  moral and emotional foundation of 
bilateral ties.  The Committee, however, express concern that the recent 
developments in Bangladesh have temporarily eroded the atmosphere of 
trust and goodwill between the two peoples. The Committee are of the 
considered view that cultural diplomacy and people -to-people initiatives 
can act as a potent i nstrument for rebuilding confidence and deepening 
mutual understanding at this crucial juncture.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India 
should intensify efforts to institutionalize annual joint cultural events, 
including Tagore -Nazrul literary festivals, joint film retrospectives, and 
cross-border art residencies, in collaboration with cultural institutions, 
universities and civil society organizations from both countries. The 
Committee further recommend that the Government of India should closely 
work with the Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and West Bengal 
to promote sub-national cultural linkages, leveraging their shared linguistic 
and historical heritage to advance deeper people -to-people engagement.  

Page | 74 
 
The Committee are  of the view that bordering states, especially West 
Bengal can play a supportive role in advancing India ’s strategic goals in 
Bangladesh particularly in people-to-people connectivity and trade 
facilitation considering deep cultural and geographical linkages. 
 
Role of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
26. The Committee note that the Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR), through the Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre (IGCC) in Dhaka, has 
played a pivotal role in promoting India’s cultural diplomacy in Bangladesh, 
offering training in Yoga, Hindustani classical music, Kathak, and Hindi, and 
organizing collaborative performances by eminent artists from both 
countries. The Committee commend ICCR ’s initiatives such as the 
International Dance an d Music Festival  and its efforts to sustain cultural 
engagement even during periods of political uncertainty . The Committee 
are hopeful that the cultural programs of renowned artists of India and 
Bangladesh will contribute in promotion of people-to-people contacts. 
Recognizing the increasing demand and positive response, the 
Committee are of the considered view that the scope and geographical 
reach of ICCR’s activities should be substantially expanded beyond Dhaka 
to other major cultural hubs of Bangladesh.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the ICCR, in coordination with the Government of 
Bangladesh, expand its cultural footprint by establishing satellite cultural 
centres in other cities, as well as by organizing mobile cultural troupes and 
developing digital cultural platforms to reach wider audiences. The 
Committee further suggest that the ICCR and Bangladesh ’s Shilpakala 
Academy jointly develop a Cultural Exchange Roadmap focusing on joint 
training programmes, artist residencies, youth festivals, an d academic 
collaborations to deepen the cultural foundation of the bilateral 
relationship.   
 

Page | 75 
 
Human-Resource Development and Capacity Building under ITEC and ICCR 
27. The Committee note that human resource development and capacity-
building initiatives, particularly through the Indian Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (ITEC) Programme and ICCR scholarships is a key component 
of India ’s development cooperation efforts  with Bangladesh. The 
Committee observe that over 3,000 Bangladeshi students have been 
awarded ICCR scholarships in the last decade and around 500 scholarships 
are being processed for the academic year 2025 -26.  The Committee have 
been informed that the se scholarships have been useful in strengthening 
people-to-people ties and providing opportunities to Bangladeshi students 
to better know and understand India.  The Committee also note that India 
has been providing training to Bangladeshi officials from civil s ervices, 
police, judiciary, etc. at various premier training institute s in India. The 
Committee also note that in March 2021 , India had announced 1000 
‘Suborno Jayanti Scholarships’ for Bangladeshi students.  So far, more than 
900 scholarships have been aw arded to Bangladeshi students between 
2022-2024.  In addition, under the Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme, 
24,018 scholarships have been awarded to wards of Bangladeshi war 
veterans. 
  The Committee are glad to note that flagship initiatives such as ICCR 
scholarships and the ITEC courses continue to enjoy wide recognition 
among Bangladeshi students and professionals.  The Committee desire that 
more Bangladeshi youths, students and professionals are provided 
opportunities under ICCR and ITEC training programme s. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government of India to significantly upscale the number 
and diversity of ITEC and ICCR scholarships for Bangladesh, with particular 
focus on emerging sectors such as digital innovation, renewable energy, 
public health, and sustainable agriculture. The Committee also suggest that 
the Ministry should ensure that the se programmes remain responsive to 
evolving needs and sectoral priorities. The Committee further desire that 
more scholarship to wards of war veterans may be provided under 

Page | 76 
 
Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme. The Committee desire that increasing  
number of Bangladeshi professionals, researchers, and youth should benefit 
from various sector specific, skill oriented and other training modules. 
 
Cross-Border Tourism and Border-Haat Linkages 
28. The Committee recognize that tourism and localized cross -border 
trade are powerful drivers for strengthening socio -economic and cultural 
engagement between India and Bangladesh.  The Committee commend the 
establishment of Border Haats along the India -Bangladesh border in 
Meghalaya and Tripura for promoting localised trade among people living 
along the border areas.  The Committee notes that these Border Haats are 
designed to improve the well -being of people living in remote regions on 
both sides of the border.  The Committee suggest that the Ministry should 
conduct a feasibility study to explore the possibility of establishing 
additional Border Haats between the two countries. The Committee are 
hopeful that expanding the network of Border Haats will serve as effective, 
community-based models for informal tra de and cultural exchange. Such 
initiatives will not only revitalize trade in border areas but also foster 
stronger people-to-people ties.  
 
Visa Facilitation and Consular Cooperation 
29. The Committee recognize that visa and consular facilitation 
constitute the most visible and people -centric dimension of India –
Bangladesh relations, directly impacting the movement of tourists, 
patients, students, and businesspersons. In 2023, India issued over 1.6 
million visas to Bangladeshi nationals, making it one of India’s largest visa 
operations abroad. However, following the events of 5 August, 2024, visa 
services were significantly scaled down, and consular personnel were 
withdrawn from Bangladesh.  The Committee observe that e ssential visa 
categories have continued t o function despite temporary disruptions 

Page | 77 
 
resulting from the security situation post-August 2024. Bangladesh remains 
one of India’s major visa operations, processing approximately 1,500 visas 
daily, with medical visas accounting for around 80% of the total.  
The Committee acknowledge the Ministry ’s commitment to 
prioritizing medical visas, underscoring India ’s responsiveness to the 
healthcare needs of Bangladeshi people. However, the Committee express 
concern that reduced visa processing volumes and the security -related 
disruptions may adversely affect public perception and impede people -to-
people engagement, which is vital for fostering bilateral ties. 
Recognizing the i mportance of sustained inter -personal contact for 
preserving mutual trust and confidence, the Committee urge that the 
Ministry of External Affairs , in coordination with concerned security 
agencies, should progressively normalize visa operations in Bangladesh as 
soon as the situation permits. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
develop a bilateral consular cooperation mechanism to periodically review 
visa policy, address grievances, and ensure that legitimate travellers are 
not subjected to various incon veniences, while maintaining necessary 
security safeguards. 
 
Strengthening Institutional mechanism for water cooperation 
30. The Committee observe that water sharing constitutes one of the 
most vital and sensitive aspects of India-Bangladesh bilateral relationship. 
India and Bangladesh share 54 transboundary rivers and have a water 
sharing Treaty, namely Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 on Ganga River along 
with Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) for withdrawal of water from 
Feni and Kushiyara rivers. The Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission 
(JRC), established in 1972, serves as the principal institutional mechanism 
for cooperation on shared water resources, including flood control, 
irrigation, cyclone warning, and flood forecasting. The Committee also note 
that a meeting of the JRC was held in Kolkata in March 2025. The Technical 

Page | 78 
 
Level Meeting (TLM) of the JRC further enables experts from both sides to 
undertake detailed and issue-specific deliberations. 
The Ministry has further apprised the Committee that discussions are 
ongoing between both sides to finalize more water sharing treaties on 
Teesta, Manu, Khowai, and Dharla rivers . While the JRC and the Ganga 
Water Treaty remain the cornerstone of bilateral water cooperation, the 
Committee find that the absen ce of agreements on other major shared 
rivers, particularly the Teesta, continues to pose challenges.  
The Committee feel that the overall river water cooperation 
framework between the two countries ought to be given due importance 
and institutional regula rity. The Committee recommend that the 
Government of India, in coordination with the Government of Bangladesh, 
should ensure that meetings of the Joint Rivers Commission , at both 
technical and ministerial levels, are convened on a regular and time-bound 
basis. The Committee also concur with expert opinion that bilateral water 
cooperation should move beyond water sharing of major rivers during dry-
season, and should include micro-level initiatives such as aquifer recharge, 
river rejuvenation, and technical c ollaboration. Both countries should also 
actively explore joint projects on smaller transboundary rivers such as the 
Manu, Khowai, and Dharla to promote localized water management, 
enhance climate resilience, and strengthen mutual trust. 
 
Renewal of the Ganga Water Treaty 
31. The Committee note that the Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 is a 
bilateral agreement between India and Bangladesh governing the sharing 
of waters from the Ganaga River at the Farraka Barrage for a period of 30 
years. The Committee have be en informed that the Ganga Water Treaty 
involved significant participation from the state of West Bengal, with the 
Finance Minister of West Bengal playing a key role in formulating the treaty 
provisions. The state government of West Bengal also part icipated in the 

Page | 79 
 
most recent meeting of JRC held in Kolkata in March 2025. The Committee 
also note that this treaty is set to expire in 2026 and that bilateral 
discussions on its renewal have not yet commenced.  
The Committee  recommend that the Government of India  should 
initiate bilateral discussions with Bangladesh at the earliest, to avoid any 
vacuum in the post -2026 period. The Committee further recommend that 
the renewal process should be guided by updated hydrological data, climate 
change projections, and the  need for equitable and sustainable utilization 
of river waters. In this regard, the Committee emphasize that consultations 
with concerned State Governments, particularly West Bengal and Bihar, 
may be continued to ensure that national and state -level inter ests are 
aligned in formulating India’s position during the negotiation process. The 
Committee also underscore that the sharing of Teesta river waters is of 
critical importance to the State of West Bengal, and therefore, its concerns 
may be duly addressed by the Government of India during negotiations on 
the Teesta. 
 
Enhancing Climate Resilience and Environmental Cooperation 
32. The Committee note that climate change is increasingly impacting 
river flows and rainfall patterns, leading to environmental challenges in 
both India and Bangladesh, particularly in coastal and flood-prone regions. 
The Sundarbans, a vast mangrove delta shared by both countries, is 
particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, including rising 
sea levels , increased salinity, and loss of biodiversity.  Recognizing the 
shared ecological vulnerability of the Sundarbans region, the Committee 
note with satisfaction the establishment of the India -Bangladesh Joint 
Working Group on Conservation of the Sundarbans. The Committee 
appreciate the fact that this platform provides an avenue for cooperation 
on biodiversity mapping, water quality monitoring, and ecosystem 
management in the deltaic region shared by both countries. The Committee 

Page | 80 
 
recommend that this mechanism be further strengthened to include joint 
initiatives on climate adaptation, biodiversity conservation, salinity 
management, and livelihood resilience for local populations. The Committee 
further suggest that the two countries should explore the feasibility  of 
developing a comprehensive bilateral framework on climate and riverine 
ecosystem management, integrating aspects of water quality, flood 
forecasting, and sustainable delta management. The Committee are of the 
view that cooperation on climate change and  disaster management offers 
a politically neutral domain for deepening bilateral trust between the two 
countries. The Ministry may also apprise the Committee on the progress of 
implementation of MoU signed by India and Bangladesh in 2011 for 
conservation of Sundarbans. 
 
Flood Management and Data Sharing 
33. The Committee observe that since 1972, India and Bangladesh have 
successfully engaged in flood forecasting and hydrological data exchange 
under the aegis of the Joint River Commission. This cooperation has played 
an important role in mitigating the impact of floods and enhancing 
preparedness in both countries. The Committee recommend that this 
cooperation be modernized and expanded through the integration of 
modern technologies such as satellite -based ra infall estimation, remote 
sensing, and digital hydrological modelling, to improve transboundary 
water management and enhance the resilience of both nations to climate 
variability. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                     Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
16 December, 2025                                                                   Chairperson,                                
25 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                Committee on External Affairs 

Page | 81 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 11 DECEMBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 11 December, 2024 from 1630 hrs. to 1830 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 1.     Shri Anjani Kumar   Joint Secretary 
 2.    Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  Deputy Secretary 
  
Ministry of External Affairs 
   S. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Vikram Misri Foreign Secretary  
[Leader of Delegation] 
2.  Shri Balasubramanian Shyam Joint Secretary(BM) 
3.  Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
4.  Shri Raghuram S. Joint Secretary (PP&R) 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
  
 Lok Sabha 
2  Shri Vijay Baghel 
3   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
4  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
5  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
6  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
7  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
8  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
9  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
10  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
11  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
12  Dr. John Brittas 
13  Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
14  Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
15  Dr. K. Laxman 
16  Ms. Kavita Patidar 
17  Shri A. D. Singh 
18  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

Page | 82 
 
5.  Shri Kajari Biswas Director (PP&R) 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have a briefing by the Foreign Secretary on the subject ‘Future 
of India-Bangladesh Relationship’. He also drew the attention of the representatives 
of the Ministry to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. Highlighting 
the importance of the subject particularly in view of the recent developments, the 
Hon’ble Chairperson outlined the points of interest relating to India -Bangladesh 
relations on which the Committee desired the views of the Ministry.  
3. The Foreign Secretary set the context for discussions on the subject by 
summarizing the recent developments in Bangladesh and its impact on bilateral 
relations. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised various queries related to 
border security and management; engagement with political stakeholders in 
Bangladesh; impact of the evolving situation on North Eastern region; Foreign Office 
Consultations; trade and connectivity; situation of minorities in Bangladesh including 
attacks on Hindu temples; development partnership with Bangladesh; outcomes of 
the recent Foreign Office Consultations in Dhaka; people to people ties; safety and 
security of Indian diplomatic personnel; regional and multilateral fo rums like Bay of 
Bengal Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) 
and South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC) etc.  
 
4.  In response, the Foreign Secretary addressed the Members' questions, 
providing detaile d insights into the various issues raised. The Chairperson, in 
conclusion, directed that the Ministry should furnish written replies on the various 
points raised by the Members during discussion to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 

Page | 83 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 26 MARCH, 2025 
The Committee sat on Wednesday 26 March, 2025 from 1600 hrs. to 1725 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs on the subject ‘Future of India -Bangladesh Relationship’. In his opening 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
1)  Smt. D. K. Aruna 
2)  Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
3)  Shri Arun Govil 
4)  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
5)  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
6)  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
7)  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8)  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
9)  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
10)  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
11)  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
12)  Shri Naveen Jindal 
  
Rajya Sabha 
  
13)  Dr. John Brittas 
14)  Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
15)  Dr. K. Laxman 
16)  Ms. Kavita Patidar 
17)  Shri A. D. Singh 
18)  Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
19)  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
20)  Shri Rajeev Shukla 
21)  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 

Page | 84 
 
remarks, the Chair person set the context of the discussions and also drew the 
attention of the representatives of the Ministry to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary began by summarizing the current political 
situation in Bangladesh, highlighting the significant developments and their 
ramifications for bilateral relations between the two nations. Subsequently, the 
Members of the Committee raised various queries related to diplomatic engagement 
between the two countries; issue of water sharing; role of state governments; 
issuance of medical visas to Bangladeshi citizens; people to people ties; aspect of 
development partnership; attack on  minorities; border security infrastructure and 
fencing; role of Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC); Free Trade Agreement; Ganga Water Treaty: Joint Rivers 
Commission; disaster preparedness and flood ma nagement; environmental 
collaboration on Sundarbans and so on.  
4.  In response, the Foreign Secretary addressed the Members' questions, 
providing detailed insights into the various issues raised. The Chairperson in 
conclusion, directed that the Ministry s hould furnish written replies on the various 
points raised by the Members during discussion to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 85 
 
 
Appendix-III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 27 JUNE 2025 
The Committee sat on Friday 27 June 2025  from 1600 hrs. to 1845 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, EPHA, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
1.  Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESS 
Sl. Name of the Experts Profile 
1. Shri Shivshankar Menon Former National Security Advisor and 
Foreign Secretary 
2. Lt. General Syed Ata Hasnain 
(Retd) 
Former GOC 15 Corps & 21 Corps 
3. Smt Riva Ganguly Das Former Secretary, Ministry of 
External Affairs 
4. Professor Amitabh Mattoo Dean, School of International 
Studies, JNU, New Delhi 
 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
1)  Shri Vijay Baghel 
2)   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
3)  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
4)  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
5)  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
6)  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7)  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
8)  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
9)  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
10)  Dr. John Brittas 
11)  Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
12)  Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
13)  Dr. K. Laxman 
14)  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

Page | 86 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson extended a warm welcome to the Non -official 
Witnesses/Experts to the Sitting of the Committee convened to hear their views on 
the subject ‘Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship’ in accordance with Rule 331L of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha . The Chairperson also 
drew their attention to Direction (55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
pertaining to maintaining the confidentiality of the proceedings.  
3. Thereafter, the four experts shared their shared their insights on a wide range 
of topics concerning India -Bangladesh relations, including bilateral engagement; 
recent political shifts in Bangladesh; legacy of the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War; 
energy cooperation; people to people ties and cultural exchanges; role of Bay of 
Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) in 
regional cooperation; Track II diplomacy; is sues relating to border fencing and 
security; increasing Chinese interest and influence in Bangladesh, particularly near the 
Siliguri corridor; joint demarcation; Border Area Development Programme; strategic 
realignment in the region;  anti India sentiments in Bangladesh; need for a dedicated 
perception management body; Ganga Water Treaty; disaster management; role of 
sub national diplomacy etc. 
4. The members of the Committee then raised various queries impinging on issues 
such as bilateral trade; energy c ooperation and development partnerships; 
Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) initiative; trans -boundary water sharing; 
leveraging India’s soft power; increasing radicalization and extremism in Bangladesh; 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations ( ICCR) schol arships; Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation ( ITEC) courses and so on. The experts provided detailed 
responses to the queries raised by the Committee members, contributing to a robust 
and insightful discussion . Before the Sitting concluded, the Chair person expressed 
gratitude to the witnesses for their invaluable contributions to the deliberations on the 
subject matter.  
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

Page | 87 
 
Appendix-IV 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 04 AUGUST 2025 
 
  The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’ 
Parliament House   Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
       Dr. Shashi Tharoor- Chairperson 
Members 
 LOK SABHA  
15)   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
16)  Shri Vijay Baghel 
17)   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
18)  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
19)  Shri Navaskani K. 
20)  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
21)  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
22)  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
23)  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
24)  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
25)  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
26)  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
27)  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
28)  Dr. John Brittas 
29)  Dr. K. Laxman 
30)  Ms. Kavita Patidar 
31)  Shri A. D. Singh 
32)  Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
33)  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.      Mr. Anjani Kumar                                -          Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan                  -          Director             
3.      Ms. Rachna Saxena                             -          Deputy Secretary 
 

Page | 88 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
Sl No. Name of the officer Designation 
1.  Shri Vikram Misri Foreign Secretary [Leader of 
Delegation] 
2.  Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
3.  Shri B. Shyam Joint Secretary (BM) 
4.  Ms. Priyanka Sohoni Director (FSO) 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and Officials to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to take concluding evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of External Affairs on the subject ‘Future of India -Bangladesh 
Relationship’. In his opening remarks, the Chairperson set the context of the 
discussions by drawing attention of the some of the issues relating to the subject, 
such as legacy of 1971, implications of the development in Bangladesh on North 
Eastern States, status of border fencing, land boundary agreement between India and 
Bangladesh, regional cooperation through multilateral forums including Bay of Bengal 
Initiative for Multi -Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), role of 
border states and mechanism  for regular coordination with state governments on 
foreign policy matters, trade relations between the two countries including FTA, people 
to people contact, visa policies and border managements, strategic communication 
and perception management to counte r anti-India narratives, etc. Chairperson also 
drew attention of the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to Direction 
(55)1 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary began by summarizing the current poli tical 
situation in Bangladesh, highlighting the significant developments and their 
ramifications for bilateral relations between the two countries. Some of the issues 
highlighted by the Foreign Secretary during the meeting were  overall approach in 
relation with Bangladesh, safety and security of minorities in Bangladesh, issues 
relating to holding of next elections, law and order situation, border security and 
border fencing, issues relating to bilateral cooperation and trade, issue of Indian visas 
to Bangladeshi nationals, defence cooperation between the two countries, people to 
people contact, significance of relations with Bangladesh for States bordering 

Page | 89 
 
Bangladesh, legacy of 1971, etc.  The Foreign Secretary informed the Committee that 
there is no change in India’s overall approach in relations with Bangladesh following 
the events of August 2024 and India remained interested in a constructive, pragmatic, 
mutually beneficial and forward looking relationship with Bangladesh. 
 
4. Subsequently, the Members o f the Committee also raised various queries 
related to attacked on properties, growing China -Bangladesh relations, elections in 
Bangladesh, issues relating to Bangladeshi migrants and their deportation, impact of 
US tariff imposed on Bangladesh on foreign trade, status of Teesta Water Sharing 
Agreement, Chinese investment and influence in Bangladesh including imports of arms 
from China,  measure to address negative reporting by media in Bangladesh on India, 
safety of minorities, trade relation between the two countries, etc.  
 
5.  In response, the Foreign Secretary addressed the Members' questions, 
providing detailed insights into the various issues raised. The Chairperson in 
conclusion, directed that the Ministry should furnish written replies on the variou s 
points raised by the Members during discussion to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 90 
 
Appendix-V 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) HELD ON 16 DECEMBER, 2025 
  
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room 2 Extension 
Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.      Shri. Anjani Kumar                         -         Joint Secretary 
2.      Shri. Shangreiso Zimik                    -         Director             
3.      Smt Shanta Banerjee Datta     -         Deputy Secretary 
       
 Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3  Shri Vijay Baghel 
4   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
8  Shri Arun Govil 
9  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
10  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 Rajya Sabha 
11  Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
12  Dr. John Brittas 
13  Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
14  Dr. K. Laxman 
15  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
16  Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
17  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

Page | 91 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3.      The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject ‘Future 
of India-Bangladesh Relationship’. 
 
4.        The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted 
the draft Report with some modifications. 
 
5.        The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to  present the Report to 
Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 92 
 
Annexure-I 
 
