 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report on the subject “Evaluation of India's Indian Ocean Strategy’. 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
MARCH 2026 / Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
13 
 

 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report on the subject “Evaluation of India's Indian Ocean Strategy’. 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 March, 2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 March, 2026 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
MARCH 2026 / Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………      1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................     20 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………    42 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..    43 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………     55 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 12 March 2025.             58                                                                 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (18th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………....        60 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
9. Shri Navaskani K. 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Dr. John Brittas 
24. Shri Raghav Chadha 
25. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
28. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
29. Shri A. D. Singh 
30. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
31. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik    –  Director  
 
 
(ii) 
 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2025-26) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Eighth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Evaluation of India's 
Indian Ocean Strategy’. 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha on 11 August, 2025. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14 October, 2025 
(English Version) and 24 October, 2025 (Hindi Version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on 
12 March, 2026. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the 
Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
12  March, 2026                                                                                      Chairperson,                                
21 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka)                              Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
      (iii) 

1 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their 8th 
Report on the subject ‘Evaluation of India’s Indian Ocean Strategy’ which was 
presented to the both Houses of Parliament on 11 August, 2025. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the 32 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
  
(i)    Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 7, 8, 10, 16, 17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 
26, 27, 28, 31 and 32. 
 Total- 20 
Chapter-II 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
  Recommendation No.    NIL                                             
        Total- 0 
Chapter-III 
(iii)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, and 20              
Total- 09 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation No.  12. 29 and 30 
Total- 03 
Chapter-V 

2 | P a g e 
 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained 
in Chapter-I and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
India's Strategic Responsibility in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
5. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee acknowledge the paramount strategic, economic, and 
environmental significance of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) for India. With a 
coastline of over 7,500 kilometres, coupled with its vast Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) of 2.4 million square kilometres, India is uniquely positioned at the 
heart of one of the most vital regions in the world. Nearly 90% of India's trade 
by volume, including oil imports, transits through the Indian Ocean which also 
handles half of the world's container shipments. Thus, the Indian Ocean is not 
only critical for India's economic stability but also serves as a bridge for global 
trade between Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. 
Given this geo-strategic importance, the Committee are of the considered 
view that India's leadership role in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) is both a 
natural and necessary extension of its geopolitical and economic interests and 
thereby, it should take a leading role in ensuring the security, stability, and 
prosperity of the region. The Committee observe that India's leadership in the 
Indian Ocean is underscored by its strategic framework, Vision SAGAR 
(Security and Growth for All in the Region) and its evolved version, Vision 
MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth 
Across Regions for the Global South). These guiding principles accentuate 
India's commitment to a rules-based order, respect for sovereignty, freedom 
of navigation, and the protection of regional maritime security. The Indian 
Ocean is undeniably an integral part of India's global strategy, and it is in 
India's best interest to assert its role as a guardian of this vital maritime space. 
The Committee urge that the MEA should intensify its efforts to build stronger 
bilateral, multilateral engagements and defence partnerships while ensuring 
the region's sustainability and security. By fostering a cooperative, rules-
based order in the Indian Ocean, India should continue enhancing its role as a 
leading regional power, securing the region for itself and the global 
community, while affirming that the Indian Ocean remains India's Ocean.” 
 

3 | P a g e 
 
6. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“As demonstrated by frequent high level visits and the outcomes thereof, India 
continues to strengthen bilateral engagements in the region. India is 
committed to further strengthening defence and security cooperation in the 
region through continued provision of military assets, joint exercises, high 
level bilateral visits as well as capacity building support. Conclusion of MoU 
on Defence Cooperation with Sri Lanka, construction of Maldives National 
Defence Forces Coast Guard Harbour, enhanced strategic partnership with 
Mauritius, signing of Charter and MoU for establishment of the Colombo 
Security Conclave, regular joint exercises with defence forces, provisioning of 
defence security platforms, training and capacity building, are some of the 
recent measures that reaffirm our intent for closer cooperation in the security 
and defence domains aimed at tackling common security challenges in the 
region.”     
7. Acknowledging the paramount strategic, economic, and environmental 
significance of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) for India, the Committee in their 
original Report had urged the MEA to intensify its efforts to build stronger 
bilateral, multilateral engagements and defence partnerships to ensure 
region’s sustainability and security.  The Committee note from the Action 
Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry that India is committed to further 
strengthening defence and security cooperation in the region through 
continued provision of military assets, joint exercises, high level bilateral 
visits as well as capacity building support.  Some of the recent measures 
taken in this regard are conclusion of MoU on Defence Cooperation with Sri 
Lanka, construction of Maldives National Defence Forces Coast Guard 
Harbour, enhanced strategic partnership with Mauritius, signing of Charter and 
MoU for establishment of the Colombo Security Conclave, regular joint 
exercises with defence forces, provisioning of defence security platforms, 
training and capacity building, etc.  The Committee are of the view that Indian 
Ocean is undeniably an integral part of India’s global strategy. The importance 
of the Indian Ocean Region can be seen from the fact that it is spread over an 
area of over 70 million square kilometers, connecting over 35 littoral states 
and is home to one third of the world’s population.  India also has a significant 
stake in the Indian Ocean Region, with coastline exceeding 11,098 kilometers 
and India’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) spanning 2.4 million square 
kilometers, and handles 90 per cent of India’s trade volume.  Globally, these 
waters handle half of container shipments, a third of bulk cargo, and two thirds 

4 | P a g e 
 
of oil shipments.  Considering that Indian Ocean is vital not only to India’s 
geopolitical, economic and cultural landscape, but also for maintaining 
regional and global order, the Committee desire that a more comprehensive 
strategy which will adequately enable India to take a leading role in ensuring 
security, stability and prosperity in the region may be worked out by the 
Ministry.  The Committee has noted some of the recent initiatives taken by the 
Government to address the security and various other concerns in the Indian 
Ocean Region.  The Committee are of the view that more initiatives are 
required to enable India to take a leading role in the region In view of this, the 
Committee once again urge the Ministry of External Affairs to take further 
necessary measures to deepen bilateral, multilateral engagements, expand 
defence partnerships, and formulate a comprehensive regional strategy that 
will adequately reflects the centrality of the Indian Ocean in India’s long-term 
strategic outlook. 
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
Countering Chinese Expansion and Influence in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 
8. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee express concern regarding the escalating Chinese presence 
and its increasing influence in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), a development 
which poses substantial risks to India's national security and broader strategic 
interests. The Committee recognizes that China's enhanced naval 
capabilities, exemplified by the growing size of its fleet, including over 15 units 
commissioned annually, has now surpassed the United States Navy, making 
it the world's largest naval force. The induction of advanced warships, 
including multiple Carrier Battle Groups and an additional aircraft carrier, 
along with the regular deployment of Chinese submarines and naval vessels, 
demonstrates a clear and growing strategic interest by China in consolidating 
its position in the IOR.  
The strategic positioning of Chinese military and commercial infrastructure 
across key maritime chokepoints, particularly under the Belt and Road 
Initiative (BRI) and the "String of Pearls" strategy, is gradually reconfiguring 
the region's geopolitical dynamics in favor of Chinese interests. Of equal 
concern is the strengthening of the China-Pakistan naval nexus, which not 
only facilitates joint military exercises but also advances Pakistan's naval 
modernization. This cooperation complicates the security situation further, 
particularly in the context of the increasing Chinese influence over Pakistan's 
naval assets, which could destabilize the balance of power in the region. 

5 | P a g e 
 
The Committee believe that these developments must be addressed with 
urgency, as they have the potential to shift the balance of power in the region, 
challenging India's strategic autonomy and undermining its influence over key 
maritime chokepoints. In the considered view of the Committee, India must 
remain proactive in countering the combined naval threat from China and 
Pakistan by bolstering its own deterrence capabilities and conducting joint 
exercises with partner countries to maintain strategic balance. The Committee 
urge the Government to enhance Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) through 
further integration of advanced technologies, such as satellite-based 
surveillance systems and Artificial Intelligence, to monitor Chinese activities 
more effectively. This should be complemented by a significant upgradation in 
naval capabilities, including the induction of advanced anti-submarine warfare 
(ASW) vessels, surveillance aircrafts, and nuclear-powered submarines, 
ensuring India's readiness to respond to any emerging threat. India should 
also deepen its strategic alliances with regional powers and global partners, 
particularly through forums such as the Quad, to ensure collective security 
and strengthen deterrence. Building closer ties with IOR littoral states through 
defense cooperation, capacity-building initiatives, and joint maritime 
operations will be crucial in countering Chinese influence.” 
9. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Indian Navy is seized of the security implications of the combined naval 
threat from China and Pakistan, and maintains a constant and close watch on 
their deployments. The Indian Navy concept of operations are being 
continuously fine-tuned and capability perspective plans are being pursued to 
counter all emerging threats. The commissioning of INS Vikrant, and the 
continued modernization of our submarine fleet, including nuclear-powered 
submarines is aimed at ensuring that we retain a credible deterrence in the 
region. The Navy’s anti-submarine warfare capabilities have also been 
significantly enhanced with induction of ASW corvettes, P8I Long Range 
Maritime Reconnaissance aircraft and the MH-60R helicopters. Whole of 
Government efforts are also being pursued to augment underwater domain 
awareness (UDA) in the region. 
Indian Navy has enhanced strategic partnerships through increased 
deployments, joint exercises and collaborations with like-minded navies in the 
region. Partnerships through bilateral and multilateral exercises like the Rim of 
the Pacific Exercise (RIMPAC), Malabar, Varuna, Konkan and initiatives like 
Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) have helped the Indian Navy to 
maintain a strong deterrent posture in the IOR.  
Towards enhancing maritime domain awareness (MDA), the Indian Navy has 
been actively pursuing Space Based Survillance-III (SBS3) programme with 
relevant stakeholders. The early realization of SBS3 would enable Indian 
Navy towards persistent MDA in areas of interests. Indian Navy is also 
leveraging artificial intelligence and machine learning capabilities using 
commercially contracted services to monitor activities of adversaries in IOR.” 
 
10. Concerned to note the continued strengthening of the China-Pakistan 
naval nexus, the Committee had expressed the view that India must remain 

6 | P a g e 
 
proactive in countering the combined naval threat by bolstering its own 
deterrence capabilities and conducting joint exercises with partner countries 
to maintain strategic balance.  From the Action Taken Reply furnished by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that the Indian Navy is seized of the security 
implications of the combined naval threat from China and Pakistan, and 
maintains a constant and close watch on their deployments in the region. The 
Committee also note that numerous measures have also been taken by Indian 
Navy, such as commissioning of INS Vikrant, modernization of submarine fleet 
including nuclear powered submarine, induction of ASW corvettes, P8I Long 
Range Maritime Reconnaissance aircraft and the MH-60R helicopters.  The 
Committee are concerned to note reports regarding growing Chinese 
deployment in the IOR. The Committee apprehend a possibility of a nexus 
between China and Pakistan in the naval field in the Region. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that MEA should facilitate Indian navy’s continued efforts to 
enhance strategic partnerships through increased deployments, joint 
exercises and collaborations with like-minded navies in the region. 
 The Committee further emphasize the critical importance of 
strengthening Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) capabilities. In this regard, 
the Space Based surveillance-III (SBS-III) programme assumes strategic 
significance. The Committee recommend that this programme be implemented 
in a strictly time-bound manner so as to ensure real-time intelligence 
gathering, enhanced surveillance, and improved maritime situational 
awareness in the Indian Ocean Region.   
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
Combating Narcotics Trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
11.   The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note with concern the rising threat of narcotics trafficking in 
the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), which is increasingly intertwined with issues 
such as terrorism, organized crime, and regional instability. The growing 
volume of illicit drugs transiting through this strategic maritime corridor is 
fuelling parallel economies that finance terrorism and exacerbate security 
challenges. While the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard (ICG) have 
conducted several successful Anti-Narcotics Operations (ANO), resulting in 
significant narcotics seizures, the Committee believes that current efforts are 

7 | P a g e 
 
insufficient to effectively address the expanding scale of trafficking. The 
Committee emphasizes that this menace poses significant domestic security 
challenges, particularly to India's coastal states, which are increasingly 
vulnerable due to their proximity to critical maritime routes. The presence of 
organized criminal networks in these areas not only endangers the local 
populations but also threatens broader national security. 
In view of these challenges, the Committee recommend a comprehensive 
strengthening of India's coastal surveillance infrastructure, significantly 
enhancing human, financial and technological resources dedicated to counter-
narcotics operations. The Committee also highlight the critical importance of 
enhancing state capacity and infrastructure along with regional and 
international cooperation through improved intelligence-sharing platforms and 
more robust legal frameworks. Additionally, given, the vital role of local 
communities in preventing narcotics smuggling, the Committee urge the 
expansion of the Indian Coast Guard's Community Interaction Programs 
(CIPs), and call for enhanced deployment of Coast Guards vessels in affected 
coastal states, particularly in the West Coast.” 
12. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“Since 2008, coastal security has been a focus area for the Indian Navy and a 
large number of measures have been implemented to strengthen the overall 
security apparatus.  
The Indian Navy has established a National Command, Control, 
Communication and Intelligence Network (NC3I) which integrates information 
obtained from multiple sources to form a composite maritime picture at 
Information Management and Analysis Centre (IMAC) at Gurugram. The 
Indian Navy is at advance stages of establishing a National Maritime Domain 
Awareness Project to integrate all maritime surveillance centres and 
databases, under a single umbrella. Various other initiatives such as creation 
of a ‘Sagar Prahari Bal’, induction of over 80 Fast interceptor Craft and 23 
Immediate Support vessels, coastal security exercises and awareness drives, 
fitment of Automatic identification systems (AIS) transponders on fishing 
vessels, training of Marine Police, etc, have also been successfully 
undertaken to augment coastal security, including conducting narcotics 
operations. 
In the last four years, the Indian Navyhas conducted numerous Anti-Narcotics 
Operations (ANOs) on the high seas, seizing approx 12000 kgs of narcotics. 
Further, to combat narcotic trafficking, Indian Coast Guard (ICG) has 
intensified electronic surveillance, and expanded patrolling by ships and 
aircraft. Under Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) - Phase-I, the ICG has 
established 46 Radar Stations (RS) across the mainland and island territories. 
This network is being further strengthened under Phase-II with the addition of 
38 RS and 4 Mobile Surveillance System (MSS). 

8 | P a g e 
 
In parallel, the ICG regularly conducts Community Interaction Programme 
(CIPs) to sensitize the fishing community and develop them as ‘Eyes and 
Ears at Sea’ for Coastal Security. 
As the designated Lead Intelligence (LIA) for coastal and sea borders, the 
ICG also maintains effective liaison with central and state agencies to ensure 
coordinated security efforts. 
Over the last five years, the ICG has carried out several successful 
interdictions, seizing narcotics worth a total of Rs. 46387.56 crore, including 
its largest-ever haul of 6016 kg of methamphetamine. 
Further, there has been an apparent shift of narco-traffic away from India’s 
exclusive economic zone (EEZ), reflecting the impact of enhanced 
surveillance and patrolling.” 
 
13.  Observing that greater efforts are required to effectively address the 
expanding scale of narcotics trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), the 
Committee had recommended for a comprehensive strengthening of India’s 
coastal surveillance infrastructure.  The Committee note that a large number 
of measures have been implemented by Indian Navy to strengthen the overall 
security apparatus, such as establishment of National Command, Control, 
Communication and Intelligence Network (NC3I), creation of Sagar Prahari 
Bal, induction of over 80 fast interceptor craft and 23 Immediate Support 
Vessels, Coastal Security exercise, fitment of Automatic identification 
Systems (AIS) transponders on fishing vessels, etc.  The Committee also 
note that Indian Coast Guard has also taken various measures to combat 
narcotic trafficking, such as intensification of electronic surveillance, 
conducting community Interaction Programme to develop the fishing 
community as the ‘Eyes and Ears at Sea’ for coastal security, etc.  Indian 
Navy had seized approximately 12000 kgs of narcotics in the last four years, 
whereas Indian Coast Guard over the last five years had seized narcotics 
worth of Rs.46,387.56 crore, including 6016 kg of methamphetamine which is 
the largest haul of this substance.  The Committee are glad to note that due 
to enhanced surveillance and patrolling, there has been an apparent shift of 
narco-traffic away from India’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).   
While appreciating the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard for 
implementing various measures to enhance overall coastal security 

9 | P a g e 
 
apparatus, the Committee reiterate that the threat posed by narcotics 
trafficking extends beyond coastal areas and has serious implications for 
national security, economic stability, and social order. The Committee are of 
the considered view that there is aneed to strengthen India’s coastal 
surveillance infrastructure so as to effectively tackle the threat posed by 
Narcotics Trafficking not only to coastal regions but also to broader national 
security.  In this regard, the Committee desire that a National Maritime 
Domain Awareness Project, which is at an advanced stage of implementation 
to integrate all maritime surveillance centres and database, under a single 
umbrella may be established in a time bound manner.  The Committee are of 
the considered view that it is imperative for India to set up state of the art 
coastal surveillance infrastructure for monitoring its huge Exclusive 
Economic Zone so as to effectively address the challenges posed by threats 
like piracy, trafficking, illegal fishing, maritime terrorism, natural calamities, 
etc. 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
Role of the Indian Navy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
14. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee acknowledge the critical and expanding role of the 
Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard in safeguarding India's national 
maritime interests and securing the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). The Indian 
Navy's four key roles - military, constabulary, benign and diplomatic- serve as 
the cornerstone of India's maritime security strategy. These roles are 
becoming increasingly crucial as piracy, maritime terrorism, and illegal 
activities in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) pose growing threats to India's 
Sea Lines of Communication (SLOCs) and trade routes. The ICG's expanding 
mandate to secure India's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and provide 
coastal security is equally critical in ensuring the country's maritime interests. 
While the Indian Navy and Coast Guard have demonstrated significant 
operational effectiveness, there are numerous challenges that need urgent 
attention to ensure India's naval forces remain a modern, capable deterrent 
force. These challenges primarily concern fleet readiness, personnel training, 
and logistical support, which must be addressed to cope with emerging 
threats in the maritime domain. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Government should invest in the modernization of capabilities of the Indian 
Navy and Coast Guard by prioritizing the development and induction of 
indigenous platforms through the Aatmanirbhar Bharat initiative. The 

10 | P a g e 
 
Committee recommend that the Government should prioritize enhancing the 
Navy's fleet with advanced platforms, such as next-generation submarines, 
destroyers, and carrier-based fighters, to improve its deterrence and 
operational readiness. Additionally, the ICG must be further empowered with 
modern assets, including specialized patrol vessels and surveillance aircraft, 
to enhance its ability to monitor and secure India's vast maritime boundaries.” 
15. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“As brought out earlier, Indian Navy remains focused towards threat and 
capability-based modernisation plan, with a thrust on ‘Atmanirbharta’, through 
the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP 2012-27) and Maritime 
Capability Perspective Plan (MCPP 2022-37). 
 
Further, in line with the Hon’ble PM’s Vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat, the Indian 
Coast Guard (ICG) is ensuring that all its assets are fully indigenous. All ships 
being made are designed and constructed in India. Similarly, all aircraft, 
including helicopters and fixed-wing platforms for maritime surveillance, are 
indigenously manufactured. Even the modern equipment and weapons fitted 
on these ships and aircraft are entirely sourced from Indian industry.” 
 
 
(Recommendation No.14) 
Provisioning of Adequate Financial support to Maritime Forces 
16. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee underscore the need for adequate and sustained 
financial allocations to support the modernization efforts of both the Indian 
Navy and the Indian Coast Guard. As the strategic importance of India's 
maritime security grows and emerging threats in the Indian Ocean Region 
(IOR) become more pronounced, it is crucial that the government's financial 
commitment aligns with the evolving demands of maritime defense. To 
effectively counter these threats, the Committee advocate increased funding 
to procure advanced technologies and to expand naval modernization 
programmes, including the acquisition of next-generation platforms, 
submarines, and surveillance systems. Without sufficient budgetary 
provisions, India's maritime forces may be unable to meet the future security 
challenges that lie ahead.” 
17. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“As of 03 September 2025, the Indian Navy has a force level of 140 ships and 
submarines and 264 aircrafts. These include aircraft carriers, state-of-the-art 
destroyers and frigates, nuclear and conventional submarines, carrier-based 
fighters, deck-based helicopters, shore-based surveillance aircraft and 

11 | P a g e 
 
surface/ sub-surface/ aerial autonomous vehicles. Towards expeditious 
capacity and capability building of the Navy, 55 ships are presently under 
construction, to be inducted over the next six years. Besides, acceptance of 
necessity (AoN) has been accorded for the construction of 74 additional ships 
and submarines. 
Indian Navy is focused on being a ‘Combat Ready, Credible, Cohesive and 
Future Ready Force’. Towards the same, adequate budgetary allocation have 
been facilitated by Government of India for capability development and 
modernisation of the Indian Navy.  
Further, for modernisation and capacity enhancement of the Indian Coast 
Guard (ICG), over the past five years, the ICG’s Budget has seen a significant 
increase, rising from Rs. 7310.29 crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 9676.70 crore in 
2025-26. This increase will strengthen the ICG’s operational capabilities and 
ensure it is well-equipped to address maritime security challenges effectively.” 
18. Acknowledging the critical and expanding role of the Indian Navy and 
the Indian Coast Guard in safeguarding India’s national maritime interests and 
securing the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), the Committee had recommended 
that the Government should invest in the modernization of Indian Navy and 
Coast Guard through the Atmanirbhar Bharat initiatives.  The Committee had 
also underscored the need for adequate and sustained financial allocations to 
support the modernization efforts.  From the Action Taken Note, the 
Committee note that the Indian Navy remains focused towards threats and 
capability-based modernization plan, with a thrust on ‘Atmanirbharta’.  The 
Indian Coast Guard is also ensuring that all its assets are fully indigenous in 
line with the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat.  The 
Committee also note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that as on 03 
September, 2025, the Indian Navy has a force level of 140 ships and 
submarines and 264 aircrafts.  Besides this, 55 ships are presently under 
construction to be inducted over the next six years, and acceptance of 
necessity (AoN) has been accorded for the construction of 74 additional ships 
and submarines.  The Committee are of the view that India has an important 
role to play to ensure safety, security and prosperity of the region.  
Considering that Indian Ocean is vital to India’s geopolitical, economic and 
cultural landscape, it is important that India devote more resources for a 
greater naval presence in the region and provide a credible deterrence, protect 
its national interest. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to invest in the modernization of Indian Navy and Indian 

12 | P a g e 
 
Coast Guard so that India can provide a credible deterrence, protect its 
national interest and efficiently play the role of net security provider in the 
Indian Ocean Region. 
(Recommendation No.15) 
Enhancing Coordination Among Maritime Agencies 
 
19. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee emphasize the need for enhanced coordination among 
India's maritime forces and agencies, including the Indian Navy, Coast Guard, 
Ministries of External Affairs, Defence, and Home Affairs, as well as with 
external partners in the international maritime community. Joint operations, 
intelligence-sharing, and multilateral exercises with nations such as the United 
States, Japan, and Australia should be integrated more effectively into India's 
security framework. The Committee suggest that India should prioritize 
formalizing and expanding such collaborations, particularly in the areas of 
Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) and interoperability. Furthermore, 
streamlined communication protocols both within national agencies and with 
international partners are crucial to ensure that India maintains a proactive 
and responsive maritime security posture.” 
20. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“The Indian Navy has already established a National Command, Control, 
Communication and Intelligence Network (NC3I) which integrates information 
obtained from multiple sources to form a composite maritime picture. As 
stated earlier, the Indian Navy is at advance stages of establishing a National 
Maritime Domain Awareness (NMDA) Project to integrate all maritime 
surveillance centres and databases, under a single umbrella. The Information 
Management and Analysis Centre (IMAC) at Gurugram, will be transformed 
into a multi-agency NMDA centre, co-locating representatives from multiple 
agencies across ministries (such as Ministry of Defence; Ports,Shipping and 
Waterways; Petroleum and Natural Gas, etc). This will not only enhance MDA 
but also enable interoperability, real-time information sharing, and 
collaborative action. 
 
Towards enhancing the communication between the Indian Navy and other 
national agencies, Exercise Sea Vigil was conceived, which is the largest 
coastal defence exercise conducted in India. The conduct of the exercise has 
not only galvanized the maritime security stakeholders, but also improved 
communication. The Indian Navy also maintain functional linkages with 
multinational constructs through established communication channels. These 
channels are being regularly used to exchange information and coordinate 
issues pertaining to security operations in the region.  
 

13 | P a g e 
 
Further, Indian Coast Guard (ICG) has significantly strengthened coordination 
and cooperation with International agencies. During 2024-25, ICG ships 
undertook eight overseas deployments covering 14 countries, including 
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR) missions to Yemen, 
Sudan and Djibouti, while also participating in major events like the Naval 
Defence Exhibition & Conference (NAVDEX)-2025 in the UAE under the 
Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative. Bilateral ties were reinforced through high-level 
meetings and joint exercises.” 
 
21. The Committee in their original report had emphasized the need for 
enhanced coordination among India’s maritime forces and agencies, as well as 
with external partners, such as the United States, Japan and Australia.  The 
Committee note from the Action Taken Reply that a National Maritime Domain 
Awareness to integrate all maritime surveillance centres and databases under a 
single umbrella is still under process.  Once completed, the Information 
Management and Analysis Centre (IMAC) at Gurugram will be transformed into a 
multi-agency NMDA centre, co-locating representatives from multiple agencies 
across Ministries, such as Defence; Ports, Shipping and Waterways; Petrolum 
and Natural Gas, etc., which will enable real time information sharing and 
collaborative action.  From the information provided by the Ministry of Defence 
during the examination of the subject, the Committee note that on an average, 
over 1,65,000 ships traverse the Indian Ocean annually.  Additionally, with a 
coastline of over 11,000 km consisting of nearly 1400 islands, nine coastal states 
and four Union territories, a significant responsibility is imposed on the Indian 
Navy.  The Committee feel that the number of ships traversing Indian Ocean will 
increase in future. It is, therefore, necessary that to properly monitor the 
movement of these ships in the Indian Ocean for maritime security, anti-piracy 
operations, protection of strategic and economic interests, etc., there is a need 
for close coordination among India’s various maritime forces and agencies.  The 
Committee note that Joint EEZ surveillance exercise have been conducted with 
countries in the IOR, such as Seychelles, Mauritius and Mozambique in 2024. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to implement the recommendation of the 
Committee to integrate Joint Operations, intelligence sharing and multilateral 
exercises with nations such as United States, Japan and Australia into India’s 
security network.  The Committee hope that this will substantially help the Indian 
Navy in monitoring the various developments in the region. 

14 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
Enhancing Bilateral and Multilateral Diplomacy 
22. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee acknowledge India's active participation and leadership in 
various multilateral institutions and regional groupings in the Indian Ocean 
Region such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), Indo-Pacific 
Oceans Initiative (IPOI), the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral 
Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), the Quadrilateral Security 
Dialogue (Quad)), Mekong - Ganga Cooperation (MGC) and others. However, 
despite this broad engagement, the Committee observe that India's approach 
remains fragmented, lacking the strategic coherence necessary to fully 
leverage these platforms to advance its geopolitical, economic and strategic 
interests. 
The Committee recommend strengthening of bilateral arrangements to protect 
the interests of fishermen who may inadvertently cross international maritime 
boundaries and encounter law enforcement interception by neighbouring 
countries. The Government should establish bilateral mechanisms to 
safeguard the interests of the fishermen and ensure their speedy release as 
well as of their boats and equipment. 
The Committee, further recommend that the Government should adopt a more 
coherent, outcome-driven, and strategically aligned approach to harmonize 
India's initiatives in the IOR. This should be accompanied by enhanced inter-
ministerial coordination, increased financial and technical commitments, 
promotion of synergy among overlapping forums, and periodic evaluation of 
outcomes. In addition, there is an urgent need for establishment of a centralized 
coordinating mechanism within the Ministry of External Affairs.” 
23. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“Government of India attaches highest priority to the safety, security and 
welfare of Indian fishermen. The fishermen issue is dealt with in a bilateral 
manner with Sri Lanka and the Government has been taking up the fishermen 
issues, including the early release and repatriation of Indian fishermen and 
fishing boats, with respective governments through diplomatic channels, 
various official interactions and established bilateral mechanisms. The matter 
of early release and repatriation of Indian fishermen is consistently raised with 
respective countries at all levels and it is conveyed that this issue may be 
considered purely on humanitarian and livelihood grounds.  
Further, our Missions and Consulates in respective countries make regular 
visits to local jails and detention centres to ascertain the condition of Indian 
fishermen and provide requisite help and support, including legal assistance. 
Our Missions also provide necessary travel documents to facilitate repatriation 
of released fishermen to India.” 

15 | P a g e 
 
24. The Committee in their Original Report had noted the need to fully leverage 
various multilateral and regional groupings in the Indian Ocean Region to 
advance its geographical, economic and strategic interests.  The Committee had 
also recommended to further strengthen bilateral arrangements to protect the 
interests of fishermen, and to establish a centralized coordinating mechanism 
within the Ministry of External Affairs.  From the Action Taken Reply, the 
Committee note that the  fishermen issue is dealt with in a bilateral manner with 
Si Lanka and the Government has been taking up the fishermen issues, including 
the early release and repatriation of Indian fishermen and fishing boats, with 
respective governments through diplomatic channels, various official 
interactions and established bilateral mechanisms.  However, the Ministry has not 
furnished any reply with regard to leveraging various multilateral institutions and 
regional groupings in the Indian Ocean region, and the urgent need for 
establishment of a centralized coordinating mechanism within the Ministry.  In 
view of the above the Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs to 
formulate a comprehensive strategy to fully leverage various multilateral and 
regional groupings in the Indian Ocean Region, such as the Indian Ocean Rim 
Association (IORA), Indo-Pacific Ocean Initiatives (IPOI), the Bay of Bengal 
Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), the 
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad), Mekong Ganga Cooperation, etc, to 
advance India’s geopolitical, economic and strategic interests.  The Committee 
note that India’s engagement with multilateral organizations in the IOR is a 
strategic requirements of India’s foreign and security policy, and India should 
continue to actively engage with this organizations given India’s geographical 
location, economic interest, maritime security concerns and aspirations to 
emerge as regional power.  India should continue to participate and play active 
leadership role in functioning of these organizations so as to fully leverage these 
platforms to advance India’s strategic interests.  The Ministry may keep the 
Committee apprised of all the progress made in this regard. 
 
  

16 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation No.19 & 20) 
Revitalizing Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) 
25. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), 
established in 1987 with its Secretariat in Mauritius, was created to revive the 
historic pan-Indian Ocean connectivity among countries. Over the years, 
IORA's membership has expanded to 23 Member States and 12 Dialogue 
Partners. The primary sources of funding for IORA include an annual 
membership fee of USD 24,000 from Member States and voluntary 
contributions from both Member States and Dialogue Partners to the IORA 
Special Fund, with India being the largest contributor. During the oral 
evidence, the Ministry emphasized that India places the highest priority on 
IORA and is focused on strengthening the institutional, financial, and legal 
frameworks of the organization to unlock its true potential. Efforts are being 
made to consolidate and streamline initiatives to promote cooperation in 
IORA's six priority areas and two cross-cutting themes. 
The Committee acknowledge IORA's promise as a transformative platform for 
regional economic growth, sustainable development, and maritime 
cooperation. However, despite India's substantial contributions and a vast 
membership, the organization's full potential remains untapped. With its 
diverse membership, including 23 Member States, 12 Dialogue Partners, and 
an expanding number of stakeholders, IORA is well-positioned to act as a 
catalyst for peace, development, and shared prosperity in the Indian Ocean 
region. Recognizing the need for a strategic overhaul, the Committee strongly 
recommend that, in light of India's forthcoming Chairship of IORA from 2025-
2027, India should assume a leading role in revitalizing the organization. This 
includes prioritizing the strengthening of IORA's institutional framework and 
governance. Specifically, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
streamline the Secretariat's operations, enhance coordination among Member 
States, and explore innovative funding mechanisms to enable more effective 
implementation of projects.” 
26. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“India views IORA as a vital platform for fostering sustainable development, 
economic growth, prosperity, and regional stability. Recently, with the 
objective of streamlining the existing financial mechanism of IORA, a meeting 
of the Sub-Committee on Finance (SCF) was organised on 22 July 2025 
under the current Chair Sri Lanka.  As a member of the IORA Troika, India 
attended the meeting and presented its views. Similarly, India is also a 
member of committee formed to review the Special Fund Guidelines, which 
has been mandated to review the existing administrative arrangement of the 
Special Fund. First meeting of the Ad-Hoc committee on the review of IORA 
special fund was held on 27 August 2025. Following up on this meeting, and 
after obtaining concurrence from other Member States, IORA’s financial 

17 | P a g e 
 
framework will be amended to ensure transparency and explore avenues for 
financial prudence. Similarly, India has also conveyed its interest in joining an 
Ad-hoc committee for IORA reforms.  
As a part of strengthening the institutional framework, we have now seconded 
an IFS officer Shri Mayur Hazarika to IORA in the role of Director, IABE 
(Institutional Arrangement and Broadening Engagement). Thus, we currently 
have 2 Directors from India in IORA, in addition to IORA Secretary General 
Shri Sanjeev Ranjan. Furthermore, with the aim of imparting diplomatic 
training to IORA Staffs, India has planned a week long capacity building 
training programme from 08 to13 December, 2025 at Sushma Swaraj Institute 
of Foreign Service (SSIFS), Delhi.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
Expanding IORA's Priorities to Address emerging regional challenges 
27. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“Considering that the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) has emerged as 
a leading platform for regional cooperation, spanning key sectors such as 
trade, maritime safety, disaster risk management, fisheries, tourism, and the 
emerging blue economy, the Committee observe that the organization 
undertakes cooperation activities under six priority areas science and 
technology, disaster risk management, maritime safety, trade and investment 
facilitation, fisheries management, and tourism - as well as two cross-cutting 
issues: the blue economy and women's economic empowerment. 
 
The Committee is of the opinion that, while these areas remain critical, there 
is an urgent need to broaden the scope of IORA's priorities to encompass 
emerging challenges and opportunities. The Committee suggest that 
additional priority areas, such as cyber-security, regional health cooperation, 
and disaster resilience, which are becoming increasingly significant in the 
context of global challenges facing the Indian Ocean region should be 
included. To advance this goal, the Committee urge the Government to 
strengthen collaborative efforts between IORA's functional bodies, Dialogue 
Partners, and other regional organizations. By fostering closer partnerships 
and aligning priorities with the evolving needs of the region, IORA can ensure 
that its actions remain relevant and effective in addressing contemporary and 
future challenges.” 
28. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
stated as under: 
“During India’s previous Chairship, a major re-vitalization of IORA was 
initiated with the identification of six priority areas: Maritime Safety and 
Security (MSS), Disaster Risk reduction, Science and Technology, Trade and 
Investment, Tourism and Fisheries Management.  These six priority sectors 

18 | P a g e 
 
along with other two cross-cutting areas – Blue Economy and Women’s 
Economic Empowerment paved the way for significant progress in IORA. 
During the upcoming Chairship of India for the period 2025-2027, while 
expanding the existing pillars, India will seek support of rest of the Member 
States to extend IORA’s scope to other functional domains and focus on 
emerging challenges such as climate change, artificial intelligence, marine 
pollution, cyber warfare etc.” 
29. Noting that the Organisation’s full potential remains untapped, the 
Committee had strongly recommended that during India’s tenure as Chair of 
Indian Ocean Rim Associations (IORA) from 2025-27, India should assume a 
leading role in revitalizing the organization, by streamlining the Secretariat’s 
operations, enhancing coordination among member states, and exploring 
innovative funding mechanisms.  The Committee, however, note from the 
Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry that further work is required to 
implement the above recommendation of this Committee.  The Committee note 
that following the meeting of the Ad-hoc Committee on the review of IORA 
Special Fund on 27 August 2025, IORA’s financial framework will be amended 
to ensure transparency and explore avenues for financial prudence.  This 
requires concurrences from other Member States.  India has also conveyed its 
interest in joining an Ad-hoc Committee on IORA reforms.  As part of 
strengthening the institutional framework, India currently has 2 Directors in 
IORA, in addition to IORA Secretary General.  The Committee note that IORA is 
the largest country grouping in the Indian Ocean Region, consisting of 23 
Member States and 12 Dialogue Partners. Cooperation activities are 
undertaken under the six Priority Areas, such as academic science and 
technology, disaster risk management, maritime safety and security, trade and 
investment facilitation, fisheries management, tourism and cultural exchange, 
and two core cutting issues, i.e. Blue economy and Women’s Economic 
Empowerment.  From the above, the Committee note that the organisation has 
wide range of activities and to meaningfully implement these activities, it 
requires strengthening the institutional, financial, and legal framework of the 
organisation. This will also help to realise its full potential and promote 
sustainable growth and balanced development of the region and the Member 
States.  As the highest contributor to the IORA Special Fund, the Committee 
are of the view that India occupies a prominent place in the organisation and, 

19 | P a g e 
 
therefore, should join the Ad-hoc Committee for IORA reforms.  The Committee 
hope that India would make a sincere effort to revitalize the organisation so as 
to unlock its true potential during its presidency from 2025 to 2027. 
 The Committee have also been informed by the Ministry of External 
Affairs that India will seek support of the rest of the Member States to extend 
IORA’s scope to other functional domains and focus on emerging challenges 
such as climate changes, artificial intelligence, marine pollution, cyber 
warfare, etc.  In this regard, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that effort should be made to include additional priority 
areas, such as cyber security, regional health cooperation, and disaster 
resilience.  The Committee are of the considered view that collaborative efforts 
among the IORA member states and Dialogue Partners are required to achieve 
various priorities so as to remain relevant and effective in addressing 
contemporary and future challenges. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

20 | P a g e 
 
Chapter-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Strengthening India's Role as a net security Provider in the Indian Ocean 
Region (IOR) 
 The Committee are cognizant of the significant geopolitical and security 
challenges faced by IOR that jeopardize its stability. The growing presence of 
extra-regional actors, particularly China, through strategic infrastructure 
investments and dual-use projects, poses a serious challenge to India's 
security interests. The increasing militarization of ports, alongside activities 
such as illegal fishing, piracy, and the rise of terrorism, further complicate the 
situation. Additionally, issues like climate change, marine pollution, and the 
destruction of marine biodiversity threaten the ecological balance of the 
region and, in turn, regional food security and disaster resilience. 
 
 In light of these challenges, the Committee recommend that India should 
adopt a multifaceted and comprehensive approach to securing and stabilizing 
the Indian Ocean. As the largest and most influential nation in the Indian 
Ocean Region, India is uniquely positioned to act as the net security provider. 
While underscoring the importance of India's proactive stance in promoting 
regional stability, ensuring maritime security, and safeguarding the interests 
of IOR nations, the Committee suggest that India must devote the necessary 
resources for a greater naval presence in the region and continue to work 
collaboratively with regional partners, extending capacity-building support, 
maritime domain awareness, and defense cooperation, particularly with 
countries that face infrastructural and financial constraints. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 India enjoys strong defence relationships with all countries of the region 
pillared on commonality of security concerns and the promotion of rule-based order 
in the region. Recent measures such as the setting up of the Maritime Rescue and 
Coordination Centre in Colombo, supply of BHISM (Bharat Health Initiative for 
Sahyog Hita & Maitri) Cubes to Maldives, undertaking of joint-hydrographic surveys 
with Maldives and Mauritius, extending unmatched assistance for calamities like 
cyclone Chido (December 2024) and Wakashio Oil Spill (2021), cement our status 
as the first responder in the region while also enhancing the capabilities of partner 
countries in the field of maritime security and maritime domain awareness. The 

21 | P a g e 
 
Colombo Security Conclave has emerged as a key platform in recent times to 
address such issues at the regional level.  
  In order to strengthen India’s role as a preferred security partner in the IOR, 
the Indian Navy re-oriented its deployment pattern and commenced Mission Based 
Deployments (MBD) in 2017. The MBDs have ensured enhanced naval presence, 
especially near key choke points and strategic locations, which have also enabled 
the Indian Navy to proactively respond to emerging situations and crises. Opportune 
collaborative engagements with like-minded navies are also undertaken by units 
deployed for MBDs. 
 
  In the wider IOR, the Indian Navy cooperates with friendly foreign countries 
(FFCs) to strengthen maritime security through capacity building, capability 
enhancement, information sharing, joint exclusive economic zone (EEZ) patrols and 
operational interaction, where required and possible. This endeavor has remained a 
key focus area and would be pursued to further strengthen our strategic narrative as 
the preferred security partner in the IOR. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Comprehensive Strategic Engagement Plan for Strengthening India's 
Partnerships with Littoral States of the Indian Ocean Region 
 Recognizing the geopolitical and strategic significance of the Indian 
Ocean Region, the Committee note that India has maintained diplomatic 
relationship with all the Indian Ocean littoral states except Comoros, Somalia 
and Yemen. India has also fostered strong bilateral partnerships with littoral 
states in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) to enhance regional security, 
economic cooperation, and strategic influence. India's relationship with 
countries in the IOR rests on the core pillars of developmental assistance, 
capacity building programmes, Humanitarian Assistance Disaster Relief 
(HADR) support and defence and maritime security cooperation. 
 
 The Committee recommend that India should frame a comprehensive 
and dynamic strategic engagement plan for all 35 littoral states of the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR), grounded in shared common interests. This strategy 
should be flexible and tailored to the specific needs, priorities, and challenges 
of each country or sub-region, recognizing the diverse geopolitical, economic, 
and cultural landscapes across the IOR. With island nations like the Maldives 
and Seychelles, India should focus on enhancing maritime security, capacity 
building, and climate resilience, while also offering infrastructure development 
assistance. For South Asian partners like Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, the 
emphasis should be on strengthening defence cooperation, countering 
extremism, and promoting trade and investment ties. In Eastern Africa, 

22 | P a g e 
 
especially in the Horn of Africa, India should prioritize anti-piracy measures, 
counter-terrorism initiatives, and maritime security cooperation. Furthermore, 
India's relationship with Australia should focus on deepening joint naval 
exercises, intelligence sharing, and addressing shared maritime challenges. 
By crafting this sub-region and country-specific approach, India should seek 
to enhance its strategic influence, foster trust, and contribute to a stable, 
secure, and prosperous Indian Ocean region, while securing its own national 
interests in the process. 
Reply of the Government 
 India’s engagement with littoral countries of the IOR is guided by its vision of 
the area as a zone of stability and shared prosperity while safeguarding its own 
national interests. This approach is continuously evolving and rests on a combination 
of developmental partnerships, capacity building, humanitarian assistance and 
maritime cooperation. India seeks to continue its  role of a net security provider and 
first responder in the region while promoting inclusive growth and countering external 
challenges. In this endeavor the MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement 
for Security and Growth Across Regions) policy will serve as the cornerstone of our 
engagement and form the foundation of our relationship with littoral countries in the 
region. 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Need for addressing the ambiguities in SAGAR and MAHASAGAR 
approaches in India's Indian Ocean Strategy 
 
 The Committee note that India's strategy for the Indian Ocean Region 
(IOR) is anchored in two complementary frameworks: SAGAR (Security and 
Growth for All) and MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement for 
Security and Growth Across Regions). Introduced in 2015, the SAGAR vision 
is primarily focused on safeguarding India's interests in the IOR, with an 
emphasis on combating terrorism, piracy, trafficking, and other illicit activities. 
In contrast, MAHASAGAR pursues a broader agenda encompassing mutual 
security, economic growth, and sustainable development, extending India's 
engagement beyond the IOR to the entire Global South, including Africa. At 
present, however, there appears to be considerable overlap between the 
objectives of SAGAR and MAHASAGAR, which could lead to confusion 
regarding their distinct and collective goals. In the Committee's view, a clear 
and unified vision will provide further strategic coherence and effectiveness to 
these initiatives. 
 Considering the region's vital role in securing trade routes, energy 
flows, and regional stability, the Committee are satisfied to see India's 
heightened focus on the IOR. Nevertheless, the Committee observe that India's 

23 | P a g e 
 
approach to the region currently seems fragmented, with various initiatives 
spread across different policy frameworks. To ensure greater alignment, 
precision of objectives, and a more coherent strategy, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should undertake a 
comprehensive review of both these frameworks and inform the Committee 
about the outcome of its assessment within three months. 
Reply of the Government 
 MAHASAGAR builds on the existing Vision of SAGAR and expands its scope 
from the Indian Ocean to the wider Global South. While SAGAR was primarily 
focused on the IOR, MAHASAGAR builds on it and extends India’s engagement to 
the entire Global South, including Africa, Indo-Pacific, Latin America, and Pacific 
Island nations. The vision emphasizes a larger agenda, including mutual security, 
economic growth, and sustainable development, aiming to foster deeper cooperation 
across trade, technology, maritime security, and capacity building. The initiative 
seeks to amplify the voice of developing nations in global governance and policy-
making forums such as the G20, BRICS, the UN etc. It also highlights India’s role as 
a trusted development partner committed to a shared and inclusive future for the 
Global South. 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Integrating India's Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific Strategies 
 
 The Committee observe that India's approach to the Indian Ocean 
Region (IOR) and the Indo-Pacific is intricately interconnected, as articulated 
in the Ministry's testimony. Both regions are confronted with shared 
challenges, particularly in maritime security, and necessitate cooperative 
responses to ensure peace, stability, and sustained growth. The Committee 
note India's recognition of the Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific as a contiguous 
strategic space, where security and prosperity in one region directly influence 
the other. 
 However, while India's Indo-Pacific Policy, as articulated in Prime 
Minister Modi's keynote address at the Shangri-La Dialogue in 2018, offers a 
broad framework for engagement, the Committee believe that there is a 
pressing need for a more integrated and coherent strategy that consolidates 
India's Indian Ocean Policy with its broader Indo-Pacific approach. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
develop a cohesive strategic framework that seamlessly aligns India's Indian 
Ocean and Indo-Pacific policies into a unified regional strategy. In the face of 
increasing Chinese influence and presence in both the Indian Ocean and the 
Indo-Pacific, the Committee also emphasize that India's strategy should not 
only focus on addressing shared threats but also act as a balancing force to 
counteract destabilizing actions. Multilateral platforms such as the Quad, 

24 | P a g e 
 
IORA, and ASEAN should also be leveraged for fostering collaborative security 
and development initiatives. 
Reply of the Government 
 India’s Indian Ocean Strategy and Indo-Pacific Strategy are aligned and 
complementary. While Indian Ocean Strategy serves our interests in India’s 
neighborhood and beyond, Indo-Pacific Strategy provides us a broader framework 
where we can influence, build coalitions and ensure stability in the region. India’s 
Indian Ocean Strategy focuses on ensuring maritime security, fostering regional 
stability and building strong partnerships with littoral states. Our engagements with 
like-minded countries in the IOR are driven by our policy of MAHASAGAR (Mutual 
and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions), which is 
complimented by Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI) and reflected in bilateral and 
multilateral platforms like Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), Indian Ocean 
Commission (IOC). India’s Indo-Pacific strategy expands this vision beyond Indian 
Ocean and emphasizes a free and open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) while balancing China’s 
growing influence where we work with like-minded countries through platforms like 
Quad, IPOI, ASEAN-India summit etc. 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Establishment of an Inter-Ministerial Task Force 
 
 
 The Committee has observed that, despite the strategic importance of 
the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) for India's national security, economic growth, 
and geopolitical interests, there remains an absence of a dedicated inter-
ministerial mechanism to effectively coordinate and streamline the various 
facets of India's Indian Ocean Strategy. Given the multifaceted nature of the 
strategy, which encompasses defence, trade, maritime security, diplomacy, 
environmental sustainability, and development assistance, the Committee 
strongly recommend the creation of a comprehensive Inter-Ministerial Task 
Force, involving key ministries, such as External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, 
Commerce, Environment, Shipping, Finance, Home Affairs, among others. The 
Committee believe that the establishment of such a task force is imperative for 
addressing the existing gaps in coordination between Ministries and agencies, 
ensuring the effective allocation and utilization of resources, and facilitating 
the rapid and efficient execution of India's strategic priorities in the Indian 
Ocean. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), with the overall mandate to represent 
India’s interests on the global stage, helps develop theoretical frameworks and 

25 | P a g e 
 
practical cooperation initiatives with various countries. Such frameworks for 
cooperation with other countries are prepared and proposed in consultation with the 
concerned line Ministries, taking into account our capabilities and our ability to 
contribute. Any Agreement signed with foreign partners is with  approval of the 
Cabinet of Ministers, and involves a process of inter-Ministerial consultation, where 
the comments of all concerned are suitably taken into account.   
 
 MEA works in close cooperation with Ministry of Defence (MOD) on policy 
formulation and implementation strategies in the area of defence and maritime 
cooperation. Both Ministeries also have a hybrid dialogue approach called ‘2 plus 2 
dialogue’ where the External Affairs Minister and Defence Minister’ (or in some cases 
the Defence Secretary and the Foreign Secretary) together engage with their 
counterparts in other countries. Preparations for such meetings are coordinated 
closely with all concerned stakeholders in various Ministries and Departments to 
advance our interests in a holistic manner. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Tackling Environmental and Economic Challenges through Regional 
Cooperation 
 
 The Indian Ocean is not just a vital geopolitical space but also an 
ecologically significant and economically prosperous region. The region's 
abundant marine resources, including its extensive Exclusive Economic Zones 
(EEZs), present tremendous opportunities for collaboration on the Blue 
Economy, which encompasses sustainable fisheries, marine biodiversity 
conservation, renewable ocean energy, and eco-tourism. India's leadership in 
promoting these areas can contribute to the sustainable development of the 
region while addressing pressing environmental concerns such as climate 
change, marine pollution, and the degradation of marine ecosystems. 
 In view of the ecological richness and fragility of the Indian Ocean, the 
Committee underscore the importance of integrating environmental 
sustainability into India's regional strategy. India's large coastline and 
maritime population make this imperative even more urgent. To effectively 
address these environmental and economic challenges, the Committee 
recommend that MEA should align India's Indian Ocean policy with global and 
regional environmental priorities and deepen its efforts to promote regional 
cooperation on marine conservation, renewable energy, and sustainable 
fisheries. Moreover, the Committee stress that it is now time for India to 
champion the concept of a Green MAHASAGAR, which would focus on 
collaborative initiatives with littoral states for marine protection, disaster 
response, and climate adaptation. As part of the Green MAHASAGAR 
framework, India should promote and coordinate efforts for the protection of 

26 | P a g e 
 
marine ecosystems, the reduction of marine pollution, and the adoption of 
climate-resilient practices across the Indian Ocean Region. 
Reply of the Government 
 India has been actively working to protect the environment and promote 
sustainable development in the Indian Ocean Region through bilateral cooperation 
and multilateral platforms. Under the MAHASAGAR vision, India emphasizes 
sustainable use of ocean resources while ensuring ecological balance. Some of the 
key initiatives in this regard are International Solar Alliance (ISA), Coalition for 
Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI), bilateral engagements in climate resilience 
and fisheries management, Coordinating country for the Blue Economy pillar under 
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) mechanism etc. Recently, a capacity building 
training programme on “Spilled/ leaked oil at the sea investigation and emergency 
response management” under Indonesia–Malaysia–Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-
GT) India Development Partnership was also organised in Chennai from 18 to 29 
August 2025.  
Thus, India ensures sustainable economic growth and resilience against climate 
change by acting as a responsible stakeholder in the region’s ecological security. 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
India's Maritime Security Architecture in IOR 
 
 The Indian Ocean is a critical component of India's maritime security, 
strategically connecting South Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. With a 
coastline extending over 11,098 km and an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) 
spanning approximately 2.3-2.4 million square kilometers, India exercises 
considerable influence over regional maritime dynamics. Its maritime domain, 
encompassing nine coastal states and four island territories, is a vast and 
resource-rich area that supports critical economic activities such as fishing, 
ocean mining, and offshore drilling for oil and gas. This geographic advantage, 
coupled with deep civilizational and cultural ties with neighboring countries, 
places India in a central role in shaping regional maritime stability. As India's 
strategic, economic, and security interests in the IOR grow, its maritime 
security is increasingly intertwined with the broader stability of the region. 
While noting that the IOR will remain a vital conduit for security, energy and 
connectivity, it will be also a space for intense geo-political contestations and 
competitions. 
 In view of the traditional non-traditional threats in IOR, the Committee 
desire that India should keep a close watch and coordinate with our friendly 
foreign countries to ensure that our interests are fully protected. The 
Committee further recommend that India should adopt a comprehensive 
approach and framework that combines technological innovation, 

27 | P a g e 
 
strengthened regional cooperation, military readiness, and robust diplomatic 
engagement. By enhancing its maritime operational capabilities and 
deepening strategic relationships with regional partners, India should 
safeguard its national interests while contributing to the long-term security 
and stability of the Indian Ocean Region. The Committee further suggest that 
the Government should give careful consideration to the establishment of 
adequate ship repair and maintenance facilities in the island countries. 
Reply of the Government 
 Indian Navy maintains a proactive engagement with like-minded navies and 
maritime neighbours to augment maritime domain awareness (MDA) and monitoring 
activities of potential adversaries. Most importantly, engagement with friendly foreign 
countries (FFCs) has also promoted regional and global stability, and has enhanced 
maritime security in the region. These are pursued to ensure that India’s national 
interests are fully safeguarded.  
 Indian Navy has already put in a place a holistic approach towards 
engagement with FFCs and like-minded navies through regular exchanges. During 
the last one year, Indian Navy has undertaken operations and exercised with nearly 
30 nations, wherein, 23 bilateral, 08 multilateral, 31 maritime partnership exercise, 
04 coordinated patrols and 14 joint EEZ surveillance operations have been 
undertaken. Indian Navy has extended technical assistance to FFCs and has been 
undertaking refits in Indian Naval Dockyards. In the recent past, Indian Navy 
undertook refits of Maldivian National Defence Force Ship Huravee and Mauritian 
Coast Guard Ship Valiant, at Mumbai and Visakhapatnam, respectively.  
 Indian Navy has also enhanced and would continue to pursue technical 
capacity building of FFCs through comprehensive training exercises. Engagements, 
such as the Africa India Key Maritime Engagement (AIKEYME) and Indian Ocean 
Ship (IOS) Sagar, which have adequately reinforced Indian Navy’s role as the 
‘preferred security partner’ in the Region. 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Combating Piracy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 The Committee acknowledge the persistent and evolving challenge of 
piracy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), particularly in areas like the Red Sea 
and the Gulf of Aden, where the resurgence of piracy, exacerbated by regional 
instability and conflicts such as the Houthi attacks, has led to significant 
disruptions in global shipping routes. The Committee stress the critical need 
for sustained bilateral and multilateral cooperation to effectively combat piracy 
and secure maritime trade routes. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that India should continue to play a proactive role in regional 
frameworks such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) and the Indian 

28 | P a g e 
 
Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS), fostering collaborative efforts to enhance 
joint patrolling, intelligence-sharing, and conducting regular maritime security 
exercises with regional and international partners. 
India should also leverage cutting-edge technologies, including Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), machine learning, and big data analytics to enhance real-time 
surveillance and threat detection. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Indian Navy is committed to maintaining peace, stability, and a rule based 
order in the region, which is vital for global trade and regional security. To combat 
piracy in the region, Indian Navy has been at the forefront and has been 
continuously deploying ships for anti-piracy patrols in the Arabian Sea, since 2008. 
Further, the Indian Navy has increased collaboration with regional frameworks such 
as Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS), Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), 
Combined Maritime Forces (CMF), Regional Narcotics Interagency Fusion Cell 
(RNIFC), European Union Naval Force (EU NAVFOR), etc. to combat piracy and 
other non-traditional threats. The Indian Navy would continue to proactively engage 
with like-minded partners to help strengthen the collective maritime security. 
 As brought out earlier, the Indian Navy has already put in a place a holistic 
approach towards engagement with friendly foreign countries (FFCs) and like-
minded navies through regular exercise/ joint patrolling, to foster collaborative efforts 
towards effectively countering the non-traditional threats in the region.  
 The ongoing development of the baseline tool of the National Command, 
Control, Communication and Intelligence Centre (NC3I) network is envisaged to 
incorporate machine learning capabilities. Further, a number of other projects are 
also under various stages of development/conception, which would help Indian Navy 
to leverage cutting edge-technology to enhance real-time surveillance and threat 
detection.  
 Director General, Indian Coast Guard (ICG) serves as Indian Governor to 
Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against 
Ships in Asia (ReCAAP), Information Sharing Centre, Singapore with Maritime 
Rescue Co-ordination Centre (MRCC),  Mumbai as the focal point for sharing piracy 
information. To strengthenregional and bilateral cooperation, the ICG has concluded 
10 Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with FFCs to ensure swift responses to 
transnational maritime crimes. 
 With effective, electronic surveillance through the Coastal Security Network 
(CSN), along with regular patrolling by ships and aircraft, the ICG has significantly 
reduced incidents of petty theft and armed robbers at sea. Further ICG has launched 
‘Operation NISCHAY’ to counter incidents of petty theft within Indian Port limits, 
particularly at Kandla, Alang, Kakinada, Visakhapatnam and Haldia. 

29 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
Maritime Infrastructure and Enhancing Connectivity through Sagarmala 2.0 
 The Committee note that Sagarmala is the flagship initiative of the 
Government of India that aims to boost India's maritime sector by enhancing 
port connectivity, developing inland waterways, and promoting industrial 
growth. While significant progress has been made under Sagarmala, the 
Government has launched Sagarmala 2.0 to further enhance India's maritime 
competitiveness. However, the Committee note that the Ministry of External 
Affairs has not sufficiently articulated the specific objectives and 
distinguishing features of Sagarmala 2.0 in both oral and written submissions. 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should explicitly outline 
Sagarmala 2.0's objectives, placing greater emphasis on advancing smart port 
infrastructure, integrating digital technologies, and building multimodal 
transport networks that go beyond traditional port development. It is crucial to 
define specific metrics and performance indicators that distinguish Sagarmala 
2.0 from its predecessor, enabling more accurate and effective assessment of 
its impact. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Sagarmala Scheme, an initiative under the Ministry of Ports, Shipping, 
and Waterways (MoPSW), is structured to finance projects that align with the goals 
of the SagarmalaProgramme. Additionally, the scheme provides funding for projects 
that have significant social impact but yield a low or no Internal Rate of Return (IRR). 
This includes initiatives such as last mile port connectivity, Ro-Ro jetties to facilitate 
passenger movement, coastal berths to improve multimodality, fishing harbour, skill 
development for coastal communities, and infrastructure for coastal & river tourism 
etc. Significant progress have been made under Sagarmala Scheme. 
  Going forward, MoPSW is proposing Sagarmala 2.0 Scheme to build on the 
successes of its first phase by addressing new challenges and seizing opportunities 
in the maritime sector. Aligned with Maritime India Vision 2030 and Maritime Amrit 
Kaal Vision 2047, it focuses on advancing India towards Viksit Bharat. The primary 
developmental themes of Sagarmala 2.0 include facilitating a green transition in the 
maritime sector, reducing logistics cost for EXIM trade and promoting modal shift in 
freight movement. Key priorities include continuous focus on development of world 
class smart ports and it’s a robust connectivity infrastructure with a special emphasis 
on green initiatives such as LNG bunkering, shore to ship power supply, transition to 
electric port equipment and vehicles and sustainable dredging etc. Other focus areas 
would be developing maritime clusters with an emphasis on shipbuilding, repair & 
recycling infrastructure development, islands development, promoting port-led 
industries in line with global trends such as development of hydrogen hubs, industrial 
parks, SEZ’s, vessels procurement etc. 

30 | P a g e 
 
 The observations of the Committee have been duly noted and shall be 
appropriately incorporated into the proposed Sagarmala 2.0. 
Recommendation No. 17 
Enhancing Maritime Domain Awareness and Regional Cooperation 
 The Committee note that India has made significant strides in improving 
Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) through 
initiatives such as the Information Fusion Centre- Indian Ocean Region (IFC-
IOR), as well as bilateral cooperation with neighbouring countries like 
Mauritius, Seychelles, and Sri Lanka. Additionally, the Indo-Pacific Maritime 
Domain Awareness (IPMDA) initiative, launched in 2022, has provided a crucial 
technological framework to address emerging maritime security challenges. 
Despite these positive developments, the Committee believe that there could 
be greater collaboration of maritime surveillance systems and broader 
collaboration among regional states and international partners. 
 
 The Committee recommend that India should further enhance its 
leadership role in maritime security cooperation by formalizing data-sharing 
agreements and promoting joint surveillance initiatives with regional partners. 
India should also consider expanding its role in regional maritime security 
dialogues, such as the Quad Maritime Security Working Group (QMSWG) and 
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), to facilitate multilateral responses to 
maritime challenges. 
Reply of the Government 
 India has numerous data sharing agreements both on bilateral as well as 
multilateral fronts. This is in the form of white shipping information exchanges 
(WSIEs) as well as more detailed sensitive information exchange mechanisms. India 
is also a very active contributor to numerous regional maritime security constructs 
such as Contact Group on Illicit Maritime Activities (CGIMA), Quad Maritime Security 
Working Group (QMSWG), Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS), Djibouti Code of 
Conduct-Jeddah Amendment (DCoC-JA), Combined Maritime Force (CMF) etc. 
India will soon command the CTF (Coalition Task Force) 154 of the CMF and has bid 
for the Command of CTF 150 as well. India chairs the Expert working Group (EWG) 
on Maritime Security in the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC). India also conducts CORPATs (coordinated 
patrols) and joint exclusive economic zone (EEZ) surveillance with selected partners 
to enhance regional security.  
 In QMSWG, India leads in the IOR programme of the Indo-Pacific Partnership 
for Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA). In the Quad, India has also proposed 
several initiatives to enhance maritime security in the region and all these are under 

31 | P a g e 
 
active deliberations in the QMSWG. In the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), 
India is the coordinating country for Working Group on Maritime Safety and Security 
(WGMSS). 
 
 In addition to the above mentioned initiatives, India also promotes joint 
surveillance initiatives with selected partners in the IOR including by assisting them 
in setting up National Maritime Information Sharing Centres (NMISCs). The decision 
of 21 Member States of DCoC-JA to appoint the first ever rotational DCoC-JA ILO 
(International Liaison Officer) to the Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean 
Region (IFC-IOR) and addition of IFC-IOR as a reporting Centre in the BMPs (Best 
management Practices) of IMO (International Maritime Organization) are examples 
of India’s growing credibility in MDA in IOR. Efforts are also in progress to include 
IFC-IOR in the IMO/MSC (Maritime Safety Committee) resolution. 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
Strengthening collaborative efforts under the Indo-Pacific Oceans' Initiative 
(IPOI) 
 The Committee note that the Indo-Pacific Oceans' Initiative (IPOI), 
launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2019, is a critical platform aimed 
at managing, conserving, and securing the maritime domain in the Indo-Pacific 
region. The initiative spans seven pillars: Maritime Security, Maritime Ecology, 
Maritime Resources, Capacity Building and Resource Sharing, Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Management (DRRM), Science, Technology and Academic 
Cooperation, and Trade Connectivity and Maritime Transport. India has taken 
the lead on key pillars, including Maritime Security and DRRM, while 
collaborating with likeminded nations such as the United Kingdom, Australia, 
France, Indonesia and Japan to co-lead other pillars. This growing network of 
cooperation is reflective of a shared commitment among countries to address 
pressing maritime challenges through practical, project-based collaboration. 
 
 While noticing significant progress made under the Indo-Pacific Oceans' 
Initiative (IPOI), the Committee consider the current membership of just 15 
countries as limiting its potential impact. The Committee believe that 
expanding membership to include more countries, especially those with 
significant maritime stakes, would be useful for enhancing the effectiveness 
and inclusivity of IPOI. The Committee also recommend that India should play 
a more active role in strengthening and expanding collaboration within each of 
the seven pillars. In particular, the Committee highlight the need for greater 
focus on emerging challenges such as cybersecurity in the maritime domain, 

32 | P a g e 
 
regional health cooperation, and disaster resilience, which should be 
integrated into IPOI's framework. 
Reply of the Government 
 IPOI currently has 16 countries and EU as members. A number of countries 
with significant maritime stakes are already part of the IPOI, such as the USA, 
Japan, France, Australia etc and discussions are underway with like-minded 
countries to further expand membership, and take lead on IPOI’s pillars. Currently, 
India and the UK lead on Maritime Security pillar; with Australia and Thailand leading 
Maritime Ecology pillar. France and Indonesia are taking lead on Marine Resource 
pillar; Singapore & Italy on Science, Technology and Academic Cooperation pillar; 
Germany, Netherlands and the EU on the Capacity Building & Resources Sharing 
pillar; India and Bangladesh on Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) 
pillar; and the USA and Japan on Trade, Connectivity and Maritime Transport pillar.  
 
 Furthermore, many emerging challenges are already being addressed under 
the seven IPOI pillars, such as, disaster resilience, maritime security,  maritime 
ecology etc. India is raising awareness through diplomatic channels and regional 
platforms like Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) to expand membership and 
collaborate on these emerging challenges, and will continue to work towards 
strengthening and expanding the IPOI.  
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
Enhancing resource mobilization and capacity building under the Indo-Pacific 
Oceans' Initiative (IPOI) 
 
 The Committee recognize the growing importance of resource 
mobilization for the long-term success of the Indo-Pacific Oceans' Initiative 
(IPOI). In this regard, the Committee recommend that India should explore 
innovative funding mechanisms, including the establishment of a dedicated 
IPOI Trust Fund, to support sustainable projects and enhance resource 
mobilization. In the considered view of the Committee, capacity building is a 
key area where India's Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) 
Programme can be further leveraged to provide specialized training, 
particularly in sectors such as maritime security, disaster management, and 
blue economy. The Committee also urge the Government to continue its 
diplomatic efforts to raise awareness about IPOI and its goals, using existing 
regional frameworks such as Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN), Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), and the East Asia Summit. 

33 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 India attaches high priority to resource mobilization for the IPOI. As of now, 
funding is mobilized thorough existing mechanisms and the idea of a dedicated IPOI 
Trust fund may be explored in future with consultation with stakeholders. In the past 
three years, India has provided 11500+ ITEC slots for civil and defence training, a 
significant number of which have been dedicated to Indo-Pacific partner countries. 
The ITEC program is being leveraged to offer targeted training programs to partner 
countries in areas like marine ecology, maritime transport and disaster resilience.  
 
 India actively engages with platforms like ASEAN and IORA to highlight the 
IPOI’s objectives and bring together like-minded countries, which can be seen in 
several ASEAN and IORA member countries joining IPOI (Thailand, Indonesia, 
Australia, France etc) and taking lead on its pillars, and will continue to make these 
efforts for raising awareness and strengthening the IPOI.  
Recommendation No. 23 
 
Fostering Regional Cooperation through BIMSTEC 
 
 The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) is a grouping of seven Member States lying in the 
littoral and adjacent areas of the Bay of Bengal: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, 
Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand. BIMSTEC represents a cornerstone 
of India's engagement with its neighbors in the Indian Ocean region as a 
convergence of its 'Neighbourhood First' outlook, the 'Act East Policy' and the 
'SAGAR' vision. The Committee note that BIMSTEC has been playing a crucial 
role in improving our cooperation with the other six member states on a large 
spectrum of issues including security, trade facilitation, people-to-people 
contact, connectivity, institutional building, and collaboration in health, space, 
and digital infrastructure. India's leadership in key areas such as maritime 
security, disaster management, and energy cooperation, as well as its 
initiatives like the BIMSTEC Ports Conclave, the BIMSTEC Centre for Weather 
and Climate, and disaster management exercises, positions the country at the 
forefront of regional integration. 
 
 The Committee recommend that India should continue to leverage 
BIMSTEC as a strategic tool in its Indian Ocean policy. Given the evolving 
geopolitical dynamics of the Indian Ocean Region, BIMSTEC must continue to 
be a critical platform for India's regional security, economic growth, and 
sustainable development. India, as the lead country in BIMSTEC's Security 
Pillar, should focus on strengthening maritime cooperation by implementing 
Multi-Lateral Engagement at Sea (MLEAs) guidelines and enhancing maritime 

34 | P a g e 
 
domain awareness. India's successful initiatives, such as hosting the 
BIMSTEC Ports Conclave and supporting the BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and 
Climate (BCWC), should be further expanded to strengthen regional 
connectivity and address emerging climate challenges. 
Reply of the Government 
 Engagements under the BIMSTEC framework include promotion of 
connectivity (physical, digital, trade etc.) and P2P interactions. BIMSTEC represents 
the intersection of our ‘Neighborhood First’ outlook, the ‘Act East Policy’ and the 
‘MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across 
Regions)’ vision with a specific focus on the Bay of Bengal region. 
 India has been taking significant initiatives, particularly towards capacity 
building and institution building, in the BIMSTEC. During the recently concluded 6th 
BIMSTEC Summit, in April 2025, Hon’ble PM announced a number of initiatives 
focused on trade facilitation, digital connectivity, disaster management, cultural 
cooperation, youth exchanges etc. 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
Flexible Security Framework in the Quad to enhance regional stability 
 
 The Committee note that Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad), 
comprising India, the United States, Japan, and Australia, has evolved from its 
initial focus on disaster response into a vital strategic partnership aimed at 
promoting a free, open, and inclusive Indo-Pacific, grounded in principles of 
international law and respect for sovereignty. India's vision for the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR), articulated through the principles of SAGAR (Security 
and Growth for All in the Region) and the Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI), 
aligns with the Quad's growing emphasis on enhancing maritime security. The 
Committee note that Quad's naval cooperation is designed to enhance 
interoperability and interchangeability, share intelligence, and conduct joint 
patrols to ensure the safety of sea lanes and deter potential traditional and 
non-traditional threats. As a net security provider in the region, India's role is 
critical in addressing transnational threats such as illegal, unreported, and 
unregulated (IUU) fishing, piracy, and other maritime crimes. In this context, 
the Committee feel that Quad presents a valuable opportunity for India to 
bolster its maritime strategy and strengthen its strategic footprint in the IOR. 
 The Committee understand India's cautious approach towards a 
security-centric Quad due to its policy of multi-alignment. However, given the 
complex geopolitical dynamics in the Indo-Pacific, the Committee recommend 
that a more flexible security dimension within the Quad framework may be 
explored by including initiatives such as conducting joint maritime exercises 

35 | P a g e 
 
in the Indian Ocean, aimed at improving coordination, enhancing maritime 
domain awareness (MDA), and better preparedness for emerging security 
challenges. Proactive steps taken to deepen the Quad's security cooperation, 
without compromising its multi-alignment approach, focused on non-
confrontational exercises and capacity-building initiatives, could significantly 
enhance regional stability and strengthen India's role as a responsible 
maritime power in the IOR. 
Reply of the Government 
 In line with the Committee’s recommendations, India is actively engaged in a 
range of security-focused activities under the Quad framework to strengthen 
maritime security and promote the prosperity of Indo-Pacific countries. These efforts 
encompass information sharing, capability development, capacity building, 
operational coordination, and public messaging. Within the Quad Maritime Security 
Working Group, India leads the Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain 
Awareness (IPMDA) for the IOR, as well as key capability development initiatives. In 
doing so, India carefully balances its bilateral relationships in the IOR while engaging 
Quad partners diplomatically to avoid overlap and ensure complementarity in 
capacity-building efforts. Operational coordination among Quad partners has 
advanced through the recently concluded Quad-at-Sea Ship Observer initiative. 
Additionally, the Quad’s Indo-Pacific Logistics Network (IPLN) pilot project, 
announced in 2024, is pursuing shared airlift capacity for civilian disaster response. 
A Tabletop Exercise (TTX) hosted by U.S. INDOPACOM in Hawaii marked the first 
step, with a Field Training Exercise scheduled for December 2025 to enhance 
preparedness and interoperability. Although not formally a Quad initiative, the 
Malabar Exercise remains a cornerstone of naval cooperation among Quad 
countries. Originating in 1992 as a bilateral India–U.S. exercise, it expanded to 
include Japan in 2015 and Australia in 2020. Today, it is one of the most significant 
multilateral exercises in the Indo-Pacific, encompassing advanced surface, anti-
submarine, and air warfare operations. Malabar not only deepens interoperability but 
also underlines the shared commitment of Quad partners to a free, open, and rules-
based maritime order. 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
Aligning Quad Cooperation with India's Vision for Sustainable Infrastructure 
and Connectivity in the Indian Ocean Region 
 
 India's approach to the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) is firmly rooted in the 
principles of sustainable and transparent development. In this context, the 
Committee are of the considered view that Quad's cooperation with India's 
Indian Ocean vision, particularly through the Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative 
(IPOI), holds significant potential for advancing regional infrastructure and 

36 | P a g e 
 
connectivity while ensuring long-term sustainability. The Committee strongly 
recommend that India should work closely with its Quad partners to ensure 
that infrastructure projects in the region align with sustainable development 
goals and fosters economic growth without compromising the region's 
financial stability or sovereignty. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Quad’s Economic Prosperity and Security Working Group seeks to foster 
sustainable and resilient infrastructure development across the Indo-Pacific, 
including the IOR. Its efforts are directed at safeguarding critical infrastructure—such 
as strategic ports and undersea cables—and at strengthening regional supply 
chains. India has consistently promoted transparent, demand-driven, quality, and 
sustainable infrastructure as the guiding principles for these efforts. Quad partners 
have held extensive consultations under the Quad Infrastructure Coordination Group 
and the Quad Partnership for Cable Connectivity and Resilience, as well as among 
the Quad Development Finance Institutions, with the objective of aligning 
approaches and harnessing collective strengths to support resilient infrastructure in 
the region. Quad members have also jointly released the Principles for Development 
and Deployment of Digital Public Infrastructure, while supporting the Pacific Quality 
Infrastructure Principles. The Quad Infrastructure Fellowship, launched in 2023, has 
played an important role in building capacities and professional networks across the 
Indo-Pacific to design, manage, and attract investment in high-quality infrastructure 
projects. Similarly, the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) 
organized a workshop in India to help partners strengthen resilience in the power 
sector, further underlining India’s contributions to regional capacity building. Looking 
ahead, India will host the inaugural Ports of the Future Partnership Conference in 
Mumbai in October 2025, as part of India Maritime Week. This conference will bring 
together governments and the private sector to mobilize investment in quality port 
infrastructure across the Indo-Pacific, thereby advancing both India’s national 
priorities and our shared vision of sustainable growth and connectivity in the region. 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
 
IFC-IOR and Quad's Maritime Technologies 
 
 For strengthening regional security, the Committee suggest that the 
Government may consider bolstering information sharing between the 
Information Fusion Center-Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR) and Quad's 
advanced maritime technologies to significantly enhance the region's ability to 
respond to emerging security threats, such as illegal, unreported, and 
unregulated (IUU) fishing, piracy, and other transnational maritime crimes. 
 

37 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 India leads the Quad’s Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain 
Awareness (IPMDA) initiative in the Indian Ocean Region. The initiative already 
leverages the Quad’s advanced maritime technologies to strengthen collective 
capability. In parallel, Quad partners are working towards integration of regional 
MDA efforts through a Common Operational Picture (COP) of the Indo-Pacific. 
Looking ahead, India together with its Quad partners intends to incorporate new 
technology layers and data streams into IPMDA, thereby ensuring the delivery of 
cutting-edge capability and actionable information to regional partners. This will 
significantly enhance their capacity to monitor and secure their waters. Undertaken 
in close cooperation with regional partners, these efforts will not only strengthen the 
collective ability to respond to emerging maritime threats but also reinforce India’s 
standing as a preferred security partner in the Indo-Pacific. 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
Advancing the Quad Ports of the Future Partnership and Infrastructure 
Development in the Indo-Pacific 
 
 The Committee note that the Quad Ports of the Future Partnership was 
announced in 2024 to coordinate, exchange information & best practices, and 
mobilize government & private sector investments in quality port 
infrastructure across the Indo-Pacific region. Further, India will host a Quad 
Regional Ports and Transportation Conference, in Mumbai this year with a 
view to increasing knowledge, facilitating dialogue, and exchanging 
experiences on advanced ports and logistics practices. This will complement 
the work Quad partners have done to boost infrastructure expertise across the 
Indo-Pacific region through the Quad Infrastructure Fellowships. Keeping this 
in view, the Committee recommend that India should take a proactive 
leadership role in advancing the Ports of the Future Partnership initiated by 
the Quad for modernizing ports, improving trade infrastructure, and 
promoting. environmentally responsible practices across the Indo-Pacific 
region. 
Reply of the Government 
 In the run-up to the Quad Leaders’ Summit to be hosted by India in 2025, the 
Quad partners will formally launch the Quad Ports of the Future Partnership with the 
inaugural conference scheduled in Mumbai in October 2025, as part of India 
Maritime Week. The event is expected to draw participation from several Indo-Pacific 
partner countries. The partnership seeks to facilitate knowledge exchange, mobilize 
both private and public investment, promote the sharing of best practices, and 
enhance port capabilities with the aim of strengthening regional maritime connectivity 
and fostering economic resilience across the Indo-Pacific. Ministry of External Affairs 

38 | P a g e 
 
is working in close coordination with the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
to ensure that India’s national priorities in the ports and logistics sector are advanced 
even as we leverage this platform to realize our broader foreign policy and strategic 
objectives in the Indo-Pacific and beyond. 
Recommendation No. 28 
 
Scaling up MAITRI Initiative for enhanced maritime cooperation in Maritime 
Domain Awareness 
 
 The Committee understand that the Indo-Pacific Partnership for 
Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) initiative announced in 2022 aims to 
provide near-real-time, integrated, and cost-effective maritime domain data to 
maritime agencies in the region; support regional capacity in combating a 
wide range of illicit maritime activities, including illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing, and respond to climate-related and humanitarian events, 
covering three major subregions in the Indo-Pacific maritime space- the 
Pacific Islands, Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean Region. The Committee 
are happy to note further that the India-led initiative MAITRI (Maritime Training 
Institute- containerized and mobile training infrastructure for easy deployment 
to multiple locations of interest) enables partner countries in the Indo Pacific 
region to maximize tools provided through IPMDA and other Quad partner 
initiatives, to monitor and secure their waters, enforce their laws, and deter 
unlawful behavior. It is learned that India will host the inaugural MAITRI 
workshop in 2025 which aims to assess the capability gaps in the region and 
enhance the maritime capabilities in consultation with regional partners. Given 
Quad's commitment to regional security and capacity building, particularly in 
the maritime domain, the Committee recommend that initiatives like the 
Maritime Training Institute (MAITRI) should be expanded to ensure that 
regional partners are equipped with the necessary tools, knowledge, and 
technologies to effectively monitor and secure their maritime domains. 
Reply of the Government 
 Currently, both the United States and Australia, owing to recent administrative 
changes and revised financial priorities, are reassessing their support for the MAITRI 
initiative. They have conveyed their inability to fund certain core elements of the 
concept—such as simulator-based training and containerized solutions—citing 
budgetary constraints. These limitations risk undermining the very effectiveness and 
purpose of MAITRI, prompting the Quad to place the initiative under review. 
Deliberations on the most effective modalities for implementing MAITRI are ongoing 
within the Quad Maritime Security Working Group. In parallel, India is weighing the 
option of advancing the initiative independently. Pursuing MAITRI on a national basis 
would provide greater flexibility in selecting regional partners, allow us to maximize 
strategic leverage, and further reinforce India’s role as a preferred security partner. 

39 | P a g e 
 
Such a step would also be in harmony with our broader vision of MAHASAGAR 
(Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions). 
Recommendation No. 31 
Strengthening cultural diplomacy in the Indian Ocean Region 
 Recognizing the profound historical, religious, trade, and cultural ties 
between India and the countries of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), the 
Committee acknowledge the significant progress made in strengthening these 
relations through various initiatives, including the establishment of Cultural 
Centers, sponsoring visits of performing art groups, organizing conferences, 
and promoting Indian languages and heritage. Given the strategic importance 
of cultural diplomacy in furthering India's ties with IOR countries, the 
Committee strongly urge that the Indian Missions and Cultural Centers be 
further reinforced and adequately resourced. These institutions serve not only 
as platforms for showcasing India's diverse cultural heritage but also as vital 
spaces where the diaspora communities can reconnect with their roots and 
identity. To this end, the Committee urge increased allocation of funds to 
support a broad spectrum of cultural activities such as events, art exhibitions, 
and festivals that showcase India's rich cultural diversity. Such initiatives will 
further elevate India's cultural profile, stimulate greater Diaspora engagement 
and foster a deeper cultural bond between India and the region. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under the guidance of Ministry of External Affairs, ICCR has taken various 
new initiatives to develop cultural relations and create mutual understanding with 
other nations; including by leveraging the Indian diaspora abroad; and thus to 
enhance the soft power with its Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad. Its activities 
include teaching of Yoga; Indian classical dance; vocal and instrumental music; 
Sanskrit and Hindi; supporting Chairs of Indian Studies in foreign universities; gifting 
busts and statues of Mahatma Gandhi and other national icons; hosting visitors 
under various programmers such as the Academic Visitors Programme, 
Distinguished Visitors Programme, Important Visitors Programme, and the Gen-Next 
Democracy Network; and sponsoring scholarships to foreign students under different 
schemes. ICCR is operating 14 Cultural Centres and 25 Chairs on Indian Studies in 
the IOR Countries. The ICCs engage with the local diaspora in many ways including 
organizing events in collaboration with the diaspora associations, regularly inviting 
them for ICCs’ activities, recognizing their contribution on various platforms, chalking 
out future plans for adding new activities and conducting them in a participatory 
manner. In addition, ICCR facilitates cultural exchange by hosting foreign cultural 
troupes in India, enabling Indians to experience diverse world cultures, and by 
sending Indian cultural troupes, exhibitions, and conferences abroad to showcase 
rich Indian cultural heritage and knowledge. 

40 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
Proactive Engagement with the Indian Diaspora to support India's IOR Strategy 
 The Committee acknowledge the significant presence of the Indian 
diaspora in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), which constitutes 53% of the total 
Indian overseas population, and acknowledge their potential to serve as a 
meaningful voice in fostering stronger bilateral ties. The Committee note that 
the Ministry has formulated a multifaceted Diaspora engagement policy 
framework characterized under the rubric of 4Cs - Care, Connect, Celebrate, 
and Contribute. It is also observed that initiatives such as PravasiBharatiya 
Divas (PBD) and its regional editions (RPBD), Know India Programme (KIP), 
the Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD), Scholarship Programme 
for Diaspora Children (SPDC), etc. play a vital role in strengthening cultural 
identity, educational ties, and India's soft power globally. The Committee are of 
the opinion that current Diaspora engagement efforts, though commendable, 
can be further imbued with an appreciation of the needs of the Diaspora and 
the importance of their voices in strengthening bilateral relations between 
their countries and India. By adopting a sharper strategic focus and nurturing 
sustained two-way communication, the Diaspora can play a significant role as 
a positive contributor to India's regional and global efforts and thereby 
strengthen India's soft power and fostering greater goodwill in the Indian 
Ocean Region. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of External Affairs accepts the recommendation of the Committee and 
has, in fact, been tirelessly working towards promoting two-way engagement and 
communication between the Government of India and its influential and diverse 
diaspora spread across the globe. The diaspora engagement schemes presently 
being run seek to not only connect India with its diaspora, but also provide invaluable 
and positive recommendations for projecting India's soft power including its 
developmental efforts abroad. The Ministry also collaborates with the Indian diaspora 
abroad to contribute to the India's developmental journey and to realize vision of 
"Viksit Bharat by 2047". During PravasiBharatiya Divas, several panel discussions 
are organised on different themes wherein the Indian diaspora not only recount their 
experiences and contributions in diverse fields, but also proposes mechanisms for 
fostering collaboration between India and their respective countries of residence. 
During such PravasiBharatiya Divas celebrations, distinguished members of the 
Indian Diaspora community are honored with the PravasiBharatiya Samman Awards 
(PBSAs) to recognise their outstanding contributions in multidimensional sectors 
either in their respective countries or India. The Indian diaspora overseas is 
encouraged to contribute towards accelerating India's growth trajectory as well as to 
join the nation's collective efforts to promote the welfare of its nationals. The 
participants of Know India Programme (KIP) also extend valuable recommendations 

41 | P a g e 
 
and propose several measures for further bolstering India's bilateral economic, 
educational and cultural partnerships with their respective countries of residence. 
Such two-way communications and proactive engagements between the 
Government of India and the Indian diaspora have proved to be effective and this 
Ministry wishes to further actively pursue such strategies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

43 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
India's Strategic Responsibility in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the paramount strategic, economic, and 
environmental significance of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) for India. With a 
coastline of over 7,500 kilometres, coupled with its vast Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) of 2.4 million square kilometres, India is uniquely positioned at the 
heart of one of the most vital regions in the world. Nearly 90% of India's trade 
by volume, including oil imports, transits through the Indian Ocean which also 
handles half of the world's container shipments. Thus, the Indian Ocean is not 
only critical for India's economic stability but also serves as a bridge for global 
trade between Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. 
 
 Given this geo-strategic importance, the Committee are of the 
considered view that India's leadership role in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
is both a natural and necessary extension of its geopolitical and economic 
interests and thereby, it should take a leading role in ensuring the security, 
stability, and prosperity of the region. The Committee observe that India's 
leadership in the Indian Ocean is underscored by its strategic framework, 
Vision SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the Region) and its evolved 
version, Vision MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security 
and Growth Across Regions for the Global South). These guiding principles 
accentuate India's commitment to a rules-based order, respect for sovereignty, 
freedom of navigation, and the protection of regional maritime security. The 
Indian Ocean is undeniably an integral part of India's global strategy, and it is 
in India's best interest to assert its role as a guardian of this vital maritime 
space. The Committee urge that the MEA should intensify its efforts to build 
stronger bilateral, multilateral engagements and defence partnerships while 
ensuring the region's sustainability and security. By fostering a cooperative, 
rules-based order in the Indian Ocean, India should continue enhancing its 
role as a leading regional power, securing the region for itself and the global 
community, while affirming that the Indian Ocean remains India's Ocean. 
 
 
 

44 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As demonstrated by frequent high level visits and the outcomes thereof, India 
continues to strengthen bilateral engagements in the region. India is committed to 
further strengthening defence and security cooperation in the region through 
continued provision of military assets, joint exercises, high level bilateral visits as 
well as capacity building support. Conclusion of MoU on Defence Cooperation with 
Sri Lanka, construction of Maldives National Defence Forces Coast Guard Harbour, 
enhanced strategic partnership with Mauritius, signing of Charter and MoU for 
establishment of the Colombo Security Conclave, regular joint exercises with 
defence forces, provisioning of defence security platforms, training and capacity 
building, are some of the recent measures that reaffirm our intent for closer 
cooperation in the securityand defence domains aimed at tackling common security 
challenges in the region.     
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/64/2025 dated 14/10/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Countering Chinese Expansion and Influence in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 
 
 The Committee express concern regarding the escalating Chinese 
presence and its increasing influence in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), a 
development which poses substantial risks to India's national security and 
broader strategic interests. The Committee recognizes that China's enhanced 
naval capabilities, exemplified by the growing size of its fleet, including over 
15 units commissioned annually, has now surpassed the United States Navy, 
making it the world's largest naval force. The induction of advanced warships, 
including multiple Carrier Battle Groups and an additional aircraft carrier, 
along with the regular deployment of Chinese submarines and naval vessels, 
demonstrates a clear and growing strategic interest by China in consolidating 
its position in the IOR. 
 The strategic positioning of Chinese military and commercial 
infrastructure across key maritime chokepoints, particularly under the Belt and 
Road Initiative (BRI) and the "String of Pearls" strategy, is gradually 
reconfiguring the region's geopolitical dynamics in favor of Chinese interests. 
Of equal concern is the strengthening of the China-Pakistan naval nexus, 
which not only facilitates joint military exercises but also advances Pakistan's 
naval modernization. This cooperation complicates the security situation 
further, particularly in the context of the increasing Chinese influence over 

45 | P a g e 
 
Pakistan's naval assets, which could destabilize the balance of power in the 
region. 
 The Committee believe that these developments must be addressed with 
urgency, as they have the potential to shift the balance of power in the region, 
challenging India's strategic autonomy and undermining its influence over key 
maritime chokepoints. In the considered view of the Committee, India must 
remain proactive in countering the combined naval threat from China and 
Pakistan by bolstering its own deterrence capabilities and conducting joint 
exercises with partner countries to maintain strategic balance. The Committee 
urge the Government to enhance Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) through 
further integration of advanced technologies, such as satellite-based 
surveillance systems and Artificial Intelligence, to monitor Chinese activities 
more effectively. This should be complemented by a significant upgradation in 
naval capabilities, including the induction of advanced anti-submarine warfare 
(ASW) vessels, surveillance aircrafts, and nuclear-powered submarines, 
ensuring India's readiness to respond to any emerging threat. India should 
also deepen its strategic alliances with regional powers and global partners, 
particularly through forums such as the Quad, to ensure collective security 
and strengthen deterrence. Building closer ties with IOR littoral states through 
defense cooperation, capacity-building initiatives, and joint maritime 
operations will be crucial in countering Chinese influence. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Indian Navy is seized of the security implications of the combined naval 
threat from China and Pakistan, and maintains a constant and close watch on their 
deployments. The Indian Navy concept of operations are being continuously fine-
tuned and capability perspective plans are being pursued to counter all emerging 
threats. The commissioning of INS Vikrant, and the continued modernization of our 
submarine fleet, including nuclear-powered submarines is aimed at ensuring that we 
retain a credible deterrence in the region. The Navy’s anti-submarine warfare 
capabilities have also been significantly enhanced with induction of ASW corvettes, 
P8I Long Range Maritime Reconnaissance aircraft and the MH-60R helicopters. 
Whole of Government efforts are also being pursued to augment underwater domain 
awareness (UDA) in the region. 
 
 Indian Navy has enhanced strategic partnerships through increased 
deployments, joint exercises and collaborations with like-minded navies in the region. 
Partnerships through bilateral and multilateral exercises like the Rim of the Pacific 
Exercise (RIMPAC), Malabar, Varuna, Konkan and initiatives like Indian Ocean 
Naval Symposium (IONS) have helped the Indian Navy to maintain a strong 
deterrent posture in the IOR.  
 

46 | P a g e 
 
 Towards enhancing maritime domain awareness (MDA), the Indian Navy has 
been actively pursuing Space Based Survillance-III (SBS3) programme with relevant 
stakeholders. The early realization of SBS3 would enable Indian Navy towards 
persistent MDA in areas of interests. Indian Navy is also leveraging artificial 
intelligence and machine learning capabilities using commercially contracted 
services to monitor activities of adversaries in IOR.  
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Combating Narcotics Trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 The Committee note with concern the rising threat of narcotics 
trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), which is increasingly intertwined 
with issues such as terrorism, organized crime, and regional instability. The 
growing volume of illicit drugs transiting through this strategic maritime 
corridor is fuelling parallel economies that finance terrorism and exacerbate 
security challenges. While the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard (ICG) have 
conducted several successful Anti-Narcotics Operations (ANO), resulting in 
significant narcotics seizures, the Committee believes that current efforts are 
insufficient to effectively address the expanding scale of trafficking. The 
Committee emphasizes that this menace poses significant domestic security 
challenges, particularly to India's coastal states, which are increasingly 
vulnerable due to their proximity to critical maritime routes. The presence of 
organized criminal networks in these areas not only endangers the local 
populations but also threatens broader national security. 
 In view of these challenges, the Committee recommend a 
comprehensive strengthening of India's coastal surveillance infrastructure, 
significantly enhancing human, financial and technological resources 
dedicated to counter-narcotics operations. The Committee also highlight the 
critical importance of enhancing state capacity and infrastructure along with 
regional and international cooperation through improved intelligence-sharing 
platforms and more robust legal frameworks. Additionally, given, the vital role 
of local communities in preventing narcotics smuggling, the Committee urge 
the expansion of the Indian Coast Guard's Community Interaction Programs 
(CIPs), and call for enhanced deployment of Coast Guards vessels in affected 
coastal states, particularly in the West Coast. 
Reply of the Government 
 Since 2008, coastal security has been a focus area for the Indian Navy and a 
large number of measures have been implemented to strengthen the overall security 
apparatus.  

47 | P a g e 
 
 The Indian Navy has established a National Command, Control, 
Communication and Intelligence Network (NC3I) which integrates information 
obtained from multiple sources to form a composite maritime picture at Information 
Management and Analysis Centre (IMAC) at Gurugram. The Indian Navy is at 
advance stages of establishing a National Maritime Domain Awareness Project to 
integrate all maritime surveillance centres and databases, under a single umbrella. 
Various other initiatives such as creation of a ‘Sagar Prahari Bal’, induction of over 
80 Fast interceptor Craft and 23 Immediate Support vessels, coastal security 
exercises and awareness drives, fitment of Automatic identification systems (AIS) 
transponders on fishing vessels, training of Marine Police, etc, have also been 
successfully undertaken to augment coastal security, including conducting narcotics 
operations. 
 In the last four years, the Indian Navyhas conducted numerous Anti-Narcotics 
Operations (ANOs) on the high seas, seizing approx 12000 kgs of narcotics. 
 
 Further, to combat narcotic trafficking, Indian Coast Guard (ICG) has 
intensified electronic surveillance, and expanded patrolling by ships and aircraft. 
Under Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) - Phase-I, the ICG has established 46 Radar 
Stations (RS) across the mainland and island territories. This network is being further 
strengthened under Phase-II with the addition of 38 RS and 4 Mobile Surveillance 
System (MSS). 
 In parallel, the ICG regularly conducts Community Interaction Programme 
(CIPs) to sensitize the fishing community and develop them as ‘Eyes and Ears at 
Sea’ for Coastal Security. 
 As the designated Lead Intelligence (LIA) for coastal and sea borders, the 
ICG also maintains effective liaison with central and state agencies to ensure 
coordinated security efforts. 
 Over the last five years, the ICG has carried out several successful 
interdictions, seizing narcotics worth a total of Rs. 46387.56 crore, including its 
largest-ever haul of 6016 kg of methamphetamine. 
 Further, there has been an apparent shift of narco-traffic away from India’s 
exclusive economic zone (EEZ), reflecting the impact of enhanced surveillance and 
patrolling. 
 
 
 
 

48 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Role of the Indian Navy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 
 The Committee acknowledge the critical and expanding role of the 
Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard in safeguarding India's national 
maritime interests and securing the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). The Indian 
Navy's four key roles - military, constabulary, benign and diplomatic- serve as 
the cornerstone of India's maritime security strategy. These roles are 
becoming increasingly crucial as piracy, maritime terrorism, and illegal 
activities in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) pose growing threats to India's Sea 
Lines of Communication (SLOCs) and trade routes. The ICG's expanding 
mandate to secure India's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and provide coastal 
security is equally critical in ensuring the country's maritime interests. 
 While the Indian Navy and Coast Guard have demonstrated significant 
operational effectiveness, there are numerous challenges that need urgent 
attention to ensure India's naval forces remain a modern, capable deterrent 
force. These challenges primarily concern fleet readiness, personnel training, 
and logistical support, which must be addressed to cope with emerging 
threats in the maritime domain. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Government should invest in the modernization of capabilities of the Indian 
Navy and Coast Guard by prioritizing the development and induction of 
indigenous platforms through the Aatmanirbhar Bharat initiative. The 
Committee recommend that the Government should prioritize enhancing the 
Navy's fleet with advanced platforms, such as next-generation submarines, 
destroyers, and carrier-based fighters, to improve its deterrence and 
operational readiness. Additionally, the ICG must be further empowered with 
modern assets, including specialized patrol vessels and surveillance aircraft, 
to enhance its ability to monitor and secure India's vast maritime boundaries. 
Reply of the Government 
 As brought out earlier, Indian Navy remains focused towards threat and 
capability based modernisation plan, with a thrust on ‘Atmanirbharta’, through the 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP 2012-27) and Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCPP 2022-37). 
 
 Further, in line with the Hon’ble PM’s Vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat, the Indian 
Coast Guard (ICG) is ensuring that all its assets are fully indigenous. All ships being 
made are designed and constructed in India. Similarly, all aircraft, including 
helicopters and fixed-wing platforms for maritime surveillance, are indigenously 
manufactured. Even the modern equipment and weapons fitted on these ships and 
aircraft are entirely sourced from Indian industry. 
 

49 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Provisioning of Adequate Financial support to Maritime Forces 
 The Committee underscore the need for adequate and sustained 
financial allocations to support the modernization efforts of both the Indian 
Navy and the Indian Coast Guard. As the strategic importance of India's 
maritime security grows and emerging threats in the Indian Ocean Region 
(IOR) become more pronounced, it is crucial that the government's financial 
commitment aligns with the evolving demands of maritime defense. To 
effectively counter these threats, the Committee advocate increased funding to 
procure advanced technologies and to expand naval modernization 
programmes, including the acquisition of next-generation platforms, 
submarines, and surveillance systems. Without sufficient budgetary 
provisions, India's maritime forces may be unable to meet the future security 
challenges that lie ahead. 
Reply of the Government 
 As of 03 September 2025, the Indian Navy has a force level of 140 ships and 
submarines and 264 aircrafts. These include aircraft carriers, state-of-the-art 
destroyers and frigates, nuclear and conventional submarines, carrier-based fighters, 
deck-based helicopters, shore-based surveillance aircraft and surface/ sub-surface/ 
aerial autonomous vehicles. Towards expeditious capacity and capability building of 
the Navy, 55 ships are presently under construction, to be inducted over the next six 
years. Besides, acceptance of necessity (AoN) has been accorded for the 
construction of 74 additional ships and submarines. 
 
 Indian Navy is focused on being a ‘Combat Ready, Credible, Cohesive and 
Future Ready Force’. Towards the same, adequate budgetary allocation have been 
facilitated by Government of India for capability development and modernisation of 
the Indian Navy.  
 Further, for modernisation and capacity enhancement of the Indian Coast 
Guard (ICG), over the past five years, the ICG’s Budget has seen a significant 
increase, rising from Rs. 7310.29 crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 9676.70 crore in 2025-26. 
This increase will strengthen the ICG’s operational capabilities and ensure it is well-
equipped to address maritime security challenges effectively. 
Recommendation No. 15 
Enhancing Coordination Among Maritime Agencies 
 The Committee emphasize the need for enhanced coordination among 
India's maritime forces and agencies, including the Indian Navy, Coast Guard, 

50 | P a g e 
 
Ministries of External Affairs, Defence, and Home Affairs, as well as with 
external partners in the international maritime community. Joint operations, 
intelligence-sharing, and multilateral exercises with nations such as the United 
States, Japan, and Australia should be integrated more effectively into India's 
security framework. The Committee suggest that India should prioritize 
formalizing and expanding such collaborations, particularly in the areas of 
Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) and interoperability. Furthermore, 
streamlined communication protocols both within national agencies and with 
international partners are crucial to ensure that India maintains a proactive 
and responsive maritime security posture. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Indian Navy has already established a National Command, Control, 
Communication and Intelligence Network (NC3I) which integrates information 
obtained from multiple sources to form a composite maritime picture. As stated 
earlier, the Indian Navy is at advance stages of establishing a National Maritime 
Domain Awareness (NMDA) Project to integrate all maritime surveillance centres 
and databases, under a single umbrella. The Information Management and Analysis 
Centre (IMAC) at Gurugram, will be transformed into a multi-agency NMDA centre, 
co-locating representatives from multiple agencies across ministries (such as 
Ministry of Defence; Ports,Shipping and Waterways; Petroleum and Natural Gas, 
etc). This will not only enhance MDA but also enable interoperability, real-time 
information sharing, and collaborative action. 
 
 Towards enhancing the communication between the Indian Navy and other 
national agencies, Exercise Sea Vigil was conceived, which is the largest coastal 
defence exercise conducted in India. The conduct of the exercise has not only 
galvanized the maritime security stakeholders, but also improved communication. 
The Indian Navy also maintain functional linkages with multinational constructs 
through established communication channels. These channels are being regularly 
used to exchange information and coordinate issues pertaining to security operations 
in the region.  
 
 Further, Indian Coast Guard (ICG) has significantly strengthened coordination 
and cooperation with International agencies. During 2024-25, ICG ships undertook 
eight overseas deployments covering 14 countries, including humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief (HADR) missions to Yemen, Sudan and Djibouti, while 
also participating in major events like the Naval Defence Exhibition & Conference 
(NAVDEX)-2025 in the UAE under the Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative. Bilateral ties 
were reinforced through high-level meetings and joint exercises. 
 
 

51 | P a g e 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
Enhancing Bilateral and Multilateral Diplomacy 
 The Committee acknowledge India's active participation and leadership 
in various multilateral institutions and regional groupings in the Indian Ocean 
Region such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), Indo-Pacific Oceans 
Initiative (IPOI), the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue 
(Quad)), Mekong - Ganga Cooperation (MGC) and others. However, despite this 
broad engagement, the Committee observe that India's approach remains 
fragmented, lacking the strategic coherence necessary to fully leverage these 
platforms to advance its geopolitical, economic and strategic interests. 
 The Committee recommend strengthening of bilateral arrangements to 
protect the interests of fishermen who may inadvertently cross international 
maritime boundaries and encounter law enforcement interception by 
neighbouring countries. The Government should establish bilateral 
mechanisms to safeguard the interests of the fishermen and ensure their 
speedy release as well as of their boats and equipments. 
 
 The Committee, further recommend that the Government should adopt a 
more coherent, outcome-driven, and strategically aligned approach to 
harmonize India's initiatives in the IOR. This should be accompanied by 
enhanced inter-ministerial coordination, increased financial and technical 
commitments, promotion of synergy among overlapping forums, and periodic 
evaluation of outcomes. In addition, there is an urgent need for establishment 
of a centralized coordinating mechanism within the Ministry of External 
Affairs. 
Reply of the Government 
 Government of India attaches highest priority to the safety, security and 
welfare of Indian fishermen. The fishermen issue is dealt with in a bilateral manner 
with Sri Lanka and the Government has been taking up the fishermen issues, 
including the early release and repatriation of Indian fishermen and fishing boats, 
with respective governments through diplomatic channels, various official 
interactions and established bilateral mechanisms. The matter of early release and 
repatriation of Indian fishermen is consistently raised with respective countries at all 
levels and it is conveyed that this issue may be considered purely on humanitarian 
and livelihood grounds.  
 Further, our Missions and Consulates in respective countries make regular 
visits to local jails and detention centres to ascertain the condition of Indian 
fishermen and provide requisite help and support, including legal assistance. Our 

52 | P a g e 
 
Missions also provide necessary travel documents to facilitate repatriation of 
released fishermen to India. 
Recommendation No. 19 
Revitalizing Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) 
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), 
established in 1987 with its Secretariat in Mauritius, was created to revive the 
historic pan-Indian Ocean connectivity among countries. Over the years, 
IORA's membership has expanded to 23 Member States and 12 Dialogue 
Partners. The primary sources of funding for IORA include an annual 
membership fee of USD 24,000 from Member States and voluntary 
contributions from both Member States and Dialogue Partners to the IORA 
Special Fund, with India being the largest contributor. During the oral 
evidence, the Ministry emphasized that India places the highest priority on 
IORA and is focused on strengthening the institutional, financial, and legal 
frameworks of the organization to unlock its true potential. Efforts are being 
made to consolidate and streamline initiatives to promote cooperation in 
IORA's six priority areas and two cross-cutting themes. 
 
 The Committee acknowledge IORA's promise as a transformative 
platform for regional economic growth, sustainable development, and 
maritime cooperation. However, despite India's substantial contributions and a 
vast membership, the organization's full potential remains untapped. With its 
diverse membership, including 23 Member States, 12 Dialogue Partners, and 
an expanding number of stakeholders, IORA is well-positioned to act as a 
catalyst for peace, development, and shared prosperity in the Indian Ocean 
region. Recognizing the need for a strategic overhaul, the Committee strongly 
recommend that, in light of India's forthcoming Chairship of IORA from 2025-
2027, India should assume a leading role in revitalizing the organization. This 
includes prioritizing the strengthening of IORA's institutional framework and 
governance. Specifically, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
streamline the Secretariat's operations, enhance coordination among Member 
States, and explore innovative funding mechanisms to enable more effective 
implementation of projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 India views IORA as a vital platform for fostering sustainable development, 
economic growth, prosperity, and regional stability. Recently, with the objective of 
streamlining the existing financial mechanism of IORA, a meeting of the Sub-
Committee on Finance (SCF) was organised on 22 July 2025 under the current 

53 | P a g e 
 
Chair Sri Lanka.  As a member of the IORA Troika, India attended the meeting and 
presented its views. Similarly, India is also a member of committee formed to review 
the Special Fund Guidelines, which has been mandated to review the existing 
administrative arrangement of the Special Fund. First meeting of the Ad-Hoc 
committee on the review of IORA special fund was held on 27 August 2025. 
Following up on this meeting, and after obtaining concurrence from other Member 
States, IORA’s financial framework will be amended to ensure transparency and 
explore avenues for financial prudence. Similarly, India has also conveyed its 
interest in joining an Ad-hoc committee for IORA reforms.  
 
 As a part of strengthening the institutional framework, we have now seconded 
an IFS officer Shri Mayur Hazarika to IORA in the role of Director, IABE (Institutional 
Arrangement and Broadening Engagement). Thus, we currently have 2 Directors 
from India in IORA, in addition to IORA Secretary General Shri Sanjeev Ranjan. 
Furthermore, with the aim of imparting diplomatic training to IORA Staffs, India has 
planned a week long capacity building training programme from 08 to13 December, 
2025 at Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS), Delhi. 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
Expanding IORA's Priorities to Address emerging regional challenges 
 
 Considering that the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) has emerged 
as a leading platform for regional cooperation, spanning key sectors such as 
trade, maritime safety, disaster risk management, fisheries, tourism, and the 
emerging blue economy, the Committee observe that the organization 
undertakes cooperation activities under six priority areas science and 
technology, disaster risk management, maritime safety, trade and investment 
facilitation, fisheries management, and tourism - as well as two cross-cutting 
issues: the blue economy and women's economic empowerment. 
 
 The Committee is of the opinion that, while these areas remain critical, 
there is an urgent need to broaden the scope of IORA's priorities to 
encompass emerging challenges and opportunities. The Committee suggest 
that additional priority areas, such as cyber-security, regional health 
cooperation, and disaster resilience, which are becoming increasingly 
significant in the context of global challenges facing the Indian Ocean region 
should be included. To advance this goal, the Committee urge the Government 
to strengthen collaborative efforts between IORA's functional bodies, Dialogue 
Partners, and other regional organizations. By fostering closer partnerships 

54 | P a g e 
 
and aligning priorities with the evolving needs of the region, IORA can ensure 
that its actions remain relevant and effective in addressing contemporary and 
future challenges. 
Reply of the Government 
 During India’s previous Chairship, a major re-vitalization of IORA was initiated  
with the identification of six priority areas: Maritime Safety and Security (MSS), 
Disaster Risk reduction, Science and Technology, Trade and Investment, Tourism 
and Fisheries Management.  These six priority sectors along with other two cross-
cutting areas – Blue Economy and Women’s Economic Empowerment paved the 
way for significant progress in IORA. During the upcoming Chairship of India for the 
period 2025-2027, while expanding the existing pillars, India will seek support of rest 
of the Member States to  extend IORA’s scope to other functional domains and focus 
on emerging challenges such as climate change, artificial intelligence, marine 
pollution, cyber warfare etc.  
 
 
 
 
 

55 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
India's Maritime Strategy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
 
 
 The Committee recognize the evolving maritime security landscape in 
the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), particularly in the context of rapid geopolitical 
realignments and growing security challenges, including piracy, narcotics 
trafficking, and the strategic influence of regional and global powers. The 
Committee commend the efforts of the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard (ICG), 
and various law enforcement agencies in enhancing coastal security, as 
evidenced by the successful conduct of the biennial Exercise Sea Vigil, the 
establishment of Joint Operation Centres (JOCs), and the effective 
coordination through the National Command, Control, Communications, and 
Intelligence Network (NC31). 
 While emphasizing the urgent need to elevate India's maritime strategy 
in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) as a foreign policy priority, the Committee 
believe that a far more comprehensive approach is required. Despite 
commendable progress in maritime security efforts, the Committee feel that 
India's existing strategy requires additional depth, clarity, and sustained 
resources to effectively assert its influence and maintain deterrence in the 
IOR. To address this gap, the Committee recommend that India should 
prioritize the modernization of its naval capabilities, with a clear commitment 
to long-term, robust funding for its maritime security initiatives. Additionally, 
the Committee stress the importance of improving coordination and 
integration of maritime security operations across national and regional 
agencies, ensuring a unified and comprehensive approach to safeguarding 
India's interests in the region. 
Reply of the Government 
 Indian Navy’s modernization plans are formulated in accordance with the Long 
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP 2012-27) and Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCPP 2022-37). Recent induction of Indigenous Aircraft Carrier 
Vikrant, nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs), Visakhapatnam 
Class destroyers, frigate Nilgiri, Scorpene Class submarines, MH60R multi-role 
helicopters, and P8I and High Altitude Long Endurance aircraft are testimony to the 
Indian Navy’s focused approach towards a threat and capability based modernization 
plan with a thrust on ‘Atmanirbharta’. The ongoing modernisation aims to induct 
capabilities for accomplishing a range of missions, including maritime security, to 

56 | P a g e 
 
effectively respond to the threats and challenges, both prevailing and emerging, in 
the IOR. 
 Indian Navy has been and would continue to pursue collaboration with regional 
frameworks to counter maritime security challenges in the region.  
 
 Further, the Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is also strengthening its capacity by 
adding 37 new ships and 11 aircraft in the near future. By 2030, the ICG aims to 
have a fleet of over 200 ships and 100 aircraft. Along with this expansion, the ICG is 
also upgrading technology by introducing AI-enabled surveillance drones, Coastal 
Surveillance Network (CSN) and autonomous surface vessels. These improvements 
will make the ICG more capable and better prepared to meet future maritime security 
challenges. 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
 
Leveraging India's Chairmanship of IONS for enhanced maritime cooperation 
 
 The Committee are aware that the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium 
(IONS), established in 2008 and comprises of 25 states and 9 observer states 
aims to strengthen maritime security and promote collaborative efforts among 
Navies of the littoral states of the Indian Ocean Region to address common 
challenges in the Indian Ocean Region. The Ministry has informed that IONS 
has established 3 working groups to focus on key areas, namely Humanitarian 
Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), Maritime Security and Information 
Sharing & Interoperability. The Committee stress the need for expanding 
regional cooperation on emerging non-traditional security challenges such as 
Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) fishing and climate change. 
Towards achieving this end, the Committee urge India to make efforts in 
fostering a more collaborative environment which includes sharing of 
information not only between governments but also between industry and 
government. While appreciating the pivotal role played by India as a founding 
member and leader of the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) in shaping 
the regional maritime security landscape, the Committee are hopeful that after 
assumption of the Chairmanship of IONS for the 2025-27 India would leverage 
this opportunity to further enhance regional maritime security, cooperation, 
and humanitarian assistance within the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). By 
fostering stronger engagement with IONS observer nations and promoting a 
collective maritime governance framework, India should ensure that IONS 
transitions into an active, impactful organization that contributes meaningfully 
to peace, stability, and maritime security in the Indian Ocean Region. To 
strengthen regional maritime security, the Committee recommend that India 
should intensify efforts to enhance interoperability among IONS member 
navies through regular joint exercises and the development of common 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 

57 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Indian Navy is scheduled to assume Chairmanship of IONS in February 2026. 
During the Chairmanship, Indian Navy would endeavor to enhance regional maritime 
security and foster stronger engagement with the IONS nations.  
 
Recommendation No. 30 
 
Institutionalizing Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) within 
IONS framework 
 
 The Committee commend India's demonstrated leadership in providing 
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR) during natural disasters, 
such as Cyclone Idai in Mozambique, and in responding to the COVID-19 
pandemic. As part of India's leadership in IONS, the Committee recommend 
that India should further institutionalize these efforts within the IONS 
framework by coordinating joint HADR exercises and establishing standard 
protocols for rapid disaster response. India should work with IONS member 
states to develop common frameworks for disaster response, ensuring a swift, 
coordinated, and effective regional approach to humanitarian crises. By 
strengthening IONS' capabilities in HADR, India can reinforce its commitment 
to regional stability, while also demonstrating the organization's practical and 
collaborative potential in addressing humanitarian emergencies. 
Reply of the Government 
 Indian Navy would continue to institutionalize HADR efforts within the IONS 
framework. In this regard, promulgation of IONS HADR guidelines is under progress. 
Further, IONS Maritime Exercise (IMEX) focusing on HADR was conducted in March 
2022, off Goa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                     Dr. Shashi Tharoor, 
12 March, 2026                                                                      Chairperson,                                
21 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka)                         Committee on External Affairs 

58 | P a g e 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) HELD ON 12 MARCH 2026 
   
The Committee sat on Thursday, 12 March 2026 from 1700 hrs. to 
1740 hrs. in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
       PRESENT 
    
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
  
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3  Shri Vijay Baghel 
4   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5   Shri Arun Govil 
6  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
7  Shri Navaskani K. 
8  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
9  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
10  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
11  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
12  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
13  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 Rajya Sabha 
14  Dr. John Brittas 
15  Shri Raghav Chadha 
16  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
17  Shri Rajeev Shukla 
18  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

59 | P a g e 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar     Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik    Director 
3. Ms. Maya Menon     Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the 
Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report on the subject “Evaluation of India's Indian Ocean 
Strategy’. 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions for 
incorporation in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor 
modifications. After deliberations the Committee adopted the draft 
Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the 
Report incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present 
the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 | P a g e 
 
 
APPENDIX- II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 7, 8, 10, 16, 17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 26, 
27, 28, 31 and 32. 
 Total- 20 
Percentage : 63% 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
Recommendation No. NIL          
         Total- 0 
Percentage: 0%  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, and 20 
Total- 09 
Percentage : 28% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation No.  12, 29 and 30 
Total- 03 
Percentage:9% 
  
 