 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India and Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) - Contours of Cooperation’ 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
01 
 

 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report 
of the Committee on External Affairs (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC) - Contours of Cooperation’ 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 03 December, 2024 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03 December, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………      1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................   24 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………  69 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..   70 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………   72 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on 25 October, 2024………   79                                                                  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee  
On External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)…………………………………………….... … 81 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
29.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  _  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anurag Sandil   _  Assistant Executive Officer 
 (ii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Sixth Report of the Committee on External Affairs (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India and Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC)- Contours of Cooperation’. 
2. The Twenty Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha on 12 December, 2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14 February, 2024 
(English Version) and 23 February, 2024 (Hindi Version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held 25 
October, 2024. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the 
Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
25 November, 2024                                                                                                  Chairperson,                                
04 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                           Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
      (iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
        This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of 
the Committee on the subject ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)- Contours of 
Cooperation’. The Twenty Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 December, 2023. 
 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all 
the 49 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
  (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
  
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3,4 , 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,  
20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,  40, 41, 42, 43, 
46, 47, 48 and 49  
Total-41  
Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL                                
        Total-NIL 
Chapter-III 
  (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
  Recommendation Nos. 39 and 45.                                                                    
   
Total-2   

2 
 
Chapter-IV 
  (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 5, 19, 21, 25, 27and  44 
Total-6  
Chapter-V 
  
3.    The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments and 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and 
recommendations included in Chapter V may be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
EARLY FORMATION OF JOINT WORKING GROUPS 
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
5. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
   
 ‘The Committee note that political dialogues between India and GCC have been held 
over the years. A Memorandum of Understanding on Mechanism of Consultations to 
institutionalize the political dialogue between India and GCC was signed in September 
2022. This MoU also instituted a dialogue at the Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) level. 
The Committee further note that during the first India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting 
held in March 2023, it was proposed to form five Joint Working Groups in the fields of 
political and security issues; economic cooperation and trade; cultural, education, 
youth and sports; health and pharmaceuticals; maritime security and counter 
terrorism. The Committee welcome the proposal for formation of five mutually 

3 
 
beneficial JWGs and urge the Government to make all out efforts for the finalization of 
all the groups and start working at an early date.’ 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The recommendation from the committee is noted and the Ministry is actively 
 following up with the GCC authorities for the finalization of all working groups 
 and for their work to begin at an early date.” 
  
7. Welcoming the proposal for formation of Five mutually beneficial Joint Working 
Groups in the fields of political and security issues; economic cooperation and trade; 
cultural, education, youth and sports; health and pharmaceuticals; maritime security 
and counter terrorism between India and GCC, the Committee had urged the 
Government to make all out efforts for finalization and early  working of these Groups. 
Though the Ministry has stated that it is actively following up with the GCC Authorities 
in its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee,  the progress achieved so far, 
details of meetings held, challenges faced and steps taken to overcome such 
challenges, etc. have not been mentioned at all. The Committee, hence desire  to be  
apprised of the renewed efforts made and the outcome of such efforts as well as 
action plan contemplated  for early finalization of the modalities for formation and 
operationalization of these JWGs to usher in greater cooperation between India and 
GCC countries in all spheres. 
 

4 
 
TALKS FOR JOINING ISA    
(Recommendation No. 13) 
  
8. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
 ‘The Committee note that Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman and Bahrain have joined 
 the International Solar Alliance while two GCC countries namely, Kuwait and 
 Qatar are yet to join the ISA. The Committee desire that all the GCC countries 
 should be brought under the ISA as India is already having cooperation with 
 GCC countries in the energy sector. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
 Government to make extra efforts to persuade Kuwait and Qatar to join the 
 Alliance at an early date.’ 
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
  “The Government of India is actively engaging encouraging GCC countries to  
  become a member of ISA as well as CDRI. 4 out of 6 GCC countries including 
  UAE, Oman, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain are members of the ISA while Qatar  
  and Kuwait are yet to join the ISA. However, with the concerted efforts of our  
 ` Missions, both Kuwait and Qatar have expressed their interest and are in  
  further talks to join ISA.” 
 
  
10.  The Committee had urged the Government to make extra efforts to bring Kuwait 
and Qatar under the International Solar Alliance to have a comprehensive cooperation 
with all GCC countries in the energy sector.  The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has 
stated that with the concerted efforts of our Missions, both countries have expressed 
their interest and are in further talks to join ISA. The Committee are of the view that 
entry of Kuwait and Qatar under the ISA would greatly enhance energy cooperation 
between India and GCC and augment India’s energy security. The Committee, 

5 
 
therefore, urge the Ministry as well as Indian Missions to pursue these countries and 
make renewed efforts for early conclusion of the said talks and intimate the progress 
achieved in this regard. 
 
 IDENTIFICATION OF TOP UNIVERSITIES FOR PROMOTION OF EDUCATIONAL AND 
CULTURAL COLLABORATIONS 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
  
11. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
‘The Committee note that the education sector has emerged as a strong area of 
cooperation between India and the GCC countries. As a matter of policy, collaboration 
between educational institutions in India and countries abroad is encouraged.  Indian 
Missions also facilitate collaborations in education sector. There is an ongoing 
process of identifying 40 top universities globally in which Indian diaspora are playing 
a role in the form of faculty members or senior researchers as a part of educational 
and cultural collaborations with universities across the world.  The Committee also 
note that an MoU was signed in July 2023 to establish an IIT campus in the UAE. The 
Committee feel that educational collaborations between India and GCC countries 
should be enhanced and urge the Government to explore more avenues for 
partnerships in this sector so that more MoUs for facilitating higher and technical 
education would be signed. Indian Missions abroad may be pursued to play a more 
proactive role in facilitating educational collaborations between institutions in India 
and in the GCC countries. The Committee also urge the Ministry to complete the 
exercise regarding identification of top universities having involvement of diaspora at 
the earliest for promotion of educational and cultural collaborations.’ 
 
 

6 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 
  “As a matter of policy, we encourage collaboration between educational 
institutions in India and countries abroad.  Our Missions also facilitate collaborations in 
education sector with GCC countries. It is may be noted that important exams such as 
the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET), Joint Entrance Examination (JEE), 
and other similar exams are concurrently conducted in Gulf countries alongside India. 
The collaboration between India and GCC countries in the education sector has a 
longstanding and robust. Recently, Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Dhofar University, for establishing chair in 
Hindi language was signed in December 2023. Additionally, possibility of signing a 
Letter of Understanding (LoU) between ICCR and Sultan Qaboos University for the 
establishment of chair in economics is also being explored. It may be noted that leading 
Indian Universities like BITS Pilani, AMITY, Manipal etc have also established their 
campuses in UAE. Our Mission is also facilitating discussions of other universities with 
the UAE authorities, to set-up their campuses in UAE. Kuwait College of Science and 
Technology is being run in active collaboration with IIT Delhi. In order to promote 
collaborations between India and Bahrain in the field of education, Mission has 
facilitated meetings of Bahrain Institute of Banking & Finance (BIBF) with IIT Mumbai 
and IIM Ahmadabad to help them start joint courses for mid-level executive training. 
Discussions in respect of establishment of IIT campus and other private Indian 
Institutions interested in setting up campus in Bahrain such as Rajagiri Group have 
been facilitated by the Mission. Our Mission in Qatar continues to engage with the 
Qatar side for greater educational collaboration between Indian and Qatari institutions 
as well as provision of higher education courses by Indian universities. Since 2022, 
Savitribai Phule University has started providing some courses to students in Qatar. 
Our Mission in Saudi Arabia is actively working with Saudi Ministry of Education to 
deepen collaboration in the higher education sector. During the recent visit of Crown 
Prince to India in 2023, it was agreed that direct relations between universities and 
scientific & educational institutions would be encouraged.  ” 
 
  
13.  The Committee had felt the need for enhancing educational collaboration 
between India and GCC countries and had urged the Government to explore more 
avenues for partnerships in the sector and signing of more MoUs for facilitating  
higher and technical education. The Ministry was also urged to complete the exercise 
regarding identification of top 40 universities having involvement of diaspora at the 

7 
 
earliest for promotion of educational and cultural collaborations.  The Ministry, in its 
Action Taken Reply, has highlighted the steps taken to encourage, promote and 
deepen collaborations in the education sector as well as  collaborations facilitated by 
Indian  Missions and Mou/LoU between ICCR and universities in GCC countries, but is  
silent on the issue of identification of 40 top universities having involvement of 
diaspora. The Committee, hence, reiterate this aspect of their recommendation and 
urge the Ministry to complete the exercise of identifying the 40 top universities having 
involvement of diaspora without further delay for promotion of educational and 
cultural collaborations.  
 
INTEGRATION OF UPI WITH PAYMENT PLATFORMS OF GCC COUNTRIES   
(Recommendation No. 19) 
  
14. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
‘On the adoption of India’s Digital Public Infrastructure by GCC countries, the 
Committee note that the Rupay card is already functional in UAE while MoUs for the 
same have also been signed with Saudi Arabia, Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE 
are also engaged in discussions on possible integration of the UPI platform with UAE 
payment platform. India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on 
establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. Moreover, 
proposals related to trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued 
with Kuwait. The Committee understand that besides promoting digital transactions, 
integration of the UPI platform with the payment platforms of GCC countries would go 
a long way in fostering closer economic cooperation through enhanced bilateral trade  

8 
 
as well as tourism and at the same time, reduce the cost of cross border payments. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to pursue the GCC countries and 
enter into constructive talks with UAE, Kuwait and others for an early finalization of 
India’s UPI connectivity and its integration with the payment Platforms of the GCC 
countries. Efforts made and success achieved in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee.’ 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 
  “UPI is not merely a Real Time Payment system providing Person to Person 
Payment system but it is a comprehensive payment scheme where the online 
transaction processing, Interbank settlements and Customer dispute life cycle 
management are encompassed holistically. At present, Indians who visit different 
countries have to pay for any expenses via international cards. With the introduction of 
UPI, Indians will now be able to use multiple bank accounts to make payments via a 
single mobile application. UAE has accepted India’s UPI interface. While talks are 
ongoing with the Central Bank of Oman for technical integration of UPI.  The 
implementation of UPI in overseas markets is a significant step towards promoting 
digital transactions and fostering closer economic cooperation between India and 
foreign countries. With UPI's user-friendly and secure interface, Indian tourists will be 
able to make payments seamlessly, eliminating the need for currency exchange. This 
will enhance our bilateral trade as well as tourism. Internationalization of UPI will also 
help in reducing the cost of cross border payments. NPCI (I) is the nodal agency under 
the Ministry of Finance. MEA works as an interface to promote Unified Payment 
Interface in other countries. In this regard, we have been facilitating NPCI International 
Payments Limited (NIPL controlled by RBI which is under Department of Financial 
Services, MoF) interactions with Banks of respective countries through our Missions. 
The details country wise are as follows:  
 
i. United Arab Emirates (UAE)- Al Etihad Payments (AEP), an indirect subsidiary of 
Central Bank of UAE (CBUAE) and NPCI International Payments Limited (NIPL) signed 
a strategic framework agreement on for Domestic Card Scheme (DCS) implementation 
based on NPCI’s RuPay stack. Also, Mercury is Middle East’s first domestic payment 
scheme, headquartered in the United Arab Emirates, which enable member institutions 
to issue cards under the Mercury brand that function securely at large number of ATMs 
and merchant outlets across the UAE. Mercury connects consumers, banks, the 
government entities and businesses to facilitate payments in the region. NIPL has 
signed definitive agreement with Mercury for seamless integration to ensure 
acceptance of RuPay cards in UAE. Rupay cards have been accepted in the UAE since 

9 
 
2021. Today Rupay Cards have 98% Point of Sale acceptance coverage in the UAE. 
Similarly, UPI has also been active in UAE since 2022. Recently, Phonepe [a UPI App] 
went live in the UAE. Indians visiting the UAE can now do UPI transactions though UAE 
NeoPay. In addition to the above, an MoU was signed on July 15, 2023 for interlinking 
UPI and UAE’s instant payment platform. Discussions are underway to complete this 
integration soon. 
ii. Saudi Arabia- NPCI and Saudi Arabia Monetry Authority (SAMA) have already 
signed an NDA. RBI has proposed a MOU/TOR to SAMA and their response is awaited 
on the same. 
iii. Oman- NDA and MOU were signed between Central Bank of Oman and NPCI 
international Payments Limited on 4th October 2022 for enabling acceptance of UPI 
QR and RuPay cards. Also, NDA and MoU signed between NIPL and Bank Muscat for 
enabling Real-time crossborder remittance between Oman and India using UPI rails. 
Discussion on technical integration and definitive agreement are still in progress 
between teams of NIPL and Bank Muscat. 
iv. Kuwait- Knet is a Kuwaiti national company providing electronic banking 
services to all the banks in Kuwait.  NIPL and Knet signed an Memorandum of 
Agreement. Discussion on technical Specifications and integration are still in the 
pipeline. Mission is following up the matter of trade in local currencies as well as UPI 
connectivity with the Kuwaiti authorities. Central Bank of Kuwait and K-Net are already 
in touch with NPCI on UPI connectivity. 
v. Bahrain and Qatar- Discussions are on-going with Bahrain and Qatar side on 
Technical integration and definitive agreements are still in progress.” 
 
  
16.  The Committee had urged the Government to pursue the GCC countries for an 
early finalization of India’s UPI connectivity and its integration with the payment 
platforms of the GCC countries for enhanced bilateral trade,  tourism and reduction in 
the cost of cross border payments. In its Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, the Ministry has informed that UAE has accepted India’s UPI interface 
while discussion are underway for interlinking UPI and UAE’s instant payment 
platform. In respect of the remaining GCC countries, discussion on technical 
integration and definitive agreements are still in progress. The Committee emphasize  
the need for complete integration of India’s UPI platform with the payment platforms of 

10 
 
the GCC countries at the earliest for deeper economic ties and trading in local 
currencies and urge the Government to make all out efforts so that the ongoing talks 
and discussions are brought to a fruitful conclusion soon. The progress achieved in 
this regard may also be communicated to the Committee.   
  
MoU/MoC ON CYBER SECURITY  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
  
17.  The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that India and GCC countries continue to exchange information 
and best practices on cyber security in various defence and security related 
dialogues. MoUs on cyber security cooperation are also being discussed between 
India and various Gulf countries. The MoUs on Cyber Security cooperation between 
CERT-In and its equivalent organisation in GCC countries are currently under 
discussions at various stages.  The Committee are of the view that MoUs on cyber 
security between India and GCC countries are long overdue especially in the 
backdrop of severe challenge posed by cyber terrorism globally. They, therefore, 
desire that the Government should make concerted efforts to evolve a mechanism for 
cooperation with GCC countries through MoUs/Agreements on cyber security 
expeditiously. The Committee also urge the Ministry to facilitate the ongoing 
discussion on MoUs regarding cyber security cooperation between CERT-In and its 
equivalent organisation in GCC countries for its early and successful conclusion.’ 
 
18.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:  
 
 “Ministry has been actively taking initiatives in facilitating 
discussion/negotiation for signing of MoU/MoC on cooperation in the area of Cyber 

11 
 
Security between CERT-In and its counterparts in GCC Countries to enhance cyber 
security for India.  MEA has taken initiative in this respect with Saudi Arabia, UAE, 
Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar.  However, CERT-In has recently informed that 
they are awaiting for the clarity and clearance on the standard CERT to CERT draft 
MoU for cooperation in the area of cyber security from NSCS.” 
  
19.  In the backdrop of severe challenge posed by cyber terrorism globally, the 
Committee had desired that the Government should make concerted efforts to evolve 
a mechanism for cooperation with GCC countries through MoUs/Agreements on cyber 
security expeditiously and had also urged the Ministry to facilitate the ongoing 
discussion on MoUs regarding cyber security cooperation between CERT-In and its 
equivalent organisation in GCC countries. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has 
submitted that MEA has been actively taking initiatives in facilitating 
discussion/negotiation for signing of MoU/MoC on cooperation in the area of Cyber 
Security between CERT-In and its counterparts in respect of Saudi Arabia, UAE, 
Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar.  However, CERT-In has recently informed that they 
are awaiting for the clarity and clearance on the standard CERT to CERT draft MoU for 
cooperation in the area of cyber security from NSCS. In view of the increasing use of 
cyber space by global terrorists, the Committee stress the urgency for concluding 
MoU/MoC on cyber security cooperation with GCC countries and the need to finalize  
the standard CERT to CERT draft MoU without delay. The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Ministry to take up the matter with the NSCS at the Highest level so that the 
requisite clearance is obtained and MoU/MoC on cyber security cooperation are 

12 
 
signed with the GCC countries at the earliest for enhanced cooperation on cyber 
security. 
  
FINALIZATION OF THE FTA BETWEEN INDIA AND GCC 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
20. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that commencement of negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement 
between India and GCC was approved in 2005 and two rounds of negotiations were 
subsequently held in 2006 and 2008. However, in 2011, GCC announced deferral of 
FTA negotiations with all countries and economic groups. GCC Secretariat again 
welcomed the resumption of FTA negotiations in November 2019 and followed it up in 
2021. After the constitution of Joint Working Group and preliminary virtual meeting of 
the Joint Working Group held in February 2022, the intent to pursue negotiations on 
the India-GCC FTA was announced in November 2022. As of now, the technical 
teams have been constituted and the modalities and terms of reference are  being 
worked upon. The Ministry has also stated that the recent delay was due to the non-
appointment of Chief Negotiator from the GCC side. GCC Secretariat has now 
informed that a new Chief Negotiator from the GCC is in place. The Committee feel 
that the process of negotiation and finalization of the FTA between India and GCC 
has been delayed for long and in view of the prospects of substantial increase in trade 
between India and GCC countries as well as India’s integration into the global value 
chain through the signing of the FTA, urge the Government to maintain close 
coordination with the GCC Secretariat so that formal negotiations on the India-GCC 
FTA commence soon for its early conclusion.’ 
 

13 
 
 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “Upon appointment of Chief Negotiator from the GCC side, a meeting at that 
level took place in August 2023 to take forward the discussions and Terms of 
References were exchanged. While the GCC is keen on including investment 
protection as a chapter, Indian side has suggested to follow the India-UAE CEPA text 
and instead include a chapter of investment promotion. GCC side has sought time to 
respond to the suggestions made by Indian side upon consultation with its member 
countries.” 
  
 
22. In view of the long delay in the process of negotiation and finalization of the 
FTA between India and GCC and the prospects of substantial increase in trade 
between both the countries as well as India’s integration into the global value chain 
through the signing of the FTA, the Committee had urged the Government to maintain 
close coordination with the GCC Secretariat so that formal negotiations on the India-
GCC FTA commence soon for its early conclusion. In its Action Taken Reply furnished 
to the Committee, the Ministry has informed that GCC side has sought time to respond 
to the suggestions made by Indian side upon consultation with its member countries. 
In view of this development, the Committee feel the need for closer coordination with 
the GCC Secretariat and member countries individually, if needed, and urge the 
Government to keep all channels of communication open for GCC.  
 

14 
 
MoUs ON BILATERAL TRADE SETTLEMENT IN LOCAL CURRENCIES 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
23. The Committee in their 16th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that MoUs were signed between India and UAE on 
establishment of a framework for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies - the 
Indian rupee and the Emirati Dirham for cross-border transaction and interlinking 
payment and messaging system of both countries. With the operationalization of the 
MoUs, exporters and importers in both the countries can invoice in their local 
currencies. India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on 
establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. The 
proposals related to trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued 
with Kuwait. The Committee understand that bilateral trade settlement in local 
currencies and interlinking payment and messaging systems of India and GCC 
countries will greatly enhance the economic engagements between the countries 
resulting in increased trade and FDI inflow and urge the Ministry to facilitate the 
signing of such MoUs with all the GCC countries at an early date.’ 
 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  “India has held discussions related to the UPI platform with various Gulf 
countries. The Rupay card is already functional in UAE and MOUs for the same have 
also been signed with Saudi Arabia, Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE are also 
engaged in discussions on possible integration of the UPI platform with UAE payment 
platform. Similarly, India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on 
establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. RBI is open 
to signing such MoU with GCC countries based on the (i) willingness and cooperation 
of the Central Banks and authorities in these countries, (ii) their macro-financial and 
macroeconomic parameters and (iii) geo strategic concerns with the overall 
concurrence of the Government.” 
 
  

15 
 
25. With a view to enhancing the economic engagements between India and GCC 
countries for increased trade and FDI inflow, the Committee had urged the Ministry to 
facilitate signing of MoUs on bilateral trade settlement in local currencies and 
interlinking payment and messaging systems at an early date. The Ministry, in its 
action taken reply, has stated that India is engaged in discussions with various Gulf 
countries on establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local 
currencies. RBI is open to signing such MoU with GCC countries based on certain 
parameters. The Committee are of the view that the potential for trade with GCC 
countries and increased FDI inflow can be realized through bilateral trade settlement 
in local currencies and urge the Ministry to take further initiatives and facilitate the 
talks/discussions proactively.  
 
FACILITATING EMPLOYMENT ABROAD FOR FEMALE DSWs 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
  
26. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
‘The Committee note that recruitment of Indian female Domestic Sector Workers is 
regulated through the provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983. To safeguard the 
interests of female DSWs, the process of their recruitment for employment abroad has 
been restricted only through 10 State run Recruiting Agencies. The Committee 
understand that regulating the recruitment for female DSWs is necessary for their 
safety, security and well being but at the same time, care should be taken to ensure 
that restricting the recruitment process through only ten State run RAs do not deprive 
them of the opportunity to find means of livelihood abroad. The Committee urge the 

16 
 
Ministry to maintain a fine balance between strict regulation and employment 
opportunities abroad and make all efforts to facilitate the migration of such workers 
through authorized RAs.’ 
 
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 
  “The Government accords highest priority to the safety, security and well-being 
of Indian nationals abroad, particularly Indian female Domestic Sector Workers 
(DSWs). To protect DSWs from exploitation/harassment in the destination country, the 
Ministry has made process of issue of EC for female workers going for employment in 
18 ECR countries mandatory only through state-run recruiting agencies. Recently, with 
addition of a new state-run recruitment agency in Bihar; the number of state-run 
recruitment agencies has become 11.” 
 
  
28.  The Committee had urged the Ministry to maintain a fine balance between strict 
regulation and employment opportunities abroad in respect of Indian female domestic 
sector workers and make all efforts to facilitate the migration of such workers through 
authorized RAs. In its Action Taken reply, the Ministry has informed that issuance of 
EC for female workers in 18 ECR countries has been made mandatory only through 
state-run recruiting agencies for protection from exploitation/harassment in the 
destination country. Moreover, a new state-run recruitment agency has been added in 
Bihar recently, taking the number of such recruitment agencies to 11. While 
acknowledging the steps taken for safety, security and well being of these vulnerable 
workers, the Committee also desire that workers who have travelled to Emigration 
Check Not Required (ECNR) countries should be included in the ambit of the 
Ministry’s efforts  and the female domestic sector workers should be facilitated to find 
means of livelihood abroad. 

17 
 
STUDY ON HARMONIZATION OF EMPLOYEE RECRUITMENT PLATFORMS 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 
29. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that the Government is working with the GCC countries to 
harmonise employee recruitment platforms so that Indian workers are provided with 
better and more transparent working conditions. However, the extent to which the 
Ministry and the Government have been successful in achieving these objectives is 
not known. The Ministry has also not mentioned whether any specific MoU or 
Agreement have been signed with the GCC countries in this regard. Keeping in view 
the security and well being of the migrant workers at the forefront, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to commission a study on harmonization of employee recruitment 
platforms and working conditions of migrant workers in the Gulf. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to ensure better and more transparent working conditions for Indian 
workers as well as prospective emigrant workers in GCC countries.’ 
 
30. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are in place with the 
six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia, and United Arab Emirates) and Jordan that provide the 
overarching framework for cooperation on labour and manpower related 
issues. In accordance with the Labour and Manpower Cooperation/Agreement, 
Joint Working Group (JWG) meetings are held on regular basis to discuss 
various labour related issues so that to ensure that India migrant workers in 
these countries have better and transparent working conditions.  Further, to 
safeguard the specific interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, who are 
often the most vulnerable category; Ministry has signed separate 
MOUs/Agreements on domestic workers with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia..” 
  
31. The Committee had urged the Ministry to commission a study on harmonization 
of employee recruitment platforms and working conditions of migrant workers in the 

18 
 
Gulf as well as to ensure better and more transparent working conditions for Indian 
workers as well as prospective emigrant workers in GCC countries. The Ministry, in its 
Action Taken Reply, has informed that in accordance with the Labour and Manpower 
Cooperation/Agreement, Joint Working Group (JWG) meetings are held on regular 
basis to discuss various labour related issues.  The Committee, however, find that the 
Ministry is silent regarding commissioning a study on harmonization of employee 
recruitment platforms and working conditions of migrant workers in the Gulf which 
would be highly beneficial while drafting MoUs/Agreements on labour and manpower 
related issues and for prospective emigrants. The Committee, hence, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to commission the said study at the 
earliest.  
TRANSPARENCY IN UTILIZATION OF ICWF 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
  
32. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
‘The Committee note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund was set up in Indian 
Missions in 17 ECR countries & Maldives in the year 2009. Subsequently, the Fund 
was extended to another 24 Missions in April 2010. In March 2011, it was extended to 
cover all Missions and Posts abroad. Revised guidelines for utilization of ICWF came 
into effect from 1st September 2017. Approval for expenditure from ICWF is at the 
level of HOM /HOP on the recommendation of the ICWF committee of the Mission.  
The Committee further note that as on 31 March 2023, the corpus of the ICWF is 
approximately Rs.558 crore or so. An amount of Rs. 565 crore has been utilized from 
2014 to 2023 covering 3,33,607 Indians during this period. The Committee 

19 
 
acknowledge the assistance rendered to overseas Indian nationals in times of distress 
and emergency under the ICWF including  air passage offered to stranded Indians 
during the COVID pandemic. In view of the crucial role played by the ICWF in 
providing relief to Indian nationals during extreme hardships and emergency 
conditions, the Committee desire that sanctioning of funds/expenditure should be 
prompt and decisive. The Ministry should ensure that there is no delay on the part of 
the ICWF committee to give its recommendations for approval of the expenditure and 
sanctioning of the same by the Competent Authority so that timely assistance is 
provided during exigencies. The Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure 
transparency in the utilization of the Fund for those in need.’ 
 
33. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 
  “Recognizing the need for providing timely assistance to distressed Indians, 
the Ministry has authorized Heads of Missions and Posts to incur expenditure on most 
of the items of assistance as provided for in the detailed ICWF guidelines. Approval of 
the Ministry is required only in a few exceptional cases only and proposals for decision 
on such cases are processed on top priority.” 
 
  
34.  In view of the crucial role played by the ICWF in providing relief to Indian 
nationals during extreme hardships and emergency conditions, the Committee had 
desired that sanctioning of funds/expenditure should be prompt and decisive. The 
Ministry was also urged to ensure transparency in the utilization of the Fund. In its 
Action Taken Note  furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated that Heads of 
Missions and Posts have been authorized to incur expenditure on most of the items of 
assistance as provided for in the detailed ICWF guidelines. Approval of the Ministry is 
required only in a few exceptional cases and proposals for decision on such cases are 
processed on top priority. The Committee hope that the said measures would help the 

20 
 
needy persons to get timely assistance from the ICWF. The Committee also desire that 
the Ministry should take fresh steps to ensure transparency in the utilization of the 
ICWF as urged by them and apprise them of the efforts made in this regard.  
DATABASE OF PBS  AWARDEES 
(Recommendation No. 44) 
  
35. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that Indian Missions are engaging with Pravasi Bharatiya 
Samman Award winners at the local level and the Ministry is also proposing to 
engage with them in a more structured manner. A diaspora directory based on 
professions is being prepared. The Ministry is also proposing to organise an 
interactive session of PBS awardees with all the Ministries . Being aware of the 
benefits of deeper engagement with PBS Awardees with outstanding 
accomplishments in areas such as science, business, culture, education and public 
service and who have significantly contributed to the welfare of the Indian diaspora or 
to India itself, the Committee urge the Ministry to create an alumni of all the PBS 
award winners within the shortest  time possible specifying their specialization and 
utilize their expertise in achieving our national priorities.’ 
 
36. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
 
 “The Ministry is trying to create a list of all Pravasi Bharatiya Samman 
Awardees with details of their specialization and achievements as part of its efforts to 
have a comprehensive database of the Awardees for further engagement with them.”  
  
37.   The Committee had urged the Ministry to create an alumni of all the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman award winners specifying their specialization and utilize their 

21 
 
expertise in achieving our national priorities. The action taken reply of the Ministry 
that it is trying to create a list of all Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awardees with details 
of their specialization and achievements indicate that not much efforts have been 
made in this direction so far. The Committee are of the view that the PBS awardees 
would greatly contribute towards achieving our national priorities and since 
compilation of the list of PBS awardees and their areas of specialization from the 
official records of the Ministry would not take much time, a database of all the PBS 
Awardees with details of their specialization and achievements should be created at 
the earliest. The Committee also desire that based on the specialization and 
achievements of PBS Awardees, the Ministry should engage them suitably in our 
national development agenda.  
 
RATIONALIZATION OF FEE STRUCTURE  FOR DIASPORA CHILDREN   
(Recommendation No. 45) 
 
38. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that under the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children 
(SPDC), 150 scholarships are offered to pursue under-graduate courses in India for 
specific professional and non-professional courses (except medical and related 
courses). A total of 131 scholarships were given to children of Indian workers in Gulf 
countries for the Academic Year 2022-23. The Committee, however, observe that the 
fees charged to diaspora children for education in India are quite high. The Committee 
have also been informed that the MEA has always communicated the concerns about 
high fees to the Ministry of Education. The Committee are of the view that adequate 

22 
 
educational support should be given to diaspora children to pursue their education in 
India and urge the MEA to make persistent efforts with the Ministry of Education to 
rationalize the fee structure for such children in Indian educational institutions.’ 
 
39.    In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
 
“The Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) scheme is aimed at 
enabling the Diaspora children to pursue undergraduate courses in Indian 
Universities/Institutions. The scheme has especially been aligned to cater to the 
requirement of financial assistance for the children of emigrant Indian workers 
proceeding for employment in Gulf countries. Out of 150 total scholarships being 
provided under the Scheme, 50 seats are reserved for children of Indian workers in 
ECR countries (which includes Gulf countries). Further, out of the aforesaid 50 seats, 
1/3rd slots, i.e., 17 seats are reserved for children of Indian workers who had been 
pursuing studies in India. This demonstrates the Ministry’s efforts to provide financial 
support for the deserving diaspora children on merit-cum-means basis. 
 
The Government is also facilitating admission of NRI Students in AICTE Approved 
Institutions by way of creating supernumerary seats through admission to NRI, where 
in five percent of seats within approved intake shall be allowed for admission under 
NRI category and also through introduction/continuation of supernumerary Seats 
for(OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries. The Institution sha1l have nil 
deficiency based on self-disclosure fifteen percent supernumerary seats over and 
above the approved intake per course shall be approved for AICTE approved 
Institutions and University Departments, for admitting students from Foreign 
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries. 
One third of these 15 percent seats shall be reserved for the Children of Indian 
Workers in the GuIf Countries.” 
 
40.  Being of the view that adequate educational support should be given to 
diaspora children to pursue their education in India, the Committee had urged the 
Ministry to make persistent efforts with the Ministry of Education to rationalize the fee 
structure for such children in Indian educational institutions. The Ministry, in its 

23 
 
Action Taken Reply, has highlighted its Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children 
and facilitating admission of NRI Students in AICTE Approved Institutions, but is silent 
on the issue of rationalization of fee structure for such children, urged by the 
Committee. The Committee strongly feel that education for children belonging to 
emigrant Indian workers in Indian educational institutions should be made affordable 
and reiterate their earlier recommendation of rationalization of fee structure for such 
children by pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Education. The Committee also 
desire that the progress achieved in this regard may be communicated to them. 

24 
 
Chapter-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation Sl No.1) 
 
The Committee note that India has a long standing historic deep-rooted relationship 
with GCC countries comprising of Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman, Kuwait, Qatar and 
Bahrain which has consolidated into a very strong relationship in modern times. The 
GCC countries are home to 8.7 million strong Indian expatriate community and 
cultural and people-to-people ties between India and Gulf are bedrock of the bilateral 
relations. The Committee further note that GCC has emerged as a major trade and 
investment partner for India. The GCC’s substantial oil and gas reserves are of vital 
importance for India's energy security while defence and security cooperation with 
GCC has also been increasing. There are various institutional mechanism between 
India and GCC, including political dialogue at the level of Foreign Ministers; MoU on 
Mechanism for Consultations; India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting at Secretary level 
and India-GCC Industrial Conference. The Committee understand that India has been 
maintaining close political and economic ties with all the GCC countries but strategic 
partnership is mostly with three countries, namely Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Oman. 
In view of the GCC as a collective entity having tremendous significance for India, the 
Committee desire that the Government should consider to elevate India’s strategic 
partnership based on mutual interests and cooperation with the remaining GCC 
countries viz. Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain to a higher level. The efforts and progress 
made in this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Gulf constitutes the “extended” neighborhood of India separated only by the Arabian 
Sea. India has a long standing historic deep-rooted relationships with GCC countries. The 
relationship goes back to 3000 BC with India having relationship with Mesopotamian 
civilization. Our relationship with Gulf countries has consolidated in modern times, in the form 
of a very strong relationship.  The GCC as a collective entity has tremendous significance for 
India. GCC has emerged as a major trade and investment partner for India. The GCC’s 
substantial oil and gas reserves are of vital importance for India's energy security. Defence 
and security cooperation with GCC has also strengthened. The GCC countries collectively 
host 8.7 million strong Indian expatriate community. The cultural and people-to-people ties 
between India and Gulf are a bedrock of the bilateral relations. India and Oman, recently 
cemented their long-term partnership through the signing of a Joint vision document titled ‘A 
Partnership for Future’ during the State Visit of His majesty Sultan Haitham Bin Tarik to India 
in December 2023. There has also been high level engagements between other two 
Strategic partners, UAE and Saudi Arabia. Hon. PM visited UAE in November 2023 to attend 

25 
 
COP28, UAE President was the Guest of Honour at the recently concluded Vibrant Gujarat in 
January 2024 and Saudi Crown Prince visited India in September 2023 for first meeting of 
the India - Saudi Strategic Partnership Council.  
 
Even though India has strategic partnership with three Gulf countries, India has maintained a 
multifaceted relationship with all GCC countries, with cooperation in diverse areas including 
political, economic, defence, cultural, people to people ties, etc. All efforts are being made to 
further enhance the bilateral relations with Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait. Besides, UAE, Saudi 
Arabia and Oman, India's bilateral trade has increased with Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait in 
recent years. Bilateral trade between India and Qatar was USD 18.77 billion in 2022-23, 
registering a growth of 24.90% as compared to 2021-22.  The bilateral trade between India 
and Bahrain reached USD 1.97 billion during the fiscal year 2022-23, indicating a substantial 
growth of 19.75% in comparison to the previous fiscal year, 2021-22. The bilateral trade 
between India and Kuwait reached USD 13.80 billion in the fiscal year 2022-23, marking a 
growth of 12.78% in comparison to the fiscal year 2021-22. There are various institutional 
mechanisms with these countries to deepen our ties based on mutual interests and 
cooperation.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.2) 
  
The Committee find that there are great opportunities for continuous enhancement in 
India’s relationship with GCC countries in multiple areas of interests and new and 
emerging fields for cooperation. In Committee’s view, India and the GCC countries 
have significant scope to enhance their cooperation in various multilateral bodies 
including the UN bodies. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to formulate a 
fresh strategy encompassing all these aspects and establish a robust Institutional 
mechanism for strengthening its relationship with GCC countries and expanding it to 
multilateral bodies. New initiatives may also be taken to deepen the cultural and 
people-to-people ties between India and GCC countries including the active 
participation of the 8.7 million strong Indian expatriate community to foster better 
understanding and cooperation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has been engaging with all Gulf countries on issues of global interests through various 
multilateral forums. At the UN and other multilateral fora, wherever appropriate, India has 
already been having engagements with the GCC countries, mostly bilaterally but also en-
block. Recently, GCC was a co-sponsor for India’s event "UDHR75 and VDPA30: 
Implementing the Right to Development for Realizing Human Rights and the 2030 Agenda" 
held on the sidelines of the 54th session of the Human Rights Council on 21 September 
2023. Saudi Arabia, UAE and Oman also attended the G20 Meetings during India’s 

26 
 
Presidency last year. However, depending upon the issues and the multilateral bodies, GCC 
does not always have a coordinated group position nor the views of the individual GCC 
countries are overlapping with or fully aligned with India’s position. Nevertheless, the 
importance of taking India-GCC engagement (either bilaterally or as a group) in the 
multilateral fora, as intended by the recommendation of the Committee is well taken and the 
same has been conveyed to the Indian Missions dealing with UN agencies. Apart from these, 
the bilateral institutional mechanisms like Joint Commission, Joint Working Groups, Task 
Force established between India and various Gulf countries also serve as an effective 
platform for engagement and cooperation.   
  
With regards to the participation of Indian expatriate community, they form a key pillar in 
fostering our bilateral relations with all Gulf countries with the presence of large expat 
community of close to 8.7 million. Our Missions in these countries have been making 
continuous efforts and undertaking various initiatives to strengthen cultural and people-to-
people ties.  There are various cultural exchanges between India and GCC countries under 
the Cultural Exchange Programmes. India has Cultural Exchange Programm /Cultural 
agreements all GCC countries. Our Missions have been showcasing India's rich cultural  and 
heritage diversity in Gulf countries through celebrations of Indian festivals, organizing cultural 
events, holding of special bilateral cultural events. For example, India participated as the 
‘Guest of Honour’ in prestigious Saudi National Festival of Heritage and Culture – Janadriyah 
in 2018. The year 2019 was celebrated as India-Qatar Year of Culture in Qatar. Our Embassy 
in Kuwait organized a Festival of India in 2023. As part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) 
celebrations, many events were organised in the Gulf countries. The AKAM events in Gulf 
countries included Indian dance and music events, illuminations of iconic buildings in 
tricolour, painting exhibitions, promotion of Indian cuisine etc.  Members of Indian community 
participate in cultural and other activities organized by the Mission from time to time, which 
also include celebration of important days like International Day of Yoga and Ayurveda Day, 
Festival of India. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
(Recommendation Sl No.3) 
 
The Committee note that India, together with UAE is actively engaged in the I2U2 
grouping which aims to encourage joint investments in six mutually identified areas 
such as water, energy, transportation, space, health, and food security. In the first 
virtual summit of I2U2 leaders on 14 July 2022, two joint projects on Food Corridor 
and Wind-Solar Hybrid Renewable energy and Battery Storage have been announced 
to be set up in India. The Committee are pleased at the initiatives taken by the I2U2 as 
these projects would contribute towards India’s energy and food security and urge the 
Government to ensure its effective implementation. New ideas and innovation in the 
field of water, space, health, technology, skilled workforces and entrepreneurial 

27 
 
dynamism etc. may be taken forward in the I2U2 so that India is able to fully capitalize 
on its partnership with  UAE and further with other GCC countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
I2U2 countries (India, Israel, USA and UAE) are united by common desire and commitment 
to strengthen the economic partnership in trade and investment. There is regular follow up at 
Sherpas level and Working Group level of the two joint projects on Food Corridor and Wind-
Solar Hybrid Renewable energy and Battery Storage announced during the I2U2 leaders’ 
summit. For the Food corridor project, ADQ, a Sovereign Wealth Fund of UAE is in regular 
contact with Gujarat government and working on its implementation. With respect to Wind-
Solar Hybrid Renewable energy and Battery Storage, there is a discussion going on with a 
few multinational companies for equity investment and collaborating with US and Israel 
companies for technology. Apart from these projects, I2U2 group is also discussing a few 
potential projects which includes project on Space Technology, Innovation center and Cold 
Chain Storage to be considered under I2U2.  
 
Further, with the objective of mobilizing private sector capital and expertise, the first I2U2 
Business Forum was held on 22 February 2023 in Abu Dhabi, UAE. It was the first event of 
this kind to take place since the official launch of the I2U2 Group during the I2U2 Leaders’ 
Summit in July 2022.  Companies and private sector representatives exchanged insights and 
discussed potential partnerships during seven parallel sessions focused on the food security, 
energy, water, space, transport, health, and technology fields. Further, a webpage of I2U2 
was also launched in September 2023, to provide a platform where business communities of 
four countries can submit their proposal. With these initiatives, government is working to 
further deepen it partnership across various sectors with I2U2 countries. In addition to the 
Food Security and Renewable Energy projects, considerable progress has also been made 
in space co-operation. A joint declaration of intent between the four countries on space 
cooperation is being discussed. Efforts are also underway to initiate concrete projects/ 
programs in other areas agreed by the leaders.  
 
Apart from cooperation with UAE under I2U2, we are also engaging with all GCC countries 
for enhancing cooperation in areas of mutual interests including through bilateral institutional 
frameworks and mechanisms like Joint Working Groups, Ministerial Committees, etc to 
deepen our bilateral partnership in various areas of common interests including space, 
health, technology, skilled workforces, etc. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

28 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.4) 
 
The Committee note that the Gulf region is considered as our extended 
neighbourhood and critical for trade, investment, energy and security of Indians living 
in the Gulf. The Committee also note that India is having good long standing relations 
with all the GCC countries. To maintain peace, progress and stability in the region, the 
Committee desire that the Government should make constant endeavour to 
strengthen and deepen its political, economic and cultural ties with the GCC 
countries. India should remain focused on building stronger relationship with Gulf 
countries through regular exchange visits including high level interactions and 
working on several areas of mutual benefits and emerging areas of cooperation. At the 
same time, India should work with GCC countries to create architecture for safety and 
security of the region and a coordinated response mechanism to deal with threats 
including piracy in high seas, environmental threats, response during disasters etc. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
India has excellent relations with all countries of GCC, straddling almost all domains of 
cooperation like political, economic, energy, security, culture and people-to-people ties. The 
strong and stable relations with all GCC countries are ensured through several specific steps. 
These include inter alia the following: 
 
i. In the field of political exchanges, regular exchange of high-level visits between India 
and Gulf countries have taken place. Prime Minister Modi has visited Gulf countries 11 
times since May 2014. These include 6 visits to UAE, 2 visits to Saudi Arabia and one 
each to Oman, Qatar and Bahrain. Saudi Arabia, UAE and Bahrain have conferred 
their highest civilian awards on PM Modi. There has been regular exchange of 
ministerial visits.  
ii. In trade relations, efforts are being made to improve trade relationship with all GCC 
countries. The GCC region contributes to about one-sixth of India’s total trade. UAE is 
India’s third largest trade partner while Saudi Arabia is at the fourth place. In FY 2022-
23, India’s trade with GCC countries was approximately USD 184 billion. This was 
almost a 20% rise from FY 2021-22. To further enhance trade relationship, India 
signed Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with UAE on 
February 18, 2022. We are also discussing FTA with GCC.  
iii. In the area of Investments, continuous engagements are made for promoting 
investments from GCC countries into India by engaging sovereign wealth funds in the 
region as well as private companies. Total FDI from GCC countries into India currently 
stands at about USD 20 billion. 

29 
 
iv. In the area of energy partnership, there has been efforts towards expansion of energy 
cooperation by moving from a buyer-seller relationship to a more comprehensive 
relationship by encouraging participation in India’s strategic petroleum reserves, 
negotiating long term gas supply arrangements, getting concessions in oilfields and 
renewable energy cooperation.  
v. In the area of Defence and Security, we have been strengthening defence and 
security cooperation with GCC countries including through exchange of high-level 
visits, bilateral exercises, training and participation in exhibitions.  Our cooperation 
has strengthened on counter terrorism, intelligence sharing, cybersecurity, maritime 
security, prevention of human trafficking and narcotics smuggling. Our strengthened 
relationship was also evident recently when Saudi Arabia provided excellent 
cooperation to Indian Air Force and Indian Navy for Operation Kaveri under which we 
evacuated about 3800 Indian nationals through Jeddah. India become Associate 
Partner in the multilateral Combined Maritime Forces (CMF) in Bahrain in 2022. India 
joined as full member of CMF in November 2023. A Joint Military Exercise was held 
for the first time between India and Saudi Arabia in Rajasthan from 29 January-10 
February 2024.  
vi. In the area of community, we have been working with Gulf countries for the welfare of 
the Indian workforce. The meetings of Joint Working Groups on labour and manpower 
issues with various Gulf countries are regularly convened to discuss issues related to 
Indian workers. Government is also working with the GCC countries on issues like 
skill harmonization and connecting worker recruitment platforms so that Indian 
workers get better and more transparent working conditions.  
vii. In the area of cultural cooperation, various initiatives are being undertaken for 
further strengthening cultural cooperation with all GCC countries, which include 
organising events such as International Day of Yoga, cultural exhibitions, cultural 
events, etc with involvement of local authorities and community organisations,  
 
India has been working with GCC countries to create architecture for safety and security of 
the region and a coordinated response mechanism to deal with threats including piracy in 
high seas, environmental threats, response during disasters etc. A co-ordinated response to 
deal with threats including piracy already exists in the form of DCoC-JA (Djibouti Code of 
Conduct- Jeddah Amendment) and CGIMA (Contact Group on Illicit Maritime Activities) 
wherein India is an observer but plays an active role. Saudi Arabia plays a very significant 
role in DCoC-JA.  The signatories of DcoC-JA include Saudi Arabia, UAE and Oman.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 

30 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.6) 
 
The Committee note that out of the six GCC countries, Oman, UAE and Bahrain have 
conveyed support to India’s claim for a permanent seat at a reformed UN Security 
Council. However, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have not, so far, expressed their 
support for India’s claim publicly. The Committee feel that India should continue it’s 
diplomatic efforts to gain support of India’s claim for a permanent seat at a reformed 
UN Security Council. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The recommendation from the committee is noted for giving further impetus to our strong 
engagement with GCC countries in the UN. It may be noted that on the multilateral front, 
especially with respect to the United Nations, it is ensured during bilateral visits and Foreign 
Office Consultations that the UN issues are flagged including greater convergence in various 
issues ranging from UNSC reforms, political issues, sustainable development agenda etc. In 
addition, bilaterally, we seek support from GCC countries to support each other’s 
candidatures in various multilateral fora.It is also pertinent to note that in the year 2023, a UN 
Foreign Office Consultation with Kuwait in Kuwait City was also held at Joint Secretary level. 
In addition, at New York, constant engagements with our Permanent Representative and 
other officers are held with their GCC counterparts on a range of matters. Ministry also 
endeavours to garner maximum written support for India's claim for permanent membership 
in the UN Security Council. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.7) 
 
The Committee note that during India’s G20 Presidency, Saudi Arabia as a member of 
G20 and UAE and Oman as invitee countries have participated in the G20 summit. The 
Committee further note that these three countries are having strategic partnerships 
with India. The Committee understand that India is keen to elevate its relationship with 
Kuwait and have been engaging with Kuwait at other levels. In view of the importance 
of Kuwait from our manpower perspective, the Committee urge the Government to 
actively engage with Kuwait including at the highest level for a positive outcome of the 
engagements.    
                                                                       
  
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India-Kuwait partnership has been traditionally close and time-tested. Historical contacts and 
people to people linkages are the foundation of our robust relations. Bilateral relationship has 
been nourished by sustained cultural and civilizational linkages. India was one of the first 
countries to establish diplomatic relations with the State of Kuwait. We celebrated the 60th 
anniversary of our diplomatic relations in 2021. There has been continuous efforts to 
increase the frequency of high level engagements including institutional mechanisms to 
further elevate the bilateral relationship with Kuwait.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.8) 
 
The Committee note that India is also working together with Gulf countries on issue of 
Climate Change. India and UAE have held regular consultations on climate change 
issues this year in view of our G-20 presidency and UAE’s COP-28 presidency. 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change has also established a Joint 
Working Group with UAE. Under India’s Presidency, G20 has accorded high priority to 
climate change. India has also pioneered several global initiatives contributing to fight 
against climate change and impact of climate change such as Mission LiFE (Lifestyle 
for Environment), India-UN Development Partnership Fund, International Solar 
Alliance(ISA), Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CRDI), Infrastructure for 
Resilient Island States (IRIS), Leadership Group on Industry Transition (LeadIT) etc. 
The Committee desire that the Government should impress upon the GCC countries to 
join and actively participate in the global initiatives pioneered by India for combating 
climate change and its impact.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
On the issue of climate change, there are certain areas where there is an alignment of India’s 
interests with those of the Arab Group of which the GCC countries are members. On those 
matters, India engages with the Arab Group. Saudi Arabia is a member of the Like-Minded 
Developing Countries (LMDC) Group of which India is also a part of. India and UAE also 
engaged on climate change issues  under UAE’s COP-28 presidency. The recommendation 
of the Committee that the Government should impress upon the GCC countries to join and 
actively participate in the global initiatives pioneered by India for combating climate change 
and its impact, is well taken.  The Government of India is actively encouraging GCC 
countries to join and engage in the global initiatives pioneered by India for combating climate 
change and its impact. In this regard, International Solar Alliance (ISA) is India’s initiative to 
provide a collective response to the common obstacles by massive deployment of solar 
energy in terms of technology, finance and capacity. UAE, Oman, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain 

32 
 
are members of the International Solar alliance. Other Gulf countries are also actively 
engaged to join the ISA. Similarly, CDRI works as an inclusive multi- stakeholder partnership 
on different aspects of strengthening disaster resilience of infrastructure. In order to 
strengthen the membership  CDRI, CDRI has been changed from membership by invitation 
only to membership by expression of interest. In this regard, CDRI membership has 
increased from 31 countries to 37 countries and 7 international organizations. We are 
actively encouraging GCC countries through bilateral and multilateral mechanisms to join 
CDRI headquartered in India. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.9) 
 
The Committee note that GCC countries are contributing almost 35% of India’s oil 
imports and 70% of gas imports. India and the GCC countries have a very strong 
energy partnership and efforts have been made to evolve this partnership into a 
comprehensive energy partnership rather than mere transactional buyer-seller 
relationship. UAE was the first country to participate in India’s Strategic Petroleum 
Reserve (SPR) in 2018. An MoU was signed with Saudi Arabian National Oil Company 
– Saudi Aramco for its participation in India’s SPR in 2019. India is now executing 
Phase-II of the SPR and several countries, including GCC countries, have expressed 
their interest for participation in the Phase-II of India’s SPR. The Committee further 
note that National Oil Companies of GCC countries are partnering Indian PSUs under 
the overall value chain of oil & gas sector including E&P assets and technological 
advancement in clean energy. Indian PSUs have also been awarded stakes in oilfields 
in UAE & Oman. Long term agreements for supply of LNG was also signed with UAE 
and Qatar. The Committee are pleased at the progress made towards a comprehensive 
energy partnership with GCC countries. Keeping in view India’s energy security needs, 
the Committee desire that the Government should keep up the ongoing momentum 
and make constant efforts to enhance the energy partnership including in the field of 
renewable energy. The Committee also urge the Government to actively engage with 
the GCC countries to secure their participation in Phase II of its Strategic Petroleum 
Reserve for an early implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the Cabinet approval on 08.07.2021 for construction of caverns along with SPM’s 
and associated pipelines in Phase II at Chandikhol (4 MMT) and Padur ( 2.5 MMT)  on PPP 
mode, the ISPRL has been engaging with GCC countries for their participation in phase II. 
ISPRL had informed Saudi Aramco of Saudi Arabia, ADNOC of UAE regarding opportunity for 
participation in phase 2 on PPP basis. In this context details were also shared by ISPRL. 
ISPRL shall inform Saudi Aramco as and when RFP is getting floated. Participation of Kuwait 

33 
 
Petroleum Company in Phase 2 of SPR program of India is one of the new areas of 
cooperation which is also being explored.  KPC had evinced interest to explore the 
opportunity of storing Kuwait Crude in ISPRL phase II. Information regarding Phase 2 
strategic reserves was shared with KPC on 10th Nov 2022. To broaden the scope of strategic 
reserves beyond national borders, ISPRL has signed an MoU with Oman Tanking Terminal 
Company LLC (OTTCO) on June 25th, 2023. This agreement is aimed at conducting 
feasibility studies for ISPRL's potential involvement in Phase 1 of the Ras Markaz project 
through equity partnership or leasing storage space. This endeavor presents a distinctive 
opportunity to establish strategic storage beyond India, particularly with an oil-producing 
nation. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.10) 
 
The Committee further note that India is engaging with the GCC countries on multiple 
levels to deepen the cooperation in the area of energy through exchanges/dialogues at 
various levels, Ministerial level meetings, institutional frameworks such as JWGs and 
Free Trade Agreements.  The Committee desire that through these 
exchanges/dialogues and Agreements, GCC countries may be persuaded to invest in 
India as well as provide more investment opportunities to Indian PSUs, including in 
renewable energy sector like solar and green hydrogen, green ammonia sector and 
hydrocarbon assets. Indian PSUs may also be facilitated and incentivized by the 
Government for such investments in GCC countries. The Committee also desire that 
the Government should explore the opportunity of signing more MoUs/Long Term 
Agreements and collaborations for India’s energy security. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The government has actively been highlighting investment opportunities in India's upstream, 
midstream, and downstream sectors, as well as renewable energy. This includes fostering 
collaboration in clean energy technology with Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. 
India is currently in discussions with the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Saudi Arabia and 
Kuwait regarding Green Hydrogen initiatives. Additionally, there is ongoing engagement with 
the UAE on biofuels through participation in the Global Biofuels Alliance. These efforts 
underscore India's commitment to fostering sustainable and innovative energy solutions 
through international collaboration. Presently, India has established long-term contracts with 
key Gulf nations, including Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Qatar, Kuwait, and Bahrain, for the 
procurement of crude oil, LNG, and LNG resources. Additionally, India is actively exploring 
the possibility of entering into a term contract with Oman for the sourcing of crude oil. These 
strategic engagements underscore India's efforts to secure a stable and diversified energy 
supply and strengthen diplomatic and economic ties with prominent energy-producing 

34 
 
nations in the region. MoU in the field of Energy with Saudi Arabia was signed in September 
2023, MoU in the field of Green Hydrogen Developments and Investments was signed with 
UAE in January 2023 and MoU on Investment cooperation in the field of Renewable Energy 
Sector was signed with UAE in January 2024. The Ministry continues to explore the 
opportunity of signing more MoUs/Long Term Agreements and collaborations for India’s 
energy security. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.11) 
 
The Committee note that GCC countries are focusing on India as preferred investment 
destination under natural gas, green hydrogen and clean energy technologies on 
broadening our relationship. India and Saudi Arabia have had two rounds of 
discussions replicating the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana in 2022 and has requested 
for further sharing of India’s experience in designing and implementation of PMUY. 
The Committee desire that the Government should maximize the focus on India as 
preferred investment destination by GCC countries and reciprocate through creation 
of favourable environment and incentives/ concessions for investment, where 
applicable.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has actively fostered engagements with Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries to attract investments across the entire value chain of the hydrocarbon sector. This 
includes securing investments in Strategic Petroleum Reserves, enhancing India's natural 
gas sector, and exploring collaborations. Additionally, efforts are underway to foster 
cooperation in green hydrogen and other renewable & clean energy technologies, in each 
other countries, demonstrating a comprehensive approach to bolstering energy infrastructure 
and sustainability through partnerships for our mutual benefits. India and UAE have signed 
an MoU for cooperation in the area green hydrogen and related technologies, which provides 
framework for enhancing UAE investments. An MoU for investments in the field of 
Renewable Energy was signed during the visit of the President of UAE to India from 09-10 
January 2024.The UAE is also in discussion with the Government of Gujarat to set up 
renewable power capacity of 10 GW. This includes solar and wind projects. An India-Kuwait 
investment Conference was organized by the Mission in May 2023 with participation of DPIIT, 
Invest India, CII and NIIF along-with business-houses and investment companies from 
Kuwait to encourage investments from Kuwait into India in these sectors. India has been 
growing as an attractive destination for investments from Qatar including in sectors like 
natural gas and clean energy. In August 2023, it was reported that INQ Holding LLC, a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of Qatar Investment Authority, acquired 2.7 % stake in the Adani 
Green Energy for about USD 474 million. India is engaging with the Saudi authorities under 

35 
 
the JWG on Energy that exists within the framework of the Strategic Partnership Council 
between the two countries. On the sidelines of Crown Prince’s visit to India in September 
2023, a special Saudi-India Investment Forum was convened which provided an opportunity 
to highlight the various initiatives and schemes for investment in India. Indian Missions in 
Gulf countries also organizes regular visits of commercial delegation such as CII, FICCI etc. 
to showcase opportunities in India.Government continues to highlight the investment 
potential in these areas through its investment promotion activities. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.12) 
 
The Committee further note that Indian PSUs have invested in green 
energy/technologies in GCC countries. India has signed MoU with Saudi Arabia, UAE 
and others. Large number of companies in India are looking at investing in these 
countries in the green technologies. Saudi Arabia under its Vision 2030 and other 
countries with similar long-term visions are giving encouragement to increments in 
the field of renewable energy. The Committee desire that as per India’s Long Term 
Vision for the energy sector to cater to our energy security needs, the Indian PSUs 
should be encouraged, facilitated and incentivized to invest in green 
energy/technologies in GCC countries so that they can contribute towards our energy 
security through importing/buying back of the product.   
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Government of India has placed special emphasis on transforming into a preferred 
investment destination in both the oil and gas sector and renewable energy. This 
commitment is evident through various measures, including policy reforms, Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF), budgetary support, strategic partnership showcasing India’s investment 
opportunity, and other initiatives aimed at creating an attractive and conducive environment 
for investments in these crucial sectors. The Government has actively fostered engagements 
with Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries to attract investments across the entire value 
chain of the hydrocarbon sector. This includes securing investments in Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves, enhancing India's natural gas sector, and exploring collaborations with Saudi 
Arabia and the UAE for the establishment of a Greenfield refinery and Petrochemical 
complex in Maharashtra. Additionally, efforts are underway to foster cooperation in green 
hydrogen and other renewable & clean energy technologies, in each other countries, 
demonstrating a comprehensive approach to bolstering energy infrastructure and 
sustainability through partnerships for our mutual benefit. These concerted efforts reflect the 
government's dedication to fostering sustainable and inclusive growth in the energy 
landscape. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

36 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.13) 
 
The Committee note that Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman and Bahrain have joined the 
International Solar Alliance while two GCC countries namely, Kuwait and Qatar are yet 
to join the ISA. The Committee desire that all the GCC countries should be brought 
under the ISA as India is already having cooperation with GCC countries in the energy 
sector. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to make extra efforts to 
persuade Kuwait and Qatar to join the Alliance at an early date. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government of India is actively engaging encouraging GCC countries to become a 
member of ISA as well as CDRI. 4 out of 6 GCC countries including UAE, Oman, Saudi 
Arabia and Bahrain are members of the ISA while Qatar and Kuwait are yet to join the ISA. 
However, with the concerted efforts of our Missions, both Kuwait and Qatar have expressed 
their interest and are in further talks to join ISA.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.14) 
 
The Committee note that India and GCC countries are also engaging within the Green 
Grids Initiative and the One Sun One World One Grid initiative under the aegis of the 
International Solar Alliance. The GGI-OSOWOG will interconnect generators and 
demand centres across continents with an international power transportation grid. 
Cross-border connections would also be combined with community grids, smart 
vehicle charging and interactive appliances to ensure that grids are green and resilient 
at all levels. The Committee further note that India is looking forward to explore 
potential cooperation and has invited GCCIA, UAE and Saudi Arabia to GGI-OSOWOG 
initiative for setting up interconnected cross border grids. The Committee are of the 
view that cooperation between India and GCC under the GGI-OSOWOG initiative would 
greatly enhance its partnership in the renewable/green energy sector and urge the 
Government to make vigorous efforts for meaningful dialogues so that interconnected 
cross border grids with GCC countries are set up at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry continues to make all efforts in enhancing partnership in the renewable/green energy 
sectors with GCC countries. The MoUs signed in recent years likeMoU in the field of Energy 

37 
 
with Saudi Arabia in September 2023, MoU in the field of Green Hydrogen Developments 
and Investments with UAE in January 2023 and MoU on Investment cooperation in the field 
of Renewable Energy Sector with UAE in January 2024 are testament to such efforts. 
Technical teams and working groups are being constituted under the MoUs to pursue the 
cooperation. With regard to GGI-OSOWOG initiative, Indian side has inter-alia proposed to 
include Gulf Cooperation Council Interconnection Authority (GCCIA) as member of the 
International Ministerial Steering Group. Including GCCIA on the steering committee would 
help in mutual benefit of sharing experiences, existing infrastructures and technology in grid 
connectivity. In this regard, Ministry will continue to make vigorous efforts in coordination with 
line Ministries for meaningful dialogues so that interconnected cross border grids with GCC 
countries are set up at the earliest. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.15) 
 
The Committee observe that India and the GCC countries cooperated closely during 
the COVID pandemic. India supplied Hydrochloroquine tablets and Covishield vaccine 
doses to the Gulf countries. GCC countries helped India with supply of Liquid Medical 
Oxygen and containers during the Delta wave of COVID in 2021. In the post pandemic 
period, both countries continue to take forward their healthcare cooperation which 
includes discussions on promoting medical and wellness tourism to India, 
collaborations between hospitals and medical institutions, development of reliable 
supply chains of vaccines and medicines, investments in rapidly growing health 
infrastructure in India, enhanced access of Indian pharmaceuticals to GCC countries 
and joint health cooperation in third countries especially in Africa. The Committee feel 
that mutually beneficial healthcare cooperation between India and GCC countries 
should continue unabated even in the post COVID world and thus urge the 
Government to formalize/institutionalize the said objectives in the form of MoUs/ 
Agreements.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has ongoing cooperation in health sector with GCC countries and has also entered into 
various agreements. With Oman, MoU on Cooperation in Health-care has been signed. 
Under this MoU, the Joint Working Group (JWG) has been constituted, to discuss various 
areas of cooperation  like pharmaceutical cooperation, exchange of medical professionals, 
medical value travel etc.  India and Saudi Arabia are currently negotiating an MoU on Health. 
This will further expand the existing cooperation in the health sector including areas such as 
investments in health care industries, capacity building, exports of medical products, joint 
ventures, exchange of knowledge and service exports. A draft MoU for Cooperation in the 
Healthcare and a MoU for cooperation in traditional medicines such as AYUSH, Unani and 

38 
 
Homeopath, etc. are also under discussion with UAE. A MoU on Investment Cooperation in 
Innovative Healthcare Projects was signed with UAE during the recent visit of UAE President 
to India in January 2024. There is a MoU for cooperation in the field of traditional medicine 
and homeopathy under discussion with Qatar. India has signed an MoU on Medical 
Cooperation with Kuwait, under which Joint Working Group (JWG) on Medical Cooperation 
has been set up to discuss areas like  medical technology, generic drugs, exchange of 
knowledge etc. India and Bahrain have signed an MOU for cooperation in the field of 
Healthcare. JWG meeting has been held to discuss cooperation in the field of pandemic 
management, exchange of medical professionals and ways to enhance trade in 
pharmaceuticals & medical devices and medical value travel.  India has proposed an MoU on 
Pharmacopoeial Cooperation and an annex titled “Bilateral Cooperation on Pharmaceutical 
Products” under the existing MoU with Bahrain. Government continues to accord high 
importance to strengthening health-care cooperation with GCC countries. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.16) 
 
The Committee note that India has entered into various agreements/MoUs in the health 
sector with Oman, Kuwait and Bahrain while several MoUs are under negotiation with 
the GCC countries. India and Saudi Arabia are currently negotiating an MoU on Health; 
a draft MoU for Cooperation in the Healthcare and a MoU for cooperation in traditional 
medicines such as AYUSH, Unani and Homeopath, etc. are under discussion with UAE 
and an MoU for cooperation in the field of traditional medicine and homeopathy is 
under discussion with Qatar. India has also proposed an MoU on Pharmacopoeial 
Cooperation and an annex titled “Bilateral Cooperation on Pharmaceutical Products” 
under the existing MoU with Bahrain. The Committee are pleased at the progress 
made so far and the initiatives and ongoing discussions/negotiations for cooperation 
in the health sector. They, however, desire that MEA should facilitate appropriately so 
that the discussions/negotiations are concluded at the earliest and the 
agreements/MoUs on health cooperation between India and some of the GCC 
countries are signed and operationalized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India has ongoing cooperation in health sector with GCC countries and has also entered into 
various agreements. An MoU on Cooperation in Health-care between India and Oman was 
signed during the visit of Prime Minister of India to Oman in 2018, which forms the basis of 
cooperation in health-care sector between the two countries.  It is important to note that 
Ayurveda has gained significant popularity in Oman and  there are over 35 operational 
Ayurvedic clinics and a full fledged Ayurvedic hospital in Oman. A MoU on Investment 
Cooperation in Innovative Healthcare Projects was signed between India and UAE during the 

39 
 
recent visit of UAE President to India in January 2024. India and Kuwait have signed  MoU 
on Medical Cooperation. A MoU on Pharmacopoeial cooperation has been proposed to the 
Kuwaiti side and the matter is being followed up with the Kuwaiti side for early conclusion of 
the MoU. India and Qatar, like with other GCC countries, are pursuing enhanced cooperation 
in health sector. A draft Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Pharmacopoeial 
Cooperation between Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, and its Qatari counterpart has 
been shared with the Qatari side for its consideration. Discussions have also been held on an 
MOU for cooperation in the field of traditional medicine and homeopathy between Ministry of 
AYUSH and Qatari Ministry of Public Health. An MoU in the field of cooperation in health is 
currently under consideration between India and Saudi Arabia. Ministry is continuously 
engaging on regular basis with Gulf countries on the early finalization of MoUs under 
discussion.  MEA will continue to facilitate appropriately so that the discussions/negotiations 
are concluded at the earliest and the agreements/MoUs on health cooperation between India 
and some of the GCC countries are signed and operationalized as recommended by the 
Committee.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.17) 
 
The Committee note that Space Agencies of India and GCC countries like UAE, Saudi 
Arabia, Oman are in the process of discussion to explore further collaboration while 
space agencies of India and Saudi Arabia have been coordinating regarding potential 
areas of collaboration under the framework of Strategic Partnership Council and also 
negotiating an MoU on cooperation in space sector. Efforts have been made to further 
expand the horizon of bilateral cooperation with Qatar in Space sector, especially in 
Satellites. Moreover, a Collaboration Framework between New Space India Limited 
(NSIL), India and National Space Agency (NSSA) Bahrain  in the areas of capacity 
building; space technology & applications; Ground Segment support; and 
Consultancy services is under discussion. In order to enhance and strengthen 
partnerships in space cooperation and bring about further collaboration in this sector 
between India and GCC countries, the Committee urge the Government to bring all the 
ongoing discussion and collaborative efforts to a fruitful conclusion for an early 
implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
India has been actively engaging with all the GCC countries to strengthen partnership in 
Space cooperation.  There are ongoing discussions between the Space Agencies of India 
and the GCC countries like UAE, Saudi Arabia, Oman to explore further collaboration. Under 
the framework of Strategic Partnership Council, space agencies of India and Saudi Arabia 

40 
 
have been coordinating regarding potential areas of collaboration. Both sides are also 
negotiating a country to country MoU on cooperation in space sector. A MoU on Space 
cooperation signed with Oman lays the foundation for collaborative efforts in space 
exploration, satellite technology, academic collaboration and research. There have been 
efforts to further expand the horizon of bilateral cooperation with Qatar in Space sector, 
especially in Satellites. India has signed a MoU with Kuwait on Cooperation in the exploration 
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. India and Bahrain have signed a Statement of 
Intent for cooperation in Space Sector. A Collaboration Framework between NewSpace India 
Limited (NSIL), India and National Space Agency (NSSA) Bahrain  in the areas of capacity 
building; space technology & applications; Ground Segment support; and Consultancy 
services is under discussion. Space agencies of India and Saudi Arabia have been 
coordinating regarding potential areas of collaboration under the framework of Strategic 
Partnership Council and also negotiating an MoU on cooperation in space sector.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.18) 
 
The Committee note that the education sector has emerged as a strong area of 
cooperation between India and the GCC countries. As a matter of policy, collaboration 
between educational institutions in India and countries abroad is encouraged.  Indian 
Missions also facilitate collaborations in education sector. There is an ongoing 
process of identifying 40 top universities globally in which Indian diaspora are playing 
a role in the form of faculty members or senior researchers as a part of educational 
and cultural collaborations with universities across the world .  The Committee also 
note that an MoU was signed in July 2023 to establish an IIT campus in the UAE. The 
Committee feel that educational collaborations between India and GCC countries 
should be enhanced and urge the Government to explore more avenues for 
partnerships in this sector so that more MoUs for facilitating higher and technical 
education would be signed. Indian Missions abroad may be pursued to play a more 
proactive role in facilitating educational collaborations between institutions in India 
and in the GCC countries. The Committee also urge the Ministry to complete the 
exercise regarding identification of top universities having involvement of diaspora at 
the earliest for promotion of educational and cultural collaborations. 
   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As a matter of policy, we encourage collaboration between educational institutions in India 
and countries abroad.  Our Missions also facilitate collaborations in education sector with 
GCC countries. It is may be noted that important exams such as the National Eligibility cum 
Entrance Test (NEET), Joint Entrance Examination (JEE), and other similar exams are 

41 
 
concurrently conducted in Gulf countries alongside India. The collaboration between India 
and GCC countries in the education sector has a longstanding and robust. Recently, 
Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
and Dhofar University, for establishing chair in Hindi language was signed in December 
2023. Additionally, possibility of signing a Letter of Understanding (LoU) between ICCR and 
Sultan Qaboos University for the establishment of chair in economics is also being explored. 
It may be noted that leading Indian Universities like BITS Pilani, AMITY, Manipal etc have 
also established their campuses in UAE. Our Mission is also facilitating discussions of other 
universities with the UAE authorities, to set-up their campuses in UAE. Kuwait College of 
Science and Technology is being run in active collaboration with IIT Delhi.In order to promote 
collaborations between India and Bahrain in the field of education, Mission has facilitated 
meetings of Bahrain Institute of Banking & Finance (BIBF) with IIT Mumbai and IIM 
Ahmadabad to help them start joint courses for mid-level executive training. Discussions in 
respect of establishment of IIT campus and other private Indian Institutions interested in 
setting up campus in Bahrain such as Rajagiri Group have been facilitated by the Mission. 
Our Mission in Qatar continues to engage with the Qatar side for greater educational 
collaboration between Indian and Qatari institutions as well as provision of higher education 
courses by Indian universities. Since 2022, Savitribai Phule University has started providing 
some courses to students in Qatar. Our Mission in Saudi Arabia is actively working with 
Saudi Ministry of Education to deepen collaboration in the higher education sector. During 
the recent visit of Crown Prince to India in 2023, it was agreed that direct relations between 
universities and scientific & educational institutions would be encouraged.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.20) 
 
The Committee note that India’s defence and security relationship with the Gulf 
countries consist of  high level defence visits, joint naval and air exercises, NSA and 
Deputy NSA level dialogues, ship visits, training and participation in exhibitions, 
cooperation in areas such as counter-terrorism, intelligence sharing, cyber security, 
maritime security, etc. The Committee further note that MoUs on defence cooperation 
have been signed with UAE, Saudi Arabia and Oman in the past few years and two 
MoUs on defence cooperation with Oman were renewed in May 2021. The Committee 
acknowledge the growing cooperation between India and GCC countries in defence 
and security matters but are surprised that MoUs have been signed with only few 
countries so far. The Committee, are, therefore of the view that India-GCC cooperation 
on defence and security needs to be scaled up with proper mechanism for intelligence 
sharing on terrorism, human trafficking, smuggling of narcotics, etc. An institutional 
framework for cooperation in new and emerging areas such as cyber security, 
maritime security, use of science and technology and artificial intelligence in the 
detection and countering of terrorist threats, etc. may be evolved to strengthen our 

42 
 
partnerships in the field of defence and security. The Committee also desire that 
security dialogues between India and GCC countries may be held regularly at the 
highest level. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
We have an abiding interest in the region which we consider as our extended 
neighbourhood. India’s defence and security relationship with the Gulf countries is 
continuously expanding, with high level visits, bilateral exercises, ship visits, training and 
participation in exhibitions. There is good cooperation in areas such as counter-terrorism, 
intelligence sharing, cyber security and maritime security. Out of the six GCC countries, India 
has signed Defence Cooperation MoUs with Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. India has 
regular structured meetings with Gulf countries in Joint Defence Cooperation Committee 
meetings on Security and Defence Cooperation. The MoUs with Kuwait and Bahrain are also 
under consideration. 
 
Indian Navy has structured exercises with four GCC countries’ navies viz  Oman (Naseem Al 
Bahr), Saudi Arabia (Al Mohed Al Hindi), UAE (Zayed Talwar) and Qatar (Za’ir Al Bahr). In 
addition to these structured exercises, Indian Navy also undertakes regular Passage 
Exercise (PASSEX) with GCC Navies. There are also Staff level talks between Indian 
Services and their counterparts in GCC countries. Navy to Navy talks with UAE and Oman 
are already institutionalized and that with Saudi Arabia is under consideration. Army to Army 
Staff Talks (AAST) with UAE and Oman also exists. A Joint Military Exercise is being held for 
the first time between India and Saudi Arabia in Rajasthan from 29 January-10 February 
2024. Air Force to Air Force Staff Talks between India and Oman takes place. IAF has been 
engaging with Gulf countries to develop significant interoperability with GCC countries viz 
UAE(Ex Desert Flag and Advanced Tactical Leadership course), Oman (Ex Easter Bridge). 
IAF is planning to initiate exercise with other Gulf countries in the near future.  
 
There have also been NSA/Dy. NSA level dialogues with various GCC countries. NSA visited 
Saudi Arabia in May 2023 and met his counterparts from Saudi Arabia, US and UAE. He also 
visited Oman in June 2023. A Dy. NSA level dialogue with Oman was held in January 2023.  
Similarly, India and GCC countries continue to exchange information and best practices on 
cybersecurity in various defence and security related dialogues. MOUs on cybersecurity 
cooperation are also being discussed between India and various Gulf countries. The 
deepening of our engagement in various means including exchange of visits, institutional 
mechanisms are fostering our efforts for improved regional security.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
 
 

43 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.21) 
 
The Committee note that India and GCC countries continue to exchange information 
and best practices on cyber security in various defence and security related 
dialogues. MoUs on cyber security cooperation are also being discussed between 
India and various Gulf countries. The MoUs on Cyber Security cooperation between 
CERT-In and its equivalent organisation in GCC countries are currently under 
discussions at various stages.  The Committee are of the view that MoUs on cyber 
security between India and GCC countries are long overdue especially in the backdrop 
of severe challenge posed by cyber terrorism globally. They, therefore, desire that the 
Government should make concerted efforts to evolve a mechanism for cooperation 
with GCC countries through MoUs/Agreements on cyber security expeditiously. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to facilitate the ongoing discussion on MoUs 
regarding cyber security cooperation between CERT-In and its equivalent organisation 
in GCC countries for its early and successful conclusion. 
                                                                                  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has been actively taking initiatives in facilitating discussion/negotiation for signing of 
MoU/MoC on cooperation in the area of Cyber Security between CERT-In and its 
counterparts in GCC Countries to enhance cyber security for India.  MEA has taken initiative 
in this respect with Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar.  However, CERT-
In has recently informed that they are awaiting for the clarity and clearance on the standard 
CERT to CERT draft MoU for cooperation in the area of cyber security from NSCS. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation No.22) 
 
The Committee note that high priority has been attached to maritime security in India’s 
cooperation with GCC countries. Given the pivotal role of the Gulf countries in 
maritime trade, its enormous oil and natural gas resources and India’s dependence on 
these countries for our energy security, the Committee desire that India-GCC 
cooperation  on maritime security should be considerably enhanced including signing 
of more MoUs/Agreements, if required, so as to ensure maritime safety and 
unhindered transportation of energy resources in the region. The Committee also urge 
the Government to extend all support to the GCC countries for protection of its 
maritime routes to prevent instability which has the potential to impact our economy 
as well as the global economy. 
 

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry concurs with the committee's recommendations. Maritime security has been high on 
the agenda of cooperation between India and GCC countries. This is reflected in high level 
visits such as that of Chief of Naval Staff to Oman in September 2021, joint naval exercises 
such as ‘Al-Mohed al-Hindi’ exercises between India and Saudi Arabia that took place in 
August 2021 and May 2023, signing of MOU on White Shipping Information with Oman in 
2021 and India joining the multilateral Combined Maritime Forces in Bahrain as an Associate 
Partner in 2022. The Chief of Saudi Naval Forces visited India in January 2024 to strengthen 
cooperation in maritime defence.  Maritime security is discussed in various security and 
defence meetings between India and GCC. Indian Navy has become full member of 
Combined Maritime Forces(CMF) from November 2023. Towards cooperation in Information 
Sharing, one ILO from Indian Navy is being placed at CMF Headquarters in Bahrain. Indian 
Naval ships have been continuously engaging with Mission deployed at PoG and Op Sankalp 
towards ensuring protection of International Shipping lanes near the Gulf region and to 
provide assistance/support to merchant vessels, whenever required.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation No.23) 
 
The Committee note that the contribution of the GCC region to India’s total trade is 
about one-sixth while the total volume of India’s trade with GCC countries stood at 
184.46 billion USD during the FY 2022-23. Out of the total volume, India’s exports 
stood at 51.27 billion USD and its imports at 133.19 billion USD indicating trade 
imbalance between the two countries. The Ministry has stated that the trade deficit is 
owing to heavy energy dependence of India on Gulf nations and high imports of oil 
and gas. Petroleum and petrochemical products constitute the main items of export 
for GCC countries to India while the main items of export by India include cereals and 
food items, jewelleries, synthetic fibres and yarns, textiles, apparels, machinery, iron 
and steel products and plastic products. The Committee feel that the trade imbalance 
between India and GCC countries should be addressed through collective efforts of all 
the Ministries/Departments/Agencies concerned and urge the Ministry to facilitate the 
process of devising a fresh strategy for enhancing India’s exports to GCC countries as 
well as to increase  inward investments to India. Diversification of India’s exports 
basket by including other sectors such as IT, space, automobiles, chemical and 
pharmaceutical products, etc. should also be taken up for enhancing our exports to 
GCC countries.  The Committee also urge the Ministry to impress upon our Missions 
in these countries to make vigorous efforts in trade and investment promotion events, 
facilitation of visits of delegations, addressing non-tariff barriers, and other measures, 
in association with Industry bodies/associations. 
 

45 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Negative trade balance with the GCC is largely on account of the import of crude oil/natural 
gas which are raw material imports. Excluding trade in Chapter 27 (oil trade), non-oil trade is 
relatively more balanced with India’s non-oil (exports excluding those in chapter 27) exports 
to the GCC totalling USD 38(approx) billion in FY 2022-23 and India’s non-oil imports from 
the GCC during the same period stood at USD 42.45 billion. India-GCC trade data for last 
three years are as under: 
 
India-GCC Non-Oil Trade  
Values in US $ Billions | Source: DGCIS 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Export Import Total Trade Export Import Total Trade Export Import Total Trade 
23.86 21.74 45.61 33.82 37.20 71.02 37.97 42.44 80.41 
 
To correct the trade imbalance via enhanced exports with the GCC countries, various steps 
have been taken. Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry in partnership 
with the Indian Missions in GCC countries, are making dedicated trade and investment 
promotion efforts to enhance Indian exports to these countries and also to increase inward 
investments from GCC countries to India. Moreover, Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme 
also provides financial support to Business Federation, Chambers and Export Promotion 
Councils (EPCs) for organizing trade exhibitions, trade fairs, and business meets etc. In this 
regard, ten (10) MAI proposals of Apex Chamber/organization/EPCs have been 
recommended for the FY-2023-24 in GCC with MAI Assistance of total 462.56(in lakhs). Also, 
one of the steps being taken includes operationalization of India-UAE CEPA wef 01/05/2022 
and also starting negotiations with Oman for a bilateral CEPA. With regard to India-UAE 
CEPA, in the first year of implementation, total exports from India witnessed a 12.71% growth 
compared to the previous year. Both the countries have set an ambitious target of taking non-
oil bilateral trade to $100 billion  by 2030.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

46 
 
 
(Recommendation No.24) 
 
The Committee observe that trade between India and GCC countries have been 
dominated by UAE and Saudi Arabia. UAE is India’s largest trade partner among the 
GCC countries with the total volume of trade at Rs. 84.8 billion USD while Saudi Arabia 
occupies the second position at 52.76 USD during the FY 2022-23. In terms of trade 
imbalance, India’s exports to Saudi Arabia stood at 10.72 and its imports at 42.03 
billion USD. The Committee find scope for enhancement  in India’s trade and 
investment with the other GCC countries like Kuwait, Qatar, Oman and Bahrain and 
desire that the Government should explore the opportunities collectively with all the 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies concerned. On the issue of the huge trade deficit 
between India and Saudi Arabia, the Committee urge the Ministry of External Affairs in 
coordination with all related Ministries, to make all out efforts for improving the trade 
imbalance in favour of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Besides, UAE and Saudi Arabia, India's bilateral trade has increased with other GCC 
countries also. Trade with Qatar has also increased over the year. Bilateral trade between 
India and Qatar was USD 18.77 billion in 2022-23, registering a growth of 24.90% as 
compared to 2021-22. Trade with Bahrain has witnessed a year-on-year increase. The 
bilateral trade between India and Bahrain reached USD 1.97 billion during the fiscal year 
2022-23, indicating a substantial growth of 19.75% in comparison to the previous fiscal year, 
2021-22. Trade with the UAE has experienced a yearly upswing. The bilateral trade between 
India and the UAE amounted to USD 84.84 billion in the fiscal year 2022-23, demonstrating a 
significant expansion of 16.41% in contrast to the preceding fiscal year, 2021-22. Commerce 
with Kuwait has seen an annual uptick. The bilateral trade between India and Kuwait reached 
USD 13.80 billion in the fiscal year 2022-23, marking a growth of 12.78% in comparison to 
the fiscal year 2021-22. Trade with Saudi Arabia has witnessed a yearly upsurge. The 
bilateral trade between India and Saudi Arabia amounted to USD 52.76 billion in the fiscal 
year 2022-23, reflecting a substantial growth of 23.11% compared to the fiscal year 2021-22. 
Commerce with Oman has experienced an annual upswing. The bilateral trade between 
India and Oman reached USD 12.38 billion in the fiscal year 2022-23, indicating a significant 
growth of 24.02% compared to the fiscal year 2021-22. Trade with GCC nations excluding 
UAE and Saudi Arabia has also increased over the year. 
Bilateral trade between India and Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar was USD 46.95 billion in 
2022-23, registering a growth of 20.64% as compared to 2021-22. Significantly, in order to 
further leverage trade complementarities with Oman, the CEPA negotiations were started in 
November, 2023.  
 

47 
 
On the issue of trade deficit with Saudi Arabia, Mission has been making vigorous efforts by 
conducting B2B meetings, buyer-seller meets, and frequent visits of Indian business 
delegations to Saudi Arabia in order to diversify our export basket to the Kingdom. Mission 
has also been identifying various non-tariff barriers which have been taken up with Saudi 
side. These issues were also taken up during the recent Ministerial visits including Hon. 
Commerce and Industry Minister in October 2023. FICCI is also planning to open a regional 
office in Riyadh for bilateral trade promotion.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.26) 
 
The Committee note that the total FDI of GCC countries to India stood at about 20 
billion USD as of December 2022. The Sovereign Wealth Funds of the Gulf countries of 
UAE, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait have been positive on increasing their 
investments in India while other  public/private companies from the Gulf have also 
been increasing investments in India. The Committee further note that some UAE 
companies have also shown interest in investing in the UT of Jammu &Kashmir. India 
is also currently negotiating Bilateral Investment Treaty with UAE, Saudi Arabia and 
Kuwait. The Committee find it encouraging that FDI inflow to India from GCC countries 
have been increasing over the years but would like to point out that more than 90% of 
the FDI inflow has been from two countries only i,e UAE and Saudi Arabia. 
Investments from the other four GCC countries like Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait 
have been low. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should assess 
the factors for low FDI inflow to India from these countries and work out a strategy for 
increased investments in India by these countries. The opportunity presented by some 
UAE companies for investing in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir should also be followed 
up promptly. The Committee also urge the Ministry to take proactive role in facilitating 
the ongoing Bilateral Investment Treaty negotiation with UAE, Saudi Arabia and 
Kuwait for its early and fruitful conclusion for an enhanced FDI inflow into India. 
Indian Embassies/ Missions in GCC countries may also be pursued to organize 
sustained and vigorous country and sector specific investment promotion campaigns 
to bring more FDI inflow to India.  
                                              
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pursuant to the Cabinet approval on the Model Indian BIT on 16.12.2015, it has been 
decided to terminate the existing Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) with countries whose initial 
duration period is over and re-negotiate on the basis of the revised Model BIT. Accordingly, 
India is having on-going/active negotiations of Bilateral Investment Treaties with UAE, Saudi 

48 
 
Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, Bahrain and Oman which are part of the GCC. These negotiations are 
at different stages. Status of these BIT are as follows:  
 
i. India-UAE – India-UAE signed the BIT in December 2013 which got enforced in September 
2014. The treaty is valid till September 2024. Meanwhile, both countries started renegotiation 
on BIT and the 1st round was held from 25th to 27th September 2017. Since then, 18 rounds 
of negotiations have been held between India and UAE, the last one being held on 8 th -10th 
January 2024. Substantial progress has been made in the negotiations. 
 
ii. India-Saudi Arabia – India signed a BIPA with Saudi Arabia on 25.01.2006 which was 
enforced on 20.05.2008 and terminated on 01.08.2019. However, the investments made prior 
to the date of termination will remain protected under the Agreement for a further period of 20 
years from the date of termination of the Agreement. Both sides had exploratory discussions 
on BIT on 12th September, 2019 through VC and agreed to continue the discussions on the 
BIT. So far 6 rounds of negotiation have been held, the last one being held on 13.12.2023 
wherein discussions were on Most Favoured Nation and Dispute Settlement. A High Level 
Task Force is also being setup to facilitate and monitor investments from Saudi Arabia. 
iii. India-Qatar - BIT signed on 07.04.1999, which was enforced on 15.12.1999 and 
terminated on 23.03.2017. Nonetheless the Agreement shall continue to be effective for a 
further period of ten years form the date of its termination in respect of investments made or 
acquired before the date of termination. BIT negotiations with Qatar have started. 
 
iv. India-Kuwait – BIT signed on 27.11.2001, which was enforced on 28.06.2003 and 
terminated on 28.06.2018. However, provisions of the Agreement shall continue to remain 
effective on the investments made prior to the date of notice for termination for a period of 15 
years from the date of termination of the Agreement. India sent a Note Verbale to the Kuwaiti 
side in 2017 to terminate the existing BIT and a request for negotiating a new agreement on 
the basis of 2015 Model BIT. The 1 st Round of negotiations was held in New Delhi from 12th 
-14th June and 16th June 2023. The Indian Model BIT Text was taken as base text during 
negotiation and good progress was recorded. The next round of negotiations is being 
proposed to be held at the earliest. 
 
v. India-Bahrain –BIT signed on 13.01.2004, which was enforced on 05.12.2007 and 
terminated on 24.03.2021. Notwithstanding the termination, the Agreement shall continue to 
be effective for a further period of 15 years from the date of its termination in respect of 
investments made or acquired before the date of the termination of the Agreement.  Bahrain 
has conveyed that the offer of signing a BIT is currently under consideration. 
 
vi. India-Oman –BIT, signed on 02.04.1997, was enforced on 13.10.2000 and terminated on 
23.03.2017. Notwithstanding the termination, the Agreement shall continue to be effective for 
a further period of 20 years from the date of its termination in respect of investments made or 

49 
 
acquired before the date of termination of the Agreement. The delegations of India and the 
Sultanate of Oman have met. The discussions are ongoing. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.27) 
 
The Committee note that MoUs were signed between India and UAE on establishment 
of a framework for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies - the Indian rupee and 
the Emirati Dirham for cross-border transaction and interlinking payment and 
messaging system of both countries. With the operationalization of the MoUs, 
exporters and importers in both the countries can invoice in their local currencies. 
India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing 
mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. The proposals related to 
trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued with Kuwait. The 
Committee understand that bilateral trade settlement in local currencies and 
interlinking payment and messaging systems of India and GCC countries will greatly 
enhance the economic engagements between the countries resulting in increased 
trade and FDI inflow and urge the Ministry to facilitate the signing of such MoUs with 
all the GCC countries at an early date.  
 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
India has held discussions related to the UPI platform with various Gulf countries. The Rupay 
card is already functional in UAE and MOUs for the same have also been signed with Saudi 
Arabia, Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE are also engaged in discussions on possible 
integration of the UPI platform with UAE payment platform. Similarly, India is also engaged in 
discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade 
settlement in local currencies. RBI is open to signing such MoU with GCC countries based on 
the (i) willingness and cooperation of the Central Banks and authorities in these countries, (ii) 
their macro-financial and macroeconomic parameters and (iii) geo strategic concerns with the 
overall concurrence of the Government. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.28) 
 
The Committee note that under Cultural Exchange Programme, regular cultural 
exchanges have been held between India and GCC countries. Besides, specific events 
and campaigns were conducted including celebration of Indian festivals, Indian dance 
and music events, promotion of Indian cuisine, popularization of yoga, etc. The 

50 
 
Committee further note that media cooperation between organizations in India and 
Gulf countries is also encouraged by both the parties. Indian embassies regularly 
organize cultural programmes and Indian associations have also been involved in  
organizing social and cultural programmes. Keeping in view the fact that cultural and 
people-to-people ties are bedrock to the bilateral relations between India and the Gulf 
and presence of significant number of Indian diaspora, the Committee desire that the 
number, frequency, scope of cultural exchanges, events and campaigns and scale of 
participation should be expanded in a planned manner. More number of cultural 
exchange programmes/cultural cooperation agreements should also be signed to 
deepen the cultural ties and people-to-people contacts. The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to actively facilitate/further escalate media cooperation between organization 
in India and the GCC countries.    
                                                        
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Our Missions have been proactive in strengthening cultural cooperation with all GCC 
countries. Indian contingents, including cultural troops regularly participate in cultural events.  
Series of events such as roadshows, cultural exhibitions, and festivals that celebrate the rich 
heritage of India are also being organized regularly.  Apart from government agencies, a 
large number of private organizations and individuals are actively engaged in the fields of 
entertainment and culture to promote cultural ties in these countries. Our Missions in 
association with the local communities are supporting such initiatives of private organizations 
and individuals to promote cultural interactions. In order to closely engage with these 
countries on the recommendation of the Missions, the ICCR has deployed India-based 
teachers to teach Yoga in Iraq, Oman and Saudi Arabia during the last two years. An MoU on 
Yoga Cooperation was also entered into with Saudi Arabia in 2021.  
  
There are various cultural exchanges between India and GCC countries under the Cultural 
Exchange Programmes. India has Cultural Exchange Programm /Cultural agreements all 
GCC countries. Our Missions have been showcasing India's rich cultural  and heritage 
diversity in Gulf countries through celebrations of Indian festivals, organizing cultural events, 
holding of special bilateral cultural events. For example, India participated as the ‘Guest of 
Honour’ in prestigious Saudi National Festival of Heritage and Culture – Janadriyah in 2018. 
The year 2019 was celebrated as India-Qatar Year of Culture in Qatar. Our Embassy in 
Kuwait organized a Festival of India in 2023. As part of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) 
celebrations, many events were organised in the Gulf countries. The AKAM events in Gulf 
countries included Indian dance and music events, illuminations of iconic buildings in 
tricolour, painting exhibitions, promotion of Indian cuisine etc.   
Ministry organizes visits of foreign journalists to India with the objective of familiarizing them 
with different aspects of the country. The familiarization programme includes engagements 
with senior Government officials in the Ministry as well as other Ministries/Departments, and 

51 
 
field visits to places of commercial, scientific, educational, and touristic interests. A 
familiarization programme for journalists of Gulf countries was organized from 14 to 21 
January, 2023. 19 media persons from different media organization of Bahrain, Oman, Saudi 
Arabia and UAE visited India for the familiarization programme. In the current financial year, 
a similar Familiarization programme for journalists was held, under which Journalists from 
Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and UAE visited India from 13 to 20 January, 2024. 
Journalists from Saudi Arabia were part of special familiarization visit to India which was 
organized for G20 member countries from 12 to 23 August 2023.Asian News International 
(ANI) has concluded MoUs on cost free content sharing with foreign media organizations 
including with the following GCC countries to boost cooperation between the countries. 
 
 
S. No. 
 
Country 
 
Newspaper / Channel 
 
 
1. 
 
 
 
Oman  
Muscat Daily 
The Arabian Stories  
The Times of Oman  
Oman News Agency 
2. 
 
Kuwait  Kuwait Times  
Indiansinkuwait.com   
Aljarida Newspaper 
3. Qatar Qatar Tribune 
4. 
 
 
United Arab Emirates Emirates News Agency, WAM  
Khaleej Times  
Gulf News  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation No.29) 
 
The Committee note that apart from Government agencies, a large number of private 
organizations and individuals are actively engaged in the fields of entertainment and 
culture to promote cultural ties in GCC countries. Indian Missions, in association with 
the local communities, have also been supporting such initiatives of private 
organizations and individuals in promoting cultural interactions. The Committee 
desire that in addition to encouraging and extending support to the private 
organizations and individuals actively engaged in promoting cultural interactions as 
well as local communities/diaspora associations in GCC countries, Indian Missions 
should provide incentives, whether monetary or otherwise to such entities to achieve 
the goal of deepening cultural ties and people-to-people contacts. The Committee 
further desire that the Ministry should formulate a strategy to capitalize on India's vast 
potential in tourism, entertainment and culture to forge strong partnerships with GCC 

52 
 
countries over the next five years for ensuring substantial growth and collaboration in 
these fields. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government continues to promote India's tourism, entertainment and cultural potential 
including through enhanced cooperation with GCC countries entities and involvement of 
Indian community organizations in these countries. This is being done keeping in mind both 
short and long term perspectives. Our Missions have been proactive in strengthening cultural 
cooperation with all GCC countries. Indian contingents, including cultural troops regularly 
participate in cultural events.  Series of events such as roadshows, cultural exhibitions, and 
festivals that celebrate the rich heritage of India are also being organized regularly.  Apart 
from government agencies a large number of private organizations and individuals are 
actively engaged in the fields of entertainment and culture to promote cultural ties in these 
countries. Our Missions in association with the local communities are supporting such 
initiatives of private organizations and individuals to promote cultural interactions. Our 
Missions have been actively promoting and disseminating information on Indian tourism to 
various stakeholders in respective GCC countries and has been conducting meetings and 
workshops with tour operators to increase the inflow of tourists from Gulf countries to India. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.30) 
 
The Committee note that food and food-related products constitute the bulk of Indian 
exports to GCC countries. Under the Integrated Food Corridors Project under I2U2 
Framework, the UAE will invest $2 billion USD to develop a series of integrated food 
parks across India while India will provide appropriate land for the project and will 
facilitate farmers’ integration into the food parks. The Committee further note that UAE 
delegations have already visited India and held meetings with different stakeholders. 
The Committee understand that integrated food parks across India would greatly 
contribute towards food security as well as bring benefits to farmers in the country. 
They, therefore,  urge the MEA to facilitate the discussions with all the stakeholders, 
actively coordinate with the Ministry/Department concerned for allotment of 
appropriate land and work out the modalities so that integrated food parks are 
established across the country at an early date. The Committee also urge the Ministry 
to explore avenues for food security cooperation/ agreements  with other GCC 
countries.  
 
 
                                                  
 

53 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Food and food-related products constitute the bulk of Indian exports to GCC countries. 
Government of India through its Embassy in these countries is encouraging to invest in food 
and agro industries in India. The Integrated Food Corridors Project under I2U2 Framework 
was announced during I2U2 Leader’s Summit on 14 July 2022. Under this project, Ministry 
continues to facilitate the discussions with all the stakeholders for the establishment of the 
integrated food parks at an early date. It may be noted that during the recent visit of UAE 
President to India in January 2024, a Memorandum of Understanding on Investment 
Cooperation in Food Park Development was signed between India and UAE. Under the 
agreement, the parties are committed to developing food park projects and driving other 
initiatives in the food processing sector that contribute to global food security. There are also 
continuous efforts on exploring avenues for enhancing food security cooperation and 
agreements with GCC countries. Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in 
agriculture and fisheries is under negotiation with Oman and expected to be signed in near 
future. With Saudi Arabia,  a JWG on Agriculture and Food Security exists within the 
framework of the Strategic Partnership Council between the two countries. During the visit of 
Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia to India in September 2023, an MoU on saline water 
conversion was signed between the two countries. A Technical Agreement regarding export 
of agri-products from India to Saudi Arabia was signed in November 2023. There are also 
discussions on signing of an MoU on Food Safety with Qatar with a view to promote bilateral 
cooperation in this important area. Our Missions in GCC countries have conducted several 
events to spread awareness on millets with respect to the International Year of Millets 2023, 
an UN-initiative, to promote food security. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.31) 
 
The Committee note that the Indian diaspora in the Gulf region comprising of around 
8.7 million are an important source of inward remittances to India. The last figures for 
remittances from the diaspora has been more than $120 billion as compared to the 
previous figures of $87 billion in 2021 and $115 billion in 2022. The Committee 
recognize the potential for further increase in inward remittances and desire that the 
Ministry should motivate the Indian diaspora to make enhanced remittances through 
acknowledgment of their role as strong pillars for our economic development. It is 
also expedient upon the Ministry to bring out a diaspora-centric policy focused to Gulf 
region keeping the welfare and protection of Indian diaspora at the foremost of our 
national development agenda. 
 
                                                          
 

54 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry, through its Missions and Posts, regularly engages with the Indian emigrant 
workers in the Gulf through open houses and consular camps. The contribution of workers in 
national development through inward remittances to their homeland is adequately 
emphasized in such interactions. Trade promotion events and commercial events organised 
by Missions and Posts also  highlight the high growth rate of Indian economy, indirectly 
encouraging workers in Gulf region to increase their remittances to India. The Ministry 
already has a robust policy in place to take care of all aspects of welfare and protection of 
Indian workers abroad. Our Missions and Posts in Gulf region have dedicated Labour Wings, 
which remain vigilant and actively monitor any complaints from workers. Grievances can be 
registered by workers through various channels i.e. emergency telephone number, Walk-ins, 
E-mails, Social Media, 24x7 Multilingual Helpline, Open Houses, Consular Camps,  and 
portals such as MADAD and e-Migrate. Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras in Dubai (UAE), 
Riyadh, Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) provide guidance 
and counseling to Indian workers on all matters. Further, Indian Missions/Posts utilize the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) to provide necessary assistance, whenever needed, 
on means tested basis to Indian citizens abroad, including workers. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.32) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has taken up specific measures like Indian 
Community Welfare Fund, online MADAD portal, e-migrate portal, Pravasi Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendras, Kshetriya Pravasi Sahayata Kendras, Open Houses, multilingual 
24x7 Helpline, etc. for the welfare of the Indian diaspora and for redressal of their 
grievances. All the Indian Missions have been sensitized to extend prompt help to any 
Indian in distress abroad.  The Committee further note that Pre- Departure Orientation 
Training Programme has been started to facilitate safe and legal migration while the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana covers accidental deaths and injury and also provides 
legal assistance. Besides, a number of MoUs/Agreements on Labour and Manpower 
Cooperation have been signed with the GCC countries. India is also working with the 
GCC countries on issues like skill harmonization and connecting worker recruitment 
platforms so that Indian workers get better and more transparent working conditions. 
The Committee appreciate these measures undertaken by the Ministry for the welfare 
and protection of the Indian diaspora. The Committee, however, desire that the 
Ministry should also focus on the implementation aspects of such measures and 
assess the impact of such initiatives and schemes on the migrant workers and 
domestic sector workers. Since the Ministry is yet to come out with a rehabilitation 
scheme for migrant workers who lost their means of livelihood due to global 
pandemics or natural disasters, the Committee also desire that a comprehensive 

55 
 
scheme for such workers may be formulated in consultation with all the 
Ministries/Departments concerned. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Assessment of the implementation aspects of welfare measures for migrant workers is a 
dynamic and regular process and Missions and Posts remain in constant contact with the 
migrant workers through various communication channels to assess the effectiveness of 
such measures. Grievances and suggestions  in this regard brought to the notice of the 
Missions are addressed promptly through necessary corrective measures.   
  
During the pandemic, it was the Government’s priority to ensure that its impact on Indian 
workers in terms of loss of employment was mitigated. To that end, the Ministry and all our 
Missions especially in the Gulf region were continuously engaged with respective local 
Governments to maintain the workers, ensure their welfare and facilitate financial payments 
due to them. Government to Government interactions, including at the level of the Prime 
Minister, helped the Government of India to mitigate devastating impact of the pandemic on 
Indian migrant workers. 
  
As soon as pandemic started to recede, Government’s focus was shifted on pressing for 
return of workers and families on an expeditious basis. These issues have been taken up by 
the Government with its Gulf counterparts at the highest levels and various diplomatic 
endeavours led by the EAM and MoS(VM) to the GCC countries.  Government of India 
worked with Governments of identified countries, including the GCC countries, to establish 
air bubbles and ease visa and travel restrictions. As a result, there has been a steady flow of 
returnees back especially to the Gulf region. 
  
The Ministry collaborated with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship( 
MSDE) to  undertake following initiatives at Union and State levels for rehabilitation of 
returnee migrant workers. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the govt. launched the ‘SWADES 
(Skilled Worker Arrival Database for Employment Support) initiative under the Vande Bharat 
Mission with an aim to empower the returning citizens with relevant employment 
opportunities by creating a database of qualified citizens based on their skill sets and 
experience to tap into and fulfill demand of Indian and foreign companies. The returning 
citizens are required to fill up an online SWADES Skills Card. The database has been 
integrated with Skill India’s ASEEM portal which provides employee connect for the 
employers, agencies and job aggregators looking for skilled workforce in specific sectors.  
Further, concerted efforts are being taken to make skill ecosystem more vibrant and 
competitive in accordance global market standards. The thrust of the government is on the 
co-ordination of all skill development efforts across the country, removal of disconnect 
between demand and supply of skilled manpower, building of new skills, skill upgradation, 
and encouraging entrepreneurship and livelihood generation. 

56 
 
  
Training programmes for both short term and long term skilling have been implemented by 
the government. The govt. has been implementing Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 
(PMKVY), Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS) Scheme and National Apprenticeship Promotion 
Scheme (NAPS) for providing short term Skill Development training and Craftsman Training 
Scheme (CTS) through Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) for long term training, to the youths 
to acquire skill development training of their choice and be employable. Also, in order to help 
Job seekers to transition to being Job creators, MSDE through its different initiatives and 
dedicated institutions such as Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship is encouraging 
entrepreneurship.                 
  
Due to Ministry’s consistent efforts and strict implementation of various measures taken for 
the welfare and protection of the Indian migrant workers abroad, the number of Indians 
proceedings for overseas employment, in the post COVID-19 era, through e-Migrate portal, 
has significantly increased and is continuously on upward trajectory. It is  evident from the 
number of Emigration Clearances (ECs) issued to Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
category workers during the last few years which is tabulated below : 
 
Year No. of EC issued through e-Migrate 
2020 93,223 
2021 1,32,673 
2022 3,73,434 
2023 (till November) 3,68,570 
  
Further, with an aim to expand network of registered Recruitment Agents (RAs) across the 
country, the Ministry has introduced Credit Insurance Scheme in addition to the existing Bank 
Guarantee (BG) mechanism. This flexibility in financial security to be furnished by RAs will 
promote emigration of workers through ‘safe and legal” mechanism. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024]

57 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.33) 
 
The Committee observe that Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements 
provide institutional mechanism to discuss and resolve all prevailing Indian labour 
and manpower-related issues through regular meetings of Joint Working Groups. 
Such MoUs/Agreements are in place with GCC countries and Jordan, while specific 
agreements on labour cooperation for the domestic sector have been signed with 
Saudi Arabia, UAE and Kuwait. The Committee desire that the Ministry should further 
identify the gaps in this regard and work out country-specific  MoUs/Agreements to 
secure the rights of Indian workers in the GCC countries. The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to strengthen the Joint Working Groups to serve as effective mechanism for 
redressing the grievances of migrant workers and domestic sector workers in the Gulf 
region. 
                                                       
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) signed by the Government of India with all 
GCC member countries are country specific. The broad principles covered in these MoUs 
include: 
(i) Declaration of mutual intent to enhance employment opportunities and for bilateral 
cooperation for protection and welfare of Indian workers; 
(ii) The host countries to take measures for protection and welfare of the Indian workers 
working in their organized sector; 
(iii) Statement of the broad procedures that the Foreign Employers shall follow to recruit 
Indian workers;                                                      
(iv) The recruitment and terms of employment are in conformity with the laws of both the 
countries; 
 
Constitution of Joint Working Groups, which is part of these MOUs is aimed at finding 
solutions to bilateral labour issues arising from time to time. Agenda for the meetings  of the 
Joint Working Groups is decided on the basis of issues faced by the Indian workers as 
reported by affected workers from time to time to the Missions and the Ministry.  Composition 
of the Group from different Ministries and Departments of both countries  is also decided on 
the basis of agenda to be discussed in a particular meeting of the Joint Working Group to 
ensure that concerns of Indian workers are addressed directly by the officials directly related 
to these issues.                                                                                                                   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

58 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.34) 
 
The Committee note that Indian workers in the Gulf countries are facing many 
challenges on various issues such as legal cases, imprisonments on false 
allegations,employment related issues, harassment by the employer, cheating by 
recruiting agents, non- payment of wages, death compensation, exploitation of 
domestic workers, difficulty in equalisation of degrees, emergency medical problems, 
lack of financial resources for returning to India, etc. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry and Indian Missions should extend all assistance to the migrant workers for 
quick redressal of their grievances and ensure that the mechanisms to resolve their 
grievances such as ICWF, MADAD portal, PBSK/SPSK, PBBY, dedicated community 
welfare/labour wings in Missions and Posts are functioning effectively. The Committee 
also desire that fake or unregistered recruitment agencies involved in cheating and 
luring people to bypass the immigration system, should be rooted out completely 
through vigorous checking, identification and prosecution. 
                                          
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government has robust mechanism to monitor working conditions and grievance redressal of 
Indian workers abroad and all these are functioning effectively. The workers have been given 
various channels to register and monitor their complaints such as i.e. emergency telephone 
number, walk-ins, e-Mails, social media, 24x7 multilingual helpline, open houses, MADAD 
and e-Migrate portals, Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK). In addition, there are 
dedicated Labour Wings in all the Indian Missions in Gulf Countries. 
 
On receipt of complaint from or on behalf of the emigrant, the same is taken up pro-actively 
with the concerned Foreign Employer (FE) and the work place of the aggrieved worker is 
visited, if required. The complaints pertaining to employment issues are also taken up with 
the local Labour Department and other relevant authority of the host country for prompt 
redressal.  
 
The Missions/Posts utilize the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) from time to time to 
provide financial and legal assistance to Indian national in distress abroad on a ‘means 
tested basis’. Under ICWF, the major assistance includes Boarding and Lodging, Air Passage 
to India, Legal Assistance, Emergency Medical Care, Transportation of Mortal Remains to 
India, and Payment of Small Fines and Penalties. Since the launch of ICWF, total 3,42,543 
Indian nationals have been assisted by Indian Missions/Posts with a total outlay of Rs.626 
Crore (Rupees Six Hundred Twenty Six Crore only) till September, 2023. The Indian emigrant 
workers  are provided with the low cost insurance scheme, Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojna 
(PBBY) which offers wide range of insurance coverage at a low cost.  The insurance scheme 

59 
 
is being extended by around ten Indian insurance companies and is operating satisfactorily.  
The PBBY insurance scheme is mandatory for emigrant workers in ECR countries. 
Grievances received from the insurer/family of the insurer are taken up with respective 
insurance companies for redressal. 
 
Ministry comes to know about fraudulent activities of illegal recruitment agents in the country 
based on the complaints filed by aggrieved emigrants who have been cheated by their 
employers. As and when complaints of illegal migration/human trafficking are received, such 
matters are referred to the State police for investigation and prosecution. Details of 
complaints received and forwarded to state police for action and investigation, requests 
received from state governments for issue of prosecution sanction and the prosecution 
sanctions issued during the last three years are as under: 
 
Year No. of 
complaints 
Cases referred to 
state governments 
for action 
Prosecution 
sanctions sought 
Prosecution 
sanctions issued 
2020 166 166 7 7 
2021 139 139 7 7 
2022 297 297 11 11 
2023 
(till November) 
80 77 15 15 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.35) 
 
The Committee note that recruitment of Indian female Domestic Sector Workers is 
regulated through the provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983. To safeguard the 
interests of female DSWs, the process of their recruitment for employment abroad has 
been restricted only through 10 State run Recruiting Agencies. The Committee 
understand that regulating the recruitment for female DSWs is necessary for their 
safety, security and well being but at the same time, care should be taken to ensure 
that restricting the recruitment process through only ten State run RAs do not deprive 
them of the opportunity to find means of livelihood abroad. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to maintain a fine balance between strict regulation and employment 
opportunities abroad and make all efforts to facilitate the migration of such workers 
through authorized RAs.  
   

60 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government accords highest priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indian 
nationals abroad, particularly Indian female Domestic Sector Workers (DSWs). To protect 
DSWs from exploitation/harassment in the destination country, the Ministry has made 
process of issue of EC for female workers going for employment in 18 ECR countries 
mandatory only through state-run recruiting agencies. Recently, with addition of a new state-
run recruitment agency in Bihar; the number of state-run recruitment agencies has become 
11.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.36) 
 
The Committee note that a new draft Emigration Bill seeking to replace the Emigration 
Act of 1983 is under preparation since long. The proposed Bill envisages 
comprehensive emigration management by instituting regulatory mechanisms and 
developing a regime for safe and orderly migration governing overseas employment of 
Indian nationals for their protection and welfare. The Committee understand that the 
proposed Bill would facilitate and promote overseas employment to a large number of 
Indian nationals and urge the Ministry to commence and conclude the deliberations 
and consultations with other Ministries/ Departments and stakeholders while keeping 
the migrant worker at the very core of its formulation, and bring the Bill to Parliament 
within the shortest possible time. 
                                                         
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Bill is currently undergoing Inter-Ministerial Consultations with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA), Ministry of Finance (MoF), Department of Commerce (DoC), Ministry of 
Labour and Employment (MoLE), Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE) and Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ). On completion of Inter-Ministerial 
Consultations, the public consultations and consultations with the State Governments will be 
held before obtaining External Affairs Minister's approval to the Cabinet Note. After approval 
of the Cabinet note, the same will be processed for introduction in both the Houses of 
Parliament after completing procedural requirements.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024]

61 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.37) 
 
The Committee note that while the National Skill Development Corporation focus on 
providing skills as per global standards, the focus of the MEA is to provide facilities 
for skill mobility and providing a pre-departure orientation training programme. 
However, MEA, Indian Missions and Consulates work very closely with NSDC. The 
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for a coordinated approach amongst MEA, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship 
and NSDC and hence, desire that a defined  mechanism may be worked out for the 
purpose and the Committee may be apprised of accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has been working in close coordination with the Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entreprenuership (MSDE) and National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and 
Missions abroad to provide facility for skill mobility and providing pre-departure orientation 
training programme.  To this end,  the Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) was 
initiated by the Ministry in January 2018.  At present 13 PDOT Centres run by National Skill 
Development Corportion (NSDC) under Pravsai Kaushal Vikas Yojna(PKVY), a joint 
collaboration under an MoU between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Skill 
Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) for MEA has extended a Grant of Rs. 10 crore to 
MSDE. In addition, there are 17 PDO training centres which are run by the various State 
Government agencies, funded by the Ministry.  Alongwith in-person training, the PDOT 
training programme is now imparted through online mode also for a greater outreach to 
workers in remote areas, looking for overseas employment.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.38) 
 
The Committee note that MEA is conducting labour market studies across the entire 
GCC and these studies are in the last phase of completion. The Committee are of the 
view that the findings of the labour market studies would be invaluable for the aspiring 
emigrant workers in terms of its prospects for the coming years. The Committee, 
therefore,  urge the Ministry to complete the studies at the earliest so that the 
information could be disseminated to all the recruiting agents and prospective 
emigrants.  
 
 
 
                                                     

62 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The study on the 6 GCC countries has been completed. The study analyses the labour 
market of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) region with an aim to understand the 
dynamics of international migration for foreign workers in the region and project future trends. 
It provides a broad overview of each of the six countries, their economic profiles, 
demographic characteristics, and policy changes, and identifies sectors with ongoing or 
anticipated labour shortages. The study has been published on the Indian Council of World 
Affairs’ (ICWA) website and is easily accessible to all stakeholders.Link: 
https://www.icwa.in/pdfs/GulfStudy.pdf 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.40) 
 
The Committee note that the Indian Community Welfare Fund was set up in Indian 
Missions in 17 ECR countries & Maldives in the year 2009. Subsequently, the Fund 
was extended to another 24 Missions in April 2010. In March 2011, it was extended to 
cover all Missions and Posts abroad. Revised guidelines for utilization of ICWF came 
into effect from 1st September 2017. Approval for expenditure from ICWF is at the level 
of HOM /HOP on the recommendation of the ICWF committee of the Mission.  The 
Committee further note that as on 31 March 2023, the corpus of the ICWF is 
approximately Rs.558 crore or so. An amount of Rs. 565 crore has been utilized from 
2014 to 2023 covering 3,33,607 Indians during this period. The Committee 
acknowledge the assistance rendered to overseas Indian nationals in times of distress 
and emergency under the ICWF including  air passage offered to stranded Indians 
during the COVID pandemic. In view of the crucial role played by the ICWF in 
providing relief to Indian nationals during extreme hardships and emergency 
conditions, the Committee desire that sanctioning of funds/expenditure should be 
prompt and decisive. The Ministry should ensure that there is no delay on the part of 
the ICWF committee to give its recommendations for approval of the expenditure and 
sanctioning of the same by the Competent Authority so that timely assistance is 
provided during exigencies. The Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure 
transparency in the utilization of the Fund for those in need.  
                                                    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recognizing the need for providing timely assistance to distressed Indians, the Ministry has 
authorized Heads of Missions and Posts to incur expenditure on most of the items of 
assistance as provided for in the detailed ICWF guidelines. Approval of the Ministry is 

63 
 
required only in a few exceptional cases only and proposals for decision on such cases are 
processed on top priority.        
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.41) 
 
The Committee note that legal assistance to Indian nationals imprisoned or arrested in 
GCC countries is provided through panel of lawyers appointed by the Mission/Post 
and expenditure on lawyers’ fee is paid from Indian Community Welfare Fund.  ICWF 
can also be used by Missions for payment of small fines & penalties for minor 
offences/crimes, for illegal stay in the host country where prima  facie  the  worker is 
not at fault and to enable release of Indian nationals from jail/detention center and 
their repatriation. The Committee are aware that there may be some section of the 
diaspora like labourers and domestic workers who could not afford the fees for 
lawyers and actually needed assistance while other sections could well afford legal 
fees for their court cases. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should 
differentiate between those who could afford fees for lawyers and those who could 
not, and ensure that priority is given to those who actually needed legal assistance 
under the ICWF.   
                                                    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Eligibility of the Indian national seeking assistance from ICWF is determined by the Mission / 
Post after taking into account financial condition of the applicant. Immediate assistance for 
lawyers fee, air passage for return to India, emergency medical care, boarding & lodging etc., 
as the case may be, is provided to those who are not in a position to incur the requisite 
expenditure on their own resources.                                                   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.42) 
 
The Committee note that as per the law in Gulf countries, charges for the 
transportation of mortal remains is the responsibility of the employer/company and 
the sponsor. In cases where the employer could not be traced, the entire expenditure 
is borne by the ICWF. The Committee further note that there has been undue delay in 
dispatch of mortal remains back to India generally due to cumbersome procedures for 
completion of formalities in most of the Gulf countries. Transportation of mortal 
remains being a sensitive and humanitarian issue, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
take it up at the Highest level with the Gulf countries for easing of the cumbersome 

64 
 
procedures. Indian Missions may also play a more proactive role in coordinating  with 
the local authorities for early completion of all the required formalities and timely 
dispatch of the mortal remains to India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The transportation of mortal remains of Indian workers involves family  of the deceased, 
sponsor/employer and local authorities. Initially, concerned India Mission grants a No 
Objection Certificate (NOC) expeditiously upon receipt of all essential death-related 
documents submitted by the sponsor/Attorney. Necessary clearances from the local 
authorities are also required before completion of the cargo formalities. Any delay, which 
might occur in securing clearances from local authorities and  completion of procedures by 
the sponsors is  mitigated by proactive efforts by the  Missions  to get all necessary 
formalities completed in the shortest time in coordination with the family of the deceased, 
sponsors/ employers and  the local authorities to ensure timely transportation of the mortal 
remains to India.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.43) 
 
The Committee note that the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas celebrations and Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman Awards are special elements undertaken by the Ministry in its 
engagement with the diaspora in the Gulf countries. The Ministry has also made 
efforts to have a regional PBD element taking a theme related to the Gulf countries. 
The Committee desire that the focus of the PBD celebrations should be to ensure 
maximum participation of migrant workers in these celebrations and events, 
consider/discuss their issues and prepare the policies for improving the working and 
living conditions of such workers. The Committee further desire that PBD and regional 
PBD elements should serve as platforms for engagement of these workers with the 
policy makers in India.   
 Regarding the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards given by the Government to 
recognize and honour exceptional achievements and contributions made by overseas 
Indians in various fields, the Committee urge the Government to ensure that at least 
one awardee is selected from each region and from each country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry takes note of the recommendation regarding Pravasi Bharatiya Divas and 
regional PBD elements serving as platforms for engagement of workers from Gulf countries 
with policy makers in India. The 17th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) Convention held in 
Indore, Madhya Pradesh in January 2023 had enthusiastic participation from the Indian 

65 
 
diaspora in Gulf, including a large number of blue-collar workers from the region. The focus 
of the PBD on workers in Gulf region was also reflected in a dedicated plenary session on 
the welfare of Indian emigrant workers in Gulf countries, and release of a commemorative 
postal stamp emphasizing the importance of safe, legal, orderly and skilled migration.  
 
The selection process of Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards has already mechanisms in 
place to ensure that adequate nominations are received from all geographic regions, 
including Gulf countries. The 17th PBSA ensured that at least one Awardee was selected 
from each region. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation No.44) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Missions are engaging with Pravasi Bharatiya 
Samman Award winners at the local level and the Ministry is also proposing to engage 
with them in a more structured manner. A diaspora directory based on professions is 
being prepared. The Ministry is also proposing to organise an interactive session of 
PBS awardees with all the Ministries. Being aware of the benefits of deeper 
engagement with PBS Awardees with outstanding accomplishments in areas such as 
science, business, culture, education and public service and who have significantly 
contributed to the welfare of the Indian diaspora or to India itself, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to create an alumni of all the PBS award winners within the shortest  time 
possible specifying their specialization and utilize their expertise in achieving our 
national priorities. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Ministry is trying to create a list of all Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awardees with details 
of their specialization and achievements as part of its efforts to have a comprehensive 
database of the Awardees for further engagement with them. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.46) 
 
The Committee observe that Indian diaspora are investing their money in Gulf 
countries including Dubai and Saudi Arabia. The Committee have been informed that 
there have been demolitions in old Jeddah area and other places. As conveyed by the 
Saudi authorities, some of the structures have become structurally weak and hence, 
demolition had to take place. The Committee further note that the Indian Embassy has 
taken up the cases where compensation to any Indian diaspora is to be made. To 

66 
 
ensure that the Indian diaspora who have invested their hard money do not suffer 
major losses, the Committee urge the Ministry and the Indian Embassy to identify the 
individuals entitled for compensation and pursue the competent authority in Saudi 
Arabia for payment of the said compensation at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There has been demolitions in old Jeddah area and other places. Saudi authorities have 
conveyed that some of the structures demolished had become structurally weak, therefore 
demotion had to take place.  The Indian Mission/ Post in Saudi Arabia has not received any 
formal request so far from Indian investors where compensation is to be claimed from Saudi 
authorities on account of demolition of their properties in Jeddah. Mission/Post will take up 
compensation issue promptly with Saudi authorities whenever received from Indian investors. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.47) 
 
The Committee note that the MEA has always been flagging the issue of high price of 
flight tickets to the Gulf with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Indian Embassies have also 
been talking to two airlines. The Committee are aware that India has Bilateral Air 
Services Agreements with many countries and desire that such agreements should be 
reviewed frequently for assessing the capacities of air services at the ground level. 
Consistent efforts may be made to bring down the cost of air flights in coordination 
with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee also desire that the Indian 
Embassies/Missions should hold regular discussion with airlines operating in the Gulf 
region to resolve the issue of high air fares. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry takes note of the recommendation of the Committee. Flight tickets are market-
driven and are neither established nor regulated by the Government, but Ministry has always 
communicated the concerns of Indians living in Gulf about high ticket prices to Ministry of 
Civil Aviation. Ministry of Civil Aviation has also conveyed that the airlines have been 
sensitised regarding instances of aberration in air fares charges by airlines and have been 
urged to build some level of sensitivity in their reservation booking designator and to take 
corrective action to deploy additional capacity, etc. India and various Gulf countries have also 
held discussions on civil aviation issues including Air Services Agreement from time to time. 
Efforts are being made for the introduction of more number of flights and destinations 
between the two countries that will result in the reduction of cost of ticket for journeys. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

67 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.48) 
 
The Committee note that based on a review conducted by the Ministry, there are about 
12 Passport Offices out of 36 where the appointment cycle for passports is quite high.  
In Punjab sometimes the appointment cycle goes up to 60 days and beyond. It is 
informed that  TCS has already started an exercise to shift several PSKs in Punjab to 
buildings with better infrastructure to accommodate more appointment slots.  The 
Committee further note that migration from PSP version 1 to 2 would also enable the 
system to be in a better position to cope up with enhanced demands for passports. 
The Committee are of the view that the issue of long appointment cycle for issuance of 
passports should be addressed urgently to facilitate aspiring migrants for getting 
employment abroad. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to complete the 
exercise of shifting the identified PSKs to the new locations and migration from PSP 
version 1 to 2 without further delay. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For the past several months, Ministry has been working hard to bring down the appointment 
cycle at PSKs/POPSKs with high appointment cycle. One of the measures has been release 
of appointments during the Saturday Special Drive at such PSKs/POPSKs. This drive is 
being conducted since May 2023 on Saturdays. This has resulted in bringing down the 
appointment cycle from an average of 55 working days to an average of 26 working days. As 
regards shifting of PSKs, there are 5 PSKs in the State of Punjab, out of which, Ministry in 
collaboration with the service provider, is in the process of shifting 3 PSKs, namely, 
Ludhiana, Amritsar and Jalandhar-2 and the migration from PSP V1.0 to PSP V2.0, and the 
project is expected to go-live by the end of March 2024.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.49) 
 
The Committee note that in pursuance of a ban imposed by the Government on travel 
to Yemen, 422 passports of Indian truck drivers who have travelled to Yemen after the 
notification was issued and came back to India, have been seized. The Committee 
further note that passports of those people who found jobs elsewhere, have been 
released. So far, about 169 passports have been released based on the appeals made 
on a case-by-case basis. The Committee view the causes of those people whose 
passports are still lying with the passport offices, sympathetically and desire that the 
Ministry/Passport Offices should take a lenient view of their cases and release their 
passports if their appeals have merit. 

68 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of the fragile political and security situation in Yemen, Government of India 
promulgated a travel ban to Yemen through Gazette Notification S.O. 3223(E) dated 26 
September 2017. The Notification continues to remain in force. Under the provisions of this 
Notification, there have been instances where passports of individuals have been seized by 
Indian authorities due to their travel to Yemen despite the travel ban.  Out of 463 passports 
seized, a total of 204 passports have been released based on merit of each case. Humane 
and sympathetic considerations guide the Government in examining all such cases of seized 
passports and wherever the facts and circumstances of the case merit release of the 
passport, recommendation to that effect is made to the Passport Issuing Authority.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 

69 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
-NIL- 

70 
 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
(Recommendation Sl No.39) 
 
The Committee note that the Government is working with the GCC countries to 
harmonise employee recruitment platforms so that Indian workers are provided with 
better and more transparent working conditions. However, the extent to which the 
Ministry and the Government have been successful in achieving these objectives is 
not known. The Ministry has also not mentioned whether any specific MoU or 
Agreement have been signed with the GCC countries in this regard. Keeping in view 
the security and well being of the migrant workers at the forefront, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to commission a study on harmonization of employee recruitment 
platforms and working conditions of migrant workers in the Gulf. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to ensure better and more transparent working conditions for Indian 
workers as well as prospective emigrant workers in GCC countries.  
                                               
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Labour and Manpower Cooperation MoUs/Agreements are in place with the six Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and 
United Arab Emirates) and Jordan that provide the overarching framework for cooperation on 
labour and manpower related issues. In accordance with the Labour and Manpower 
Cooperation/Agreement, Joint Working Group (JWG) meetings are held on regular basis to 
discuss various labour related issues so that to ensure that India migrant workers in these 
countries have better and transparent working conditions.  Further, to safeguard the specific 
interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, who are often the most vulnerable category; 
Ministry has signed separate MOUs/Agreements on domestic workers with Kuwait and Saudi 
Arabia. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 

71 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.45) 
 
The Committee note that under the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children 
(SPDC), 150 scholarships are offered to pursue under-graduate courses in India for 
specific professional and non-professional courses (except medical and related 
courses). A total of 131 scholarships were given to children of Indian workers in Gulf 
countries for the Academic Year 2022-23. The Committee, however, observe that the 
fees charged to diaspora children for education in India are quite high. The Committee 
have also been informed that the MEA has always communicated the concerns about 
high fees to the Ministry of Education. The Committee are of the view that adequate 
educational support should be given to diaspora children to pursue their education in 
India and urge the MEA to make persistent efforts with the Ministry of Education to 
rationalize the fee structure for such children in Indian educational institutions. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) scheme is aimed at enabling the 
Diaspora children to pursue undergraduate courses in Indian Universities/Institutions. The 
scheme has especially been aligned to cater to the requirement of financial assistance for the 
children of emigrant Indian workers proceeding for employment in Gulf countries. Out of 150 
total scholarships being provided under the Scheme, 50 seats are reserved for children of 
Indian workers in ECR countries (which includes Gulf countries). Further, out of the aforesaid 
50 seats, 1/3rd slots, i.e., 17 seats are reserved for children of Indian workers who had been 
pursuing studies in India. This demonstrates the Ministry’s efforts to provide financial support 
for the deserving diaspora children on merit-cum-means basis. 
 
The Government is also facilitating admission of NRI Students in AICTE Approved 
Institutions by way of creating supernumerary seats through admission to NRI, where in five 
percent of seats within approved intake shall be allowed for admission under NRI category 
and also through introduction/continuation of supernumerary Seats for(OCI)/ Children of 
Indian Workers in Gulf Countries. The Institution sha1l have nil deficiency based on self-
disclosure fifteen percent supernumerary seats over and above the approved intake per 
course shall be approved for AICTE approved Institutions and University Departments, for 
admitting students from Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India/ Children of Indian 
Workers in the Gulf Countries. One third of these 15 percent seats shall be reserved for the 
Children of Indian Workers in the GuIf Countries. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024]

72 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.5) 
 
The Committee note that political dialogues between India and GCC have been held 
over the years. A Memorandum of Understanding on Mechanism of Consultations to 
institutionalize the political dialogue between India and GCC was signed in September 
2022. This MoU also instituted a dialogue at the Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) level. 
The Committee further note that during the first India-GCC Senior Officials Meeting 
held in March 2023, it was proposed to form five Joint Working Groups in the fields of 
political and security issues; economic cooperation and trade; cultural, education, 
youth and sports; health and pharmaceuticals; maritime security and counter 
terrorism. The Committee welcome the proposal for formation of five mutually 
beneficial JWGs and urge the Government to make all out efforts for the finalization of 
all the groups and start working at an early date.                                           
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation from the committee is noted and the Ministry is actively following up 
with the GCC authorities for the finalization of all working groups and for their work to begin 
at an early date.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

73 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.19) 
On the adoption of India’s Digital Public Infrastructure by GCC countries, the 
Committee note that the Rupay card is already functional in UAE while MoUs for the 
same have also been signed with Saudi Arabia, Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE are 
also engaged in discussions on possible integration of the UPI platform with UAE 
payment platform. India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on 
establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. Moreover, 
proposals related to trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued 
with Kuwait. The Committee understand that besides promoting digital transactions, 
integration of the UPI platform with the payment platforms of GCC countries would go 
a long way in fostering closer economic cooperation through enhanced bilateral trade  
as well as tourism and at the same time, reduce the cost of cross border payments. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to pursue the GCC countries and 
enter into constructive talks with UAE, Kuwait and others for an early finalization of 
India’s UPI connectivity and its integration with the payment Platforms of the GCC 
countries. Efforts made and success achieved in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
UPI is not merely a Real Time Payment system providing Person to Person Payment system 
but it is a comprehensive payment scheme where the online transaction processing, 
Interbank settlements and Customer dispute life cycle management are encompassed 
holistically. At present, Indians who visit different countries have to pay for any expenses via 
international cards. With the introduction of UPI, Indians will now be able to use multiple bank 
accounts to make payments via a single mobile application. UAE has accepted India’s UPI 
interface. While talks are ongoing with the Central Bank of Oman for technical integration of 
UPI.  The implementation of UPI in overseas markets is a significant step towards promoting 
digital transactions and fostering closer economic cooperation between India and foreign 
countries. With UPI's user-friendly and secure interface, Indian tourists will be able to make 
payments seamlessly, eliminating the need for currency exchange. This will enhance our 
bilateral trade as well as tourism. Internationalization of UPI will also help in reducing the cost 
of cross border payments. NPCI (I) is the nodal agency under the Ministry of Finance. MEA 
works as an interface to promote Unified Payment Interface in other countries. In this regard, 
we have been facilitating NPCI International Payments Limited (NIPL controlled by RBI which 

74 
 
is under Department of Financial Services, MoF) interactions with Banks of respective 
countries through our Missions. The details country wise are as follows:  
 
i. United Arab Emirates (UAE)- Al Etihad Payments (AEP), an indirect subsidiary of 
Central Bank of UAE (CBUAE) and NPCI International Payments Limited (NIPL) 
signed a strategic framework agreement on for Domestic Card Scheme (DCS) 
implementation based on NPCI’s RuPay stack. Also, Mercury is Middle East’s first 
domestic payment scheme, headquartered in the United Arab Emirates, which enable 
member institutions to issue cards under the Mercury brand that function securely at 
large number of ATMs and merchant outlets across the UAE. Mercury connects 
consumers, banks, the government entities and businesses to facilitate payments in 
the region. NIPL has signed definitive agreement with Mercury for seamless 
integration to ensure acceptance of RuPay cards in UAE. Rupay cards have been 
accepted in the UAE since 2021. Today Rupay Cards have 98% Point of Sale 
acceptance coverage in the UAE. Similarly, UPI has also been active in UAE since 
2022. Recently, Phonepe [a UPI App] went live in the UAE. Indians visiting the UAE 
can now do UPI transactions though UAE NeoPay. In addition to the above, an MoU 
was signed on July 15, 2023 for interlinking UPI and UAE’s instant payment platform. 
Discussions are underway to complete this integration soon. 
ii. Saudi Arabia- NPCI and Saudi Arabia Monetry Authority (SAMA) have already signed 
an NDA. RBI has proposed a MOU/TOR to SAMA and their response is awaited on 
the same. 
iii. Oman- NDA and MOU were signed between Central Bank of Oman and NPCI 
international Payments Limited on 4th October 2022 for enabling acceptance of UPI 
QR and RuPay cards. Also, NDA and MoU signed between NIPL and Bank Muscat for 
enabling Real-time crossborder remittance between Oman and India using UPI rails. 
Discussion on technical integration and definitive agreement are still in progress 
between teams of NIPL and Bank Muscat. 
iv. Kuwait- Knet is a Kuwaiti national company providing electronic banking services to 
all the banks in Kuwait.  NIPL and Knet signed an Memorandum of Agreement. 
Discussion on technical Specifications and integration are still in the pipeline. Mission 
is following up the matter of trade in local currencies as well as UPI connectivity with 
the Kuwaiti authorities. Central Bank of Kuwait and K-Net are already in touch with 
NPCI on UPI connectivity. 
v. Bahrain and Qatar- Discussions are on-going with Bahrain and Qatar side on 
Technical integration and definitive agreements are still in progress. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 

75 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.21) 
The Committee note that India and GCC countries continue to exchange information 
and best practices on cyber security in various defence and security related 
dialogues. MoUs on cyber security cooperation are also being discussed between 
India and various Gulf countries. The MoUs on Cyber Security cooperation between 
CERT-In and its equivalent organisation in GCC countries are currently under 
discussions at various stages.  The Committee are of the view that MoUs on cyber 
security between India and GCC countries are long overdue especially in the backdrop 
of severe challenge posed by cyber terrorism globally. They, therefore, desire that the 
Government should make concerted efforts to evolve a mechanism for cooperation 
with GCC countries through MoUs/Agreements on cyber security expeditiously. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to facilitate the ongoing discussion on MoUs 
regarding cyber security cooperation between CERT-In and its equivalent organisation 
in GCC countries for its early and successful conclusion. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has been actively taking initiatives in facilitating discussion/negotiation for signing of 
MoU/MoC on cooperation in the area of Cyber Security between CERT-In and its 
counterparts in GCC Countries to enhance cyber security for India.  MEA has taken initiative 
in this respect with Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar.  However, CERT-
In has recently informed that they are awaiting for the clarity and clearance on the standard 
CERT to CERT draft MoU for cooperation in the area of cyber security from NSCS. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.25) 
The Committee note that commencement of negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement 
between India and GCC was approved in 2005 and two rounds of negotiations were 
subsequently held in 2006 and 2008. However, in 2011, GCC announced deferral of FTA 
negotiations with all countries and economic groups. GCC Secretariat again 
welcomed the resumption of FTA negotiations in November 2019 and followed it up in 
2021. After the constitution of Joint Working Group and preliminary virtual meeting of 
the Joint Working Group held in February 2022, the intent to pursue negotiations on 

76 
 
the India-GCC FTA was announced in November 2022. As of now, the technical teams 
have been constituted and the modalities and terms of reference are  being worked 
upon. The Ministry has also stated that the recent delay was due to the non-
appointment of Chief Negotiator from the GCC side. GCC Secretariat has now 
informed that a new Chief Negotiator from the GCC is in place. The Committee feel 
that the process of negotiation and finalization of the FTA between India and GCC has 
been delayed for long and in view of the prospects of substantial increase in trade 
between India and GCC countries as well as India’s integration into the global value 
chain through the signing of the FTA, urge the Government to maintain close 
coordination with the GCC Secretariat so that formal negotiations on the India-GCC 
FTA commence soon for its early conclusion.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Upon appointment of Chief Negotiator from the GCC side, a meeting at that level took place 
in August 2023 to take forward the discussions and Terms of References were exchanged. 
While the GCC is keen on including investment protection as a chapter, Indian side has 
suggested to follow the India-UAE CEPA text and instead include a chapter of investment 
promotion. GCC side has sought time to respond to the suggestions made by Indian side 
upon consultation with its member countries. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
(Recommendation Sl No.27) 
 
The Committee note that MoUs were signed between India and UAE on establishment 
of a framework for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies - the Indian rupee and 
the Emirati Dirham for cross-border transaction and interlinking payment and 
messaging system of both countries. With the operationalization of the MoUs, 
exporters and importers in both the countries can invoice in their local currencies. 
India is also engaged in discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing 
mechanisms for bilateral trade settlement in local currencies. The proposals related to 
trade in local currencies and UPI connectivity are being pursued with Kuwait. The 

77 
 
Committee understand that bilateral trade settlement in local currencies and 
interlinking payment and messaging systems of India and GCC countries will greatly 
enhance the economic engagements between the countries resulting in increased 
trade and FDI inflow and urge the Ministry to facilitate the signing of such MoUs with 
all the GCC countries at an early date.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
India has held discussions related to the UPI platform with various Gulf countries. The Rupay 
card is already functional in UAE and MOUs for the same have also been signed with Saudi 
Arabia, Oman and Bahrain. India and UAE are also engaged in discussions on possible 
integration of the UPI platform with UAE payment platform. Similarly, India is also engaged in 
discussions with various Gulf countries on establishing mechanisms for bilateral trade 
settlement in local currencies. RBI is open to signing such MoU with GCC countries based on 
the (i) willingness and cooperation of the Central Banks and authorities in these countries, (ii) 
their macro-financial and macroeconomic parameters and (iii) geo strategic concerns with the 
overall concurrence of the Government. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024]  
 
(Recommendation No.44) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Missions are engaging with Pravasi Bharatiya 
Samman Award winners at the local level and the Ministry is also proposing to engage 
with them in a more structured manner. A diaspora directory based on professions is 
being prepared. The Ministry is also proposing to organise an interactive session of 
PBS awardees with all the Ministries . Being aware of the benefits of deeper 
engagement with PBS Awardees with outstanding accomplishments in areas such as 
science, business, culture, education and public service and who have significantly 
contributed to the welfare of the Indian diaspora or to India itself, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to create an alumni of all the PBS award winners within the shortest  time 
possible specifying their specialization and utilize their expertise in achieving our 
national priorities. 
 
 

78 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is trying to create a list of all Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awardees with details 
of their specialization and achievements as part of its efforts to have a comprehensive 
database of the Awardees for further engagement with them. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2023 dated 14/10/2024] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
25 November, 2024                                                                         Chairperson,                                
04 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                    Committee on External Affairs 

79 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 25 OCTOBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, 25 October, 2024 from 1430 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
     Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
 3. Shri Arun Govil 
 4. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
 5. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
 6. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 7. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 8. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
 9.  Dr. John Brittas 
 10. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
 11. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
 12. Dr. K. Laxman 
 13. Shri A. D. Singh 
 14. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
 15. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Ms. Maya Menon    - Under Secretary 

80 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1.  Shri Vikram Misri   : Foreign Secretary 
2.  Shri Randhir Kumar Jasiwal  : JS(XP) 
3.  Shri Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur  : JS(AMS) 
4.  Ms. Pratibha Parkar   : JS (Parl & Coord.) 
5.  Dr. Suresh Kumar   : JS (WANA) 
6.  Ms. Priyanka Sohoni   : DS (FSO) 
7.  Shri Abhishek Upadhyay   : DS (FSO) 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of 
the Committee on External Affairs (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India and Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC)- Contours of Cooperation’. After Chairperson invited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report and 
deliberations on the subject, the Committee adopted the Draft Report with minor 
modifications suggested by the Members.  
4.  xxx xxx xxx 
5. xxx xxx xxx  
6. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
7. xxx xxx xxx  
8. xxx xxx xxx  
9. xxx xxx xxx  
10. xxx xxx xxx  
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record.  

81 
 
Appendix-II 
 (Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SIXTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (17TH LOK SABHA) 
                                           
(i) Total Number of Recommendations              49  
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
  
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 , 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,  
20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,  40, 41, 42, 43, 
46, 47, 48 and 49  
                                                                  Total-41 
Percentage:  83.673% 
  
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
       
 NIL 
                                                       Total-Nil 
 Percentage: 00 % 
  
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require   
reiteration. 
  
 Recommendation Nos. 39 and 45 
                                                      Total- 2 
 Percentage: 4.082 % 
  
(v)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
  
 Recommendation Nos. 5, 19, 21, 25, 27and 44 
                                                                                        Total- 6 
Percentage:  12.25% 