 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
EVALUATION INDIA’S INDIAN OCEAN STRATEGY 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
                                           August, 2025/Shravana,1947 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
08 
 

 
 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
EVALUATION INDIA’S INDIAN OCEAN STRATEGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 August, 2025 
 
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2025/Shravana,1947 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25)                    (i) 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                              (ii) 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS                                                                                                          (iii) 
 
PART – I 
 REPORT 
CHAPTER 1:  INDIAN OCEAN REGION: A GEOPOLITICAL OVERVIEW                                 1-22 
                          Significance of the Indian Ocean Region 
                          Challenges and Prospects 
                          Engagement with Littoral States 
                          India’s Approach towards Indian Ocean Region 
 
CHAPTER 2:  MARITIME SECURITY AND STRATEGY IN INDIAN OCEAN REGION           23-52 
                          Challenges and Threat Perception 
                          Maritime Policy and Strategy in IOR 
                          Role Of Indian Navy in IOR 
                          Maritime Infrastructure 
 
CHAPTER 3: ROLE OF MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS AND REGIONAL GROUPINGS  53-88 
                          Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) 
                          Indo-Pacific Oceans' Initiative (IPOI) 
                          Bay Of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic  
                          Cooperation (BIMSTEC) 
                          Quad 
                          Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) 
 
CHAPTER 4: CULTURAL AND DIASPORA LINKS IN THE INDIAN OCEAN REGION            89-93 
  
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
      
    94-120 
Appendix I Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 18 December 2024   121-123 
Appendix II Minutes of the Twenty Second Sitting of the Committee held on 17 June 
2025 
 
124-126 
Appendix III Minutes of The Twenty Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 06 
August 2025 
127-128 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
31. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. Smita Singh   _  Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
           I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Evaluation of 
India’s Indian Ocean Strategy’. 
 
2.    The Committee selected the subject ‘Evaluation of India’s Indian Ocean 
Strategy’ for detailed examination during 2024-25. Briefing on the subject 
was held on 18 December 2024. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence 
of the representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Defence on17 
June 2025. 
 
3.    The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 06 August 2025. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are 
appended to the Report. 
 
4.    The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External 
Affairs and the Ministry of Defence for placing material information as well as 
tendering evidence and views before the Committee. 
 
5.   The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable support rendered to them by the officials of 
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
6.   For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                                     
11 August, 2025                                                           Chairperson,                                
20 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)            Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
      (iii) 
 

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ACMECS Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth Triangle and Ayeyawady-
Chao Phraya- Mekong Economic Cooperation Strategy 
ARF ASEAN Regional Forum  
BEC BIMSTEC Energy Centre 
BIMSTEC Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
BCWC  BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate  
BRI Belt and Road Initiative  
CDRI Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure  
CGIMA Contact Group Against Illicit Maritime Activities 
CGPCS  Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia 
CGSUAS Coast Guard Ship-borne Unmanned Aerial System  
CIOS Chair of Indian Ocean Studies  
CORPAT Coordinated Patrols  
DCOC-JA Djibouti Code of Conduct-Jeddah Amendment  
DRI Directorate of Revenue Intelligence  
DRM Disaster Risk Management  
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone  
HADR Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief  
GMLU Gujarat Maritime Law University  
ICG Indian Coastal Guard  
IPMDA Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness  
 IOC Indian Ocean Commission 
IOD Indian Ocean Dialogue  
IONS Indian Ocean Naval Symposium  
IOR Indian Ocean Region 
IORA Indian Ocean Rim Association 
IOIP IORA's Outlook on the Indo-Pacific  
IFC-IOR Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean Region  
IMBL International Maritime Boundary Lines  
IPOI Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative  
ITEC Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation  
IUU Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated  
KIP Know India Programme  
MAHASAGAR Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across 
Regions  
MAITRI Maritime Initiative for Training in the Indo-Pacific  
MBDs Mission Based Deployments 
MDA Maritime Domain Awareness  
MGC Mekong - Ganga Cooperation  
MLEAs Multi-Lateral Engagement at Sea  
MRCCs Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres  

NC31 National Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence 
Network  
NCB Narcotics Control Bureau  
NISHAR Network for Information Sharing  
PBD Pravasi Bharatiya Divas  
PCTD Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora  
PICs Pacific Island Countries  
QMSWG QUAD Maritime Security Working Group  
ReCAAP Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed 
Robbery  
RIS Research and Information System for Developing Countries  
RRU Rashtriya Raksha University  
SAGAR Security and Growth for All in the Region 
SPDC Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children  
VATMs Vessel and Air Traffic Management Systems  
UDA Underwater Domain Awareness  
WRS World Registry of Shipping 
 
 

Page | 1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INDIAN OCEAN REGION: GEOPOLITICAL OVERVIEW 
The Indian Ocean is the third-largest oceanic division in the world, 
encompassing critical sea lanes, strategic chokepoints, and a diverse group of 
littoral and hinterland states. The Indian Ocean is spread over an area of over 
70 million square km, connecting over 35 littoral states and is home to one-
third of world’s population. Hosting over two-thirds of the world’s oil 
shipments, one-third of global bulk cargo traffic, and key undersea data 
cables, the Indian Ocean is crucial not only for regional actors but also for 
maintaining the stability of the global order.  
1.2 The Indian Ocean is vital to India’s geopolitical, economic, and cultural 
landscape, with a coastline exceeding 11,098.91 kilometers and over 1,300 
islands. Historically, it has been a key corridor for trade, migration, and 
cultural exchange. Economically, the region holds immense significance, with 
India’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) spanning 2.4 million square 
kilometers. Around 90% of India’s trade by volume, including nearly all oil 
imports, transits through the Indian Ocean. Globally, these waters handle 
half of container shipments, a third of bulk cargo, and two-thirds of oil 
shipments. 
 
I. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE INDIAN OCEAN REGION 
1.3 Highlighting the significance of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), the 
Ministry stated the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) has nearly 40% of the world’s 
population which is spread over around 35 littoral states. India has an 
extensive coastline of 11,098 km and over 1300 islands between Lakshadweep 
in the west and the Andaman & Nicobar Islands in the east. Hence, Indian 
Ocean is vital for India. India is not only geographically connected to the 
Indian Ocean Region but shares civilizational and cultural links with the 
countries in Indian Ocean. Throughout history, the Indian Ocean Region has 
been characterized by commercial flows, alongside migration of people, ideas 
and cultures. 

Page | 2 
 
1.4 Economically, India has a vast Exclusive Economic Zone of 2.4 million 
square kilometers and 90% of India’s trade by volume and almost all of India’s 
oil imports come through the sea. Almost a hundred thousand ships a year 
pass through waters of Indian Ocean, carrying about half of the world’s 
container shipments, one-third of the world’s bulk cargo traffic and two-thirds 
of the oil shipments. Three quarters of this traffic is headed for destinations 
beyond the region. It is the medium that connects the producers of the Gulf 
and Western Indian Ocean to the consumers of South and East Asia and vice-
versa.  
1.5 In addition, the region’s vast Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) offer 
immense potential for cooperation in areas like sustainable fisheries, marine 
biodiversity, renewable ocean energy, and eco-tourism. India’s experience and 
growing focus on the Blue Economy create potential for collaboration in these 
areas.  
1.6 Enclosed on three sides by land and with limited exchange with polar 
waters, the Indian Ocean is the warmest of the world’s oceans. This unique 
geography and thermal profile make it an ecologically dynamic and 
biologically productive space. High concentrations of phytoplankton support 
a diverse range of marine life, including economically significant fish stocks 
and some of the oldest coral reef ecosystems in the world. These reefs not only 
sustain marine biodiversity but also protect coastal communities from erosion 
and storm surges. 
1.7 Circulation patterns in the Indian Ocean are primarily governed by the 
seasonal monsoon systems, which influence regional climate and ocean 
productivity. The ocean’s islands - such as the Maldives, Seychelles, and 
India’s own Andaman & Nicobar Islands - are globally recognized biodiversity 
hotspots, harboring numerous endemic species and delicate ecosystems. 
However, these environmental assets are increasingly threatened by climate 
change, sea-level rise, unsustainable fishing practices, marine pollution, and 
coastal development pressures. The environmental significance of the Indian 
Ocean extends beyond ecological value; it is also vital to regional food security, 
disaster resilience, and economic sustainability. 

Page | 3 
 
II CHALLENGES AND PROSPECTS 
1.8 The Ministry of External Affairs has broadly identified three challenges 
in the Indian Ocean Region: 
 Geopolitical challenge: The most prominent challenge India faces in 
the IOR is the increasing presence of extra regional players with 
investments in ports and infrastructure (e.g., in Sri Lanka and 
Maldives) thereby expanding their strategic footprint and adversely 
impacting our security interests.   
 Maritime Security Threats: The region faces issues like piracy, 
terrorism, illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing (IUU fishing), 
drug trafficking and smuggling.   
 Infrastructure and Connectivity Gaps: Several IOR countries, 
including key partners like Sri Lanka, Maldives, Mauritius and 
Seychelles, face infrastructural and financial limitations. India has 
been providing need-based and demand driven developmental 
assistance to countries in IOR towards development of infrastructure 
ranging from housing, civil works, schools, hospitals, regional 
connectivity infrastructure in the region. 
1.9 The Committee enquired about the strategic challenges faced by India 
in the IOR. In a written reply the Ministry stated that strategic challenges for 
India in the IOR include threats to maritime traffic, piracy, terrorism, 
concerns about freedom of navigation and overflights, and concerns of 
safeguarding of sovereignty and of independence. Another challenge is the 
growing presence of extra-regional players in the region, especially China 
gaining a foothold in the Indian Ocean Region. China has been undertaking 
several infrastructure projects focusing on ports, airport and logistics sector 
for dual use purpose, in addition to deploying research and survey vessels in 
the region to augment maritime domain awareness and collect sensitive 
oceanography and marine data of the region. 
 
1.10 Regarding the steps taken to counter the challenges, the Ministry 
informed that India has been actively sensitizing friendly countries through 
bilateral and regional forums in the Indian Ocean Region to counter these 
activities. The Colombo Security Conclave, Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA) and QUAD cooperation are few framework mechanisms, under which 

Page | 4 
 
India is working closely with countries in the region and with like-minded 
countries. India continues to calibrate its approach and deepen defense and 
maritime security cooperation complemented by economic and developmental 
assistance to safeguard its interests in the region. 
1.11 As per the Ministry the prospects of India in the Indian Ocean Region 
can be summarized as under: 
 Strategic Partnerships: India’s approach to the Indian Ocean Region 
has been guided by ‘Neighbourhood First’ policy and Vision SAGAR, 
which has now evolved into Vision MAHASAGAR, i.e., Mutual and 
Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions for the 
Global South. These frameworks guide our cooperation in a range of 
areas including development cooperation, capacity building, defence 
and maritime security and HADR assistance. During PM’s visit to Sri 
Lanka from 04-06 April, 2025, a MoU on Defence Framework 
Cooperation was signed. During the recent PM’s visit to Mauritius, the 
partnership was elevated to enhanced strategic partnership. Further, 
in line with Vision MAHASAGAR, India extends assistance in form of 
deployment of assets and deputation of experts with the aim to enhance 
defence and security capabilities of countries in IOR. 
 Blue Economy: The region’s vast Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) offer 
immense potential for cooperation in areas like sustainable fisheries, 
marine biodiversity, renewable ocean energy, and eco-tourism. India’s 
experience and growing focus on the Blue Economy create potential for 
collaboration in these areas. 
 Regional Leadership: India plays a key role in multilateral platforms 
such as the Colombo Security Conclave, Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA) and Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS). These forums can 
enable India to further promote a rules-based order, facilitate regional 
cooperation, and act as a net security provider. 
 
III. ENGAGEMENT WITH LITTORAL STATES 
1.12 The region encompasses 35 littoral states, which face shared challenges 
such as developmental disparities, connectivity issues, unsustainable debt, 
extremism, terrorism, natural disasters, and climate change. The 35 littoral 
states of the Indian Ocean Region include Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, 
Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Réunion (France), Indonesia, India, Iraq, 

Page | 5 
 
Iran, Kuwait, Kenya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, 
Mozambique, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Saudi 
Arabia, Seychelles, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Timor- Leste, 
Thailand, United Arab Emirates and Yemen. 
1. Australia   15. Maldives   29. Tanzania 
2. Bahrain   16. Mauritius   30. Timor-Leste 
3. Bangladesh           17. Mozambique    31. Thailand 
4. Djibouti    18. Myanmar             32. UAE 
5. Egypt    19. Oman     33. Comoros 
6. Eritrea   20. Pakistan    34. Somalia 
7. Indonesia   21. Qatar     35. Yemen 
8. India    22. Réunion 
9. Iran            23. Saudi Arabia 
10. Iraq   24. Seychelles 
11. Kenya   25. Singapore 
12. Kuwait   26. South Africa 
13. Madagascar   27. Sri Lanka 
14. Malaysia           28. Sudan 
 


Page | 6 
 
1.13 The Ministry informed that India maintains diplomatic presence in 32 
littoral States. Following are the three countries where India does not have 
direct diplomatic presence: 
Sl 
No 
Littoral States where India does not have direct diplomatic 
presence 
1. Comoros Embassy of India in Antananarivo, 
Madagascar is concurrently accredited to 
Comoros. 
2. Somalia (Mogadishu) High Commission of India, Nairobi was 
concurrently accredited to Somalia in 1991. 
Indian 
Embassy in Mogadishu was closed after the 
outbreak of a Somali Civil War in 1991. 
3. Yemen (Sana) Embassy of India in Sana’a is operated from 
Riyadh. The Indian Embassy in Sanaa, 
Yemen, was closed in April 2015 due to the 
outbreak of the Yemeni Civil War. 
 
1.14 The details of diplomatic presence of India in the littoral states of the 
Indian Ocean Region is given in Annexure-I.   
1.15 India has fostered strong bilateral and multilateral partnerships with 
all key partners and like- minded countries in the IOR and continue its 
commitment to the well-being and progress of nations in the region as a first 
responder and a net security provider, based on our Neighbourhood First 
policy, MAHASAGAR outlook, and on our approach to the extended 
neighbourhood. 
1.16 Developmental assistance, capacity building programmes, HADR 
support and defence and maritime security cooperation are the core pillars of 
India’s relationship with countries in the IOR, assisting them in their socio-
economic development. India has been the ‘First Responder’ in the region 
offering timely and effective HADR support and has extended its capacities to 
respond to natural disasters and man-made accidents. India has also 
established itself as the net security provider in the IOR. The Indian Navy has 
been part of anti-piracy patrols in the sea routes of the Indian Ocean. India 
has undertaken projects to help enhance the coastal and EEZ surveillance 
capacity of the Indian Ocean Island states. 

Page | 7 
 
1.17 When asked about the bilateral strategic partnerships fostered by India, 
including defense and security ties with Indian Ocean littoral States, the 
Ministry responded that India has fostered strong bilateral partnerships, 
including defense and security ties, with Indian Ocean littoral states in South 
Asia, Gulf, Eastern Africa and smaller island states such as Comoros, 
Mauritius, Maldives, Sri Lanka, and Seychelles. A brief overview of these 
relations includes: 
(a) Given our close cultural and historical ties with the neighbouring 
and other countries in the Indian Ocean Region, India has been working 
closely with countries in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) namely, Sri 
Lanka, Maldives, Mauritius, Seychelles, Madagascar and Comoros on 
range of areas from development partnership, defence and maritime 
security, capacity building and HADR assistance, as per respective 
countries’ need and requirements. Notable among them include Indian 
Housing Project and Island-wide ambulance services in Sri Lanka, 
Metro Express Project, Social Housing Units and New ENT Hospital 
Projects in Mauritius, National College of Policing and Law Enforcement 
and Addu city development projects in Maldives among others. In the 
area of defence, India has been supporting these countries with 
provisioning of Dornier aircraft in Sri Lanka, Maldives and Mauritius; 
helicopters in Maldives and Mauritius; and Coastal Radar Surveillance 
System in Maldives and Seychelles, deputing technical experts to 
Mauritius for assisting their Mauritius Police Force and similarly to 
Maldives for operating the aviation platforms for medical evacuation 
and surveillance purpose, deploying ships for joint maritime and EEZ 
surveillance, undertaking joint exercises to counter maritime 
challenges and conducting customized training programme in the 
defence and maritime domain. Further, India is also cooperating with 
Mauritius, Seychelles and Sri Lanka on hydrography and assisting 
Mauritius with setting up of a National Maritime Information Sharing 
Centre (NMISC) & exploring similar NMISC with Comoros. India is also 
hosting Liaison Officers from Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Maldives and 
Seychelles at the IFC-IOR in India. These measures are aimed at 

Page | 8 
 
consolidating India’s role as “Net Security Provider” in the region and to 
augment capabilities of countries in the Indian Ocean Region on 
maritime domain awareness and to counter maritime challenges. 
(b) Africa: India and Africa are maritime neighbours connecting through 
the Indian Ocean which provides trade route to establish commercial 
linkages and strong people to people connections. India has maintained 
a vibrant relationship with African countries based on the 10 guiding 
principles enunciated by the Prime Minister in his speech to the 
Parliament of Uganda in 2018. The four pillars of India’s Foreign Policy 
in Africa resonate with our Indian Ocean Strategy: Developmental 
Partnership Assistance (DPA) and capacity building; defence and 
maritime security; trade and investment and robust people to people 
ties. Our long-standing development partnership with Africa is 
structured around India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS). Under DPA, 
Government of India has committed during IAFS-III to provide US $ 10 
billion concessional loans (Line of Credit). India has also provided 
assistance to Africa through various grants projects of over USD 700 
million since 2015, which has exceeded to our announced commitment 
of US $ 600 million under IAFS-III. 
c) Bangladesh: Bangladesh and India have expressed their commitment 
to a free, open, inclusive, secure, and rules-based Indo-Pacific region 
and to achieve this Bangladesh has agreed to be a co-lead with India on 
the Pillar 05 - Disaster Risk Reduction and Management pillar of the 
Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI). Under this initiative, both sides 
agreed to co-operate towards mitigating disaster risks, building disaster 
resilient infrastructure, and contributing to the sustenance of our 
shared maritime region. Bangladesh and India are both members of the 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC), a regional organization that promotes 
economic cooperation between countries bordering the Bay of Bengal. 
Bangladesh leads the Trade, Investment and Development sector and 
the Blue economy sub-sector under BIMSTEC. Bangladesh is also a 

Page | 9 
 
part of the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) and chaired the 
organization for the period 2021-2023. 
(d) Myanmar: India and Myanmar share a land border of 1643 kms, as 
well as a maritime boundary of around 1100 kms in the Bay of Bengal. 
Both countries share a heritage of spiritual, historical, linguistic and 
ethnic ties. Myanmar is India’s gateway to Southeast Asia as it is the 
only ASEAN country adjoining India and sits at the confluence of our 
two key foreign policy initiatives – ‘Act East’ and ‘Neighbourhood First’. 
Maritime cooperation between the two countries is robust and has 
witnessed gradual upswing over past few years. India has supported 
capacity building efforts of the Myanmar Navy and their personnel 
regularly subscribe to training courses offered by the Indian Navy. Both 
navies regularly undertake coordinated patrols along the International 
Maritime Boundary Line, passage exercises and ships-visits to friendly 
ports. 
(e) India and Australia are Indian Ocean partners with a shared vision 
for a peaceful, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific. The Comprehensive 
Strategic Partnership (CSP) between India and Australia, signed in 
2020, has witnessed transformational growth. There is a greater 
convergence between the two countries in the understanding of, and 
approach to, the geo-strategic environment, particularly in the Indo-
Pacific region. In its National Defense Strategy (NDS), Australia calls 
India as its “top-tier security partner”. Australia co-hosted Indian 
Ocean Conference with India in its 'Indian Ocean Capital' Perth in 
February 2024. Both India and Australia are members of the IORA, 
IONS, IPMDA, ASEAN Regional Forum, Asia Pacific Partnership on 
Climate and Clean Development, and have participated in the East Asia 
Summits. Australia is leading the Maritime Ecology Pillar of IPOI. There 
is enhanced maritime domain awareness cooperation with Australia in 
the Indian Ocean region in the field of defence and security through 
information sharing, increased number and complexity in exercises and 
operations between the navies/other elements of military and 

Page | 10 
 
constabulary forces, trusted interoperability and elements of 
interchangeability are some of the key achievements. The key enablers 
have been several MoUs/IAs on deployment of Maritime Patrol Aircraft, 
Information exchange protocols and Mutual Logistics Support 
Arrangements enabling first ever submarine deployments, MPAs on 
mainland and island territories, logistics support at sea, air and land 
by each other's troops/ forces. Australia hosted Exercise Malabar off its 
east coast for the first time in 2023. 
 
IV. INDIA’S APPROACH TOWARDS INDIAN OCEAN REGION 
1.18 India’s policy in the Indian Ocean region (IOR) is centered on 
maintaining security, fostering regional cooperation, and promoting strategic 
and economic interests with the objective of promoting greater prosperity in 
the region and of making the Indian Ocean a free, open and inclusive space, 
based on the UN Convention on the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS). 
1.19 India's policy towards the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) is encapsulated in 
the 'Neighbourhood First' approach in the maritime domain, further refined 
by the SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the Region) doctrine, announced 
by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2015. In March 2025, with the objective 
to expand our Vision to encompass broader regional cooperation across the 
Global South, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi outlined the MAHASAGAR 
doctrine i.e. "Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth 
Across Regions” (an extension of SAGAR doctrine) in Mauritius. 
1.20 India’s approach to the Indian Ocean Region is broadly composed of the 
following elements: 
i. Security and Stability: India’s commitment to the well-being and 
progress of nations of the Indian Ocean, including as first responder 
and a net security provider, is based on our Neighbourhood First policy, 
on the SAGAR outlook, and on our approach to the extended 
neighbourhood as well. It draws on our broader vision of an Indo-Pacific 

Page | 11 
 
that is built on a rules-based international order, rule of law, 
sustainable and transparent infrastructure investment, freedom of 
navigation and over-flight, and sincere respect for sovereignty and 
territorial integrity. India is focused on ensuring the security of the sea 
lanes that pass through the Indian Ocean, as they are crucial for global 
trade and energy flows. India actively engages in counter-piracy 
operations and cooperates with other nations to combat IUU fishing, 
maritime terrorism and maritime criminal activities. 
ii. Bilateral and Multilateral Strategic Partnerships and Groupings: India 
has fostered strong bilateral partnerships, including defense and 
security ties, with countries in the Indian Ocean region, such as 
Mauritius, Maldives, Sri Lanka, and Seychelles. Multilateral groupings 
such as the Quad, BIMSTEC, the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), 
the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) and the Indian Ocean Naval 
Symposium (IONS) facilitate regional cooperation. 
a. India is a founding member of the 23-member IORA, a regional 
grouping aimed at strengthening economic cooperation, maritime 
safety, and environmental security. India views the IORA as a 
platform for promoting sustainable development, economic growth 
and prosperity, and stability in the region. As the Vice-Chair of IORA 
for the term 2023-25 and as Chair in 2025-27, India will work on 
consolidating and streamlining efforts to promote cooperation in the 
realms of the 6 priority areas and 2 cross-cutting themes of the 
IORA, with particular emphasis on maritime safety and security, and 
blue economy of which India is the Coordinating Country working 
closely with Chairs Australia and Indonesia respectively. 
b. The Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI), announced by Prime 
Minister in 2019, is an open, non-treaty based global initiative that 
seeks to manage, conserve, sustain, and secure the maritime 
domain. So far, 15 countries are part of the IPOI and are co-leading 
one of its 7 pillars. Australia’s leadership on Maritime Ecology, the 
United Kingdom’s on maritime security, and the co-leadership of 

Page | 12 
 
France and Indonesia on the Maritime Resources pillars have helped 
to make a beginning. Over the past year, Italy has joined Singapore 
in leading the Science and Technology pillar, while Germany took 
the helm in Capacity Building and Resource Sharing. The United 
States, in partnership with Japan, now co-leads the Trade, 
Connectivity, and Maritime Transport pillar, and India leading the 
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management pillar and co-leading on 
Maritime Security, has added to the realisation of this initiative. 
Progress on IPOI reflects a strengthening bond among nations that 
share a common desire to sustain the two oceans through practical, 
project-based cooperation. 
c. BIMSTEC is a convergence of our "Neighbourhood First” policy, or 
"Act East” outlook and the Indian Ocean interests. India is the lead 
country for the Security pillar of BIMSTEC, which covers counter-
terrorism and transnational crime, disaster management and energy 
security. We host the BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate near 
Delhi and a BIMSTEC Energy Centre near Bengaluru. We have been 
organizing events and activities in areas ranging from agriculture, 
disaster management, space and remote sensing to transnational 
crimes, trade and investment. We also offer research and higher 
education scholarships, while promoting common programmes. 
Infusing more resources and more energy into this grouping will 
certainly give it a greater role in the times ahead. 
d. The Quad and its elevation to the Summit level has been aimed at 
ensuring delivery of public goods. It addresses maritime security, 
safety, HADR, environment protection, connectivity, strategic 
technologies, supply chain resilience, health, education and cyber 
security, amongst others. 
e. Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) is a smaller organization with five 
member states: Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles, and 
France (via Réunion). It focuses on economic and environmental 
issues but has broadened its scope to include maritime security. 

Page | 13 
 
India was granted observer status in 2020, signaling an important 
addition in its engagement with the Western Indian Ocean. 
iii. Infrastructure and Connectivity: India has been investing in the 
development of ports across the Indian Ocean, such as in Sri Lanka, 
Mauritius, and Seychelles, to enhance connectivity and strategic 
presence. The development of Chabahar Port in Iran is a significant 
example, aimed at strengthening ties with Central Asia, Iran and 
Afghanistan. 
iv. Blue Economy and Development Cooperation: India is committed to 
promoting Blue Economy through the sustainable use of ocean 
resources for economic growth, improved livelihoods, and job creation, 
while preserving the health of the ocean. India is focusing on promoting 
sustainable development through blue economy projects such as 
fishing, mineral exploration, and marine research. India provides 
economic and military assistance, infrastructure development, and 
technical support to smaller island nations in the region, strengthening 
ties and ensuring their development is aligned with regional stability. 
To ensure the safety of navigation in the IOR has been the hydrographic 
support provided to chart the waters of the region along with a large 
component of training. 
v. Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief: India plays the role of a 
reliable ‘first responder’. With this objective, India provided Covid aid 
and medicines, PPE Kits, face masks and Anti-retroviral medicines and 
anti- TB drugs to various countries in the IOR Region such as- Kiribati, 
Fiji, Maldives, Seychelles & Comoros, Nauru, Solomon Islands, 
Mozambique and other Disaster relief material, approx. 9,655 kgs to 
Tonga, in 2022. In 2023, India sent essential medicines and medical 
equipments to Palau and drugs worth Rs. 1.15 crores to Fiji. In 2024, 
19 tons of disaster relief material and 6 tons of emergency use medical 
supplies were provided, during landslides, to Papua New Guinea and 
essential medicines used in Integrated Management of Childhood 
Illness (IMCI) vaccination for the pediatric population to Fiji. In May, 

Page | 14 
 
during the floods in Kenya, India provided 22 tons of HADR items In 
the wake of floods caused by Typhoon Yagi, India launched Operation 
'Sadbhav' in September and provided 53 tons of disaster relief material 
and medical supplies to Myanmar 10 tons to Laos and 35 tons to 
Vietnam. Besides, India has also formulated the guidelines of HADR for 
the IORA. 
vi. People-to-people ties: Cultural and diaspora links in the countries of 
the Indian Ocean Region from the Indian Ocean Island nations to the 
East African nations and the Gulf countries and South East Asia are 
deep and firmly rooted in history and shared heritage. Cultural 
diplomacy, and the promotion of democratic values in the region 
enhances India’s image as a benevolent regional leader. 
1.21 Despite the geopolitical, economic and cultural significance of the 
Indian Ocean, the Committee were keen to know the reason India not give 
adequate attention to the Indian Ocean region in its foreign policy before the 
enunciation of the SAGAR doctrine. The Ministry responded that India has 
always recognized the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) as crucial and has given 
adequate attention in its foreign policy due to its strategic location, long 
coastline and energy trade routes. Our policy prior SAGAR was focused on 
the following: 
 Non-Alignment and Regional Autonomy (During the cold war Period)  
 Advocated for the Indian Ocean as a “Zone of Peace” (UN Resolution of 
1972). 
 Look East Policy (1991). 
 Modernising and Expanding our Naval capabilities. 
 Bilateral Maritime Cooperation with littoral states to combat piracy, 
disaster relief, capacity building etc. 
 Maritime Security Operations and Anti-Piracy Operations to protect 
merchant ships. 
 Multilateral Engagements like IORA, Quad, IONS etc. 

Page | 15 
 
1.22 Thus India’s policy on IOR prior to SAGAR focused on security, securing 
trade routes, bilateral and multilateral cooperation. These policies later laid 
the foundation and were encompassed under the wider ambit of SAGAR 
doctrine which has been more cohesive and inclusive. The point to note here, 
is that as our economic strength increased, our ambitions increased and we 
were able to dedicate more resources to project and promote our interests in 
the region, and work with multiple partners and engage with regional for a 
more purposefully. 
a.  Security and Growth for All in the Region (SAGAR) and Mutual and 
Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions 
(MAHASAGAR) 
1.23 SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the Region), articulated by Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi during a visit to Mauritius in March 2015, is 
India’s vision for a secure, cooperative, and prosperous Indian Ocean region. 
It emphasizes collective action on maritime security, economic growth, and 
development. This succinctly outlines our vision for the region – of advancing 
cooperation and using our capabilities for larger benefit.  
1.24 SAGAR focuses on: 
(i)  enhancing capacities to safeguard land and maritime territories 
& interests; 
(ii) deepening economic and security cooperation in the littoral; 
(iii) promoting collective action to deal with natural disasters and 
maritime threats like piracy, terrorism and emergent non-state actors; 
(iv) working towards sustainable regional development through 
enhanced collaboration; and, 
(v) engaging with countries beyond our shores with the aim of 
building greater trust and promoting respect for maritime rules, norms 
and peaceful resolution of disputes. 
1.25 Regarding tangible outcome derived under SAGAR since it was 
announced in 2015, the Ministry elaborated that India’s commitment to the 
well-being and progress of nations of the Indian Ocean is based on our 
Neighbourhood First policy, on the SAGAR outlook, and on our approach to 

Page | 16 
 
the extended neighbourhood as well.  India has established itself as the ‘First 
Responder’ in the region offering timely and effective HADR support and has 
extended its capacities to respond to natural disasters and man-made 
accidents.  
1.26 Some of the activities conducted by India as a first responder for HADR 
include: 
 Providing relief assistance during floods in Sri Lanka in 2016, Cyclone 
Mora – Bangladesh in 2017, earthquake in Indonesia in 2018, Cyclone 
in Madagascar and Mozambique in 2018-19, drought in Madagascar in 
2021, Cyclone Mocha in Myanmar in 2023 (Operation Karuna), 
landslides in Papua New Guinea in 2024, Typhoon in Myanmar in 2024 
(Operation Sadbhav), earth quake in Myanmar in 2025 (Operation 
Brahma), 
 Sending of a 10 member Indian Coast Guard team to help Mauritius 
manage the oil spill of MV Wakashio in July 2020 
 Emergency assistance during the fire accident on-board MT New 
Diamond (September 2020) and oil spill and fire accident of MV X-Press 
Pearl (June 2021) off coast of Sri Lanka 
 Providing vaccines, aid and medicines, PPE Kits, face masks and Anti-
retroviral medicines and anti-TB drugs to various countries in the IOR 
Region during the COVID pandemic 
 India has formulated the guidelines of HADR for the IORA. India has 
also circulated guidelines on HADR and SOPs on Search and Rescue 
(SAR) under East Asia Summit (EAS) mechanism. 
1.27 India has also established itself as the net security provider in the IOR. 
The Indian Navy has been part of anti-piracy patrols in the sea routes of the 
Indian Ocean. India has undertaken projects to help enhance the coastal and 
EEZ surveillance capacity of the Indian Ocean Island states. 
1.28 Some of the activities that India carries out in Indian Ocean Region 
include:  
 Deploying ships for maritime security and anti-piracy operations in 
Western Indian Ocean (Gulf of Aden, Red Sea and Gulf of Oman). 
 Conducting joint EEZ surveillance exercises with several countries 
including Maldives, Mauritius and Seychelles.  

Page | 17 
 
 Carrying out coordinated patrols in areas of interest where illicit 
maritime activities are known to be higher.  
 Participating in variety of multilateral and plurilateral initiatives to 
enhance the regional maritime security along with partner nations.  
 Information sharing through Information Fusion Centre (IFC-IOR) at 
Gurugram to enable a greater regional maritime security.  
These are some of the activities that have led to a positive perception of India 
as a net security provider in the Indian Ocean Region. 
1.29 On being asked about the expected outcome of the evolution of the 
SAGAR doctrine into MAHASAGAR in terms of strengthening regional 
maritime security in the IOR, the Ministry stated that the evolution of SAGAR 
doctrine into MAHASAGAR envisage the following objectives in regional 
maritime security: 
 MAHASAGAR initiative will further promote India’s maritime leadership 
in IOR as Net Security Provider and First Responder. 
 Enhance India’s Maritime Capabilities, by expanding the scope of our 
engagements and the range of our partners, for training , exercises and 
other activities. 
 Strengthen Maritime Security relations with countries in the broader 
Global South, in addition to just the IOR. 
 Augment operational effectiveness in safeguarding IOR maritime 
domain through joint training exercise, sharing best practices and use 
of advanced technologies.  
 Help in formulating maritime security framework that are responsive 
and resilient to contemporary challenges. 
1.30 The Committee further enquired about how MAHASAGAR doctrine was 
distinct from the SAGAR doctrine in terms of strategic approach, goals, and 
execution. In a written reply, the Ministry stated that Vision SAGAR (Security 
and Growth for All in the Region) was launched by Prime Minister Narendra 

Page | 18 
 
Modi in March 2015.  The objective of Vision SAGAR was to safeguard India’s 
interests in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) and ensure its safety, security, and 
stability as well as freedom of navigation. Vision SAGAR’s focus included to 
counter threats including terrorism, piracy, trafficking, and illegal 
fishing.  The policy also assists Ocean States with their economic and security 
needs including through grants and Indian Lines of Credit. Vision SAGAR 
further focuses on strengthening the defence and maritime capabilities of 
friendly countries in IOR. Under Vision SAGAR, India provided assets, 
manpower, and customized training to partner countries. It also promoted 
regional cooperation through platforms including Colombo Security Conclave 
and the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS). The policy emphasizes 
humanitarian aid, disaster relief, and people-to-people connections. 
Vision MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security 
and Growth Across Regions) was announced in March 2025 during PM Modi’s 
State Visit to Mauritius. It builds on Vision SAGAR and expands its scope 
from the Indian Ocean to the wider Global South. Vision MAHASAGAR focuses 
on trade, development cooperation, capacity building, sustainable growth and 
mutual security for the broader Global South for a shared future. It suggests 
a framework that builds on India’s outlook for the G20 - essentially looking 
further afield to build a community of shared values and aspirations among 
developing nations of the Global South. 
1.31 This vision highlights India’s role as a trusted development and security 
partner committed to a shared and inclusive future for the Global South. 
Thus, the MAHASAGAR vision essentially expands the reach and range of our 
engagements, to cover the entire Global South, and burnish our credentials 
as a global player. 
1.32 The Committee also were keen to learn about the challenges faced in 
implementing the Security and Growth for All (SAGAR) doctrine along with 
the progress made and notable achievements. In a written reply, the Ministry 
stated that India has been advancing its bilateral and multilateral 
partnerships in line with SAGAR i.e. Security and Growth for All in the Region. 
SAGAR doctrine has promoted security and stability. India has been 

Page | 19 
 
extending developmental assistance, offered capacity building programmes, 
HADR support and defence and maritime security cooperation with an aim to 
assist countries in the Indian Ocean Region on their socio-economic 
development. India has been the ‘First Responder’ in the region offering timely 
and effective HADR support and has extended its capacities to respond to 
natural disasters and man-made accidents. India has also established itself 
as the net security provider in the IOR.  The Indian Navy has been part of 
anti-piracy patrols in the sea routes of the Indian Ocean. India has 
undertaken projects to help enhance the coastal and EEZ surveillance 
capacity of the Indian Ocean Island states. 
1.33 Elucidating the distinction between SAGAR and MAHASAGAR doctrines 
, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs testified before the 
Committee on 17 June 2025 and said: 
“Vision SAGAR was officially launched by Prime Minister Shri Narendra 
Modi in March 2015 during a ceremony in Port Louis in Mauritius. The 
objective of Vision SAGAR was to safeguard Indian India's interests in 
the IOR and ensure safety security and stability as well as freedom of 
navigation. The focus included countering threats such as terrorism, 
piracy, trafficking, and illegal fishing. The policy also assists Indian 
Ocean states with their economic and security needs including through 
Indian lines of credit and grants. It also focuses on strengthening the 
defence and maritime capabilities of friendly countries. We saw a large 
list in the presentation made by the Navy. Under Vision SAGAR India 
also provides assets manpower and customized training to partner 
countries. It also promotes regional cooperation through platforms such 
as the Colombo Security Conclave, the IORA, IONS, BIMSTEC and also 
engagement with QUAD countries On the other hand MAHASAGAR 
which was announced in March 2025 during the Prime Minister's State 
visit to Mauritius Builds on the SAGAR approach in terms of economic 
and strategic depth extends India's engagement beyond the Indian 
Ocean region to the entire global south including Africa, the Indo-Pacific 
region in general, Latin America and Pacific Island nations. The vision 
emphasizes a larger agenda including mutual security, economic 
growth, sustainable development and aiming to foster deeper 
cooperation across trade technology interestingly, which was not there 
in the original SAGAR Vision, maritime security and capacity building. 
It also seeks to amplify the voice of developing countries in global 
governance and policy making forums such as the G20, BRICS and the 

Page | 20 
 
UN etc. It also highlights India's role as a trusted development partner 
committed to a shared and inclusive future for the global South.” 
1.34 India’s approach to the region is based on a free, open, inclusive and 
rules-based Indo-Pacific. It lays emphasis on respect for sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of all nations in the region, peaceful resolution of disputes, 
avoidance of use or threat of use of force, and adherence to international laws, 
rules and regulations. 
 
b.  Indo Pacific and Indian Ocean Region as a continuum 
1.35 On being asked about the difference between Indian Ocean Policy and 
Indo-Pacific Policy, the Ministry stated that India’s Indian Ocean Policy draws 
from India’s concept of Indo-Pacific that was articulated in Prime Minister’s 
keynote address at Shangri La Dialogue in June 2018. It is a wider 
implementation of the doctrine of SAGAR announced by PM in 2015 for the 
Indian Ocean Region and our Act East Policy. India’s concept of Indo-Pacific 
is based on the following: 
 It calls for a free, open and inclusive order in the Indo-Pacific, based 
upon respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations, 
peaceful resolution of disputes through dialogue and adherence to 
international rules and laws. 
 It is inclusive in nature, and supports an approach that respects the 
right to freedom of navigation and overflight for all in the international 
seas. 
 It is based on cooperation and collaboration, given the need for shared 
responses to shared challenges in the region and is premised upon the 
principle of ‘ASEAN-Centrality. 
1.36 On this issue, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
during testimony before the Committee n 18 December 2025 submitted as 
under: 
“In our view, it is really a continuum and the challenges that are faced 
in the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean are very similar. And as was 
pointed out by so many of the hon. Members, the threats from malign 

Page | 21 
 
actors, shall we say without naming countries which are there in the 
Pacific, are also there in the Indian Ocean. So, our responses have to 
factor that in.” 
1.37 The Committee also desired to know about the allocation of resources 
for implementing India’s Indian Ocean strategy in the past ten years, and how 
these resources are being utilized for its effective execution. The Ministry 
replied that in the last 10 years, Government of India, has allocated various 
resources inter-alia financial, human resources, infrastructure support, 
capacity building, development cooperation with the objective to implement 
India’s Indian Ocean Strategy through cooperation and collaboration with 
like-minded and neighbouring countries in the region bilaterally and 
multilaterally. 
1.38 The allocation of resources extends across multiple Ministries, 
including MEA, MOD, DEA (MoF), M/o Shipping & Waterways etc. As far as 
MEA is concerned, our development cooperation initiatives are supported 
through Lines of Credit extended through EXIM Bank, Grants-in-Aid through 
the Aid budget, and capacity-building through the ITEC budget. 
1.39 When asked whether the role of Small Island States has been factored 
in India’s Indian Ocean strategy/policy, the Ministry stated that India factors 
in all considerations with regard to partners while formulating 
strategies/policies. India engages with all like-minded countries in the IOR 
both bilaterally and in multilateral platforms. In fact, the MAHASAGAR vision 
encompasses support for Pacific Island Countries (PICs) and also small island 
states in the Caribbean, in addition to those in the Indian Ocean Region. 
1.40 When asked about the perception of the IOR countries towards India as 
a ‘net security provider’ in the Indian Ocean Region, the Ministry responded 
that Security and development are two center pieces of India’s foreign policy 
in the Indian Ocean region. India has established itself as the net security 
provider in the IOR. Some of the activities that India carries out in Indian 
Ocean Region include: 
 Deploying ships for maritime security and anti-piracy operations in 
Western Indian Ocean (Gulf of Aden, Red Sea and Gulf of Oman) 

Page | 22 
 
 Conducting joint EEZ surveillance exercises with several countries 
including Maldives, Mauritius and Seychelles. 
 Carrying out coordinated patrols in areas of interest where illicit 
maritime activities are known to be higher. 
 Participating in variety of multilateral and plurilateral initiatives to 
enhance the regional maritime security along with partner nations. 
 Information sharing through Information Fusion Centre (IFC-IOR) at 
Gurugram to enable a greater regional maritime security. 
These are some of the activities that have led to a positive perception of India 
as a net security provider in the Indian Ocean Region. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 23 
 
CHAPTER II 
MARITIME SECURITY AND STRATEGY IN INDIAN OCEAN REGION 
 
India’s strategic location at the heart of the Indian Ocean, with a 
coastline stretching over 11,098 km and an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) 
of approximately 2.4 million square kilometers, grants it significant influence 
over maritime security dynamics in the region. With nine coastal states and 
four island territories, India commands a maritime domain that is both vast 
and resource rich. The expansive sea area is a reservoir of natural resources 
and is extensively used for exploring, exploiting, conserving and managing 
ocean resources like fishing, ocean mining, drilling for oil & gas etc.  
2.2 India's maritime footprint extends beyond its immediate coastline, 
reaching over 12,000 km, from the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf in the west 
to the South China Sea and the Australian coast in the east. This extensive 
coverage places India at the crossroads of key maritime trade routes and 
strategic chokepoints, making maritime security a vital component of its 
national security architecture. 
2.3 Over the last three decades, economic growth around much of the 
Indian Ocean littoral has been rapid. Australia, Southeast Asia, India, the 
Middle East, East Africa, and Southern Africa have all enjoyed robust growth. 
In this context, trade flows through the region have rapidly increased in 
volume. Economically, the Indian Ocean’s shipping routes are increasingly 
vital arteries of global economic activity and are set to become much busier 
in the 21st Century. The key International Shipping Lanes passing through 
the Indian Ocean are as follows: 
1. Suez to Aden 
2. Aden to Kutch 
3. Aden to Mumbai 
4. Aden to Male Atolls 
5. Gulf Of Oman to Male Atolls 
6. Cape Of Good Hope to Gulf Of Oman 
7.  Cape Of Good Hope to Mumbai 
8.  Mozambique Channel to Malacca Strait 

Page | 24 
 
9.  Cape Of Good Hope to Malacca Strait 
10. Cape Of Good Hope to Sunda Strait 
11.  Cape Of Good Hope to Lombok Strait 
12. Cape Of Good Hope to Ombai And Wetar 
13.  Colombo to Vishakhapatnam 
14.  Colombo to Dhaka 
15.  Colombo to Yangon 
16. Male Atolls to Sunda Strait 
17. Male Atolls to Lombok Strait 
18. Male Atolls to Australia 
19. Singapore Strait to Taiwan Strait 
20. Sunda Strait to Taiwan.  
 
2.4 Highlighting the significance of the Indian Ocean for India’s maritime 
security, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the Indian Ocean is 
vital for India’s maritime security. India has an extensive coastline of 7500 
km and over 1300 islands between Lakshadweep in the west and the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands in the east. India is not only geographically 
connected to the Indian Ocean Region but shares civilizational and cultural 
links with the countries in Indian Ocean. Throughout history, the Indian 


Page | 25 
 
Ocean Region has been characterized by commercial flows, alongside 
migration of people, ideas and cultures. Economically, India has a vast 
Exclusive Economic Zone of 2.4 million square kilometers and 90% of India’s 
trade by volume and almost all of India’s oil imports come through the sea. 
Almost a hundred thousand ships a year pass through waters of Indian 
Ocean, carrying about half of the world’s container shipments, one-third of 
the world’s bulk cargo traffic and two-thirds of the oil shipments. Three 
quarters of this traffic is headed for destinations beyond the region. It is the 
medium that connects the producers of the Gulf and Western Indian Ocean 
to the consumers of South and East Asia and vice-versa. India’s priorities and 
efforts are aimed at developing an Indian Ocean community that is stable and 
prosperous, strong and resilient, and which is able to cooperate closely within 
and to respond to happenings beyond the ocean. It is thus important to 
maintain the Indian Ocean as a free, open and inclusive space based on the 
UN Convention on the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS), as the Constitution of the 
Seas. 
2.5  During the course of oral evidence before the Committee on 17 June 
2025, the representative of Indian Navy spelt out India’s maritime interests 
as under: 
“…the principal amongst our interest is ensuring the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of the country, promoting the safety and security of 
our citizens, shipping, fishing, trade, energy supplies etc which flow 
across the maritime domain is also another vital interest. While we 
pursue peace, stability and security in our maritime zones and 
concurrently, preserve and project other national interests, those have 
to be furthered in a dynamic, complex and often volatile environment 
posing a host of challenges…” 
 
I. CHALLENGES AND THREAT PERCEPTION 
2.6 Despite its strategic and economic value, the IOR faces a range of 
traditional and non-traditional threats that complicate maritime security. The 
Committee enquired whether there has been any change in the traditional 
and non-traditional threats in the Indian Ocean region. In response, the 

Page | 26 
 
Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the traditional and non-traditional 
threats in the Indian Ocean Region include maritime terrorism, smuggling, 
transnational crimes, drug-trafficking, illegal immigration, Illegal, Unreported 
and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, piracy, unregulated private maritime security 
companies and proliferation of contraband items. It is further compounded 
by natural disasters, oil spills and effects of climate change, to which Indian 
Ocean Region is highly prone. 
2.7 The Ministry of Defence was also asked to enumerate the key challenges 
faced by India in the Indian Ocean Region and efforts taken to tackle them. 
In a written submission the Ministry stated that the Indian Navy faces 
multifaceted challenges in the IOR, encompassing traditional security threats 
from Naval competition, territorial disputes and growing Chinese naval 
presence, alongside non-traditional challenges like piracy, trafficking, illegal 
fishing, maritime terrorism, natural calamities and complex geopolitical 
dynamics. Further, on an average, over 1,65,000 ships traverse the Indian 
Ocean annually. At any given point of time, at least 15,000 ships are being 
monitored by IMAC and IFC-IOR. Additionally, with a coastline of over 11,000 
km consisting of nearly 1400 islands, nine coastal states and four union 
territories, a significant responsibility is imposed on the Indian Navy.  
2.8 The Ministry also stated that Mission based deployments in Areas of 
Interest across the IOR are undertaken to safeguard national maritime 
interests. Regular large-scale exercises, such as Theatre Level Operational 
Readiness Exercise (TROPEX), and fleet deployments are conducted to test 
combat readiness, review capabilities and address shortfalls. Further, 
persistent air surveillance is maintained, in the Area of Responsibility to 
develop comprehensive Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA).  
2.9 For addressing non-traditional Threats, a comprehensive approach is 
adopted, primarily under the ‘Strategy for Shaping a Favourable and Positive 
Maritime Environment’ for addressing such threats. IN employs its 
constabulary, diplomatic and benign roles, which involves conduct of anti-
piracy missions, anti-narcotics operations, Coordinated Patrols (CORPAT) 
with maritime neighbours, coastal and EEZ patrol/ surveillance, 

Page | 27 
 
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) and Non-Combatant 
Evacuation Operations (NEO) to address such threats. 
 
a) Traditional Security Threats 
2.10 The Indian Ocean Region is vital to China for its great power ambitions. 
Its search for energy, mineral resources and its compulsion to look for newer 
market for finished goods has led China to increase its engagement with IOR 
littorals. Therefore. consistent presence of People’s Liberation Army (Navy) i.e. 
PLA (N) in the IOR, is a strategic imperative for China, In a written submission, 
the Ministry of Defence mentioned the broad contours of Chinese efforts in 
the IOR as follows: 
(a) PLA (N) is undergoing a significant capability accretion and has 
commissioned over 15 units per year in the last decade. PLA (N) has 
already surpassed United States (Navy) as the largest Navy in the world 
through an accelerated construction program, Two Carrier Battle 
Groups are operational and a third and much more potent Aircraft 
Carrier Fujian, is at an advanced stage of pre-commissioning trials. 
With this capability augmentation, China has been consolidating its 
position in the IOR through frequent deployments of PLA (N) ships, 
submarines and aircraft. In the past decade, Chinese deployment in the 
IOR have seen a considerable rise, Chinese submarines are also known 
to have frequently been deployed in IOR since 2013. 
(b) Further, a number of Chinese quasi military vessels, including 
research survey and satellite tracking vessels have been operating in 
the IOR. Dedicated efforts are being made in deep sea exploration for 
mining rare earth minerals towards niche technologies, in 2024, 20 
Chinese Research vessels operated in IOR for a duration of 862 days, 
which has been the highest number of days since 2020.  
(c) China continues to pursue and progress its investments, both in our 
immediate maritime neighbourhood as also in Africa by creating 

Page | 28 
 
dependencies through development of commercial and military 
infrastructure.  
(d) In 2024, PLA (N) ships have made 22 port calls in IOR countries and 
undertaken military exercises with IOR littorals, China is engaging 
considerably in Africa and exploiting the opportunity to fill the power 
void created specifically in West Africa, due to diminishing European 
Union influence. In addition, high level delegation visits are also carried 
out by China to influence the politico military leadership.  
2.11  Pakistan Navy is also undergoing a major capability development 
program with induction of four type 054 A/P frigate from China, four MILGEM 
Class Corvettes from Turkiye and eight Hangor (Yuan Class Air Independent 
Propulsion Capable submarines from China, state of the art aircraft and 
unmanned assets, among others.  
2.12 With regard to the extent of inroads made by China in the Indian Ocean 
region, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that China has expanded its 
naval power in the Indian Ocean Region by increased numbers and duration 
of deployments. This has been facilitated by establishing a military base in 
Djibouti in 2017 and creation of dual-use infrastructure astride critical 
maritime choke points in the IOR to serve logistics support functions. As part 
of this strategy, China is also developing ports and other infrastructure 
facilities in the littoral countries of the IOR, including in the vicinity of India’s 
maritime boundary and has a stated goal of becoming a maritime power. 
2.13 China has also made attempts to expand its footprint in the Indian 
Ocean Region through various activities such as Forum for Development of 
Indian Ocean Island Countries, China-Indian Ocean Region Forum on 
Development Cooperation, Global Development Initiative, Marine Disaster 
Prevention and Mitigation Alliance in Indian Ocean Region, International 
Organisation of Mediation, among others. This is in addition to undertaking 
several infrastructure projects under the Belt and Road Initiative with focus 
on ports, logistics and airport related sectors for their dual usage purpose. 
There are concerns in the international community surrounding transparency 

Page | 29 
 
involved in project financing and have resulted in debt burden for host 
countries. 
2.14 China has also been expanding cooperation with countries in the region 
on the pretext of scientific research and academic linkages in particular in 
archaeology, hydrography and oceanography, remote sensing and sharing of 
satellite images. Increase in deployment of research and survey vessels 
visiting IOR is aimed at collecting sensitive oceanography and marine data of 
the region. India has been working closely with partner countries in the region 
and sensitizing them on Chinese activities and its long-term implications for 
their internal and regional security. 
2.15 In response to the Committee’s query about India’s assessment of the 
strategic implications of China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and the String 
of Pearls strategy in the Indian Ocean Region, the Ministry of Defence stated 
that China has maintained presence since 2008 in IOR under pretext of Anti-
piracy operations. Chinese Research vessels, Satellite Tracking Ships and 
Deep-Sea Fishing boats are increasingly deployed in IOR.  From a maritime 
security standpoint, India regards the BRI and the String of Pearls strategy, 
as attempts to reshape the strategic geography by diluting India’s maritime 
influence in the IOR and altering it in China’s favour. China is increasingly 
trying to gain foothold in the region to pursue its vested interests and gain 
strategic leverage over the resources. Overall, these actions would be 
detrimental to India’s economic growth which is linked to the seas. 
2.16 Regarding the steps taken to safeguard India’s interests in the region 
considering increased Chinese presence, the Ministry of Defence submitted 
that the Indian Navy is aware about the security implications of Chinese 
presence in IOR. Own Concept of operations are continuously fine-tuned and 
capability perspective plans are formulated to cater for potential threats. The 
commissioning of INS Vikrant and the continued modernisation of our 
submarine fleet, including nuclear-powered submarines, is aimed at ensuring 
that we retain a credible deterrence in the region. The Navy’s anti-submarine 
warfare capabilities have also been significantly enhanced with induction of 
ASW corvettes, P8I Long Range Maritime Reconnaissance aircraft and the 

Page | 30 
 
MH60R helicopters. Whole of government efforts are being pursued to 
augment Under Water Domain (UDA) awareness in the region. Our focus on 
building robust relationships with IOR littoral states through capacity-
building initiatives and defence diplomacy is aimed at ensuring regional 
security. Indian Navy’s emphasis on enhancing its operational readiness, 
maintaining credible Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) and fostering littoral 
partnerships ensures that we are well-prepared to meet any security threats 
in the region. 
2.17 On the Committee’s specific query regarding encroachment in the 
Indian Ocean by vessels/alleged fishing vessels of other countries, the 
Ministry of External Affairs submitted that the Government has taken note of 
reports indicating presence of vessels of other countries in Indian Ocean. 
Government keeps a close watch on all developments having a bearing on our 
national security and takes necessary measures to safeguard it. Appropriate 
steps are taken to safeguard the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security 
of the country. China has been undertaking several infrastructure projects 
focusing on ports, airport and logistics sector for dual use purpose, and 
deploying research and survey vessels in the region to augment maritime 
domain awareness and collect sensitive oceanography and marine data of the 
region. 
2.18 When asked about the threat arising from misuse of the IOR, 
particularly by the vessels which are being used for fishing for smuggling of 
arms and drugs, the Ministry stated that the Government keeps a close watch 
on all developments having a bearing on our national security and takes 
necessary measures to safeguard it. Appropriate steps are taken to safeguard 
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of the country. India is 
helping its maritime neighbours set up their coastal surveillance networks for 
developing shared Maritime Domain Awareness. India has signed White 
Shipping Agreements with a number of countries. In addition, our ships have 
undertaken coordinated patrolling and EEZ Surveillance on the request of our 
partners. Another element of ensuring safety of navigation in the IOR has been 
the hydrographic support provided to our partners to chart the waters of the 

Page | 31 
 
region. India has established Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean 
Region (IFC-IOR) for real time information exchange towards enhancing 
maritime security. 
 
 b) Non-Traditional Security Threats 
2.19 The Indian Ocean Region (IOR) faces a range of non-traditional security 
threats that pose significant challenges to regional stability and national 
security. Among these, piracy has resurfaced as a critical concern, especially 
following attacks by Houthi militants in the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden. While 
tendering evidence before the Committee, the representative of Indian Navy 
also highlighted the attacks of Houthis: 
“Under this complexity, the region also witnesses volatility across 
various parts, for instance, attacks on shipping by the Houthis in the 
Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. Shown on screen is the Bab al-Mandab 
Strait at the end of the Gulf of Aden, joining the Red Sea and Gulf of 
Aden. The Houthi attacks were concentrated in an area north and west 
of the Bab al-Mandab. As a consequence of these attacks, a large part 
of international shipping opted to route around Africa, leading to 
increased transit time and consequent costs. This volatility also led to 
a consequent rise and resurgence of piracy. While multinational and 
Indian naval efforts over many years, since 2008, had reduced piracy 
to a certain extent, the instability that the Houthi attacks brought 
around in this region led to the resurgence of piracy. The heat map of 
incidents in the past year is as shown on the screen, with each red dot 
representing a piracy incident. Apart from piracy, other non-traditional 
challenges also persist across a wide part of the region. 
 
2.20 The drug trafficking menace in IOR intersects with an array of security 
issues for the littoral states. The money generated from the trade helps to run 
a parallel economy that is being used to finance terrorism and criminal 
activities, affecting India’s national security and region security dynamics. As 
a Preferred Security Partner in IOR, Indian Armed Forces regularly conduct 
Anti-Narcotics Operations (ANO) in coordination with various agencies. In the 
last three years, Indian Maritime Law Enforcements Agencies have conducted 

Page | 32 
 
several successful ANOs, resulting in seizure of narcotics worth over Rs. 
30,000 crores.  
2.21 Given the growing threat from narcotics trafficking in the Indian Ocean, 
the Committee asked about the measures that have been taken to address 
this issue. In a written submission, the Ministry of Defence stated that both 
the Indian Navy and the Indian Coastal Guard (ICG) are committed to tackle 
threats emanating from narcotics trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region. 
Recently, surge in drug trafficking has been observed in 2024, wherein, the 
Indian Navy undertook four Anti-Narcotics Operations, seizing narcotics 
worth approx INR 40, 000 Crores in comparison to approx INR 20,000 Crores 
between 2021 – 2023. Overall, in the last five years, 10 Anti-Narcotics 
Operations have been undertaken resulting in the seizure of 11,859 Kg of 
narcotics. ICG has also been undertaking both independent and joint anti-
smuggling operations with key agencies viz. Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB), 
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), Anti-terrorism squad (ATS) Gujarat 
and local police which has resulted in successful seizure of significant 
quantities of narcotics at sea.  
2.22 ICG undertakes regular Community Interaction Programmes (CIPs) in 
coastal areas with Fishing Community in order to sensitize them about the 
same. ICG also has representative in the Study group of Best Practices evolved 
by other countries on the issue transnational drug trafficking through 
maritime routes formulated by NCB.  
2.23 Given that around 90% of India’s trade by volume, including nearly all 
oil imports, transits through the Indian Ocean and half of the global container 
shipments, a third of bulk cargo, and two-thirds of oil shipments is handled 
by it, the Committee were keen to learn about the measures that have been 
taken to ensure maritime security of the region, countering piracy, combating 
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, maritime terrorism and maritime 
criminal activities in coordination with other nations in the region. The 
Ministry of External Affairs responded that India aims to contribute to 
regional maritime security and is working to ensure the safety and security of 
maritime traffic through the ocean by strengthening skills and logistics of our 

Page | 33 
 
Indian Ocean neighbours. We are helping our maritime neighbours set up 
their coastal surveillance networks for developing shared Maritime Domain 
Awareness. We have signed White Shipping Agreements with a number of 
countries. In addition, our ships have undertaken coordinated patrolling and 
EEZ Surveillance on the request of our partners. Another element of ensuring 
safety of navigation in the IOR has been the hydrographic support provided 
to our partners to chart the waters of the region. This has been augmented 
with a large training and capacity building effort. 
2.24 The diverse nature of the challenges before us requires effective 
partnerships, both at the regional as well as multilateral level. India considers 
the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) as an important instrument for 
achieving peace and security in the region. The focus of the IORA on maritime 
safety and security promotes a shared understanding of maritime issues and 
helps develop cooperative mechanisms. 
2.25 In addition to the ASEAN and IORA mechanisms, the Indian Ocean 
Naval Symposium (IONS), of which India is a founding member, offers a 
broad-based platform for developing greater synergies with the Navies in the 
region. We also have well-established mechanisms like Regional Cooperation 
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery (ReCAAP) and Contact 
Group on piracy off Somalia (CGPCS), and anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of 
Aden at the western extremity of this ocean. 
2.26 India has established Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean Region 
(IFC-IOR) for real time information exchange towards enhancing maritime 
security. 
2.27 India also participates in other multilateral and plurilateral initiatives 
in the Indo-Pacific region to enhance the regional maritime security along with 
partner nations. These include the Djibouti Code of Conduct-Jeddah 
Amendment (DCOC-JA), Contact Group on Illicit Maritime Activities (CGIMA), 
Combined Maritime Forces (CMF), QUAD Maritime Security Working Group 
(QMSWG), BIMSTEC, ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), ASEAN Defence 
Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM+), and the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum. 

Page | 34 
 
India has steered several maritime security dialogues including India-
Australia Maritime Security Dialogue, India-Myanmar Maritime Security 
Dialogue etc. 
2.28 India has steered several maritime security dialogues including India-
Australia Maritime Security Dialogue, India-Myanmar Maritime Security 
Dialogue etc. Some of the MoU/agreements on defence and security 
cooperation between India and IOR countries include: 
Country MoUs Year of 
signing 
Mauritius Hydrography 1974 
Seychelles Defence Cooperation 
Coastal Radar System 
0perational training and maintenance 
Hydrography 
2003 
2012 
2013 
2015 
Comoros Defence Cooperation 2019 
Madagascar Defence cooperation 2018 
 (Ref: Replies to List of Points Pg 30) 
2.29 From the above list, the Committee observed that India has signed 
MoUs/agreements on defence and security cooperation with only a few 
countries of the IOR viz, Mauritius, Seychelles, Comoros and Madagascar. On 
being asked about the reasons along with the MoUs/agreements in the 
pipeline, the Ministry stated that the Government of India has signed 
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) and agreements on defence and 
security cooperation with Sri Lanka, Madagascar, Myanmar and Bangladesh 
in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). Other than the aforesaid MoUs, 
Government of India provides necessary support including defence assets, 
training and capacity building, assistance in tackling maritime challenges and 
HADR support. Given the trust and long-standing cooperation, India is 
positioned as the ‘net security provider’ in the region. 
2.30 On the Committee’s query about utilization of advanced algorithms, big 
data analytics, or AI- based systems to predict maritime security threats in 
the IOR, the Ministry stated that at present, Indian Navy is leveraging AI/ ML 
capabilities using commercially contracted services such as M/s Windward 

Page | 35 
 
Analytics and Lloyds Sea Searcher. The Baseline Tool of the NC3I network, 
MDA-DSS (Sangraha) is envisaged to incorporate ML capabilities. Indian Navy 
is also pursuing development of the following analytical platforms with AI/ 
ML capabilities such as NMDA Baseline Tool (M/s BEL), DeepDarshak (M/s 
Crimson Energy Experts) and IFC-IOR Analytical Tool (WEESEE / BEL). 
Whereas, for ICG, the major source of MDA data is through coastal Chain of 
Radar and Static Sensors, National AIS chain, satellite AIS chain, satellite 
AIS, fisheries tracking & registration data and various other inputs from 
different sources. This MDA data is analysed through Decision Support 
Software with AI capabilities to flag suspicious vessels. 
 
II. MARITIME POLICY AND STRATEGY IN IOR 
2.31 The Naval Commander in Chiefs (C-in-Cs) as C-in-Cs Coastal Defence 
coordinate the operations with Indian Coastal Guard (ICG) and coastal state 
marine police, complemented suitably by the Indian Naval Ships and 
aircrafts. The National Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence 
Network (NC31) interconnecting 51 Indian Navy and Coast Guard stations is 
functioning effectively and integrates the information available through 
Coastal Security Network, National AIS chain, LRIT system, Space based AIS, 
Merchant Shipping Information (MSIS), World Registry of Shipping (WRS) and 
Vessel and Air Traffic Management Systems (VATMs). The Joint Operation 
Centres (JOCs) set up at Mumbai, Kochi, Vishakhapatnam and Port Blair 
(manned by Indian Navy, Coat Guards and police personnel at all times) are 
also fully integrated and functioning effectively.  
2.32 In order to validate various measures that have been instituted towards 
enhancing maritime security since 26/11, pan India maiden Coastal Defence 
exercise ‘Sea Vigil’ was conceptualized in 2018. Coastal security being a major 
sub-set of coastal defence construct, the concept of sea vigil is to activate, 
inter alia, the coastal security apparatus pan India and assess the 
overarching coastal defence mechanism. The latest edition of Exercise Sea 
Vigil was conducted from 20-21 November 2024. The exercise involving 
mobilization of a large number of coastal security assets is facilitated by 

Page | 36 
 
concerned central ministries and all coastal states/union territories and 
maritime security stakeholders (including the coastal population and fishing 
communities. This has provided an effective inter-agency mechanism to 
facilitate smooth transition of the entire coastal security mechanism to higher 
states of security preparedness.  
2.33 During the course of oral evidence before the Committee on 17 June 
2025, the representative of Indian Navy spelt out as under: 
“Coming to coastal security, the Indian Navy is responsible for overall 
maritime security, while the Indian Coast Guard, State Marine Police, 
CISF, and a host of other agencies have specific responsibilities as well. 
We understand that coastal security involves a whole-of-government 
approach, and over 40 ministries and agencies are involved in the 
overall ambit. We maintain close cooperation and coordination with 
multiple agencies, including the NSCS, MEA, MHA, MOPS&W, MOP&G, 
Department of Fisheries, etc., with a thrust on ensuring coordinated 
action towards coastal security. Towards this end, to evaluate how 
effectively we are able to ensure our security, we conduct a biennial 
Exercise Sea Vigil. This is a nationwide exercise where all coastal 
States, Union Territories, and stakeholders across multiple Ministries 
and agencies are activated simultaneously. The last exercise lasted over 
nine days, which included a tactical phase where nominated units and 
personnel attempted breaching the security layers. The exercise also 
included a multi-agency evaluation of readiness led by a joint Indian 
Naval, Indian Coast Guard, and NSCS team. We undertook a security 
audit of almost 950 locations to identify vulnerability vulnerabilities 
and to formulate mitigating measures for coastal security gaps.” 
2.34     Adding further the representatives of Indian Navy during testimony 
stated: 
“In this complex scenario, we ensure India’s maritime security through 
a clearly articulated strategy. Guided by the MoD, our strategy 
comprises of five constituent strategies, namely a strategy for 
deterrence, a strategy for conflict, strategy for shaping a favourable and 
positive maritime environment, strategy for coastal and offshore 
security, and finally, a strategy for maritime force and capability 
development. All of these strategies are pursued through four roles, 
namely military, constabulary, benign, and diplomatic.” 

Page | 37 
 
2.35 In view of the rapid realignment in geo strategic outlook, the Defence 
Secretary made the following submission before the Committee on 17 June 
2025: 
“India’s maritime strategy has undergone an evolution, with the Indian 
Ocean Region emerging as a strategic space for security, engagement 
and influence. We have been engaging with littoral States of IOR and 
practicing the policies of ‘Neighbourhood First’ and ‘Act East’ and 
Indian initiatives towards promotion of peace and stability in IOR 
includes enhanced domain awareness, shared intelligence, 
engagements through training and exercises, and capacity building of 
our regional partners. India has adopted a multi-pronged approach to 
enhance cooperation and with our maritime neighbours, including Sri 
Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh, Seychelles, Mauritius, Myanmar, the 
ASEAN nations, South West Littorals of Indian Ocean (SWIO) and the 
African nations. Our efforts in this regard include joint patrols, 
Exclusive  Economic Zone surveillance, hydrographic surveys and 
capacity building programmes with the partner navies.  
Indian Law Enforcements Agencies including the Navy have 
consistently remained as First Responder in the region as is evident 
from our Armed Forces proactive assistance to friendly foreign countries 
during crises, such as, Op Brahma (Myanmar), Cyclone Chido 
(Mauritius), Op Kaveri for (evacuation of Indian citizens from Sudan) 
and Op Karuna (Myanmar). We have also ensured the building of 
Maritime Domain Awareness through well-established linkages with 
Friendly Foreign Countries through the Network for Information 
Sharing (NISHAR), Combined Enterprise Regional Information 
Exchange System as well as through deployment of our surface and air 
platforms.  
MAHASAGAR is a declaration of intent and a call for greater inclusivity 
and outreach with stronger partnerships to undertake deterrence 
against common maritime security challenges.  
Several key initiatives are also underway such as Mission Sagar, 
conduct of Multi-Lateral Exercises like MILAN and SAREX, positive 
contributions to the IONS and IORA that you had mentioned, Exercise 
AIKEYME with East African nations and Indian Ocean Ship Sagar in 
South West Littorals of Indian Ocean are these reflect our commitment 
for regional growth and stability. Our Indian Ocean strategy also 
prioritizes protection of trade. Our Naval Forces undertook sustained 
Maritime Security Operations in the Arabian Sea during the Houthi 
crisis to ensure safe transit of Indian flagged merchant vessels to or 

Page | 38 
 
from Indian ports. We have continued to maintain regular presence and 
surveillance in India’s Maritime ‘Areas of Interest’ through the concept 
of Mission Based Deployments (MBDs) and address military challenges, 
tackle contingencies such as Anti-piracy, Humanitarian Aid and 
Disaster Relief (HADR) and Search and Rescue (SAR).” 
 
III. ROLE OF INDIAN NAVY IN IOR 
2.36 India’s strategic stakes in the Indian Ocean have grown substantially, 
necessitating a robust and forward-looking maritime force. The Indian Navy 
(IN), complemented by the Indian Coast Guard (ICG), plays a central role in 
securing India’s maritime borders, safeguarding vital sea lanes, and 
contributing to regional stability. Elaborating on the strategic and operational 
role, the Indian Navy (IN) submitted that it has four classical roles namely 
military, diplomatic, constabulary, and to ‘safeguard India’s National 
Maritime interests at all times’. Whereas preventing war and conflict is its 
primary purpose, the Indian Navy plays a decisive role in bringing them to an 
early and favourable conclusion, should they be thrust on the nation or 
become inevitable. Apart from the traditional threats, non-traditional threats 
such as terrorism, piracy, robbery, IUU (Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated) 
fishing, human/ arms/ drugs trafficking etc, also necessitates intervention 
by Indian Navy. 
2.37 Indian Navy also ensures and enables maritime security in the maritime 
zones of India and beyond, establishing an environment conducive for the 
unhindered conduct of trade, shipping, fishing, offshore exploration and other 
maritime interests, that are vital for economic growth and national 
development. Indian Navy complements the nation’s effort for energy security, 
by providing round the clock vigilance along our Sea Lines of Communication. 
Accordingly, Indian Navy maintains a close watch on all naval/ maritime 
activities of our adversaries in our maritime regions of interest and acts as 
required to signal our capability and intent. 
2.38 Based on the written as well as oral submissions before the Committee, 
the role and involvement of Indian Navy in the Indian Ocean Region can be 
summarized as under:  

Page | 39 
 
Role Objective Strategy 
Military Deterring inimical 
actions against India 
and protecting its 
national interests. 
 Building credible capability 
 Enhancing maritime 
domain awareness 
 Maritime Air surveillance 
plan 
 Deployment of Mission 
based ship and surveillance 
aircraft. 
Constabulary Enforcing 
international maritime 
laws and security 
regimes. 
 Deployment of capital ships 
with significant combat 
capability across 
dimensions-air, surface and 
sub-surface. 
 Anti-piracy operations  
 Anti-narcotics operations 
 Humanitarian Assistance 
and Disaster Relief (HADR) 
missions 
Benign Shaping international 
maritime environment 
favourable to India’s 
interests. 
Conducting humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief, 
search and rescue and medical 
evacuation measures. 
Diplomatic Advancing India’s 
interests through 
diplomatic 
engagement with 
maritime countries. 
 Bilateral and multilateral 
maritime exercises  
 Information Fusion Centre 
Indian Ocean Region at 
Gurugram- fosters 
information exchange 
among the IOR littoral states 
and international treaty-
bound organizations like the 
IMO, the UNODC, and 
Interpol, piracy reporting 
and monitoring centres with 
a regional or global outlook. 
 NISHAR (Network for 
Information Sharing) 
application facilitates the 
exchange of information 
with friendly foreign 
countries 

Page | 40 
 
 White shipping and 
information exchange 
agreement  
 
2.39 The Indian Navy has been conducting numerous anti-piracy operations, 
maritime patrols/ escorts and other proactive engagements in the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR). When asked to elaborate on some of such major 
operations/ exercises conducted in the Indian Ocean Region in the last ten 
years, Ministry of Defence stated that the Indian Navy maintains around the 
year presence in vicinity of the following maritime areas: -  
(i)  Gulf of Aden (Anti-Piracy Patrols). The Indian Navy maintains 
continuous presence in the piracy affected area of Gulf of Aden, Red 
Sea and East coast of Africa since 2008. This ensures a close watch on 
the activities of Chinese PLA (N) warships and Extra Regional Forces 
deployed in the region. A total of 128 ships have been deployed in the 
Gulf of Aden towards Anti-Piracy Patrols since October 2008.  
(ii)  Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman (Op Sankalp). Consequent to the 
flaring up of tensions in Persian Gulf/ GoO (Gulf of Oman) region, 
Indian Navy launched ‘Op Sankalp’ in June 2019 towards safety and 
security as well as to provide assurance to the Indian Flagged Merchant 
Vessels (IFMVs) transiting through the Strait of Hormuz. This also 
helped IN to monitor Pakistan Navy activities in the North Arabian Sea, 
Gulf of Oman and Persian Gulf, whilst strengthening bilateral 
relationships with Gulf countries.  
(iii) Approaches to Malacca Strait (MALDEP). Continuous presence 
has been maintained in approaches to Malacca strait, the Gateway to 
IOR, to undertake surveillance on and develop credible MDA in the 
region on Extra Regional Forces transiting in/ out of IOR.  
(iv) Central and South Indian Ocean (CENTDEP and SOUTHDEP).  
Indian Navy presence in the Central and Southern Indian Ocean region, 
enhances MDA, along with monitoring Chinese maritime activities and 
engaging with our maritime neighbours. 

Page | 41 
 
(v) Air Surveillance. Indian Navy long range maritime surveillance 
aircraft P8I and High-Altitude Long Endurance Remote Pilotless Aircraft 
(HALE RPA, Sea Guardian), have been extensively deployed for 
surveillance in IOR and within India’s Maritime Zones to augment 
‘Domain Awareness and Understanding’. 
2.40  On being asked the Ministry of Defence also responded to the way such 
operations contribute to regional security and cooperation with other 
countries maritime force. 
 SAGAR’ and ‘MAHASAGAR’. Under Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of 
Security And Growth for All in the Region (SAGAR), IN continues to 
assist friendly maritime nations in capacity building and also 
undertakes flag-showing/ operational visits to friendly countries (IN 
warships have visited over 100 countries since independence). With the 
expansion of this vision to MAHASAGAR, in Mar 2025 by Hon’ble PM, 
IN is set to play an even larger diplomatic role across the regions.  
 Engagement with Friendly Foreign Countries. IN maintains a proactive 
engagement with like-minded navies and maritime neighbours to 
augment MDA and monitoring of potential adversaries. Engagement 
with friendly foreign countries has also been promoted for regional and 
global stability, and has enhanced maritime security in the region. 
Some of the salient engagements with friendly foreign countries include 
the following: -  
 Joint EEZ Surveillance. IN has provided maritime assistance for 
conducting EEZ surveillance patrols, hydrographic surveys, diving 
assistance, search and rescue and overseeing ship construction, which 
has enhanced the security and safety of international shipping passing 
through the region, emphasised good order and has enforced the 
international legal framework at sea. Joint EEZ surveillance of 
Maldives, Mauritius, Seychelles, Madagascar and Mozambique is 
regularly undertaken based on host country’s request.  

Page | 42 
 
 Coordinated Patrols. Coordinated Patrols (CORPATs) along respective 
International Maritime Boundary Lines (IMBL) are conducted with 
Indonesia, Thailand, Bangladesh and Myanmar on annual/ bi-annual 
basis. This has further synergised our understanding and operating 
procedures with our immediate maritime neighbours. 
 Maritime Partnership Exercises with Friendly Foreign Countries. IN 
conducts both, regular and complex bilateral/ multilateral exercises 
with a large number of foreign navies to extend its operational footprint 
and develop interoperability while enhancing maritime security in the 
region. 
2.41 The Committee further enquired about the operational successes and 
challenges faced during these engagements. As regards operational 
challenges, Ministry of Defence stated that since commencement of the Anti-
piracy operations in 2008, 133 Indian Navy ships have been deployed for anti-
piracy patrol and 3765 merchant ships have been safely escorted. To counter 
the growing threat to trade since October 2023, due to attacks by Houthis, IN 
has deployed more than 30 warships with integral helicopters, Marine 
Commandos and Specialist Explosive Ordnance Disposal Teams in the 
identified areas. In the ensuring deployments, Indian Navy has successfully 
thwarted 13 piracy incidents between October 2023 to June 2024, including 
apprehension of 62 pirates. Continued Maritime Security Operations in the 
Gulf of Aden/ Red Sea has ensured safe transit of more than 325 MVs carrying 
nearly 125 Lakh MT cargo/ oil, worth more than 5.4 Bn USD to India.  
2.42  Indian Navy face differential challenges in terms of fleet readiness, 
personnel training and logistics. Inputs in respect of Indian Navy and Indian 
Coast Guard are as follows: 
i) Personnel Training Challenges: India’s expansion of Maritime 
Footprints would lead to rise in security challenges. It is imperative that 
awareness of such security challenges and SOPs for risk mitigation and 
counter actions is formally established in maritime education/ training/ 

Page | 43 
 
skilling programmes. Regular certification on this aspect would ensure a 
significantly robust foundation for the country’s maritime endeavours. 
ii) Logistics Challenges: Key logistical challenges faced by the Indian Navy 
are as follows: 
 Dependence on imports and vulnerabilities to embargoes which are 
being mitigated through Atmanirbhar Bharat initiatives and 
indigenisation. 
 Management of vintage platforms and weapon systems. 
 Logistical support, maintenance and repair challenges for distributed 
operations across vast swaths of IOR. 
 Standardisation of equipment, weapons and sensors, to progressively 
reduce inventory variations to optimum levels. This would ensure 
optimum maintenance, repair, training, stock and spares, and logistics 
management. 
iii) ICG also faces the challenges towards maintaining foreign origin 
equipment which are likely to get mitigated in future by increased induction 
of indigenous equipment in consonance with Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative. 
The Refit/ repairs capabilities are likely to get further fillip, once govt. 
approvals are accorded for development of limited captive technical 
capabilities. 
iv) Training: ICG Officers and Enlisted personnel are undergoing basic and 
professional training with Tri- Services on regular basis. The annual/ biennial 
requirement of vacancies sought from IN/ IA/ IAF are being considered 
favourably. 
v) Logistics:   Dependence on imports for spares and maintenance of 
certain equipment poses logistics challenges. 
2.43 As regards the way communication protocols have been standardized 
among the Indian Navy, Coast Guard, and other regional naval and maritime 
agencies, the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
IN-ICG Communication Protocols: Indian Navy and ICG follow common 
communication protocols which are exercised from time to time. Both the 
services have various common/ compatible communication systems for 

Page | 44 
 
interoperability at sea. Further, for seamless coordination during joint 
operations, exercises and activities, MHA has promulgated a Common 
Communication Plan in September 2022. In addition, the National Command 
Control Communication and Intelligence (NC3I) Network, setup in the 
aftermath of 26/11 terrorist attacks, connects 51 operational centres of IN 
and ICG for seamless and secure communication.  
Communication with Regional Naval/ Maritime Agencies. The Indian Navy 
has designed and developed MITRA (Maritime Information Terminal for 
Reciprocal Association) system with NISHAR (Network for Information 
Sharing) application. These terminals/ systems are being deployed on units 
of Friendly Foreign Countries during joint exercises for communication at sea, 
such as, during MILAN-24, IBSAMAR-24, VARUNA-25, AIKEYME and IOS 
SAGAR. Additionally, data communication equipment for operational level 
cooperation and MDA sharing with US Navy (CENTRIX) and French Navy (IN 
– FN link) have been installed at select Indian Navy centres. 
2.44 The Committee specifically asked about MoD’s assessment of the 
current operational strengths and preparedness of India’s Navy and Coast 
Guard. In a written submission, the Ministry stated: 
 Indian Navy. At present Indian Navy has a force level of 137 ships and 
submarines and 264 aircraft. These include aircraft carriers, state-of-
the-art destroyers and frigates, nuclear and conventional submarines, 
carrier-based fighters, deck-based helicopters, shore-based 
surveillance aircraft and surface/ sub-surface/ aerial autonomous 
vehicles. Towards expeditious capacity and capability building of the 
Navy, 58 ships are presently under construction, to be inducted over 
the next six years. Besides, necessary initial approvals have   been 
accorded for the construction of 62 additional ships and submarines 
 Indian Coast Guard (ICG). ICG was established in 1978, under the 
Ministry MoD as Maritime Security and Law Enforcement Agency for 
protection of Maritime and other National Interests in Maritime Zones 
of India (MZI). 

Page | 45 
 
 ICG boasts a robust operational footprint, encompassing 42 stations, 
12 Air Stations, 03 Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres (MRCCs), 36 
Maritime Rescue sub-Centres (MRSCs) and Coastal Security Network 
(CSN) comprising of 84 Radar station as part of Chain of Static Sensors 
(CSS) along the vast coastline.  
 ICG has a fleet of 151 indigenously built surface platforms and 78 
aircraft, propelled by over 15,000 dedicated personnel. 
 ICG presently deploys 18-20 ships, 30-35 craft and 10-12 aircraft every 
day in Indian EEZ, executing the vital charter. ICG units regularly 
participate in various joint exercise and operations with IN, including 
war fighting efforts in compliance with provisions of Union war book, IN 
war book and CG War book 
2.45 When asked whether India is investing enough in naval modernization, 
particularly in the Indian Ocean Region, to ensure its maritime security and 
safeguard vital sea lanes of communication (SLOCs), the Ministry of Defence 
made the following written submission: 
 Indian Navy Modernisation Plans and Capability Development. IN’s 
modernisation plans are formulated in accordance with the Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP 2012-27) and Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCPP 2022-37). Recent induction of Indigenous Aircraft 
Carrier Vikrant, SSBNs, Visakhapatnam Class destroyers, frigate Nilgiri, 
Scorpene Class submarines, MH60R multi-role helicopters and P8I and High 
Altitude Long Endurance aircraft are testimony to IN’s focused approach 
towards a threat and capability based modernisation plan with a thrust on 
‘Aatmanirbharta’. 
 Perspective plans include induction of state-of-the-art Next Generation 
warships, submarines, carrier-based fighters and induction of niche 
technology and equipment, including Al and Robotics, to address emergent 
and future threats.  

Page | 46 
 
 The IN's modernisation has been supported by consistent budgetary 
allocations, and a healthy capital to revenue ratio of 65:35, achieved in FY 
2024-25, aptly reflects the capability-driven approach. 
2.46 As regards the measures taken or is proposed to be taken to strengthen 
Naval and Coast Guard capacities, especially regarding upgrading naval 
fleets, providing special training to Coast Guards for effective interdiction of 
illicit activities, conducting combined maritime exercises, etc, the Ministry 
stated that Indian Navy’s force modernisation is centred on Atmanirbharta. 
Towards expeditious capacity and capability building, 58 ships are presently 
under construction in various Indian shipyards. In addition, initial approvals 
have been accorded for construction of 62 ships and submarines, and 120 
FICs (Fast Intercept Craft). With the ongoing modernisation, by 2040, average 
displacement of Fleet ships is envisaged to increase to 6000 Tons (from 4000 
Tons in 2014) and only 20% of Fleet ships would be more than 15 years old 
(as compared to current 53%).  
2.47 Ab-initio training for Officers and Sailors of ICG is being conducted by 
Indian Navy training establishments. Indian Navy also conducts 
specialisation training for ICG executive officers, aviation courses, 
seamanship training, etc. Additionally, Work Up (Operational Sea Training) of 
ICG ships is also conducted by IN (12 work ups conducted in 2024-25). 
2.48 Indian Navy is an integral part of biannual coastal security Exercise 
Sagar Kavach, conducted by ICG, and likewise, ICG forms a part of pan India 
Coastal Defence Exercise, Sea Vigil, conducted by Indian Navy as lead service. 
Coordinated patrolling/ operations are undertaken during the deployments 
for higher Coastal Raksha States. Similarly, ICG, have signed contract for 
acquisition of Two (02) Pollution Control Vessels, Twenty-Two (22) Fast Patrol 
Vessels, one (01) Training Ship, six (06) Next Generation Offshore Patrol 
Vessels & Six (06) Air Cushion Vehicles with various ship builders. Further, 
initial approvals for acquisition of eight 08 Dornier, 06 Advanced Light 
Helicopters (ALH) Mk-III, 06 Multi-Mission Maritime Aircraft (MMMA) and 04 
Coast Guard Ship-borne Unmanned Aerial System (CGSUAS) have been 
accorded. 

Page | 47 
 
2.49 ICG regularly train its personnel in Boarding & Maritime Law 
Enforcement through structured courses at IN and ICG training 
establishments In addition, ICG has concluded several MoUs with various 
national universities such as Gujarat Maritime Law University (GMLU), 
Gandhinagar and Rashtriya Raksha University (RRU), Gandhinagar for 
courses on Maritime  Law towards  effective interdiction of illicit activities and 
improving operational effectiveness in Coastal & Maritime Law Enforcement. 
2.50 On being asked how can India’s naval partnerships with countries like 
the United States, Australia, Japan, and other regional power be further 
strengthened to create a robust maritime security framework in the Indian 
Ocean, the Ministry of Defence responded that in order to create a robust 
maritime security framework in the Indian Ocean, following points are 
germane to further strengthen our naval partnerships with US, Australia, 
Japan and other regional powers: - 
  Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA): MDA is critical for developing a 
common operational picture in the surface, air and sub-surface domains. 
Towards this, IFC-IOR plays a pivotal role in enhancing shared maritime 
awareness through real time data exchange with partner navies in the region. 
Additionally, for Underwater Domain Awareness (UDA), India is presently 
advancing its joint UDA frameworks with likeminded countries. Common 
platforms are being integrated into this framework to enhance 
interoperability.  
 Interoperability: Multilateral and bilateral naval exercises with US, Japan, 
Australia etc foster interoperability and strengthen operational preparedness 
across IOR aligned with emerging threat landscapes, would ensure that navies 
remain well prepared to address the maritime security challenges.  
 Co-development of Niche Technology: Cooperation in the domain of 
emerging technologies like AI and autonomous systems with US, Australia 
and Japan will further add teeth to the IN’s operational capability. 
2.51 Similarly, ICG is actively pursuing the formalisation of bilateral 
arrangements through Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs), including 

Page | 48 
 
those already signed with Japan and under discussion with the United States 
and Australia. These frameworks facilitate enhanced cooperation in maritime 
law enforcement, search and rescue (SAR), pollution response, and combating 
transnational maritime crimes. Promoting “White Hull Diplomacy” through 
capacity building and humanitarian outreach across IORA, BIMSTEC, and 
other regional groupings remains a strategic priority for the ICG. 
2.52 In light of evolving threats and geopolitical dynamics in the IOR, the 
Committee were keen to learn about India’s long-term strategy to ensure 
maritime security and maintain regional stability. The Ministry of Defence 
responded as under: 
 India’s long-term strategy in the maritime domain aims to counter 
threats like piracy, trafficking, illegal fishing, maritime terrorism, 
natural calamities and complex geopolitical dynamics by pursuing five 
distinct strategies given as under 
 Shaping a favourable and Positive Maritime Environment to enhance 
cooperation with maritime forces of friendly nations. Additionally, IN 
will pursue its efforts to be the Preferred Security Partner and First 
Responder guided by the GoI’s vision of MAHASAGAR.  
 Deterrence through capability, posture, and communication of intent 
 Employment of India’s maritime forces during conflict.  
 Building cooperative frameworks and coordinative mechanisms for 
coastal and offshore security.  
 Building a combat ready navy to meet India’s future maritime security 
needs. 
 The focus of the Indian Navy towards ensuring combat readiness, 
through successful surface, air and sub-surface firings, enabled ships 
to be deployed for Op SINDOOR within 96 hours of the terrorist attack, 
with hundreds of missiles embarked.  
 Indian Navy focus is on building credible deterrence by modernising our 
Fleet with capable multi-dimensional platforms while also integrating 
emerging technologies to monitor and secure critical SLOCs and choke 
points. 

Page | 49 
 
2.53 Enumerating the key objectives that will guide India’s naval and 
maritime policies in the coming decade, the Ministry of Defence stated that 
India’s naval and maritime policies in the coming decade will be guided by the 
Indian Navy Vision 2047. These objectives also reinforce the overarching 
vision of ‘MAHASAGAR’ – or ‘Mutual and Holistic Advancement of Security 
and Growth Across Regions’ which signifies India’s vision to expand its 
influence and impact globally, using the seas as a conduit. This will be 
pursued by the following guiding principles: -  
 Support Govts nation building endeavours towards Viksit Bharat 2047. 
 Establish India’s salience in the maritime domain and reinforce our 
stature as the Preferred Security Partner and First Responder in the 
region.  
 Develop a well-balanced force to dominate operations across all 
domains of naval warfare.  
 Ensure credible deterrence by signalling capability, capacity and intent 
through the sea leg of the nuclear triad.  
 Transform into an Aatmanirbhar force through leadership-driven focus 
on invention, innovation, indigenisation and integration of niche, 
disruptive and emerging technologies.  
 
IV.  MARITIME INFRASTRUCTURE 
2.54 India has made significant strides in the development of maritime 
infrastructure in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), largely through initiatives 
like the Sagarmala Programme. On being asked about maritime infrastructure 
developed so far by India in the IOR including under the Sagarmala initiatives, 
MEA stated that Sagarmala is the flagship initiative of Government of India 
that aims to boost India’s maritime sector by enhancing port connectivity, 
developing inland waterways, and promoting industrial growth. 
2. 55 In Myanmar, under the Kaladan Multi modal Transit Transport Project, 
India has completed the waterways component, which includes the Sittwe 
Port inaugurated in 2023 and currently operated by India Ports Global 
Limited (IPGL). The roadways component consisting of 109 km road from 

Page | 50 
 
Paletwa to Zorinpui in Mizoram is under construction. Once completed the 
project will provide access to a sea-route to Northeast India via Myanmar. 
2.56 India has also helped develop Khulna-Mongla Port Rail Line in 
Bangladesh under concessional Line of Credit. India is also developing the 
Colombo West Terminal in Sri Lanka and is helping upgrade facilities at 
Kankesanthurai Port in Northern Sri Lanka. India is also helping develop 
cargo-handling facilities at Chabahar Port in Iran, which will link with INSTC 
and enhance connectivity with Central Asian Republics. 
2.57 Thus by enhancing connectivity and optimizing infrastructure, 
Government of India envisage promoting international trade in the IOR region. 
With the objective to enhance India’s maritime competitiveness, Government 
of India has launched Sagarmala 2.0 to further develop the Sagarmala 
Programme. 
2.58 On the Committee’s specific query about military bases along Indian 
Ocean Region by major countries, the Ministry responded that no information 
is available. 
2.59 India’s efforts are not limited to physical infrastructure. India is also 
pioneering the development of Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA). In this 
arena, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that India is helping its maritime 
neighbours set up their coastal surveillance networks for developing shared 
Maritime Domain Awareness. India has set up Coastal Radar systems in 
Mauritius, Seychelles and Sri Lanka and is implementing more in Myanmar, 
Bangladesh, Maldives. 
2.60 MEA also informed that India promotes White Shipping Information 
Exchange through our Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean Region (IFC-
IOR) in Gurugram, where Liaison Officers (LO) from 11 countries are deployed. 
We have also deployed/are deploying our LOs to regional IFCs in Singapore, 
Madagascar and Seychelles. India has provided Hydrographic Survey Support 
for Myanmar, Maldives, Mauritius, Seychelles, Mozambique, Sri Lanka, 
Tanzania and Kenya. 

Page | 51 
 
2.61 Further, to enhance the Quad’s collaboration and coordination with 
regional partners, the Indo- Pacific Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) was 
launched in 2022 as a technology and training initiative to enhance maritime 
domain awareness in the Indo-Pacific region. IPMDA harnesses innovative 
technology to provide partners across Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean 
region and the Pacific with near real-time information to rapidly detect and 
respond to a wide range of challenges involving illicit maritime activities such 
as illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, climate events, and 
humanitarian crises. Since then, the IPMDA initiative has been scaled to cover 
the Indian Ocean Region, through the integration of the Information Fusion 
Center- Indian Ocean Region, Gurugram in 2024. Quad countries also 
contribute to the region through capacity building cooperation for enhancing 
maritime security. 
2.62 As regards the details and outcome of Joint EEZ surveillance exercise 
conducted in the Indian Ocean region so far, the Ministry stated that Joint 
EEZ Surveillance exercises have been conducted with countries in the IOR. 
They include: 
 Seychelles (last in July 2024) 
 Mauritius (last in November 2024) 
 Mozambique (last in November 2024) 
India also carries out coordinated patrols in areas of interest where illicit 
maritime activities are known to be high. 
2.63 About the measures taken for the development of maritime 
infrastructure and institutionalization of cooperation in the IOR to counter 
security/ terrorist threats, the Ministry informed that India remains 
committed to extending port connectivity (part of maritime infrastructure) 
among the littoral states of the Indian Ocean and beyond. This is the objective 
behind the Sagarmala initiative, which aims to establish new ports and 
modernize old ones. Connectivity is one of the major themes of Shri Narendra 
Modi’s ‘Neighbourhood First’ policy. India continues to work on a range of 
projects to improve maritime logistics in Sri Lanka, Maldives, Mauritius and 

Page | 52 
 
Seychelles. Other initiatives include the Kaladan transport project leading to 
Sittwe port in Myanmar; the Trilateral Highway to Thailand; and, the 
Chabahar port project in Iran. 
2.64 Also, India participates in variety of multilateral and plurilateral 
initiatives in the Indo-Pacific region to enhance the regional maritime security 
along with partner nations. These include the Djibouti Code of Conduct-
Jeddah Amendment (DCOC-JA), Contact Group on Illicit Maritime Activities 
(CGIMA), Combined Maritime Forces (CMF), Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA), Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS), QUAD Maritime Security 
Working Group (QMSWG), Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating 
Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships (ReCAAP), BIMSTEC, ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF), ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM+), and 
the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum. 
2.65 Further, India’s Information Fusion Centre, (IFC-IOR) at Gurugram is 
the foundation pillar for information sharing in all these constructs to enable 
a greater regional maritime security. India became a member of the Combined 
Maritime Forces in November 2023 to enable greater collaboration region 
maritime security among partner nations. 
2.66 Given that monitoring of ship movement and intelligence sharing is 
crucial for maritime security in the IOR, MEA informed that India has 
established Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR) for 
real time information exchange towards enhancing maritime security. India 
also participates in other multilateral and plurilateral initiatives in the Indo-
Pacific region to enhance the regional maritime security along with partner 
nations. These include the Djibouti Code of Conduct-Jeddah Amendment 
(DCOC-JA), Contact Group on Illicit Maritime Activities (CGIMA), Combined 
Maritime Forces (CMF), QUAD Maritime Security Working Group (QMSWG), 
BIMSTEC, ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting 
Plus (ADMM+), and the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum. India has steered 
several maritime security dialogues including India-Australia Maritime 
Security Dialogue, India-Myanmar Maritime Security Dialogue etc. 

Page | 53 
 
CHAPTER 3 
ROLE OF MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS AND REGIONAL GROUPINGS 
India’s engagement with multilateral organizations in the IOR is a 
strategic cornerstone of its foreign and security policy. Given India’s 
geographical location, economic interest, maritime security concerns and 
aspirations of regional power, India actively participates in different 
multilateral groupings such as the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI), 
Quad, Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC), the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), the Indian 
Ocean Commission (IOC), and the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) etc. 
that facilitate regional cooperation. Many of these initiatives have a direct 
relevance to the future of the Indian Ocean and contribute to the well- being 
and security of the maritime spaces and its littoral territories 
(a) Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA): India is a founding member of the 
23-member IORA, a regional grouping aimed at strengthening economic 
cooperation, maritime safety, and environmental security. India views the 
IORA as a platform for promoting sustainable development, economic growth 
and prosperity, and stability in the region. As the Vice-Chair of IORA for the 
term 2023-25 and as Chair in 2025-27, India’s priority is on consolidating 
and streamlining efforts to promote cooperation in IORA, with particular 
emphasis on maritime safety and security, and blue economy. 
(b) Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI): On November 04, 2019, Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi launched the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative 
(IPOI) at the 14th East Asia Summit held in Bangkok, Thailand as an open, 
non-treaty based global initiative that seeks to manage, conserve, sustain, 
and secure the maritime domain. So far, 13 countries are part of the IPOI and 
are co-leading one of its 7 pillars. India has taken the lead on Maritime 
Security and DRM pillars of IPOI. We are also working with various like-
minded countries who have come on-board to lead the other IPOI pillars. 
(c) Mekong - Ganga Cooperation (MGC): India was the first to quantify the 
Mekong identity of Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam under 

Page | 54 
 
the Mekong - Ganga Cooperation mechanism. The MGC is the first and the 
oldest of all Mekong initiatives. Developmental cooperation and strengthening 
of civilisational, cultural and people to people ties and connectivity is the 
mainstay of our approach in the MGC. 
(d) Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) is a convergence of our "Neighbourhood First” policy, 
or "Act East” outlook and the Indian Ocean interests. India is the lead country 
for the Security pillar of BIMSTEC, which covers counter-terrorism and 
transnational crime, disaster management and energy security. India hosts 
the BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate near Delhi and a BIMSTEC 
Energy Centre near Bengaluru. India has been organizing events and 
activities in areas ranging from agriculture, disaster management, space and 
remote sensing to transnational crimes, trade and investment. India also 
offers research and higher education scholarships, while promoting common 
programmes. 
(e) The Quad comprising of India, Australia, Japan, and the United States 
originated as a spontaneous emergency response to the 2004 Indian Ocean 
Tsunami. The four countries today have a growing convergence of strategic, 
political and security interests in the Indo Pacific region including shared 
vision on international law, economic opportunity, peace, stability, and 
security in all domains including the maritime domain underpin the 
development and prosperity of the peoples of the Indo-Pacific. The Quad also 
has a shared commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific (FOIP). The Quad 
has today acquired momentum and salience, with regular dialogues, tabletop 
exercises, and workshops. 
(f) Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) is a smaller organization with five member 
states: Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles, and France (via 
Réunion). It focuses on economic and environmental issues but has 
broadened its scope to include maritime security. India was granted observer 
status in 2020, signalling an important addition in its engagement with the 
Western Indian Ocean. 

Page | 55 
 
(g) Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth Triangle and Ayeyawady-Chao 
Phraya- Mekong Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS) are other 
mechanisms in the Indian Ocean Region that India has joined as Development 
Partner to boost India’s connectivity and economic ties with the countries of 
South-East Indian Ocean. 
3.2 The Committee specifically asked about assessment of the Government 
regarding the addition to India’s strategic heft pursuant to starting of all its 
initiatives in the Indian Ocean region. In response, the Ministry, inter-alia, 
stated that in the last decade, India has been very open and engaging in our 
outlook. As a result, since 2014, India has joined or initiated 36 plurilateral 
groups in different domains. Many of them have a direct relevance to the 
future of the Indian Ocean. Others have a domain relevance that contributes 
to the well-being and security of the maritime spaces and its littoral 
territories. There are global endeavours which naturally have a regional 
application as well. Some have strengthened our bilateral partnership with 
Australia and the Pacific Islands. 
3.3 The Committee discussed the concerns expressed by various coastal 
states regarding the security of fishermen resident in those states who have 
crossed into the waters of neighbouring countries and subsequently, been 
arrested, with their boats impounded. Several Members expressed their 
concerns about the well-being of these fishermen and the need for their rapid 
and expeditious release along with their boats.  
 
I. INDIAN OCEAN RIM ASSOCIATION (IORA) 
3.4 Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) is the largest country grouping in 
the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). It was established in 1997 with an aim to 
revive the historic pan-Indian Ocean-ness among countries in the region. The 
vision for IORA originated during a visit by late President Nelson Mandela of 
South Africa to India in 1995. India is a founding Member State. IORA was 
formerly known as Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation 
(IOR-ARC). The name IORA was adopted in November 2013 in Perth, Australia 

Page | 56 
 
during the 13th meeting of Foreign Ministers. The Secretariat of IORA is 
located in Port Louis, Mauritius. 
3.5 It has 23 Member States (Commonwealth of Australia, People's 
Republic of Bangladesh, Union of Comoros, French Republic, Republic of 
India, Republic of Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Republic of Kenya, 
Republic of Madagascar, Malaysia, Republic of Maldives, Republic of 
Mauritius, Republic of Mozambique, Sultanate of Oman, Republic of 
Seychelles, Republic of Singapore, Federal Republic of Somalia , Republic of 
South Africa, Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Kingdom of Thailand, United Arab Emirates and Republic of 
Yemen) and 12 Dialogue Partners (People’s Republic of China, Arab Republic 
of Egypt, Republic of Germany, Republic of Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, 
Russian Federation, Republic of Turkey, Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom, 
United States of America and the EU). 
3.6 The objectives of IORA are: 
 To promote sustainable growth and balanced development of the region 
and Member States 
 To focus on those areas of economic co-operation which provide 
maximum opportunities for development, shared interest and mutual 
benefits; and, 
 To promote liberalisation, remove impediments and lower barriers 
towards a freer and enhanced flow of goods, services, investment, and 
technology within the Indian Ocean rim. 
3.7 Cooperation activities are undertaken under the six Priority Areas and 
2 Cross-cutting issues through functional bodies like Working Groups. The 6 
priority areas (proposed by India in 2011) are:  
(i) Academic Science and Technology (lead- South Africa and Oman) 
(ii) Disaster Risk Management (Lead- Madagascar) 
(iii) Maritime Safety and Security (Lead – India, Co-Chair- Australia)  
(iv) Trade and Investment Facilitation (Lead-Australia) 
(v) Fisheries Management (Lead- Indonesia) and  
(vi) Tourism and Cultural Exchange (South Africa).  

Page | 57 
 
The 2 Cross-cutting issues are (proposed by Australia in 2013): Blue Economy 
(Lead – India; Co-Chair Indonesia) and Women's Economic Empowerment 
(Iran). 
3.8 There are two main sources of funding for IORA: annual membership 
fee of USD 24,000 by Member States and voluntary contribution by Member 
States and Dialogue Partners to IORA Special Fund. 
3.9 India was the Chair of IORA during 2011-2013. At the 11th Council of 
Ministers (COM) Meeting in Bengaluru in November 2011, 6 priority areas 
were identified on the basis of an Indian proposal. During the 22nd IORA COM 
meeting held in Dhaka in November 2022, IORA endorsed India's candidature 
for the position of IORA Vice-Chair for the period 2023-25. India's Vice-
Chairship of IORA for the period 2023-25 implies assumption of Chairship of 
IORA by India from 2025-27, which was endorsed during the 23rd COM in 
Colombo on 11 October 2023. 
3.10 Some of the activities undertaken by India in IORA include: 
 Signed an MoU for promoting resilience of new and existing 
infrastructure to climate and disaster risks within the Indian Ocean 
Region between the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure 
(CDRI) with IORA (28 April 2022). 
  India is the highest contributor to the IORA Special Fund. 
 Shri. Saravanan Murugan (IAS:2002, Bihar Cadre), was seconded as 
Director to the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) Secretariat, Port 
Louis, Mauritius since December 2019 for a term of 2 (initial) +1 
(extended) years. 
 Deputed an IT Expert/Advisor from India in the IORA Secretariat in 
September 2020 towards setting up the eOffice at IORA. 
 Strengthened institutional frameworks of IORA by taking lead on 
discussion pertaining to structuring IORA’s engagement with Dialogue 
Partners (since November 2020). 
 Signed an MOU between IORA and the Centre for Science & Technology 
of the Non-aligned and other Developing Countries (NAM S&T Centre) 
on Application of Science, Technology & Innovation for Sustainable 

Page | 58 
 
Development on 7 November 2019 in Abu Dhabi,UAE (on the sidelines 
of the 19th COM meeting). 
 Promoted IORA’s engagements with other regional organisations such 
as through extension of MoU with International Solar Alliance (October 
2018). The MoU has been extended for a further period of two years in 
2022 and further extension is under process. 
 Signed an MOU between IORA and the Indian Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) to enhance 
academic cooperation in the region and other international economic 
and development issues (January 2018). 
 Undertaken the responsibility of developing HADR guidelines for IORA. 
The HADR guidelines were finalized by the Committee of Senior 
Officials’ Meeting in June 2021. 
 Led the process of development of an MoU for Promotion of Small and 
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) that was signed in October 2017. 
 Participated actively in IORA Adhoc Working Group for framing 
selection process and eligibility criteria for IORA Secretary General. 
Joined the Recruitment and Selection Committee (RSC) for selection of 
the new SG. 
 Led the process of formulation of the IORA's Outlook on Indo-Pacific 
(IOIP) and actively participated in the High level Strategic Dialogue on 
IORA, held in June 2023 and committed to formulate a Roadpmap on 
implementation of the IOIP. 
 Ambassador K. V. Bhagirath, IFS (Retd.) held the office of SG for two 
terms of 3 years each (2012-15 & 2015-18). 
 Indian Navy conducted a seminar on Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated (IUU) Fishing at Goa on 2 November 2022. 
 Organised Training on ‘Marine Oil Preparedness and Response Course' 
(IMO Introductory, Level-I & II), as the Lead Coordinating Country for 
Disaster Risk Management (DRM) priority area of IORA, from 18-29 
April 2022 in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, in collaboration with its Indian 
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) program, for all IORA 
Member States. 
 Conducted online courses on 'Principles of Ocean Remote Sensing and 
its applications' on 26-30 2021 and on 'Fundamentals of Ocean Data 
Management' (India) - 23-27 August 2021 

Page | 59 
 
 Organsied a virtual seminar/workshop on Yoga and Ayurveda for IORA 
member states on the theme of 'Wellness and Holistic Living in the time 
of COVID-19 on 25 March, 2021 
  Conducted capacity building workshop on UNCLOS 1982 (January 29, 
2021) 
 Conducted training Course organized by INCOIS on ‘Understanding Sea 
Level’ (October 2020) and Fishery Oceanography (November 2020) 
 A 26-day course on film making at Film and Television Institute of India, 
Pune – February 17 – March 13, 2020 
 Invited IORA Member States to the 4th Annual Joint HADR Exercise 
held in August 2019 in Chennai. 
 Strengthened Cooperation with IORA Regional Centre for Science and 
Technology Transfer, Tehran by setting up Coordination Centre for 
Medicinal Plants in collaboration with CSIR- CIMAP, Lucknow in 2017. 
CCMP organised a virtual workshop titled "Strengthening the 
competencies of IORA-RCSTT: Planning, Intervention and Management 
Session on Utilization of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants in the Indian 
Ocean Region on 18 July, 2022. Previously, the CCMP has also 
organised a Training Program on ‘Diversity, Documentation, Gene 
Banking, and Database for Medicinal Plants in Lucknow on 25 
November 2018. 
 Capacity building for Somalia and Yemen in the area of Fisheries under 
the IORA’s flagship Somalia – Yemen Development Programme II in 
November 2019 at Kochi. 
 Conducted the first Familiarisation Visit for Media Personnel and 
Journalists from IORA Member States from 12-17 November 2017 in 
India. 
 Initiated restructuring of IORA Chair of Indian Ocean Studies (CIOS) as 
an institution actively involved in Policy planning and research for 
IORA. India had revived the CIOS in 2014 and sponsored it together 
with Mauritius. Prof. V. N. Attri (India) held the office from 2014-2020. 
 Organized the First Blue Economy Dialogue: 'Prospects of Blue 
Economy in the Indian Ocean' (Goa, 17-18 August 2015) and Second 
Blue Economy Dialogue: 'Economic Potential and Commercialisation 
Aspects of Blue Economy in the Indian Ocean' (New Delhi, 4-5 
November 2016). 

Page | 60 
 
 Organized 6th Indian Ocean Dialogue in December 2019, New Delhi 
after which Delhi Consensus on “Indo Pacific: Re-imagining the India 
Ocean through expanded Geography” was agreed. Recently, on 15 
December 2021, organised the 8th edition of the IOD under the theme 
'Post Pandemic Indian Ocean: Leveraging Digital Technologies for 
Health, Education, Development and Trade in IORA Member States'. 
Indian Ocean Dialogue was launched as an Indian initiative and is 
IORA’s premier 1.5 track forum for dialogue between academia and 
officials on strategic issues of interest and concern facing the 
Association. India hosted the first Indian Ocean Dialogue in Kochi, 
Kerala from September 5-7, 2015. 
 2nd IORA Renewable Energy Ministerial and Experts Meetings were 
hosted by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of 
India from 2 – 4 October 2018 in Delhi NCR, India where the Delhi 
Declaration on Renewable Energy to move forward on the path of 
sustainable development was adopted. 
 India has also initiated discussions on establishing legal framework on 
various IORA priority areas such Disaster Risk Management, Maritime 
Safety and Security, Fisheries etc. 
 India also undertook the task of developing a paper on IORA’s 
Vision/Outlook on Indo- Pacific. At the last (22nd) IORA COM meeting, 
the Ministers adopted this document. 
3.11 The Committee specifically wanted to know about the Ministry’s 
assessment of IORA in successfully achieving its objective of promoting 
sustainable development, economic growth, and prosperity and stability in 
the region. The Ministry, in a written reply, stated that IORA has been 
instrumental in fostering economic growth, sustainable development, and 
enhanced cooperation in various domains in the Indian Ocean Region. IORA's 
membership has expanded to 23 member states and 12 dialogue partners. 
The IORA Special Fund was established by the Council of Ministers in its 
meeting held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, August 2004. The IORA Special Fund 
serves as a central funding mechanism for projects undertaken by the Indian 
Ocean Rim Association (IORA) Member States. Cooperation activities are 
undertaken under the six Priority Areas and 2 Cross-cutting issues through 
functional bodies like Working Groups. The draft of IORA's Outlook on the 
Indo-Pacific (IOIP) was formulated by India and was adopted by Council of 

Page | 61 
 
Ministers of IORA Member States in 2022. Several capacity-building 
initiatives have been spearheaded by member states under the aegis of IORA. 
3.12 On being asked about the issue of women empowerment in IORA, the 
Ministry submitted that the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) has 
recognized the crucial role of Women's Economic Empowerment (WEE) in 
achieving sustainable development within the region. Since 2013, IORA has 
actively pursued this goal, understanding that empowering women is not just 
a standalone priority, but intertwined with all other areas of regional 
cooperation. This commitment is reflected in IORA's second action plan (2022-
2027), which outlines the strategic objective: "Promoting gender equality and 
the empowerment of women and girls, ensuring women's rights, access, and 
opportunities for participation and leadership in the economy, and 
eliminating violence and discrimination against women and girls in all its 
forms. Realizing the full prosperity of the region requires investing in the 
empowerment of women and girls." To achieve this ambitious goal, IORA 
member states have collaboratively developed a work plan outlining specific 
activities and initiatives. This plan serves as a roadmap for advancing WEE 
across the Indian Ocean region, fostering economic opportunities for women, 
and ultimately, contributing to a more prosperous and equitable future for 
all. 
3.13 Emphasizing the priority of IORA, the representative of the Ministry of 
External Affairs during the preliminary briefing on 18 December 2024 stated: 
“I would like to assure you and the Committee that India is giving high 
priority to IORA and the following steps show our seriousness. Firstly, 
a senior and experienced Indian diplomat, Shri Sanjiv Ranjan is taking 
over as Secretary General of IORA from 1stof January 2025.We also have 
an officer seconded to the IORA Secretariat since 2019.This step has 
been taken with a view to strengthening the institutional structure and 
governance practises in IORA. Thirdly, India assumed the Vice-Chair of 
IORA for the term 2023-2025 and will assume the Chair of IORA from 
October, 2025 till 2027. 
India's focus is on strengthening institutional, financial and legal 
framework of IORA towards realizing the true potential of this grouping 
and consolidating and streamlining efforts to promote cooperation in 

Page | 62 
 
the realms of the six priority areas and two cross-cutting themes of 
IORA. 
India places particular emphasis on maritime safety and security and 
the blue economy. On both these issues, India is the coordinating 
country working closely with the Chairs on these two areas, Australia 
and Indonesia respectively. These are issues of immediate relevance to 
the Member States of IORA and we expect that undertaking concrete 
projects in these areas will help in the process of consolidating and 
revitalizing the organisation. 
India has developed policy papers such as humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief guidelines for IORA. The IORA outlook on the Indo-Pacific 
which was adopted by the Council of Ministers in 2022. We have hosted 
the Indian Ocean Dialogue. We have also undertaken capacity-building 
in areas such as IUU fishing, disaster relief, marine oil spillage 
preparedness, yoga and ayurveda, UNCLOS, oceanography and related 
issues.  
India is also the largest contributor to the IORA Special Fund.We have 
contributed a million dollars in 2012 and another million dollars in 
2019. We have also taken the lead in guiding the Secretariat towards 
financial prudence and have supported recent steps including 
reconciliation of accounts and report by an external audit agency. 
India’s Secretary-General, in our Chairship will help in further 
improving governance issues.” 
3.14 About the initiatives by IORA on maritime safety and security and blue 
economy, the Ministry stated that the IORA Action Plan 2022-27 sets out the 
strategic goals of the Maritime Safety and Security Priority Area. This involves 
promoting MSS in the Indian Ocean Region through effective coordination 
between Member States and relevant international organisations for sharing 
of expertise and resources, strengthening regional cooperation to address 
Trans Boundary challenges, and ensure freedom of navigation in accordance 
with International Law, including UNCLOS, while ensuring collaboration 
across IORA Working Groups on common areas of interest. The Working 
Group for Maritime Safety and Security (WGMSS) engages maritime officials 
and experts across IORAs Member States to promote regional cooperation by 
facilitating practical coordination amongst stakeholders. The WGMSS 
develops and implements activities through its Work Plan in line with the 
strategic goals of the IORA Action Plan 2022-27. 

Page | 63 
 
3.15 The Blue Economy (BE) initiative within the Indian Ocean Rim 
Association (IORA) has emerged as a pivotal force, driving sustainable socio-
economic growth among its member nations. Introduced in 2014, it strives to 
foster balanced development while safeguarding marine resources. Through 
collaborative efforts, member states have embarked on a journey to harness 
the vast potential of the blue economy. Since its introduction in IORA in 2014, 
Member States are committed to make this sector a driver for a balanced 
socio-economic growth and sustainable development. The objectives of the 
working group, which serves as a platform for collaboration and networking, 
range from implementing action plans to fostering dialogue and information 
exchange. 
3.16 The IORA Blue Economy team drives sustainable oceanic growth and 
resource management. Embracing public-private partnerships and 
technology transfer, it paves the way for enhanced livelihoods through 
capacity building. By promoting the protection and conservation of marine 
resources, informing policy decisions, and promoting public-private 
partnerships, the WGBE seeks to realize its overarching goal of promoting the 
development of the blue economy in a manner that is Socially inclusive; 
Economically inclusive; and environmentally sustainable. 
3.17  Further, India assumed the role of the Coordinating Country of both 
Working Groups of Maritime Safety and Security and Blue Economy in 2023. 
With co-chairs Australia (for Maritime Safety and Security) and Indonesia (for 
Blue Economy), India has been contributing to the work plans and capacity 
building activities of IORA member states. 
3.18 The Indian Ocean Dialogue (IOD) is a flagship initiative of the Indian 
Ocean Rim Association (IORA). It is an outcome of the 13th IORA Council of 
Ministers meeting, held in November 2013 in Perth, Australia. On being asked 
about the status and achievements of IOD, the Ministry stated that IOD is a 
Track 1.5 format, encouraging an open and free-flow discussion among IORA 
Member States and between scholars and experts on strategic matters related 
to the Indian Ocean Region. The Indian Ocean Dialogue covers wide ranging 

Page | 64 
 
topics such as economic cooperation, maritime safety and security, blue 
economy, human assistance and disaster relief and others.  
3.19 The Dialogue was instituted on India’s initiative. The first Dialogue was 
held in Kerala, India in 2014. The following editions were held in Perth, 
Australia in 2015, Padang, Indonesia in 2016, Abu Dhabi, UAE in 2017, in 
Durban, South Africa in 2018, in New Delhi, India in 2019 and in the virtual 
mode in 2021. The last (9th IOD) was held in Zanzibar on 22-23 May 2023.                      
3.20  When asked about the status of the IORA Outlook on the Indo-Pacific 
adopted by the Council of Ministers in 2022 and its bearing on the Indian 
Ocean region, the Ministry stated that considering the increasing awareness 
of the strategic importance of the Indo-Pacific region, IORA is guided by the 
principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, inclusivity, respect for 
international law, including the UN Charter, the principle of pacific settlement 
of disputes, political independence, non-interference in internal affairs, non-
discrimination, peaceful co-existence and mutual benefit in cooperation 
among its members and with its partners to build strategic trust through 
dialogue, transparency, and engagement. The draft of IORA's Outlook on the 
Indo-Pacific (IOIP) was formulated by India and was adopted by Council of 
Ministers of IORA Member States in 2022. IORA's Outlook to the Indo-Pacific 
is in line with India's SAGAR approach. IORA’s engagement in the Indo-Pacific 
region is guided by following objectives: Enhance Maritime safety and security 
in the Indo-Pacific region, and the exercise of freedom of navigation & over-
flight, in accordance with International Law, including the Charter of the 
United Nations and the 1982 UNCLOS; Promote Economic growth and shared 
prosperity for all through open, transparent, inclusive, rules-based and fair 
systems that enables balanced and sustainable development; enhanced 
connectivity to promote inclusive growth; Promote Conservation, sustainable 
use, and management of marine resources in the Indo-Pacific region etc. 
3.21 On the Committee’s specific question about the contribution and 
utilization of the IORA Special Fund, the Ministry stated that there are two 
main sources of Funding in IORA: annual membership by Member States and 
voluntary contribution by Member States and Dialogue Partners to IORA 

Page | 65 
 
Special Fund. The IORA Special Fund was established by the Council of 
Ministers in its meeting held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, August 2004. The IORA 
Special Fund serves as a central funding mechanism for projects undertaken 
by the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) Member States. It empowers 
these states to apply for financial support for projects aligned with IORA's 
priority areas and the guiding principles outlined in the organisation's 
Charter. India is the highest contributor to the IORA Special Fund. 
3.22 Elucidating the challenges being faced by IORA, the Ministry stated that 
as the apex regional body, IORA has the responsibility to play a significant 
role in making the Indian Ocean a more seamless and cooperative space. 
Developmental issues, lack of robust connectivity, the burden of opaque and 
unsustainable debt generated by unviable projects, threats to social fabric 
posed by extremism and fundamentalism, dangers emanating from terrorism, 
natural disasters and climate change, all these are the challenges that we 
face. We see IORA is as a regional body that can respond effectively to the 
needs and enhance individual and collective capacities of Member-States to 
tackle contemporary challenges of sustainable and balanced economic 
growth, development and common maritime domain. IORA provides an 
effective multilateral platform that facilitates realization of untapped 
opportunities for prosperity, peace and development of the region. The 
growing number of IORA Members and of Dialogue Partners testifies to that 
potential and to IORA as the apex body in the region.  
3.23 With its 23 members, 12 dialogue partners and two observers, IORA is 
the most obvious platform for trade, socio-economic and cultural cooperation. 
It creates common ground for regional economic cooperation and provides 
opportunities to develop shared interests. It also encourages close interaction 
of business, academic institutions, scholars and the peoples of the member 
states. India is committed to building up IORA in line with its own expanding 
bilateral ties in the region. We will be supportive in the expansion and further 
invigoration of its activities, from renewable energy and the blue economy to 
maritime safety and security, water science and greater institutional and 
think-tank networking. India will work with IORA Member States to 

Page | 66 
 
strengthen the institutional, financial and legal framework of IORA, towards 
realizing the true potential of this dynamic grouping. 
3.24 India undertook the responsibility of developing Humanitarian 
Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) guidelines for IORA. When asked about 
the salient features, the Ministry responded that the HADR guidelines have 
been finalized by the Committee of Senior Officials’ Meeting in June 2021 and 
recommended to IORA Council of Ministers for approval at the 21st Meeting. 
The IORA Guidelines for HADR aims at developing a speedy, responsive, 
coordinated and effective HADR strategy for IORA member states and serve 
the purpose to have a common understanding of HADR Operations. 
3.25 The salient features of HADR Guidelines for IORA include: 
 The guidelines emphasize the need for a coordinated and 
collective emergency response among IORA member states to 
effectively address the increasing number of natural disasters in 
the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). 
 HADR operations are primarily a civilian function, but the 
guidelines recognize the valuable role military assets can play in 
supporting these operations, especially in the initial response 
stages. 
 The guidelines outline key principles for HADR operations, 
including objective, unity of effort, security, restraint, legitimacy, 
responsiveness, simplicity, flexibility, neutrality, and assumption 
of existing operational plans. 
 The guidelines describe the four stages of disaster management: 
preparatory, initial response, sustenance/ rehabilitation/ 
recovery, and stabilization/reconstruction. They also detail the 
specific actions navies can take in each stage. 
 The guidelines highlight factors that contribute to the 
effectiveness of naval forces in HADR operations, such as 
timeliness, appropriateness, efficiency, absorptive capacity, 
coordination, cost, access, and exit strategy. 
 The guidelines stress the importance of interoperability among 
participating nations, which can be achieved through regular 
interactions, exercises etc. 
 

Page | 67 
 
3.26 India has assumed the Vice-Chair of IORA for the term 2023-25 and 
will assume the Chair of IORA from October 2025 till 2027. In this regard, the 
Committee were interested in knowing about the initiatives taken up during 
India’s Vice Chairmanship of IORA as well as the initiatives proposed during 
its Chairmanship. In a written reply, the Ministry stated that the Indian Ocean 
Rim Association (IORA) is viewed as fostering cooperation and sustainable 
development. It contributes to enhancing regional security by addressing 
maritime safety, piracy, and environmental sustainability. Apart from being 
the highest contributor to the IORA Special Fund, we have encouraged the 
formulation of IORA’s Outlook on the Indo-Pacific and restructuring the Chair 
of Indian Ocean Studies (CIOS). Capacity building is a priority for India and 
the Indian Navy conducts training and exercises to counter IUU fishing and 
piracy. Assistance to Somalia and Yemen has been notable in this regard. As 
the Vice Chair and the upcoming Chair for the term 2025-27, our focus is on 
structural and institutional strengthening of the IORA in order to realize its 
full potential. 
3.27 The Ministry also stated that India is committed to seeing IORA foster 
sustained growth and balanced development through better coordination and 
mutually beneficial economic cooperation in the Indian Ocean region. India’s 
focus in on capacity building in the SME sector, blue economy, maritime 
safety and security, and urgent developmental priorities such as water and 
energy security. 
3.28 Further, as the Vice-Chair of IORA for the term 2023-25 and as Chair 
in 2025-27, India will work on consolidating and streamlining efforts to 
promote cooperation in the realms of the 6 priority areas and 2 cross-cutting 
themes of the IORA, with particular emphasis on Maritime Safety and 
Security, and Blue Economy of which India is the Coordinating Country (lead) 
working closely with Chairs Australia and Indonesia respectively to organise 
meetings and rationalizing the Work Plans which will feed into IORA Action 
Plan. 
3.29 India has also formulated the IOIP which has been adopted by IORA 
Members and has taken up the responsibility of formulating a Roadmap for 

Page | 68 
 
its implementation during its Vice Chairship. India has contributed in 
formulating Guidelines on IUU Fishing and organised seminars on IUU 
Fishing in September 2024. India has taken several steps for organisational 
strengthening including sending our Secretary General, secondment of a 
Director, assisting in upgrading IT systems and financial management, 
strongly pushing for financial prudence in the procedures, financial 
contribution even on behalf of Comoros. 
3.30 India is committed to building up IORA in line with its own expanding 
bilateral ties in the region. We will be supportive in the expansion and further 
invigoration of its activities, from renewable energy and the blue economy to 
maritime safety and security, water science and greater institutional and 
think-tank networking. 
3.31 When asked about the priority areas after assumption of the Chair of 
IORA by India in October 2025, the Ministry stated that India sees the Indian 
Ocean Rim Association (IORA) as fostering cooperation and sustainable 
development. It contributes to enhancing regional security by addressing 
maritime safety, piracy, and environmental sustainability. As the apex 
regional body, IORA has the responsibility to play a significant role in making 
the Indian Ocean a more seamless and cooperative space. We see IORA is as 
a regional body that can respond effectively to the needs and enhance 
individual and collective capacities of Member-States to tackle contemporary 
challenges of sustainable and balanced economic growth, development and 
common maritime domain. 
3.32 The Committee further enquired whether the Government has drawn 
up any plan for re- energizing/strengthening the institutional, financial and 
legal framework of IORA towards realizing the true potential of IORA. The 
Ministry responded that as the Vice Chair and the upcoming Chair for the 
term 2025-27, India's focus is on structural and institutional strengthening 
of the IORA in order to realize its full potential. India will work with other 
IORA members towards the realisation of this objective. Ambassador K. V. 
Bhagirath, IFS (Retd.) held the office of SG for two terms of 3 years each (2012-
15 & 2015-18). Shri. Saravanan Murugan (IAS:2002, Bihar Cadre), was 

Page | 69 
 
seconded as Director to the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) Secretariat, 
Port Louis, Mauritius since December 2019 for a term of 2 (initial) +1 
(extended) years. Apart from being the highest contributor to the IORA Special 
Fund, we have encouraged the formulation of IORA’s Outlook on the Indo-
Pacific and restructuring the Chair of Indian Ocean Studies (CIOS). Capacity 
building is a priority and the Indian Navy conducts training and exercises to 
counter IUU fishing and piracy. India deputed an IT Expert/Advisor from 
India in the IORA Secretariat in September 2020 towards setting up the 
eOffice at IORA. 
3.33 Regarding the significance of IORA in furthering India’s foreign policy 
objectives, the Ministry stated that India sees the Indian Ocean Rim 
Association (IORA) as fostering cooperation and sustainable development. 
India’s objective is to promote greater prosperity in the region and of making 
the Indian Ocean a free, open and inclusive space, based on the UN 
Convention on the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS) as the Constitution of the Seas. 
India continues to progress in that regard. India’s commitment to the well-
being and progress of nations of the Indian Ocean, including as first 
responder and a net security provider, is based on our Neighbourhood First 
policy, on the SAGAR outlook, and on our approach to the extended 
neighbourhood as well. It also draws on our broader vision of an Indo-Pacific 
that is built on a rules-based international order, rule of law, sustainable and 
transparent infrastructure investment, freedom of navigation and over-flight, 
and sincere respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
 
II. THE INDO-PACIFIC OCEANS' INITIATIVE (IPOI) 
3.34 India’s concept of Indo-Pacific was articulated in Prime Minister’s 
keynote address at Shangri La Dialogue in June 2018. It was a wider 
implementation of the doctrine of SAGAR announced by PM in 2015 for the 
Indian Ocean Region and our Act East Policy. It calls for a free, open and 
inclusive order in the Indo-Pacific, based upon respect for sovereignty and 

Page | 70 
 
territorial integrity of all nations, peaceful resolution of disputes through 
dialogue and adherence to international rules and laws. 
3.35 India’s concept of the Indo-Pacific is inclusive in nature and supports 
an approach that respects the right to freedom of navigation and overflight for 
all in the international seas. India’s approach to the Indo-Pacific is based on 
cooperation and collaboration, given the need for shared responses to shared 
challenges in the region and is premised upon the principle of ‘ASEAN-
Centrality’. On November 04, 2019, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi 
launched the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI) at the 14th East Asia 
Summit held in Bangkok, Thailand as an open, non-treaty based global 
initiative that seeks to manage, conserve, sustain, and secure the maritime 
domain. 
3.36 So far, 15 countries are part of the IPOI and are co-leading one of its 7 
pillars. India has taken the lead on Maritime Security and DRM pillars of IPOI. 
India is working with various like-minded countries who have come on-board 
to lead the IPOI pillars - the United Kingdom on Maritime Security Pillar, 
Australia on Maritime Ecology pillar, France and Indonesia on Marine 
Resource pillar, Singapore & Italy on Science, Technology and Academic 
Cooperation Pillar. Last year Germany came on-board to lead the Capacity 
Building & Resources Sharing Pillar and the USA announced its co-lead of 
Trade, Connectivity and Maritime Transport pillar with Japan. In 2024, 
Thailand has joined IPOI as co-lead of the Maritime Ecology pillar and 
Bangladesh has decided to co-lead the Disaster Risk Reduction and 
Management (DRRM) pillar with India. Greece has also become a member of 
the IPOI. 
3.37 Stating the initiatives taken up under IPOI and the outcome, the 
Ministry stated that so far 13 countries are part of the IPOI and are co-leading 
one of its 7 pillars. India has taken the lead on Maritime Security and DRM 
pillars of IPOI. We are also working with various like-minded countries who 
have come on-board to lead the IPOI pillars - the United Kingdom on Maritime 
Security Pillar, Australia on Maritime Ecology pillar, France and Indonesia on 

Page | 71 
 
Marine Resource pillar, Singapore & Italy on Science, Technology and 
Academic Cooperation Pillar.  
3.38 Last year Germany came on-board to lead the Capacity Building & 
Resources Sharing Pillar and the USA announced its co-lead of Trade, 
Connectivity and Maritime Transport pillar with Japan. In 2024, Thailand has 
joined IPOI as co-lead of the Maritime Ecology pillar and Bangladesh has 
decided to co-lead the DRRM pillar with India. Greece has also become a 
member of the IPOI. Progress on IPOI reflects a strengthening bond among 
nations that share a common desire to sustain the two oceans through 
practical, project-based cooperation.  
3.39 As regards funding, the Ministry informed that Projects under IPOI are 
funded by the countries concerned. 
3.40 On the Committee’s query regarding the achievement of the IPOI, 
particularly on management and conservation of the maritime domain, the 
Ministry replied that the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI) is an open, non-
treaty based global initiative that seeks to manage, conserve, sustain, and 
secure the maritime domain. In 2021, Australia announced a grant of AUD 
1.5 million to generate ideas in preservation of marine ecology of Indo-Pacific. 
CSIRO, Australia and INCOIS, India have partnered together to take forward 
cooperation on this pillar. On EAS platform, India and Australia organised 
EAS Conference on Combating Marine Pollution & Marine Plastic Debris in 
February 2022, which was followed by a Hackathon on the same topic by 
Australia and India in December 2022. Under the Maritime Resource pillar, 
India has shared a concept note on areas of cooperation for consideration of 
France and Indonesia. During initial discussions Indonesia has indicated to 
work on preservation on mangroves in the Indo-Pacific and has also proposed 
for India to consider co-opting its Archipelagic and Island States Forum 
initiative under IPOI which focuses on climate change mitigation, blue 
economy and plastic debris. A joint statement titled ‘Horizon 2047: 25th 
Anniversary of the India-France Strategic Partnership, Towards A Century of 
India-France Relations’ and the India-France Indo-Pacific Roadmap was 
issued in July 2023 during PM’s visit to France. India and France have also 

Page | 72 
 
launched Indo-Pacific Parks Partnership to build capacities in the Indo-Pacific 
region in terms of sustainable management of protected areas. 
3.41 Upon noticing that only 13 countries are part of the IPOI, the Committee 
asked about the reasons for the low level of participation along with the efforts 
being made by the Ministry to bring the more countries onboard. The Ministry 
stated that so far 13 countries are part of the IPOI and are co-leading one of 
its 7 pillars. India has taken the lead on Maritime Security and DRM pillars 
of IPOI. Other like-minded countries who have come on-board to lead the IPOI 
pillars include - the United Kingdom on Maritime Security Pillar, Australia on 
Maritime Ecology pillar, France and Indonesia on Marine Resource pillar, 
Singapore & Italy on Science, Technology and Academic Cooperation Pillar. 
Germany has come on-board to lead the Capacity Building & Resources 
Sharing Pillar and the USA announced its co-lead of Trade, Connectivity and 
Maritime Transport pillar with Japan. In 2024, Thailand has joined IPOI as 
co-lead of the Maritime Ecology pillar and Bangladesh has decided to co-lead 
the DRRM pillar with India. Greece has also become a member of the IPOI.  
Several countries, such as Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Philippines, have 
expressed keen interest to join IPOI. Discussions are being held with other 
countries in this regard, and we are also working with various like-minded 
countries to come on-board to lead the IPOI pillars. Progress on IPOI reflects 
a strengthening bond among nations that share a common desire to look 
towards the sustenance of the two oceans through practical, project-based 
cooperation. 
3.42 India provides capacity building to various countries under our Indian 
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC). On being asked 
about the details of capacity building initiatives spearheaded by India under 
the aegis of IPOI and the response received the Ministry submitted that in the 
past three years, India has provided 11500+ ITEC slots including both civil 
and defence trainings, out of which countries in the neighbourhood have used 
6250+ slots. Nepal with close to 70% has best utilization and Seychelles with 
27% has the least utilization. Around 1250 defence officials from the Maldives 
and about 1700 from Sri Lanka have been trained by India. Mauritius receives 

Page | 73 
 
over 150 slots every year and India meets 70% of all capacity building needs 
of Seychelles in the defence sector. This is as part of our contributions towards 
ensuring prosperity and stability across Indo-Pacific region and is not 
specifically under IPOI. 
3.43 With regard to Government’s plan for re-energizing/strengthening the 
IPOI, the Ministry stated that the Idea of IPOI is being discussed at different 
bilateral and multilateral fora. Discussions are being held with other 
countries to familiarise them with IPOI.  Greater and sustained 
regional/global engagement, dialogue and cooperation led by India in 
partnership with key partners and groupings, as relevant, remains the 
mainstay of our approach. We are also working with various like-minded 
countries to come on-board to lead the IPOI pillars.  
3.44 Elaborating on the role of IPOI in furthering India’s foreign policy 
objectives, the Ministry stated that IPOI is our flagship initiative in the Indo-
Pacific Region which was articulated by PM Shri Narendra Modi at East Asia 
Summit (EAS) in 2019. It builds on SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the 
Region) doctrine which was outlined by PM Shri Narendra Modi in 2015 in a 
speech in Mauritius. The IPOI is meant to further practical cooperation under 
India’s Indo-Pacific concept as an open, non-treaty-based global initiative, 
drawing on existing regional cooperation architecture and mechanisms. The 
focus of IPOI is on a collaborative effort to better manage, conserve, sustain 
and secure the maritime domain. It envisages this cooperation under seven 
pillars namely Maritime Security; Maritime Ecology; Maritime Resources; 
Capacity Building and Resource Sharing; Disaster Risk Reduction and 
Management; Science, Technology and Academic Cooperation; and Trade 
Connectivity and Maritime Transport. India’s policy seeks to balance security 
concerns, promote cooperation, counter external influences, while fostering 
economic and strategic partnerships promoting regional cooperation.  India is 
also working with various like-minded countries to come on-board to lead the 
IPOI pillars. 
 

Page | 74 
 
III. BAY OF BENGAL INITIATIVE FOR MULTI-SECTORAL TECHNICAL 
AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION (BIMSTEC) 
3.45 The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) is a grouping of seven Member States lying in the 
littoral and adjacent areas of the Bay of Bengal: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, 
Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand. India is founder member of 
BIMSTEC. The organization came into existence on 6 June 1997 through the 
'Bangkok Declaration'. Six BIMSTEC Summits have been held so far - 2004 
(Bangkok), 2008 (New Delhi), 2014 (Nay Pyi Taw), 2018 (Kathmandu) 2022 
(Colombo-virtual) and 2025 (Bangkok). The 6th BIMSTEC Summit is proposed 
to be held in Bangkok in April 2025. Ambassador Indra Mani Pandey is the 
current and 4th BIMSTEC Secretary General, since 04 January 2024.  
3.46 About India’s role and contributions in BIMSTEC, the Ministry stated 
that India hosted BIMSTEC Outreach Summit and Leaders Retreat during the 
8th BRICS Summit in Goa on 15-16 October 2016. India recently hosted the 
BIMSTEC Aquatics Championship in New Delhi from 07-09 February 2024. 
India hosted the Second BIMSTEC Foreign Minister’s Retreat on 11-12 July 
2024 in New Delhi, in person. India hosted the first ever Informal Meeting of 
BIMSTEC Foreign Ministers on the sidelines of 79th Session of UNGA on 27 
September 2024, New York. National Security Advisor participated in 4th 
BIMSTEC National Security Chiefs’ (BNSCs) Meeting held on 24-26 July 2024, 
Myanmar.  
3.47 As a lead in Security pillar, India hosts the BIMSTEC Centre for 
Weather and Climate (BCWC) at Noida to provide weather data for the region. 
The Host Country Agreement (HCA) for establishment of a BIMSTEC Energy 
Centre (BEC) was signed between India and BIMSTEC Secretariat in 
November 2024. India has hosted 3 Disaster Management Exercises in 2017, 
2020 and 2021 with BIMSTEC countries. The Second Meeting of the BIMSTEC 
Expert Group on Cyber Security Cooperation was held in New Delhi, India on 
21 January 2025. 

Page | 75 
 
3.48 It has been stated that our cooperation under BIMSTEC is a 
convergence of our ‘Neighborhood First’ policy, or ‘Act East’ outlook and the 
Indian Ocean interests. India is the lead country for the Security pillar of 
BIMSTEC, which covers counter-terrorism and transnational crime, disaster 
management and energy security. Explaining the initiatives undertaken 
under BIMSTEC with regard to the Indian Ocean region and maritime 
security, the Ministry stated that India accords top-priority to Maritime 
Security in Indian Ocean Region and understands the critical role of regional 
cooperation among BIMSTEC member states to further bolster the endeavour 
to achieve a safe and secure Bay of Bengal. India has hosted three Meetings 
of the Expert Group on Maritime Security Cooperation in the Bay of Bengal. 
The draft guidelines for Conduct of MLEAs during Interaction at Sea have 
been prepared by India and are under discussion among member states.  The 
first ever BIMSTEC Ports Conclave was held at Vishakhapatnam on 7-8 
November 2019 with an aim to provide a platform to strengthen maritime 
interaction, port-led connectivity initiatives and sharing best practices among 
Member States.  
3.49 When asked about the assessment of the initiatives taken under 
BIMSTEC and its functioning, the Ministry responded that BIMSTEC has 
made progress in fostering regional cooperation through established 
institutional framework and streamlined sectors of cooperation. An Eminent 
Persons’ Group was also formed to chart a future roadmap of BIMSTEC that 
addresses the current challenges and enables the Organisation to realise its 
immense potential for regional integration, sustainable development and 
security of the Bay of Bengal region. To help in institutional building of 
BIMSTEC, India has provided a onetime grant of USD 1 million to the 
operational budget of the BIMSTEC Secretariat.  
3.50 On the Committee’s specific query regarding the Government’s plan for 
infusing more resources in BIMSTEC and strengthening of this regional body 
for greater regional cooperation, the Ministry stated that the provision of 
budgetary resources as necessary to BIMSTEC is regularly discussed at 
various levels in BIMSTEC. India as a lead member has provided a one time 

Page | 76 
 
grant of USD 1 million to the operational budget of the BIMSTEC Secretariat 
to complete institution building tasks. India has also arranged number of 
capacity building/training initiatives in several sectors of cooperation for 
BIMSTEC member states.  
3.51 The Committee also wanted to know about the programmes in the 
current year for involving the youth and women to play a greater role in 
BIMSTEC. The Ministry stated that in collaboration with the Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports, it is organizing BIMSTEC Youth Summit in Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat, on 07-11 February 2025. MEA is also organising BIMSTEC Young 
Leaders’ Climate Change Summit on 20-24 February 2025 in New Delhi.  
3.52 Spelling out the role of BIMSTEC in realizing India’s foreign policy 
objectives, the Ministry stated that for India, BIMSTEC represents the 
intersection of its ‘Neighbourhood First’ outlook, the ‘Act East Policy’ and the 
‘SAGAR’ vision with a specific focus on the Bay of Bengal region.  The 
organisation has been playing a crucial role in improving our cooperation with 
the other six member states on a large spectrum of issues: enhancing 
security, trade facilitation, improving people to people contact, establishing 
connectivity, promoting institutional building, collaboration in health and 
space, digital public infrastructure, capacity building etc. 
 
IV. QUAD 
3.53 The Quad comprising of India, Australia, Japan, and the United States 
originated as a spontaneous emergency response to the 2004 Indian Ocean 
Tsunami.  From 2008 to 2016, the four Quad partners have focused on 
securing a free and open Indo-Pacific, taking joint action against terrorism, 
and promoting a rules-based system. In 2017, the Quad began convening on 
a bimonthly basis at the Senior Officials-level.  
3.54 The Quad has two major meeting formats besides continuous activity 
across a dozen Working Groups – Quad Leaders’ Summit and Quad Foreign 
Ministers’ Meeting. In March 2021, the first Quad Leaders’ Summit was held 
in virtual format. The first in-person Leader-level meeting was hosted by 

Page | 77 
 
President Biden in Washington DC in September 2021. Since then, four more 
in-person (2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024) and two virtual Summits (2021, 2022) 
at the Leaders’ level have taken place.   
3.55 In 2019, the Quad Foreign Ministers met for the first time on the 
sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City. So far, 
one virtual and eight in-person Quad Foreign Ministerial meetings have been 
held from 2019. The most recent Quad Foreign Ministers’ Meeting was held 
on 21 January 2025 in Washington DC. In February 2021, Quad countries 
appointed Sherpas for overall coordination at the policy level.  
3.56 Explaining the manner in which the Quad fits into India's vision of the 
Indian Ocean region, the Ministry stated that the four countries today have a 
growing convergence of strategic, political and security interests in the Indo 
Pacific region including shared vision on international law, economic 
opportunity, peace, stability, and security in all domains including the 
maritime domain underpin the development and prosperity of the peoples of 
the Indo-Pacific. The Quad also has a shared commitment to a free and open 
Indo-Pacific (FOIP). The Quad has today acquired momentum and salience, 
with regular dialogues, tabletop exercises, and workshops.  
3.57 India’s vision and approach to the Indo-Pacific region was articulated 
by Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi at the Shangri La Dialogue in Singapore 
in 2018. India stands for an open, balanced, rules-based and stable 
international trade regime in the Indo-Pacific. Our approach is based on 
cooperation and collaboration, given the need for shared responses to shared 
challenges.  This was elaborated through the vision of SAGAR, which stands 
for Security and Growth for all in the Region. SAGAR also guides our approach 
towards both the Indo-Pacific region and issues related to the maritime 
domain in the Quad context.  India’s vision for the Indian Ocean region is 
rooted in advancing cooperation in our region; and, to use our capabilities for 
the benefit of all in our common maritime home. The vision is captured in the 
five principles outlined by PM Shri Narendra Modi.  It includes: 
 India will do everything to safeguard its mainland and islands and 
defend its interests. 

Page | 78 
 
 India will deepen economic and security cooperation with our 
maritime neighbours and island states. 
 Collective action and cooperation will best advance peace and 
security in the maritime region of India as well as prepare us better 
to respond to emergencies 
 India seeks a more integrated and cooperative future in the region 
that enhances the prospects for sustainable development for all; and 
 All countries in the IOR have the primary responsibility for peace, 
stability and prosperity in the Indian Ocean. 
3.58 To implement the vision of SAGAR, the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative 
(IPOI) was launched in 2019 with ASEAN and ASEAN-led mechanisms as the 
primary platforms and the East Asia Summit as a premier leaders-led forum. 
ASEAN holds a central position in the vision of Quad. The positive agenda of 
Quad complements the various mechanisms of ASEAN. The centrality of 
ASEAN and ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP) also contributes to the 
vision of Quad for the region. The Quad’s priorities pertaining to strengthening 
regional maritime, economic, and technology security in the face of increasing 
threats, as well as promoting reliable and resilient supply chains are in line 
with India’s vision of the Indian Ocean Region.  
3.59 Further, the Quad has a constructive agenda aimed at complementing 
the IPOIs development priorities – accelerating the implementation of the 
SDGs and delivering public goods, with a strong focus on enabling peace, 
prosperity, and stability. The Quad seeks to address the priorities of countries 
through practical projects and capacity building initiatives. Quad cooperation 
is also strongly anchored in the shared values and commitment to the 
principles of democracy, international law, and rules based international 
order as also a vision for a free, open and inclusive Indo-Pacific.  
3.60 The Quad’s agenda covering areas such as health security, climate 
change, critical and emerging technologies, infrastructure and connectivity, 
HADR, maritime security, and counter-terrorism only furthers the IPOI’s 
objective to promote collaboration with like-minded countries in the areas of 
maritime ecology; maritime security; maritime resources; capacity building 

Page | 79 
 
and resource sharing; disaster risk reduction and management; science, 
technology, and academic cooperation; trade, connectivity, and maritime 
transport. 
3.61 The Committee asked whether the Quad has any role in the overall 
security architecture of the IOR and in countering Chinese influence in the 
region. The Ministry responded that India’s commitment to the well-being and 
progress of nations of the Indian Ocean is based on our Neighbourhood First 
policy, the SAGAR outlook, our approach to the extended neighbourhood and 
to a free and open Indo-Pacific that we champion under Quad. India as the 
first responder and a net security provider in the Indian Ocean Region will 
continue its approach of contributing to build capacity and secure safety and 
security in the Indian Ocean Region. A multilateral rules-based international 
order along with respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity remains the 
foundation for India’s action in the IOR. As the Indian Ocean increases in 
importance in the 21st century, India and the regional stakeholders have to 
collectively ensure its security and prosperity. 
3.62 As political democracies, pluralistic societies and market economies, 
Quad countries are committed to global good and to upholding a rules-based 
order in the Indo-Pacific region including the IOR. Quad collaboration is 
aimed at ensuring that the Indo-Pacific remains free, open, stable and 
prosperous.  Quad countries are invested in trusted partnership with each 
other and is against spheres of influence. Quad collaborates in a 
contemporary and mutually beneficial mode. The Quad supports the 
democratizing of the global space and collaborative approaches and is against 
others having a veto on our choices.  
3.63 The Quad is of the view that international law, including respect for 
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the maintenance of peace, safety, 
security and stability in the maritime domain underpin the development and 
prosperity of the Indo-Pacific. The Quad continues to emphasize the 
importance of adherence to international law, particularly as reflected in the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), to address 
challenges to the global maritime rules-based order, including with respect to 

Page | 80 
 
maritime claims, and in the South and East China Seas. We are seriously 
concerned about the situation in the East and South China Seas and reiterate 
our strong opposition to any unilateral actions that seek to change the status 
quo by force or coercion. We continue to express our serious concern about 
the militarization of disputed features, and coercive and intimidating 
manoeuvres in the South China Sea. We emphasize the importance of 
maintaining and upholding freedom of navigation and overflight, other lawful 
uses of sea, and unimpeded commerce consistent with international law.  
3.64 In order to enhance the Quad’s collaboration and coordination with 
regional partners, the Indo-Pacific Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) was 
launched in 2022 as a technology and training initiative to enhance maritime 
domain awareness in the Indo-Pacific region. IPMDA harnesses innovative 
technology to provide partners across Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean 
region and the Pacific with near real-time information to rapidly detect and 
respond to a wide range of challenges involving illicit maritime activities such 
as illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, climate events, and 
humanitarian crises. Since then, the IPMDA initiative has been scaled to cover 
the Indian Ocean Region, through the integration of the Information Fusion 
Center—Indian Ocean Region, Gurugram in 2024. Quad countries also 
contribute to the region through capacity building cooperation for enhancing 
maritime security.  
3.65 As regards the achievements of the Quad in addressing maritime 
security and safety, HADR, environment protection, connectivity, strategic 
technologies, supply chain resilience, health, education and cyber security, 
etc. in the IOR, the Ministry stated that the Quad is supporting the Indo-
Pacific region through practical cooperation in areas such as maritime 
security, critical and emerging technologies, cyber security, humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief, health security, climate change, counter-
terrorism, infrastructure and connectivity, and addressing the debt crisis 
through sustainable, transparent and fair lending and financing practices. 
The Quad also has ongoing initiatives that are aimed at popularizing STEM 

Page | 81 
 
education through fellowships and organizing capacity building workshops in 
disaster resilient infrastructure. 
3.66 Under the Quad Maritime Security Working group, the Indo-Pacific 
Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) initiative was 
announced at the 2022, to provide near-real-time, integrated, and cost-
effective maritime domain data to maritime agencies in the region, supporting 
regional capacity in combating a wide range of illicit maritime activities, 
including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and responding to 
climate-related and humanitarian events, covering three major sub-regions in 
the Indo-Pacific maritime space- the Pacific Islands, Southeast Asia and the 
Indian Ocean Region. MAITRI (Maritime Training Institute – containerized and 
mobile training infrastructure for easy deployment to multiple locations of 
interest) is an India-led initiative announced during the 2024 Quad Summit 
to enable partner countries in the Indo Pacific region to maximize tools 
provided through IPMDA and other Quad partner initiatives, to monitor and 
secure their waters, enforce their laws, and deter unlawful behavior. India will 
host the inaugural MAITRI workshop in 2025. 
3.67 The Quad Partnership on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief 
(HADR) was announced by Quad Leaders in Tokyo on 24 May 2022, as part 
of a shared vision for a free and open Indo-Pacific that is inclusive and 
resilient.  Quad Foreign Ministers signed into operation the Guidelines for the 
‘Quad Partnership on HADR in the Indo-Pacific’ in September 2022. 
Subsequently, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to coordinate Quad 
HADR responses to disasters in the region have been annexed to these 
Guidelines. Quad partners coordinated their response to the PNG Enga 
Landslide (May 2024), Typhoon Yagi (September 2024) and Vanuatu 
earthquake (December 2024).  
3.68 As part of the Quad Climate Working Group, initiatives are being 
undertaken to support Indo-Pacific countries with energy transition, 
promoting sustainable consumption and production, disaster risk resilience, 
climate information exchange, green shipping, and capacity building. Under 
the clean energy pillar of this Working Group, India led projects in 

Page | 82 
 
collaboration with the ISA to funding solar projects (solar cold storage, solar 
rooftop for healthcare facilities, and solar water pumping systems) in select 
Indo-Pacific countries (Comoros, Madagascar, Seychelles and Fiji) are 
underway. 
3.69 Through the Quad Infrastructure Coordination Group, Quad partners 
regularly share assessments of regional infrastructure needs and coordinate 
their technical assistance and capacity-building efforts to deliver transparent, 
demand-driven, quality, sustainable, and climate-resilient infrastructure. The 
Quad Infrastructure Fellowships Program aims to empower more than 1,800 
of the region’s infrastructure practitioners to design, build and manage 
quality infrastructure in their home countries during the period 2024-2027. 
The Quad Ports of the Future Partnership was announced in 2024 to 
coordinate, exchange information & best practices, and mobilize government 
& private sector investments in quality port infrastructure across the Indo-
Pacific region. In 2025, India will host a Quad Regional Ports and 
Transportation Conference, in Mumbai. 
3.70 Under the Quad Critical and Emerging Technologies Working Group, 
Quad partners are working together to strengthen the supply chain resilience 
and improve digital connectivity in the Indo-Pacific region through access to 
critical and emerging technologies and advanced telecommunications 
technology, including 5G networks and Open RAN. To advance the 
development of a trusted, secure and robust telecommunications network, 
and promote supplier diversification, Quad countries are pursuing Open RAN 
deployment in Palau. Under the Advancing Innovation to Empower NextGen 
Agriculture (AI-ENGAGE) initiative, Quad science agencies are identifying 
joint funding opportunities to encourage collaborative research to leverage 
joint funding, expertise, infrastructure and other resources to deliver 
scientific advances to increase crop yield and resilience.  
3.71 As part of the Quad Health Security Partnership, the Quad  delivered 
more than 400 million safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine doses to Indo-
Pacific countries and almost 800 million doses globally, bilaterally and in 
partnership with COVAX. Announced at the 2024 Quad Leaders’ Summit, the 

Page | 83 
 
Quad Cancer Moonshot initiative aims to leverage public and private 
resources to combat cancer in the Indo-Pacific region, with an initial focus on 
cervical cancer. India has committed to offer $7.5 million worth HPV sampling 
kits, detection kits and cervical cancer vaccines to Indo-Pacific countries.  
3.72 In order to deepen educational and people-to-people ties and build a 
talented pool of next-generation STEM minds to lead Quad countries in 
cutting-edge research and innovation, two cohorts of students from the Quad 
countries and South East Asian countries (in case of the second cohort) have 
been allotted the Quad STEM Fellowship during the years 2023 and 2024. 
During the 2024 Summit, India announced a new initiative to award fifty 
Quad scholarships, worth $500,000, to students from the Indo-Pacific to 
pursue a 4-year undergraduate engineering program at a Government of 
India-funded technical institution. The scholarships are expected to be 
launched during the academic year 2025-26. 
3.73 The Quad Senior Cyber Group focuses on a range of initiatives, from 
the adoption of shared cyber security standards and secure software 
development to capacity building and cultivation of a skilled workforce. Two 
editions of the Quad Cyber Challenge have been held in 2023 and 2024 in the 
Quad countries, to strengthen individuals’ and communities’ cyber security 
awareness and action. India has proposed to host a Quad Cyber Bootcamp in 
2025 to share best practices in protecting their Critical Infrastructure, with 
the participation of around 20 nations from the Indo-Pacific and Indian Ocean 
Region. 
3.74 The Quad Space Working Group is fostering Quad's commitment to 
leveraging space capabilities – applications and technologies, for the benefit 
of the Indo-Pacific while ensuring responsible and collaborative practices in 
space activities. Capacity building workshops were organized in Feb-Mar 
2023 for Indo-Pacific countries for monitoring and responding to extreme 
precipitation events by utilizing the Earth observation satellite technology. 
Under India’s lead, a cloud-enabled web-based platform (based on archival 
satellite data) for interactive computing & visualization, and capacity 

Page | 84 
 
development related to extreme weather events has been developed by ISRO 
for Mauritius.  
3.75 On being asked about the working and achievements of the Quad 
Maritime Security Working Group in the Indian Ocean region, the Ministry 
informed that the Quad Maritime Security Working Group is aimed at 
strengthening capacity and capability of the Indo-Pacific partners to respond 
to contemporary maritime security challenges and enhance information-
sharing among Quad partners. Quad countries have been exchanging 
unclassified information on counter-narcotic operations and IUU fishing. The 
Quad is also looking at coordinating capacity building and technical 
assistance to the region. 
3.76 Through the Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness 
(IPMDA), announced at the 2022 Leaders’ Summit, Quad is providing near-
real-time, integrated, and cost-effective maritime domain data to maritime 
agencies in the region, supporting regional capacity in combating a wide range 
of illicit maritime activities, including illegal, unreported and unregulated 
fishing, and responding to climate-related and humanitarian events. IPMDA 
will cover three major sub-regions in the Indo-Pacific maritime space- the 
Pacific Islands, Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean Region. IPMDA has been 
rolled out in the Pacific (Australian-led) and Southeast Asia (US-led). The 
operationalization of IPMDA in the Indian Ocean Region, through IFC-IOR, 
Gurugram, was announced in 2024. Quad partners intend to layer new 
technology and data into IPMDA in 2024-25, to continue to deliver cutting 
edge capability and information to the region.  
3.77 During the 2024 Summit, an India-led initiative, namely regional 
Maritime Initiative for Training in the Indo-Pacific (MAITRI), was announced 
to enable partner countries in the Indo Pacific region to maximize tools 
provided through IPMDA and other Quad partner initiatives, to monitor and 
secure their waters, enforce their laws, and deter unlawful behavior. India will 
host the inaugural MAITRI workshop in 2025. The following initiatives were 
also announced during the same Summit and are under discussion by the 
Working Group: Quad-at-Sea Ship Observer Mission to improve Coast Guard 

Page | 85 
 
interoperability and to advance maritime safety; Quad Indo-Pacific Logistics 
Network pilot project, to pursue shared airlift capacity among the four nations 
to support civilian response to natural disasters; and Quad Maritime Legal 
Dialogue to support efforts to uphold the rules-based maritime order in the 
Indo-Pacific.  
3.78 On the question of importance of Quad in India’s foreign policy, the 
Ministry stated that Quad is amongst our foremost foreign policy priorities. 
India’s membership in Quad contributes towards furthering our foreign policy 
objectives including Vision SAGAR and IPOI. As a leading voice of the 
developing world and Global South countries, India in turn adds value, 
relevance and credibility to the Quad by its participation.  
3.79 The Quad is a force for global good and India is working with the other 
Quad partners in the Indo-Pacific region on initiatives which contribute to 
delivering quality and resilient infrastructure; building a resilient and secure 
cyber security environment; harnessing emerging technologies for the benefit 
of people across the Indo-Pacific, and deploying these technologies to facilitate 
economic prosperity, openness, and connectivity; and bolstering maritime 
security & improving maritime domain awareness.  
3.80 Quad has also enabled the four partners to explore plurilateral 
convergences beyond the strengths of their individual bilateral relationships. 
India remains open to intensifying the ongoing collaboration and expanding 
the agenda to include new domains. India in collaboration with the Quad 
partners is contributing to shaping a stable global order.  
3.81 Elaborating on the significance of Quad in India’s foreign policy, the 
representative of the Ministry of External Affairs during the oral evidence on 
17 June 2025 submitted as under: 
“Quad actually was a spontaneous grouping that was created after the 
2004 tsunami. It has since then developed much, much better to 
include a number of other activities. In fact, its upgradation to the 
summit level since 2004 has conveyed a key message to the rest of the 
region. Today, Quad addresses maritime security, safety, HADR, 
environment protection, connectivity, strategic technologies, a more 

Page | 86 
 
recent development, supply chain resilience, and of course, at our 
instance, health, education, and also cyber security, among others. Like 
you noted, Sir, the inclination of the other three partners to try and 
focus on security is somewhat tempered by the fact that we are the more 
reluctant partner when it comes to getting Quad to focus on security 
matters. The Chinese have never lost an opportunity to make the point 
that the Quad is essentially an Asian NATO, which will bring war to the 
Indo- Pacific, and that countries in the Indo-Pacific, especially in 
Southeast Asia, should be wary of anything to do with Quad, and that 
this is all warmongering and so on. Our own approach is also cautious 
because of our multi-alignment in the way we approach our foreign 
policy. It is one of the reasons why we are not able to enter into Defence 
partnerships the way Pakistan or someone else is able to commit to 
Military or Defence partnerships.” 
 
V. INDIAN OCEAN NAVAL SYMPOSIUM (IONS) 
3.82 Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) was established in 2008 by the 
Indian Navy to strengthen maritime security and promote collaborative efforts 
among Navies of the littoral states of the Indian Ocean Region to address 
common challenges in the Indian Ocean Region. There are 25 member nations 
- Bangladesh, India, Maldives, Pakistan, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Iran, Oman, 
Saudi Arabic, Qatar, UAE, France, Kenya, Mauritius, Mozambique, South 
Africa, Tanzania, Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Singapore, 
Thailand, Timor Leste and UK. There are 9 observer nations (China, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, Madagascar, Netherlands, Russian, Spain and Republic of 
Korea). IONS have established 3 working groups to focus on key areas: 
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), Maritime Security and 
Information Sharing & Interoperability. India has played a significant role in 
IONS both as a founding member and as a leader shaping the direction and 
the priorities of the symposium. India was the maiden chair of IONS for the 
period 2008-10. India currently co-chairs the HADR and Maritime security 
working groups alongside Iran.  
3.83 The Committee were keen to know about the initiatives taken under the 
Indian Ocean Naval Symposium and the outcome of such initiatives. The 
inaugural edition of the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) was held in 

Page | 87 
 
February 2008 at New Delhi, with Indian Navy as the Chair (2008 – 2010). 
India is scheduled to take over as the Chair of IONS (2025-27) during the 9th 
IONS Conclave of Chiefs planned to be conducted in India in late 2025. India 
has played a key role in enhancing Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) within 
IONS. India established the Information Fusion Centre – Indian Ocean Region 
(IFC-IOR), a hub for real-time information sharing among member nations to 
monitor maritime activities. India has signed White Shipping Information 
Exchange Agreements with several IONS countries towards enhancing 
regional maritime security and improving member states’ responses to 
potential threats.  
3.84 India has been providing disaster relief and humanitarian assistance in 
response to natural disasters across the IOR. India also provided medical aid 
to IOR countries during COVID-19 pandemic. India helped in the evacuation 
of Indian and foreign nationals during Operation Rahat in 2015. During 
Cyclone Idai (2019), India provided relief material and medical assistance to 
Mozambique, in cooperation with other IONS countries. India has not only 
responded to disasters in Friendly Foreign Countries in IOR, but also 
facilitated HADR workshops and coordinated disaster response exercises 
under the IONS framework, improving the region’s collective capacity in 
response to emergencies.  
3.85 India’s active role in leading IONS initiatives has improved coordination 
between regional navies, which has directly contributed to the reduction in 
piracy and maritime terrorism in the Indian Ocean. The joint exercises at sea 
hosted by India under IONS such as IONS Maritime Exercise (IMEX) focusing 
on HADR, Search and Rescue and Maritime Security have strengthened 
interoperability among IONS member states, allowing regional navies to 
operate cohesively in a variety of maritime security challenges.  
3.86 Emphasizing the role of IONS beyond a talking shop, the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence on 17 June 
2025 stated: 
“There are three working groups that work in the IONS. It is not simply 
a talking shop, but it is an inclusive organization of 34 navies, 25 

Page | 88 
 
member navies, and 9 observer navies. So, many times, through the 
three working groups that we got, one on humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief; the second one on maritime security; and the 3rd one on 
information sharing, so depending on the country that holds the Chair, 
we have a whole host of activities that are conducted under these three 
working groups which is inclusive. So, they have members that are 
changing. 
A lot of work has been done, the aim being to evolve common SOPs so 
that we have interoperability; we have a common understanding of what 
the threats are; we have a common approach to how we can address 
those threats; and we work together and build mutual trust and 
confidence. This time, we are getting back the Chair in November of 
2025, and we hope to hold it for two years. Then, with the guidance of 
the MoD and MEA, we hope to try to see whether we can intensify those 
activities and take those activities even further. We do not want it to be 
a talking shop. It is a collaborative organization and we want it to 
deliver.” 
  

Page | 89 
 
CHAPTER 4 
CULTURAL AND DIASPORA LINKS IN THE INDIAN OCEAN REGION 
 India and the countries of Indian Ocean Region (IOR) share age old 
historical, religious, trade and cultural links. As a result, Indian diaspora is 
present in all the countries of the Indian Ocean Region, especially in the Gulf 
region (Saudi Arabia, UAE, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait etc.) and in Africa 
(South Africa, Kenya, Tanzania, Mauritius etc).  
4.2 The size of the Indian Diaspora in the IOR, country-wise as enumerated 
by Indian Mission/Posts, as on 01 January 2025 is given below: 
No Littoral State(s) PIOs NRIs Total Indian Overseas  
in Littoral States 
1 Australia 6,26,000 3,50,000 9,76,000 
2 Bahrain 4,506 3,42,350 3,46,856 
3 Bangladesh 10 7,000 7,010 
4 Comoros 200 20 220 
5 Djibouti 8 1,000 1,008 
6 Egypt 366 5,134 5,500 
7 Eritrea 0 140 140 
8 Indonesia 1,20,000 14,817 1,34,817 
9 India - - - 
10 Iran 445 10,320 10,765 
11 Iraq 0 17,100 17,100 
12 Kenya 60,000 20,000 80,000 
13 Kuwait 2,356 10,07,961 10,10,317 
14 Madagascar 15,000 2,500 17,500 
15 Malaysia 27,50,000 1,85,000 29,35,000 
16 Maldives 140 30,000 30,140 
17 Mauritius 8,71,140 26,357 8,97,497 
18 Mozambique 22,000 3,000 25,000 
19 Myanmar 23 354 377 
20 Oman 1,754 6,60,299 6,62,053 
21 Pakistan 0 0 0 
22 Qatar Data not 
available 
8,30,491 8,30,491 
23 Réunion 
(France) 
Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
Data not available 

Page | 90 
 
24 SaudiArabia 0 26,45,302 26,45,302 
25 Seychelles 5,093 8,245 13,338 
26 Singapore 1,07,180 3,50,000 4,57,180 
27 SouthAfrica 13,18,431 74,057 13,92,488 
28 SriLanka 16,00,000 7,500 16,07,500 
29 Sudan 55 85 140 
30 Tanzania 40,000 15,000 55,000 
31 Thailand 1,35,179 30,236 1,65,415 
32 Timor-Leste Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
Data not available 
33 United Arab 
Emirates 
6,614 38,90,953 38,97,567 
34 Somalia 0 100 100 
35 Yemen 420 700 1,120 
 76,86,920 1,05,36,021  1,82,22,941 
Total Overseas Indians: 3,42,57,544 
Total Overseas Indians in the Littoral States IOR:1,82,22,941 
Percentage of Indians in Littoral States in the IOR out of total Indian 
Diaspora in the world: 53.19% 
 
4.3 When asked about the cultural and diaspora links shared by India with 
the countries of the IOR along with the details in respect of migration and 
cultural exchanges, the Ministry stated that India and the countries of Indian 
Ocean Region share historical links including religious, trade and cultural. 
The Indian diaspora present in this region continue to be deeply connected 
with their Indian roots especially through religious and cultural traditions and 
languages. They celebrate Indian festivals with great fervour. Some examples 
of cultural exchanges include: streets being named after Indian personalities 
e.g. a street in the city centre of Antananarivo, in Madagascar, is named after 
Mahatma Gandhi; several socio-cultural organisations in the countries 
promote Indian culture e.g. Mauritius has more than 100; Mauritius also 
hosts the World Hindi Secretariat mandated to promote Hindi globally; regular 
exchanges of cultural troupes takes places e.g. several countries of the region 
participated in the Surajkund International Craft Mela and  ICCR troupes 
regularly visit the countries to showcase Indian culture.  

Page | 91 
 
4.4 Given that India share cultural and Diaspora links with countries of the 
IOR, the Committee wanted to know about the efforts made for promoting 
cultural diplomacy through deepening of people-to-people ties. In a written 
submission, the Ministry stated inter-alia the Government of India has been 
taking steps to strengthen these ties by way of establishing Cultural Centers, 
sponsoring visits of performing art groups, organizing/supporting 
conferences/seminars, running Chairs of Indian Studies, offering 
scholarships to students to study in India, supporting visits of eminent 
academicians/dignitaries to India, promotion of Hindi and other Indian 
languages, sending busts/statues and visual art exhibitions, conferring 
awards to distinguished alumni, organizing International Day of Yoga, 
organizing festivals. India Week, conducting workshops and seminars in 
various fields including Yoga & Ayurveda etc. 
4.5 On being asked about the role of Indian diaspora in fostering deeper 
links with countries in the IOR for furthering India’s foreign policy objectives, 
the Ministry stated that the Indian diaspora plays a strategic role in 
strengthening India's ties across the world, including with the countries of the 
Indian Ocean Region. Mindful of the incredibly diverse nature of the Indian 
Diaspora, spanning across various countries, cultures, and socio-economic 
backgrounds, the Ministry has formulated a robust and multifaceted 
Diaspora engagement policy framework characterized under the rubric of 4Cs 
- Care, Connect, Celebrate & Contribute. This framework has proven to be 
successful in not only ensuring the welfare of the Indian Diaspora, but also 
in harnessing their potential to support India's economic, strategic and 
foreign policy objectives.  
4.6 Initiatives such as the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD), which celebrates 
the contributions of the Indian Diaspora and encourages them to explore the 
rich cultural heritage of India, provides a platform to leverage the diaspora’s 
expertise in technology, education, innovation, to attract investments and 
entrepreneurship, and promote India’s global soft power. Regional Pravasi 
Bhartiya Divas (RPBD) were organised in IOR countries with large Indian 
Diaspora, such as Singapore, Mauritius, Australia and South Africa, to 

Page | 92 
 
provide another platform for direct interaction and engagement with 
Diaspora. The Know India Programme (KIP) gives an opportunity to the Indian 
Diaspora youth to connect with their ancestral homeland and update their 
knowledge about India. Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) 
scheme aims to strengthen the cultural soft power of India, while Scholarship 
Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) promotes India as an education 
hub. Besides these programs, Indian Missions/ Posts abroad play a crucial 
role in understanding the needs of the diaspora. They interact regularly with 
community leaders, organizations, and individuals to gather information on 
their concerns, challenges, and aspirations. The success of these programs 
has enabled to leverage the large Indian Diaspora as a strategic asset to 
enhance India's regional influence, particularly in the neighbourhood and a 
multipolar Indo-Pacific. The Ministry remains steadfast in its endeavor of 
strategically mobilizing the Indian diaspora to contribute towards India's 
growth.  
4.7 When asked whether the large presence of Indian diaspora in the IOR 
has been factored in India’s Indian Ocean Strategy, the Ministry stated that 
the Government of India, is actively engaged in harnessing the potential of 
Indian Diaspora across the globe for the development of India. Because of 
their political, economic, social and cultural importance, the Indian Diaspora 
can be leveraged as a strategic asset to realize foreign policy goals. They 
contribute to India’s soft power projection, provide diplomatic leverage, act as 
an economic bridge through investments, remittances, and entrepreneurial 
ventures and they can also be a channel for political advocacy. In recent years, 
they have played an important role during disasters and crisis response. 
Diaspora networks mobilize swift aid and support during emergencies like the 
Covid pandemic and natural disasters. Therefore, the Government of India, 
through its Diaspora engagement programmes and schemes, endeavours to 
leverage the strength of the Indian Diaspora for furthering India’s foreign 
policy objectives. 
4.8 Given the crucial role played by Indian Missions/Posts abroad in 
connecting with the diaspora community, the Ministry was also asked the 

Page | 93 
 
manner in which such Missions/Posts abroad can play a greater role in 
promotion of India’s global soft power through its Diaspora in the IOR. In a 
written submission, the Ministry stated that Missions/Posts abroad play an 
important role in promotion of India’s global soft power through engaging with 
the Diaspora. Besides being a ‘Home away from Home’ for the Diaspora and 
assisting them when needed, Indian Missions/Posts are crucial in executing 
the various welfare schemes and engagement programmes for the Indian 
Diaspora abroad. These programmes are part of the comprehensive 
framework to engage with the Diaspora devised by the Government of India, 
in view of the growing importance of the Indian diaspora in shaping our 
foreign policy and international image. Indian Missions and Posts are thus 
the channels through which the government connects with the Indian 
diaspora to celebrate our shared heritage and to promote India’s global soft 
power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 94 
 
PART- II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. India’s Strategic Responsibility in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR)  
The Committee acknowledge the paramount strategic, economic, 
and environmental significance of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) for 
India. With a coastline of over 11098 kilometres, coupled with its vast 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of 2.4 million square kilometres, India is 
uniquely positioned at the heart of one of the most vital regions in the 
world. Nearly 90% of India’s trade by volume, including oil imports, 
transits through the Indian Ocean which also handles half of the world’s 
container shipments. Thus, the Indian Ocean is not only critical for 
India’s economic stability but also serves as a bridge for global trade 
between Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. 
Given this geo-strategic importance, the Committee are of the 
considered view that India’s leadership role in the Indian Ocean Region 
(IOR) is both a natural and necessary extension of its geopolitical and 
economic interests and thereby, it should take a leading role in ensuring 
the security, stability, and prosperity of the region. The Committee 
observe that India’s leadership in the Indian Ocean is underscored by its 
strategic framework, Vision SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the 
Region) and its evolved version, Vision MAHASAGAR (Mutual and 
Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions for the 
Global South). These guiding principles accentuate India’s commitment 
to a rules-based order, respect for sovereignty, freedom of navigation, 
and the protection of regional maritime security. The Indian Ocean is 
undeniably an integral part of India’s global strategy, and it is in India’s 
best interest to assert its role as a guardian of this vital maritime space. 
The Committee urge that the MEA should intensify its efforts to build 
stronger bilateral, multilateral engagements and defence partnerships 
while ensuring the region’s sustainability and security. By fostering a 
cooperative, rules-based order in the Indian Ocean, India should 

Page | 95 
 
continue enhancing its role as a leading regional power, securing the 
region for itself and the global community, while affirming that the 
Indian Ocean remains India’s Ocean. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
2. Strengthening India’s Role as a net security Provider in the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR)  
The Committee are cognizant of the significant geopolitical and 
security challenges faced by IOR that jeopardize its stability. The 
growing presence of extra-regional actors, particularly China, through 
strategic infrastructure investments and dual-use projects, poses a 
serious challenge to India’s security interests. The increasing 
militarization of ports, alongside activities such as illegal fishing, piracy, 
and the rise of terrorism, further complicate the situation. Additionally, 
issues like climate change, marine pollution, and the destruction of 
marine biodiversity threaten the ecological balance of the region and, in 
turn, regional food security and disaster resilience. 
In light of these challenges, the Committee recommend that India 
should adopt a multifaceted and comprehensive approach to securing 
and stabilizing the Indian Ocean. As the largest and most influential 
nation in the Indian Ocean Region, India is uniquely positioned to act as 
the net security provider. While underscoring the importance of India's 
proactive stance in promoting regional stability, ensuring maritime 
security, and safeguarding the interests of IOR nations, the Committee 
suggest that India must devote the necessary resources for a greater 
naval presence in the region and continue to work collaboratively with 
regional partners, extending capacity-building support, maritime 
domain awareness, and defense cooperation, particularly with countries 
that face infrastructural and financial constraints. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 

Page | 96 
 
3. Comprehensive Strategic Engagement Plan for Strengthening 
India's Partnerships with Littoral States of the Indian Ocean Region 
Recognizing the geopolitical and strategic significance of the 
Indian Ocean Region, the Committee note that India has maintained 
diplomatic relationship with all the Indian Ocean littoral states except 
Comoros, Somalia and Yemen. India has also fostered strong bilateral 
partnerships with littoral states in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) to 
enhance regional security, economic cooperation, and strategic 
influence. India’s relationship with countries in the IOR rests on the core 
pillars of developmental assistance, capacity building programmes, 
Humanitarian Assistance Disaster Relief (HADR) support and defence 
and maritime security cooperation.  
The Committee recommend that India should frame a 
comprehensive and dynamic strategic engagement plan for all 35 littoral 
states of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), grounded in shared common 
interests. This strategy should be flexible and tailored to the specific 
needs, priorities, and challenges of each country or sub-region, 
recognizing the diverse geopolitical, economic, and cultural landscapes 
across the IOR. With island nations like the Maldives and Seychelles, 
India should focus on enhancing maritime security, capacity building, 
and climate resilience, while also offering infrastructure development 
assistance. For South Asian partners like Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, the 
emphasis should be on strengthening defence cooperation, countering 
extremism, and promoting trade and investment ties. In Eastern Africa, 
especially in the Horn of Africa, India should prioritize anti-piracy 
measures, counter-terrorism initiatives, and maritime security 
cooperation. Furthermore, India's relationship with Australia should 
focus on deepening joint naval exercises, intelligence sharing, and 
addressing shared maritime challenges. By crafting this sub-region and 
country-specific approach, India should seek to enhance its strategic 
influence, foster trust, and contribute to a stable, secure, and prosperous 

Page | 97 
 
Indian Ocean region, while securing its own national interests in the 
process. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
4. Need for addressing the ambiguities in SAGAR and MAHASAGAR 
Approaches in India’s Indian Ocean Strategy 
The Committee note that India’s strategy for the Indian Ocean 
Region (IOR) is anchored in two complementary frameworks: SAGAR 
(Security and Growth for All) and MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic 
Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions). Introduced in 
2015, the SAGAR vision is primarily focused on safeguarding India’s 
interests in the IOR, with an emphasis on combating terrorism, piracy, 
trafficking, and other illicit activities. In contrast, MAHASAGAR pursues 
a broader agenda encompassing mutual security, economic growth, and 
sustainable development, extending India’s engagement beyond the IOR 
to the entire Global South, including Africa. At present, however, there 
appears to be considerable overlap between the objectives of SAGAR and 
MAHASAGAR, which could lead to confusion regarding their distinct and 
collective goals. In the Committee’s view, a clear and unified vision will 
provide further strategic coherence and effectiveness to these 
initiatives. 
Considering the region's vital role in securing trade routes, energy 
flows, and regional stability, the Committee are satisfied to see India’s 
heightened focus on the IOR. Nevertheless, the Committee observe that 
India’s approach to the region currently seems fragmented, with various 
initiatives spread across different policy frameworks. To ensure greater 
alignment, precision of objectives, and a more coherent strategy, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
undertake a comprehensive review of both these frameworks and inform 
the Committee about the outcome of its assessment within three 
months. 

Page | 98 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
5. Integrating India’s Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific Strategies  
The Committee observe that India’s approach to the Indian Ocean 
Region (IOR) and the Indo-Pacific is intricately interconnected, as 
articulated in the Ministry’s testimony. Both regions are confronted with 
shared challenges, particularly in maritime security, and necessitate 
cooperative responses to ensure peace, stability, and sustained growth. 
The Committee note India’s recognition of the Indian Ocean and Indo-
Pacific as a contiguous strategic space, where security and prosperity in 
one region directly influence the other. 
However, while India’s Indo-Pacific Policy, as articulated in Prime 
Minister Modi’s keynote address at the Shangri-La Dialogue in 2018, 
offers a broad framework for engagement, the Committee believe that 
there is a pressing need for a more integrated and coherent strategy that 
consolidates India’s Indian Ocean Policy with its broader Indo-Pacific 
approach. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should develop a cohesive strategic framework that 
seamlessly aligns India’s Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific policies into a 
unified regional strategy. In the face of increasing Chinese influence and 
presence in both the Indian Ocean and the Indo-Pacific, the Committee 
also emphasize that India’s strategy should not only focus on addressing 
shared threats but also act as a balancing force to counteract 
destabilizing actions. Multilateral platforms such as the Quad, IORA, and 
ASEAN should also be leveraged for fostering collaborative security and 
development initiatives. 
(Recommendation No 5) 
6. Establishment of an Inter-Ministerial Task Force  
The Committee has observed that, despite the strategic 
importance of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) for India’s national 
security, economic growth, and geopolitical interests, there remains an 

Page | 99 
 
absence of a dedicated inter-ministerial mechanism to effectively 
coordinate and streamline the various facets of India’s Indian Ocean 
Strategy. Given the multifaceted nature of the strategy, which 
encompasses defence, trade, maritime security, diplomacy, 
environmental sustainability, and development assistance, the 
Committee strongly recommend the creation of a comprehensive Inter-
Ministerial Task Force, involving key ministries, such as External 
Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Commerce, Environment, Shipping, 
Finance, Home Affairs, among others. The Committee believe that the 
establishment of such a task force is imperative for addressing the 
existing gaps in coordination between Ministries and agencies, ensuring   
the effective allocation and utilization of resources, and facilitating the 
rapid and efficient execution of India’s strategic priorities in the Indian 
Ocean. 
(Recommendation No 6) 
 
7. Tackling Environmental and Economic Challenges through 
Regional Cooperation 
The Indian Ocean is not just a vital geopolitical space but also an 
ecologically significant and economically prosperous region. The region's 
abundant marine resources, including its extensive Exclusive Economic 
Zones (EEZs), present tremendous opportunities for collaboration on the 
Blue Economy, which encompasses sustainable fisheries, marine 
biodiversity conservation, renewable ocean energy, and eco-tourism. 
India’s leadership in promoting these areas can contribute to the 
sustainable development of the region while addressing pressing 
environmental concerns such as climate change, marine pollution, and 
the degradation of marine ecosystems.  
In view of the ecological richness and fragility of the Indian Ocean, 
the Committee underscore the importance of integrating environmental 
sustainability into India’s regional strategy. India’s large coastline and 

Page | 100 
 
maritime population make this imperative even more urgent. To 
effectively address these environmental and economic challenges, the 
Committee recommend that MEA should align India’s Indian Ocean 
policy with global and regional environmental priorities and deepen its 
efforts to promote regional cooperation on marine conservation, 
renewable energy, and sustainable fisheries. Moreover, the Committee 
stress that it is now time for India to champion the concept of a Green 
MAHASAGAR, which would focus on collaborative initiatives with littoral 
states for marine protection, disaster response, and climate adaptation. 
As part of the Green MAHASAGAR framework, India should promote and 
coordinate efforts for the protection of marine ecosystems, the 
reduction of marine pollution, and the adoption of climate-resilient 
practices across the Indian Ocean Region. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
8. India's Maritime Security Architecture in IOR 
The Indian Ocean is a critical component of India’s maritime 
security, strategically connecting South Asia, Africa, and the Middle 
East. With a coastline extending over 11,098 km and an Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) spanning approximately 2.3-2.4 million square 
kilometers, India exercises considerable influence over regional 
maritime dynamics. Its maritime domain, encompassing nine coastal 
states and four island territories, is a vast and resource-rich area that 
supports critical economic activities such as fishing, ocean mining, and 
offshore drilling for oil and gas. This geographic advantage, coupled with 
deep civilizational and cultural ties with neighboring countries, places 
India in a central role in shaping regional maritime stability. As India's 
strategic, economic, and security interests in the IOR grow, its maritime 
security is increasingly intertwined with the broader stability of the 
region. While noting that the IOR will remain a vital conduit for security, 
energy and connectivity, it will be also a space for intense geo-political 
contestations and competitions.  

Page | 101 
 
In view of the traditional non-traditional threats in IOR, the 
Committee desire that India should keep a close watch and coordinate 
with our friendly foreign countries to ensure that our interests are fully 
protected. The Committee further recommend that India should adopt a 
comprehensive approach and framework that combines technological 
innovation, strengthened regional cooperation, military readiness, and 
robust diplomatic engagement. By enhancing its maritime operational 
capabilities and deepening strategic relationships with regional partners, 
India should safeguard its national interests while contributing to the 
long-term security and stability of the Indian Ocean Region. The 
Committee further suggest that the Government should give careful 
consideration to the establishment of adequate ship repair and 
maintenance facilities in the island countries.  
(Recommendation No. 8) 
9. Countering Chinese Expansion and Influence in the Indian Ocean 
Region (IOR) 
The Committee express concern regarding the escalating Chinese 
presence and its increasing influence in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), 
a development which poses substantial risks to India's national security 
and broader strategic interests. The Committee recognizes that China's 
enhanced naval capabilities, exemplified by the growing size of its fleet, 
including over 15 units commissioned annually, has now surpassed the 
United States Navy, making it the world’s largest naval force. The 
induction of advanced warships, including multiple Carrier Battle Groups 
and an additional aircraft carrier, along with the regular deployment of 
Chinese submarines and naval vessels, demonstrates a clear and growing 
strategic interest by China in consolidating its position in the IOR. 
The strategic positioning of Chinese military and commercial 
infrastructure across key maritime chokepoints, particularly under the 
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and the “String of Pearls” strategy, is 
gradually reconfiguring the region’s geopolitical dynamics in favor of 

Page | 102 
 
Chinese interests. Of equal concern is the strengthening of the China-
Pakistan naval nexus, which not only facilitates joint military exercises 
but also advances Pakistan’s naval modernization. This cooperation 
complicates the security situation further, particularly in the context of 
the increasing Chinese influence over Pakistan’s naval assets, which 
could destabilize the balance of power in the region. 
The Committee believe that these developments must be 
addressed with urgency, as they have the potential to shift the balance 
of power in the region, challenging India’s strategic autonomy and 
undermining its influence over key maritime chokepoints. In the 
considered view of the Committee, India must remain proactive in 
countering the combined naval threat from China and Pakistan by 
bolstering its own deterrence capabilities and conducting joint exercises 
with partner countries to maintain strategic balance. The Committee 
urge the Government to enhance Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) 
through further integration of advanced technologies, such as satellite-
based surveillance systems and Artificial Intelligence, to monitor 
Chinese activities more effectively. This should be complemented by a 
significant upgradation in naval capabilities, including the induction of 
advanced anti-submarine warfare (ASW) vessels, surveillance aircrafts, 
and nuclear-powered submarines, ensuring India’s readiness to respond 
to any emerging threat. India should also deepen its strategic alliances 
with regional powers and global partners, particularly through forums 
such as the Quad, to ensure collective security and strengthen 
deterrence. Building closer ties with IOR littoral states through defense 
cooperation, capacity-building initiatives, and joint maritime operations 
will be crucial in countering Chinese influence. 
(Recommendation No.9)  
 
10. Combating Piracy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
The Committee acknowledge the persistent and evolving challenge 
of piracy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), particularly in areas like the 

Page | 103 
 
Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, where the resurgence of piracy, 
exacerbated by regional instability and conflicts such as the Houthi 
attacks, has led to significant disruptions in global shipping routes. The 
Committee stress the critical need for sustained bilateral and 
multilateral cooperation to effectively combat piracy and secure 
maritime trade routes. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that India should continue to play a proactive role in regional 
frameworks such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) and the 
Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS), fostering collaborative efforts to 
enhance joint patrolling, intelligence-sharing, and conducting regular 
maritime security exercises with regional and international partners. 
India should also leverage cutting-edge technologies, including Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), machine learning, and big data analytics to enhance 
real-time surveillance and threat detection. 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
11. Combating Narcotics Trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
The Committee note with concern the the rising threat of narcotics 
trafficking in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), which is increasingly 
intertwined with issues such as terrorism, organized crime, and regional 
instability. The growing volume of illicit drugs transiting through this 
strategic maritime corridor is fuelling parallel economies that finance 
terrorism and exacerbate security challenges. While the Indian Navy and 
Indian Coast Guard (ICG) have conducted several successful Anti-
Narcotics Operations (ANO), resulting in significant narcotics seizures, 
the Committee believes that current efforts are insufficient to effectively 
address the expanding scale of trafficking. The Committee emphasizes 
that this menace poses significant domestic security challenges, 
particularly to India’s coastal states, which are increasingly vulnerable 
due to their proximity to critical maritime routes. The presence of 
organized criminal networks in these areas not only endangers the local 
populations but also threatens broader national security. 

Page | 104 
 
In view of these challenges, the Committee recommend a 
comprehensive strengthening of India’s coastal surveillance 
infrastructure, significantly enhancing human, financial and 
technological resources dedicated to counter-narcotics operations. The 
Committee also highlight the critical importance of enhancing state 
capacity and infrastructure along with regional and international 
cooperation through improved intelligence-sharing platforms and more 
robust legal frameworks. Additionally, given, the vital role of local 
communities in preventing narcotics smuggling, the Committee urge the 
expansion of the Indian Coast Guard's Community Interaction Programs 
(CIPs), and call for enhanced deployment of Coast Guards vessels in 
affected coastal states, particularly in the West Coast. 
(Recommendation No.11)  
 
12. India’s Maritime Strategy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
The Committee recognize the evolving maritime security 
landscape in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), particularly in the context 
of rapid geopolitical realignments and growing security challenges, 
including piracy, narcotics trafficking, and the strategic influence of 
regional and global powers. The Committee commend the efforts of the 
Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard (ICG), and various law enforcement 
agencies in enhancing coastal security, as evidenced by the successful 
conduct of the biennial Exercise Sea Vigil, the establishment of Joint 
Operation Centres (JOCs), and the effective coordination through the 
National Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence Network 
(NC31). 
While emphasizing the urgent need to elevate India’s maritime 
strategy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) as a foreign policy priority, 
the Committee believe that a far more comprehensive approach is 
required. Despite commendable progress in maritime security efforts, 
the Committee feel that India’s existing strategy requires additional 
depth, clarity, and sustained resources to effectively assert its influence 

Page | 105 
 
and maintain deterrence in the IOR. To address this gap, the Committee 
recommend that India should prioritize the modernization of its naval 
capabilities, with a clear commitment to long-term, robust funding for 
its maritime security initiatives. Additionally, the Committee stress the 
importance of improving coordination and integration of maritime 
security operations across national and regional agencies, ensuring a 
unified and comprehensive approach to safeguarding India’s interests in 
the region. 
(Recommendation No.12)  
 
 
13. Role of the Indian Navy in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
The Committee acknowledge the critical and expanding role of the 
Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard in safeguarding India’s national 
maritime interests and securing the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). The 
Indian Navy’s four key roles – military, constabulary, benign and 
diplomatic- serve as the cornerstone of India’s maritime security 
strategy. These roles are becoming increasingly crucial as piracy, 
maritime terrorism, and illegal activities in the Indian Ocean Region 
(IOR) pose growing threats to India’s Sea Lines of Communication 
(SLOCs) and trade routes. The ICG’s expanding mandate to secure India’s 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and provide coastal security is equally 
critical in ensuring the country’s maritime interests. 
While the Indian Navy and Coast Guard have demonstrated 
significant operational effectiveness, there are numerous challenges that 
need urgent attention to ensure India’s naval forces remain a modern, 
capable deterrent force. These challenges primarily concern fleet 
readiness, personnel training, and logistical support, which must be 
addressed to cope with emerging threats in the maritime domain. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should invest in 
the modernization of capabilities of the Indian Navy and Coast Guard by 
prioritizing the development and induction of indigenous platforms 

Page | 106 
 
through the Aatmanirbhar Bharat initiative. The Committee recommend 
that the Government should prioritize enhancing the Navy’s fleet with 
advanced platforms, such as next-generation submarines, destroyers, 
and carrier-based fighters, to improve its deterrence and operational 
readiness. Additionally, the ICG must be further empowered with modern 
assets, including specialized patrol vessels and surveillance aircraft, to 
enhance its ability to monitor and secure India’s vast maritime 
boundaries.  
(Recommendation No.13)  
 
14. Provisioning of Adequate Financial support to Maritime Forces 
The Committee underscore the need for adequate and sustained 
financial allocations to support the modernization efforts of both the 
Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard. As the strategic importance of 
India's maritime security grows and emerging threats in the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR) become more pronounced, it is crucial that the 
government's financial commitment aligns with the evolving demands of 
maritime defense. To effectively counter these threats, the Committee 
advocate increased funding to procure advanced technologies and to 
expand naval modernization programmes, including the acquisition of 
next-generation platforms, submarines, and surveillance systems. 
Without sufficient budgetary provisions, India’s maritime forces may be 
unable to meet the future security challenges that lie ahead. 
(Recommendation No.14) 
  
15. Enhancing Coordination Among Maritime Agencies 
The Committee emphasize the need for enhanced coordination 
among India's maritime forces and agencies, including the Indian Navy, 
Coast Guard, Ministries of External Affairs, Defence, and Home Affairs, 
as well as with external partners in the international maritime 
community. Joint operations, intelligence-sharing, and multilateral 

Page | 107 
 
exercises with nations such as the United States, Japan, and Australia 
should be integrated more effectively into India’s security framework.  
The Committee suggest that India should prioritize formalizing and 
expanding such collaborations, particularly in the areas of Maritime 
Domain Awareness (MDA) and interoperability. Furthermore, 
streamlined communication protocols both within national agencies and 
with international partners are crucial to ensure that India maintains a 
proactive and responsive maritime security posture. 
(Recommendation No.15) 
  
16. Maritime Infrastructure and Enhancing Connectivity through 
Sagarmala 2.0 
The Committee note that Sagarmala is the flagship initiative of the 
Government of India that aims to boost India’s maritime sector by 
enhancing port connectivity, developing inland waterways, and 
promoting industrial growth. While significant progress has been made 
under Sagarmala, the Government has launched Sagarmala 2.0 to further 
enhance India's maritime competitiveness. However, the Committee 
note that the Ministry of External Affairs has not sufficiently articulated 
the specific objectives and distinguishing features of Sagarmala 2.0 in 
both oral and written submissions. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should explicitly outline Sagarmala 2.0's objectives, placing 
greater emphasis on advancing smart port infrastructure, integrating 
digital technologies, and building multimodal transport networks that go 
beyond traditional port development. It is crucial to define specific 
metrics and performance indicators that distinguish Sagarmala 2.0 from 
its predecessor, enabling more accurate and effective assessment of its 
impact.  
(Recommendation No.16)  
 
 

Page | 108 
 
17. Enhancing Maritime Domain Awareness and Regional Cooperation 
The Committee note that India has made significant strides in 
improving Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) in the Indian Ocean 
Region (IOR) through initiatives such as the Information Fusion Centre 
- Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR), as well as bilateral cooperation with 
neighbouring countries like Mauritius, Seychelles, and Sri Lanka. 
Additionally, the Indo-Pacific Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) 
initiative, launched in 2022, has provided a crucial technological 
framework to address emerging maritime security challenges. Despite 
these positive developments, the Committee believe that there could be 
greater collaboration of maritime surveillance systems and broader 
collaboration among regional states and international partners. 
The Committee recommend that India should further enhance its 
leadership role in maritime security cooperation by formalizing data-
sharing agreements and promoting joint surveillance initiatives with 
regional partners. India should also consider expanding its role in 
regional maritime security dialogues, such as the Quad Maritime 
Security Working Group (QMSWG) and Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA), to facilitate multilateral responses to maritime challenges.  
(Recommendation No.17)  
 
18. Enhancing Bilateral and Multilateral Diplomacy 
The Committee acknowledge India’s active participation and 
leadership in various multilateral institutions and regional groupings in 
the Indian Ocean Region such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA), Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI), the Bay of Bengal Initiative 
for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), the 
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad)), Mekong - Ganga Cooperation 
(MGC) and others. However, despite this broad engagement, the 
Committee observe that India's approach remains fragmented, lacking 
the strategic coherence necessary to fully leverage these platforms to 
advance its geopolitical, economic and strategic interests. 

Page | 109 
 
The Committee recommend strengthening of bilateral 
arrangements to protect the interests of fishermen who may 
inadvertently cross international maritime boundaries and encounter 
law enforcement interception by neighbouring countries. The 
Government should establish bilateral mechanisms to safeguard the 
interests of the fishermen and ensure their speedy release as well as of 
their boats and equipments. 
  The Committee, further recommend that the Government should 
adopt a more coherent, outcome-driven, and strategically aligned 
approach to harmonize India’s initiatives in the IOR. This should be 
accompanied by enhanced inter-ministerial coordination, increased 
financial and technical commitments, promotion of synergy among 
overlapping forums, and periodic evaluation of outcomes. In addition, 
there is an urgent need for establishment of a centralized coordinating 
mechanism within the Ministry of External Affairs. 
(Recommendation No.18)  
 
19.  Revitalizing Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA)  
The Committee note that the Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA), established in 1987 with its Secretariat in Mauritius, was created 
to revive the historic pan-Indian Ocean connectivity among countries. 
Over the years, IORA's membership has expanded to 23 Member States 
and 12 Dialogue Partners. The primary sources of funding for IORA 
include an annual membership fee of USD 24,000 from Member States 
and voluntary contributions from both Member States and Dialogue 
Partners to the IORA Special Fund, with India being the largest 
contributor. During the oral evidence, the Ministry emphasized that 
India places the highest priority on IORA and is focused on 
strengthening the institutional, financial, and legal frameworks of the 
organization to unlock its true potential. Efforts are being made to 
consolidate and streamline initiatives to promote cooperation in IORA’s 
six priority areas and two cross-cutting themes. 

Page | 110 
 
The Committee acknowledge IORA's promise as a transformative 
platform for regional economic growth, sustainable development, and 
maritime cooperation. However, despite India’s substantial 
contributions and a vast membership, the organization’s full potential 
remains untapped. With its diverse membership, including 23 Member 
States, 12 Dialogue Partners, and an expanding number of stakeholders, 
IORA is well-positioned to act as a catalyst for peace, development, and 
shared prosperity in the Indian Ocean region. Recognizing the need for 
a strategic overhaul, the Committee strongly recommend that, in light 
of India’s forthcoming Chairship of IORA from 2025-2027, India should 
assume a leading role in revitalizing the organization. This includes 
prioritizing the strengthening of IORA’s institutional framework and 
governance. Specifically, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should streamline the Secretariat’s operations, enhance coordination 
among Member States, and explore innovative funding mechanisms to 
enable more effective implementation of projects. 
(Recommendation No.19)  
 
20.  Expanding IORA’s Priorities to Address emerging regional 
challenges 
 Considering that the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) has 
emerged as a leading platform for regional cooperation, spanning key 
sectors such as trade, maritime safety, disaster risk management, 
fisheries, tourism, and the emerging blue economy, the Committee 
observe that the organization undertakes cooperation activities under 
six priority areas- science and technology, disaster risk management, 
maritime safety, trade and investment facilitation, fisheries 
management, and tourism - as well as two cross-cutting issues: the blue 
economy and women’s economic empowerment. 
The Committee is of the opinion that, while these areas remain 
critical, there is an urgent need to broaden the scope of IORA’s priorities 
to encompass emerging challenges and opportunities. The Committee 

Page | 111 
 
suggest that additional priority areas, such as cyber-security, regional 
health cooperation, and disaster resilience, which are becoming 
increasingly significant in the context of global challenges facing the 
Indian Ocean region should be included. To advance this goal, the 
Committee urge the Government to strengthen collaborative efforts 
between IORA’s functional bodies, Dialogue Partners, and other regional 
organizations. By fostering closer partnerships and aligning priorities 
with the evolving needs of the region, IORA can ensure that its actions 
remain relevant and effective in addressing contemporary and future 
challenges. 
(Recommendation No.20)  
 
21.  Strengthening collaborative efforts under the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ 
Initiative (IPOI) 
 The Committee note that the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI), 
launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2019, is a critical platform 
aimed at managing, conserving, and securing the maritime domain in 
the Indo-Pacific region. The initiative spans seven pillars: Maritime 
Security, Maritime Ecology, Maritime Resources, Capacity Building and 
Resource Sharing, Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM), 
Science, Technology and Academic Cooperation, and Trade Connectivity 
and Maritime Transport. India has taken the lead on key pillars, 
including Maritime Security and DRRM, while collaborating with like-
minded nations such as the United Kingdom, Australia, France, 
Indonesia and Japan to co-lead other pillars. This growing network of 
cooperation is reflective of a shared commitment among countries to 
address pressing maritime challenges through practical, project-based 
collaboration. 
While noticing significant progress made under the Indo-Pacific 
Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI), the Committee consider the current 
membership of just 15 countries as limiting its potential impact. The 

Page | 112 
 
Committee believe that expanding membership to include more 
countries, especially those with significant maritime stakes, would be 
useful for enhancing the effectiveness and inclusivity of IPOI. The 
Committee also recommend that India should play a more active role in 
strengthening and expanding collaboration within each of the seven 
pillars. In particular, the Committee highlight the need for greater focus 
on emerging challenges such as cybersecurity in the maritime domain, 
regional health cooperation, and disaster resilience, which should be 
integrated into IPOI’s framework. 
(Recommendation No.21)  
 
22. Enhancing resource mobilization and capacity building under the 
Indo-Pacific Oceans’ Initiative (IPOI) 
The Committee recognize the growing importance of resource 
mobilization for the long-term success of the Indo-Pacific Oceans’ 
Initiative (IPOI). In this regard, the Committee recommend that India 
should explore innovative funding mechanisms, including the 
establishment of a dedicated IPOI Trust Fund, to support sustainable 
projects and enhance resource mobilization. In the considered view of 
the Committee, capacity building is a key area where India’s Indian 
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme can be further 
leveraged to provide specialized training, particularly in sectors such as 
maritime security, disaster management, and blue economy. The 
Committee also urge the Government to continue its diplomatic efforts 
to raise awareness about IPOI and its goals, using existing regional 
frameworks such as Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), 
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), and the East Asia Summit. 
(Recommendation No.22)  
 
 
 

Page | 113 
 
23.  Fostering Regional Cooperation through BIMSTEC 
 The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) is a grouping of seven Member States 
lying in the littoral and adjacent areas of the Bay of Bengal: Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand. BIMSTEC 
represents a cornerstone of India’s engagement with its neighbors in the 
Indian Ocean region as a convergence of its ‘Neighbourhood First’ 
outlook, the ‘Act East Policy’ and the ‘SAGAR’ vision. The Committee 
note that BIMSTEC has been playing a crucial role in improving our 
cooperation with the other six member states on a large spectrum of 
issues including security, trade facilitation, people-to-people contact, 
connectivity, institutional building, and collaboration in health, space, 
and digital infrastructure. India’s leadership in key areas such as 
maritime security, disaster management, and energy cooperation, as 
well as its initiatives like the BIMSTEC Ports Conclave, the BIMSTEC 
Centre for Weather and Climate, and disaster management exercises, 
positions the country at the forefront of regional integration. 
  The Committee recommend that India should continue to leverage 
BIMSTEC as a strategic tool in its Indian Ocean policy. Given the 
evolving geopolitical dynamics of the Indian Ocean Region, BIMSTEC 
must continue to be a critical platform for India’s regional security, 
economic growth, and sustainable development. India, as the lead 
country in BIMSTEC’s Security Pillar, should focus on strengthening 
maritime cooperation by implementing Multi-Lateral Engagement at Sea 
(MLEAs) guidelines and enhancing maritime domain awareness. India’s 
successful initiatives, such as hosting the BIMSTEC Ports Conclave and 
supporting the BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate (BCWC), should 
be further expanded to strengthen regional connectivity and address 
emerging climate challenges.  
(Recommendation No.23) 
 

Page | 114 
 
24.  Flexible Security Framework in the Quad to enhance regional 
stability 
 The Committee note that Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad), 
comprising India, the United States, Japan, and Australia, has evolved 
from its initial focus on disaster response into a vital strategic 
partnership aimed at promoting a free, open, and inclusive Indo-Pacific, 
grounded in principles of international law and respect for sovereignty. 
India’s vision for the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), articulated through the 
principles of SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the Region) and the 
Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI), aligns with the Quad’s growing 
emphasis on enhancing maritime security. The Committee note that 
Quad’s naval cooperation is designed to enhance interoperability and 
interchangeability, share intelligence, and conduct joint patrols to 
ensure the safety of sea lanes and deter potential traditional and non-
traditional threats.  As a net security provider in the region, India’s role 
is critical in addressing transnational threats such as illegal, unreported, 
and unregulated (IUU) fishing, piracy, and other maritime crimes. In this 
context, the Committee feel that Quad presents a valuable opportunity 
for India to bolster its maritime strategy and strengthen its strategic 
footprint in the IOR. 
The Committee understand India’s cautious approach towards a 
security-centric Quad due to its policy of multi-alignment. However, 
given the complex geopolitical dynamics in the Indo-Pacific, the 
Committee recommend that a more flexible security dimension within 
the Quad framework may be explored by including initiatives such as 
conducting joint maritime exercises in the Indian Ocean, aimed at 
improving coordination, enhancing maritime domain awareness (MDA), 
and better preparedness for emerging security challenges. Proactive 
steps taken to deepen the Quad's security cooperation, without 
compromising its multi-alignment approach, focused on non-
confrontational exercises and capacity-building initiatives, could 

Page | 115 
 
significantly enhance regional stability and strengthen India’s role as a 
responsible maritime power in the IOR. 
(Recommendation No.24)  
 
25.  Aligning Quad Cooperation with India’s Vision for Sustainable 
Infrastructure and Connectivity in the Indian Ocean Region 
India’s approach to the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) is firmly rooted 
in the principles of sustainable and transparent development. In this 
context, the Committee are of the considered view that Quad’s 
cooperation with India’s Indian Ocean vision, particularly through the 
Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative (IPOI), holds significant potential for 
advancing regional infrastructure and connectivity while ensuring long-
term sustainability. The Committee strongly recommend that India 
should work closely with its Quad partners to ensure that infrastructure 
projects in the region align with sustainable development goals and 
fosters economic growth without compromising the region’s financial 
stability or sovereignty. 
(Recommendation No.25)  
 
26.  IFC-IOR and  Quad’s Maritime Technologies  
For strengthening regional security, the Committee suggest that 
the Government may consider bolstering information sharing between 
the Information Fusion Center–Indian Ocean Region (IFC-IOR) and 
Quad’s advanced maritime technologies to significantly enhance the 
region's ability to respond to emerging security threats, such as illegal, 
unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing, piracy, and other 
transnational maritime crimes. 
(Recommendation No.26)  
 

Page | 116 
 
27. Advancing the Quad Ports of the Future Partnership and 
Infrastructure Development in the Indo-Pacific 
The Committee note that the Quad Ports of the Future Partnership 
was announced in 2024 to coordinate, exchange information & best 
practices, and mobilize government & private sector investments in 
quality port infrastructure across the Indo-Pacific region. Further, India 
will host a Quad Regional Ports and Transportation Conference, in 
Mumbai this year with a view to increasing knowledge, facilitating 
dialogue, and exchanging experiences on advanced ports and logistics 
practices. This will complement the work Quad partners have done to 
boost infrastructure expertise across the Indo-Pacific region through the 
Quad Infrastructure Fellowships. Keeping this in view, the Committee 
recommend that India should take a proactive leadership role in 
advancing the Ports of the Future Partnership initiated by the Quad for 
modernizing ports, improving trade infrastructure, and promoting 
environmentally responsible practices across the Indo-Pacific region.  
(Recommendation No.27)  
 
28.  Scaling up MAITRI Initiative for enhanced maritime cooperation 
in Maritime Domain Awareness 
  The Committee understand that the Indo-Pacific Partnership for 
Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA) initiative  announced in 2022 aims 
to provide near-real-time, integrated, and cost-effective maritime 
domain data to maritime agencies in the region; support regional 
capacity in combating a wide range of illicit maritime activities, 
including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and respond to 
climate-related and humanitarian events, covering three major sub-
regions in the Indo-Pacific maritime space- the Pacific Islands, Southeast 
Asia and the Indian Ocean Region. The Committee are happy to note 
further that the India-led initiative MAITRI (Maritime Training Institute 
- containerized and mobile training infrastructure for easy deployment 

Page | 117 
 
to multiple locations of interest) enables partner countries in the Indo 
Pacific region to maximize tools provided through IPMDA and other Quad 
partner initiatives, to monitor and secure their waters, enforce their  
laws, and deter unlawful behavior. It is learned that India will host the 
inaugural MAITRI workshop in 2025 which aims to assess the capability 
gaps in the region and enhance the maritime capabilities in consultation 
with regional partners. Given Quad's commitment to regional security 
and capacity building, particularly in the maritime domain, the 
Committee recommend that initiatives like the Maritime Training 
Institute (MAITRI) should be expanded to ensure that regional partners 
are equipped with the necessary tools, knowledge, and technologies to 
effectively monitor and secure their maritime domains.  
(Recommendation No.28)  
 
29.  Leveraging India’s Chairmanship of IONS for enhanced maritime 
cooperation  
The Committee are aware that the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium 
(IONS), established in 2008 and comprises of 25 states and 9 observer 
states aims to strengthen maritime security and promote collaborative 
efforts among Navies of the littoral states of the Indian Ocean Region to 
address common challenges in the Indian Ocean Region. The Ministry 
has informed that IONS has established 3 working groups to focus on key 
areas, namely Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), 
Maritime Security and Information Sharing & Interoperability. The 
Committee stress the need for expanding regional cooperation on 
emerging non-traditional security challenges such as Illegal, Unreported, 
and Unregulated (IUU) fishing and climate change. Towards achieving 
this end, the Committee urge India to make efforts in fostering a more 
collaborative environment which includes sharing of information not 
only between governments but also between industry and government.  
While appreciating the pivotal role played by India as a founding member 
and leader of the Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) in shaping the 

Page | 118 
 
regional maritime security landscape, the Committee are hopeful that 
after assumption of the Chairmanship of IONS for the 2025-27 India 
would leverage this opportunity to further enhance regional maritime 
security, cooperation, and humanitarian assistance within the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR). By fostering stronger engagement with IONS 
observer nations and promoting a collective maritime governance 
framework, India should ensure that IONS transitions into an active, 
impactful organization that contributes meaningfully to peace, stability, 
and maritime security in the Indian Ocean Region. To strengthen 
regional maritime security, the Committee recommend that India should 
intensify efforts to enhance interoperability among IONS member navies 
through regular joint exercises and the development of common 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).  
(Recommendation No.29)  
 
30. Institutionalizing Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief 
(HADR) within IONS framework 
The Committee commend India’s demonstrated leadership in 
providing humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR) during 
natural disasters, such as Cyclone Idai in Mozambique, and in responding 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. As part of India’s leadership in IONS, the 
Committee recommend that India should further institutionalize these 
efforts within the IONS framework by coordinating joint HADR exercises 
and establishing standard protocols for rapid disaster response. India 
should work with IONS member states to develop common frameworks 
for disaster response, ensuring a swift, coordinated, and effective 
regional approach to humanitarian crises. By strengthening IONS’ 
capabilities in HADR, India can reinforce its commitment to regional 
stability, while also demonstrating the organization’s practical and 
collaborative potential in addressing humanitarian emergencies. 
(Recommendation No.30)  

Page | 119 
 
 
31.  Strengthening cultural diplomacy in the Indian Ocean Region 
Recognizing the profound historical, religious, trade, and cultural 
ties between India and the countries of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), 
the Committee acknowledge the significant progress made in 
strengthening these relations through various initiatives, including the 
establishment of Cultural Centers, sponsoring visits of performing art 
groups, organizing conferences, and promoting Indian languages and 
heritage. Given the strategic importance of cultural diplomacy in 
furthering India’s ties with IOR countries, the Committee strongly urge 
that the Indian Missions and Cultural Centers be further reinforced and 
adequately resourced. These institutions serve not only as platforms for 
showcasing India’s diverse cultural heritage but also as vital spaces 
where the diaspora communities can reconnect with their roots and 
identity. To this end, the Committee urge increased allocation of funds 
to support a broad spectrum of cultural activities such as events, art 
exhibitions, and festivals that showcase India’s rich cultural diversity. 
Such initiatives will further elevate India’s cultural profile, stimulate 
greater Diaspora engagement and foster a deeper cultural bond between 
India and the region. 
(Recommendation No.31)  
 
32.  Proactive Engagement with the Indian Diaspora to support India’s 
IOR Strategy 
The Committee acknowledge the significant presence of the Indian 
diaspora in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), which constitutes 53% of the 
total Indian overseas population, and acknowledge their potential to 
serve as a meaningful voice in fostering stronger bilateral ties.  The 
Committee note that the Ministry has formulated a multifaceted 
Diaspora engagement policy framework characterized under the rubric 
of  4Cs - Care, Connect, Celebrate, and Contribute. It is also observed 

Page | 120 
 
that initiatives such as Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) and its regional 
editions (RPBD), Know India Programme (KIP), the Promotion of Cultural 
Ties with Diaspora (PCTD), Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children 
(SPDC), etc. play a vital role in strengthening cultural identity, 
educational ties, and India’s soft power globally.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that current Diaspora engagement efforts, though 
commendable, can be further imbued with an appreciation of the needs 
of the Diaspora and the importance of their voices in strengthening 
bilateral relations between their countries and India. By adopting a 
sharper strategic focus and nurturing sustained two-way 
communication, the Diaspora can play a significant role as a positive 
contributor to India’s regional and global efforts and thereby strengthen 
India’s soft power and fostering greater goodwill in the Indian Ocean 
Region. 
(Recommendation No.32)  
 
 
 
New Delhi                Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                                     
11 August, 2025                                                           Chairperson,                                   
20 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)            Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 121 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 18 DECEMER, 2024 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 18 December, 2024 from 1600 hrs. 
to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
     Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
4. Shri Arun Govil 
5. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6. Shri Navaskani K. 
7. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
8. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
9. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
10. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
11. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
12. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
    Rajya Sabha 
13. Dr. John Brittas 
14. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
15. Dr. K. Laxman 
16. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
17. Shri A. D. Singh 
18. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
19. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
20. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 

Page | 122 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
S No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1.  Shri Jaideep Mazumdar Secretary (East) 
2.  Shri Puneet Agrawal Additional Secretary (IOR) 
3.  Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parliament & 
Coordination) 
4.  Shri Balasubramanian Shyam Joint Secretary (BM) 
5.  Smt. Paramita Tripathi Joint Secretary (Oceania) 
6.  Shri Siddhartha Nath Joint Secretary (Indo-Pacific) 
7.  Ms. Vishakha Yaduvanshi Director (Indo-Pacific) 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and 
apprised them of the agenda i.e. briefing on the subject ‘Evaluation of India’s 
Indian Ocean Strategy’, selected for examination and report to Parliament. 
Highlighting some of the important issues to be discussed, he drew the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha pertaining to maintaining the confidentiality of the Proceedings 
and Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested 
the witnesses to introduce themselves before making submissions before the 
Committee.   
3. In his opening statement, Secretary (East) presented an overview of the 
Indian Ocean region, significance of the Indian Ocean for India and the shared 
civilizational and cultural links with the countries in the region. He then 
briefed the Committee on the guiding principles of India’s Indian Ocean policy; 
bilateral strategic partnerships with countries like Mauritius, Maldives, Sri 
Lanka and Seychelles; multilateral strategic partnerships and groupings such 
as the Quad, IPOI, BIMSTEC, IORA, Indian Ocean Commission, Indian Ocean 
Naval Symposium, etc.; maritime security and anti-piracy operations; Joint 
EEZ surveillance exercise; maritime domain awareness; capacity building; 
annual conferences  on issues of maritime security; disaster relief and 
humanitarian assistance; connectivity with countries of the region; 

Page | 123 
 
development partnerships; development of ports and  cultural and diaspora 
links, etc.  
4. Thereafter, Members of the Committee as well as the Chair raised 
various issues which inter alia included the impact of initiatives taken in the 
Indian Ocean region in the pursuit of India’s foreign policy objectives; re-
energizing IORA; impact of China’s growing presence in the Indian Ocean 
region and India’s response;  India’s efforts at countering piracy; progress in 
implementing the SAGAR initiatives; Indian Ocean Region Strategic Review 
Act of 2024 and its bearing on India; encroachment in the IOR  and threats 
from IUU fishing and smuggling of arms and drugs; institutionalizing 
maritime infrastructure  and cooperation; role of  Quad in the IOR; challenges 
in ensuring free, safe and secure Indian Ocean region;  etc.   
5.  The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries of the 
Members. Before the Sitting concluded, hon’ble Chairperson directed the 
principal witness to furnish written replies on the points which could not be 
responded due to paucity of time, to the Secretariat of the Committee at the 
earliest. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

Page | 124 
 
Appendix-II 
MINUTES OF THE  TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 17 JUNE, 2025. 
The Committee sat on Tuesday 17 June, 2025 from 1600 hrs. to 1845 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Arun Govil 
3. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
4. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
10. Shri A. D. Singh 
11. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
12. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
13. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
Secretariat 
1. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
Ministry of External Affairs 
S. Name of the officer Designation 
1. Shri Periasamy Kumaran Secretary East [Leader of Delegation] 
2. Shri Puneet Agrawal Additional Secretary (IOR) 
3. Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
4. Ms. Nabanita Chakrabarti Joint Secretary (IP) 

Page | 125 
 
Ministry of Defence 
S.  Name of the officer Designation 
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Defence Secretary 
2. Vice Admiral Atul Anand Addl. Secretary, DMA 
3. Shri Vishwesh Negi JS (IC/VN) 
4. Shri Manish Tripathi JS (Parliament) 
5. Rear Admiral Vikram Menon JS (Navy) 
6. Vice Admiral Krishna Swaminathan VCNS 
7. Vice Admiral Nirbhay Bapna ACNS (FCI) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of 
the Committee convened to take evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministries of External Affairs and Defence on the subject ‘Evaluation of India’s 
Indian Ocean Strategy’.  A one-minute silence was observed in memory of the 
lives tragically lost in the recent Ahmedabad air crash. In his opening 
remarks, the Chairperson set the context for the discussions and highlighted 
the importance of adhering to Direction (55)1 of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha. 
3. The Defence Secretary provided a comprehensive briefing on the 
maritime security situation in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). He outlined 
India’s broader maritime interests, addressing both traditional and non-
traditional challenges and threats in the IOR. The Secretary also elaborated 
on the role of Indian law enforcement agencies, including the Navy and Indian 
Coast Guard, in ensuring maritime security. This was further supplemented 
by a detailed PowerPoint presentation from a representative of the Indian 
Navy, focusing on the Navy’s role in securing the IOR, joint military exercises, 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) patrolling, coastal security, Exercise Sea 
Vigil, and other related initiatives. 
4.  Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
discussed key issues impacting India’s maritime strategy, including the 
growing Chinese presence in the region, maritime trade, and defence and 

Page | 126 
 
diplomatic cooperation. They also highlighted India’s evolving role as a first 
responder and net security provider in the IOR; Humanitarian Assistance and 
Disaster Relief (HADR); Operation Sadbhav and Operation Brahma; SAGAR 
(Security and Growth for All in the Region) and MAHASAGAR (Mutual and 
Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions) frameworks; 
Sagarmala 2.0, and the Information Fusion Centre-IOR (IFC-IOR) in 
Gurugram. 
5.  The Members and the Chair raised various queries based on the 
testimonies given by the two Ministries. The key issues focussed on security 
implications of increasing Chinese presence in the region; naval 
modernization and capabilities from anti-piracy and checking narcotics 
smuggling to maritime infrastructure and role of regional organizations such 
as Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS), the Quad, and the Indian Ocean 
Rim Association (IORA) in enhancing maritime security.  
6.  The representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Defence 
responded to the queries of the Members. Before the Sitting concluded, 
hon’ble Chairperson directed the principal witnesses to furnish written replies 
on the points which could not be responded due to paucity of time, to the 
Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 127 
 
Appendix-III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 06 AUGUST, 
2025  
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Secretariat 
      1.      Shri. Anjani Kumar                           -         Joint Secretary 
      2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan              -          Director             
      3.      Ms. Rachna Saxena                          -          Deputy Secretary     
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3  Shri Vijay Baghel 
4   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
8  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
9  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
10  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
11  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
12  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
13  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
14  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 Rajya Sabha 
15  Dr. John Brittas 
16  Dr. K. Laxman 
17  Ms. Kavita Patidar 
18  Shri A. D. Singh 
19  Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
20  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

Page | 128 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of 
the Committee.  
3.      The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject 
‘Evaluation of India’s Indian Ocean Strategy’. 
4.      The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, 
for incorporation in the draft Report. After some deliberations, the Committee 
adopted the draft Report with some modifications. 
5.      The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report 
to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 129 
 
ANNEXURE-A 
  35 Littoral States of the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) 
No. Littoral States where India has diplomatic presence 
1 Australia (Canberra) 
High Commission of India, Canberra. 
4 Consulates (Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth, 
Sydney) 
2 Bahrain (Manama) Embassy of India, Manama. 
3 
 
Bangladesh (Dhaka) 
 
High Commission of India, Dhaka. 
4 Assistant High Commissions (Rajshahi, 
Chittagong, Khulna, Sylhet) 
4 Djibouti (Djibouti City) Embassy of India, Djibouti City. 
5 Egypt (Cairo) Embassy of India, Cairo. 
6 Eritrea (Asmara) Embassy of India, Asmara. 
7 Indonesia (Jakarta) Embassy of India, Jakarta. 
2 Consulates (Medan, Bali) 
8 India (New Delhi) Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi 
9 Iran (Tehran) Embassy of India, Tehran. 
2 Consulates (Zahedan, Bandar Abbas) 
10 Iraq (Baghdad) 
Embassy of India, Baghdad. 
Consulate General of India, Erbil (Kurdistan Region 
of Iraq). 
11 Kenya (Nairobi) High Commission of India, Nairobi. 
Assistant High Commission of India, Mombasa. 
12 Kuwait (Kuwait City) Embassy of India, Kuwait City. 
13 Madagascar (Antananarivo) Embassy of India, Antananarivo. 
14 Malaysia (Kuala Lumpur) High Commission of India, Kuala Lumpur. 
15 Maldives (Malé) High Commission of India, Malé. 
16 Mauritius (Port Louis) High Commission of India, Port Louis. 
17 Mozambique (Maputo) High Commission of India, Maputo. 

Page | 130 
 
No. Littoral States where India has diplomatic presence 
18 Myanmar (Yangon) 
Embassy of India, Yangon. 
2 Consulates (Mandalay, Sittwe) 
CGI in Sittwe temporarily shifted to Yangon due to 
internal situation in Myanmar 
19 Oman (Muscat) Embassy of India, Muscat. 
20 Pakistan (Islamabad) High Commission of India, Islamabad. 
21 Qatar (Doha) Embassy of India, Doha. 
22 Réunion (France) Embassy of India, Paris (covers Réunion). 
Consulate General of India, Reunion Island. 
23 Saudi Arabia (Riyadh, 
Jeddah) 
Embassy of India, Riyadh. 
Consulate General of India, Jeddah. 
24 Seychelles (Victoria) High Commission of India, Victoria-Mahe. 
25 Singapore (Singapore) High Commission of India, Singapore. 
26 South Africa (Pretoria) High Commission of India, Pretoria. 
3 Consulates (Cape Town, Johannesburg, Durban) 
27 Sri Lanka (Colombo) 
High Commission of India, Colombo. 
Assistant High Commission of India, Kandy. 
2 Consulates (Jaffna, Hambantota) 
28 Sudan (Khartoum) Embassy of India, Khartoum. 
29 Tanzania (Dar es Salaam) High Commission of India, Dar es Salaam. 
Consulate General of India, Zanzibar. 
30 Timor-Leste (Dili) Embassy of India, Dili (established on September 
5,  2024) 
31 Thailand (Bangkok) Embassy of India, Bangkok. 
Consulate General of India, Chiangmai. 
32 United Arab Emirates (Abu 
Dhabi, Dubai) 
Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi. 
Consulate General of India, Dubai. 
 
 