 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Future of India-
Bangladesh Relationship’ 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
JULY 2026 /Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
15 
 

 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Future of India-
Bangladesh Relationship’ 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on    30 July, 2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 July, 2026 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
          JULY 2026 /Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
                
CONTENTS 
         PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)      (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION           (iii) 
 
Chapter I Report                      1-22 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
  Government                    23-57 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies                  58 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration          59 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final Replies 
  of the Government are still awaited                            60-67 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty Second Sitting of the Committee held on 21 July, 2026          68-69                        
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on 
External Affairs (18th Lok Sabha)                                       70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
9. Shri Navaskani K. 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
27. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
28. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi* 
31. Vacant # 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik    –  Director  
3. Dr. Smita Singh               _ Committee Officer 
 
 
* Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
03.06.2026. 
# Shri A.D Singh, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, retired on 09.04.2026 
@ Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, retired on 21.06.2026. 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2025-26) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Ninth Report of the Committee on External Affairs (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Future 
of India-Bangladesh Relationship’  
2. The Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the table of the Rajya 
Sabha on 18 December 2025. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs on 26 February, 2026 (English version) and 11th July, 2026 (Hindi version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on 
21st July, 2026. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on External 
Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
21 July, 2026                                                                                         Chairperson,                                
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                              Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
      (iii) 

1 
CHAPTER- I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Ninth Report on the 
subject ‘Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship’ which was presented to the both Houses 
of Parliament on 18 December, 2025. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on 
all the 33 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
  
(i)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 
23. 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 32 and 33,  
 Total- 25 
Chapter-II 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
  Recommendation No.    NIL                                             
        Total- 0 
Chapter-III 
(iii)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos.  NIL 
Total- Nil 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation No.  5, 8, 10, 13, 21, 26, 28 and 31 
Total- 8 
Chapter-V 
 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report 

2 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Overall Approach to relationship with Bangladesh 
5. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee recognize that India and Bangladesh share a relationship 
unparalleled in the South Asian region, rooted in shared history, language, culture, 
and sacrifices. Over the past five decades, this relationship has evolved into a 
comprehensive and multifaceted partnership encompassing political, security, 
economic, and cultural dimensions. Major milestones such as the Land Boundary 
Agreement (2015), Maritime Boundary Settlement (2015), and Ganga Water Treaty 
(1996) have been instrumental in building mutual trust and institutionalizing 
cooperation. The Committee also note that Bangladesh occupies a pivotal position in 
India’s foreign policy architecture, lying at the intersection of the Neighbourhood First, 
Act East, and Indo-Pacific strategies. India’s development cooperation, capacity-
building initiatives, and cross-border connectivity projects have further consolidated 
Bangladesh’s role as a key strategic and development partner.   
The Committee remain cognizant of the recent political developments in 
Bangladesh which have introduced new complexities into the bilateral relationship. 
The Committee express concern over the prevailing instability following the events of 
August 2024, which have been marked by incidents of violence, restrictions on 
democratic freedoms, growing radicalisation of certain sections of the society, attacks 
on minority communities, etc. The Committee note that the Government of India has 
adopted a calibrated policy of non-interference in Bangladesh’s internal political 
processes, while maintaining constructive engagement with the Interim Government 
and other democratic stakeholders.  The Committee also note India’s overall 
approach to its relationship with Bangladesh has remained unchanged following the 
events of August 2024. India continues to pursue a constructive, pragmatic, mutually-
beneficial and forward-looking relationship with Bangladesh, engaging with the 
interim Government of Bangladesh, engaging with several issues of strategic interest 
as well as regional security.  The Committee also recognize that there has been a 
sincere attempt by the Government of India to continue maintaining a cordial 
relationship with the new dispensation in Bangladesh. Such high-level engagements 
include Indian Prime Minister’s congratulations to Prof. Yunus and inviting him to 
participate in the 3rd Voice of Global South Summit held in August 2024; meeting 

3 
between External Affairs Minister and Foreign Advisor of Bangladesh in New York on 
the sidelines of UNGA in September 2024 and in Muscat in February 2025; visit of 
Foreign Secretary of India to Bangladesh on 9 December 2024.  The most recent and 
highest level of meeting between the two countries was held on 4 April 2025 between 
Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi and Chief Advisor of Bangladesh, 
Prof. Mohammed Yunus at Bangkok on the sidelines of the 6th BIMSTEC Summit 
meeting.  Given these ongoing efforts, the Committee are hopeful that the bilateral 
engagement between the two countries will continue to grow. 
The Committee urge the Government to continue advocating a democratic, 
stable, peaceful, people-centric, forward-looking and inclusive Bangladesh, firmly 
anchored in the spirit of 1971 and mutual respect. The Committee further recommend 
that the Government should maintain sustained diplomatic engagement with all 
political, social, and civil society stakeholders in Bangladesh to foster an environment 
of trust and dialogue. Such engagement should be complemented by Track II and 
Track 1.5 diplomacy, involving Parliamentary exchanges, think tanks, academia, 
media, and cultural organizations, to strengthen people-to-people connections and 
counter misperceptions. The Committee also desire that India should leverage all 
forms of soft power to bridge gaps and continue to proactively engage with media, 
civil society, and various organizations in Bangladesh to address the anti-India 
narrative and counter misinformation on sensitive issues.” 
 
6. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Government had maintained a sustained dialogue with the interim Government 
of Bangladesh through high-level exchanges and meetings of established bilateral 
institutional mechanisms. India also consistently conveyed its support for a 
democratic, stable, peaceful, inclusive and people-centric Bangladesh, anchored in 
the shared history and values of 1971.  
 
The Government has also clearly stated its willingness to engage with the 
Government that emerges from free, fair, credible and inclusive electoral process in 
Bangladesh. Following the electoral success of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party 
(BNP), PM Modi congratulated BNP Chairman Tarique Rahman and was the first 
leader to hold a telephone conversation with him. Speaker of Lok Sabha, Shri Om 
Birla, represented India at the swearing-in ceremony of PM Tarique Rahman and 
handed over a personal letter written from the Prime Minister conveying support for 
further strengthening the bilateral ties and inviting PM Tarique Rahman to visit India 
as mutually convenient.  
 
Track II and Track 1.5 initiatives continue to be undertaken by both countries. India 
also hosted media delegations from Bangladesh in May 2024, December 2024 and 
October 2025. Parliamentary exchanges may be resumed as the elections in 

4 
Bangladesh have been completed. Our Mission and Posts continue to engage with 
media, civil society, think-tanks and stakeholders from a wide range of organizations 
to reinforce our endeavour to accord top priority to India–Bangladesh bilateral 
partnership anchored in people-centric development and with the aim of countering 
misinformation on sensitive issues.”  
 
7. The Committee, in their original report, had urged the Government to advocate 
for a democratic, stable, peaceful, people-centric and inclusive Bangladesh, to 
sustain diplomatic engagement across all political and civil society stakeholders, and 
to leverage Track II and Track 1.5 diplomacy, soft power, and media engagement to 
counter the anti-India narrative and address misinformation. The Committee welcome 
the formation of a new government under Prime Minister Tarique Rahman following 
general elections. The Committee also take positive note of the presence of the 
Hon'ble Speaker of Lok Sabha at the swearing-in ceremony of Prime Minister Tarique 
Rahman, and the transmission of the Hon'ble Prime Minister's personal message of 
goodwill and an invitation to visit India at a mutually convenient time.  The Committee 
express the hope that the formation of an elected, representative government in 
Bangladesh will usher in a new chapter of stability, democratic consolidation, and 
strengthened bilateral engagement. In view of these developments, the Committee 
urge the Government to seize this political moment to reset and reinvigorate the 
bilateral relationship to its fullest potential, addressing all outstanding issues with 
sensitivity, urgency, and a spirit of mutual benefit that is firmly anchored in the spirit 
of 1971. The Committee wish to specifically emphasize the importance of 
Parliamentary exchanges as a cornerstone of the bilateral relationship. Now that 
Bangladesh has a new elected Parliament and government in place, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to take proactive and expeditious steps to schedule Parliamentary 
delegation visits in the near term, and to institutionalize such exchanges on a regular 
and structured basis going forward. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Recognition and preservation of the 1971 legacy 
8. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee observe that the 1971 Liberation War remains the moral and 
historical foundation of India-Bangladesh relations, symbolizing shared sacrifices and 
solidarity. The Committee are glad to know that India has supported the war veterans 

5 
through various initiatives, such as providing scholarships for their children and 
offering medical treatment upto INR 8 lakh for the veterans and their families. Even 
after the event of August 2024, both countries commemorated the Vijay Diwas on 16th 
December 2024 by organising reciprocal visits of veterans of armed forces from both 
countries in line with our long-standing tradition. However, the Committee are 
concerned to note the emergence of revisionist narratives and diminishing 
awareness, particularly among younger generations who may not have directly 
experienced the events of 1971 regarding India’s role in Bangladesh’s liberation. 
Underscoring the centrality of the 1971 legacy in India-Bangladesh relations, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should undertake proactive measures to 
preserve and promote this historical partnership through strategic public diplomacy.  
The Committee are of the view that India should continue to engage with Bangladesh 
and take various measures to ensure that the sacrifices and martyrdom of 1971 are 
not forgotten.  The Committee are hopeful that the legacy of 1971 will continue to 
foster goodwill between the two countries.: 
 
9. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
 
“The Government continues to underscore the centrality of the shared legacy of 1971 
in India–Bangladesh relations through sustained public diplomacy and 
commemorative initiatives, including through the celebration of Maitri Diwas. India’s 
Mission and Posts regularly undertake events and outreach activities to highlight the 
historical partnership and shared sacrifices of 1971. The Government has also 
extended scholarships, medical assistance and other support measures to Liberation 
War veterans, reaffirming India’s enduring commitment to preserving and promoting 
the legacy of 1971 as the wellspring for goodwill between the two countries.” 
 
10. The Committee had observed that the 1971 Liberation War remains the moral 
and historical bedrock of India-Bangladesh relations. While expressing concerns 
over the emergence of revisionist narratives and the diminishing awareness of India's 
role in Bangladesh's liberation among younger generations, the Committee had 
urged the Ministry to undertake proactive public diplomacy measures to ensure that 
the sacrifices of 1971 are not forgotten. The Committee are satisfied to note that the 
Government has continued to honour this shared legacy through Maitri Diwas, 
regular outreach by Indian Missions and Posts, and continued welfare support to 
Liberation War veterans. The Committee, however, are of the view that preservation 
of the 1971 legacy must go beyond commemorative exercises. It must be treated as 
a living element of the bilateral relationship, consciously cultivated across all 
sections of Bangladeshi society, including the current political dispensation and 

6 
younger generations. The Committee desire that the Ministry continues to engage 
with the new government in Bangladesh through diplomatic channels with tact and 
sensitivity on this matter to ensure that the memory of 1971 is woven into the fabric 
of the bilateral relationship in a manner that is inclusive and forward-looking. 
Outreach to younger Bangladeshis through academic exchanges, joint research 
initiatives, cultural programmes and people-to-people contacts should be deepened, 
so that the next generation develops an informed and nuanced appreciation of the 
events of 1971 and the enduring bonds they forged between the two peoples. The 
Committee also desire that welfare measures for Liberation War veterans be 
periodically reviewed to ensure they remain meaningful.  
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Strengthening Bilateral and Diplomatic Engagement 
11. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that India and Bangladesh benefit from an extensive diplomatic 
architecture comprising over 40 structured mechanisms operating at the Ministerial, 
Secretary, and technical levels.   At the apex of this framework is the Joint 
Consultative Commission (JCC), co-chaired by the External Affairs Minister of India 
and the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh.  This is followed by Foreign Office 
Consultations led by the Foreign Secretaries of both the countries.  Sector specific 
initiatives cover the breadth of bilateral cooperation including security and Border 
management, connectivity, trade and commerce, water resources, power and energy, 
development cooperation and people-people ties. The Committee acknowledge the 
significant outcomes from these engagements including the resolution of the Land 
Boundary Agreement, operationalization of cross-border power linkages, enhanced 
border management coordination, and expansion of trade and connectivity initiatives. 
The Committee recommend that India should continue to leverage and strengthen 
these mechanisms, ensuring regular engagement through Joint Consultative 
Commissions, Foreign Office Consultations, Home Secretary, Commerce Secretary 
level talks, Joint Rivers Commissions, etc. for timely resolution of concerns. The 
Committee hope that institutionalized dialogue will help address emerging 
challenges, dispel misinformation, and consolidate bilateral gains, even amid regional 
uncertainties.” 
 
12. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“Bilateral institutional mechanisms provide a structured framework to discuss issues 
of importance to both the countries. Such meetings have continued during the tenure 

7 
of the interim Government. Government of India will continue to prioritize the conduct 
of such meetings with Bangladesh to discuss outstanding issues of importance.” 
 
13. The Committee had noted the extensive diplomatic architecture underpinning 
India-Bangladesh relations, comprising over 40 structured mechanisms operating at 
the Ministerial, Secretary and technical levels. The Committee also acknowledged the 
significant outcomes flowing from these engagements, including the resolution of the 
Land Boundary Agreement, operationalization of cross-border power linkages and 
expansion of trade and connectivity initiatives. The Committee had recommended 
that India should continue to leverage and strengthen these mechanisms, ensuring 
regular engagement through the Joint Consultative Commission, Foreign Office 
Consultations, Home Secretary and Commerce Secretary level talks, and the Joint 
Rivers Commission, among others, for the timely resolution of outstanding concerns. 
The Committee note that the action-taken reply furnished by the Ministry is general 
and brief in nature and does not provide any substantive information regarding the 
actual steps taken in pursuance of the Committee's recommendation. While the reply 
reaffirms the importance of bilateral institutional mechanisms and states an intention 
to prioritize such meetings, it does not indicate which mechanisms have met during 
the period under review. The Committee reiterate their recommendation and desire 
that the Ministry should furnish a comprehensive account of the bilateral institutional 
engagements held with Bangladesh, covering the specific mechanisms activated, the 
issues discussed and the outcomes achieved. With a newly  elected government now 
in place in Bangladesh, the Committee urge that the full range of bilateral 
mechanisms be revitalized. Regular meetings of the Joint Consultative Commission, 
Foreign Office Consultations, Home Secretary and Commerce Secretary level talks, 
and the Joint Rivers Commission should be scheduled and held in a time-bound 
manner. 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Completion of Land Boundary Agreement and Border Demarcation 
14. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
 

8 
“The Committee note that the Land Boundary Agreement (LBA) between India and 
Bangladesh, signed in 2015, was a landmark achievement that resolved one of the 
most complex and long-pending issues in bilateral relations through the exchange of 
enclaves and rationalization of the land boundary. Alongside, the maritime boundary 
settlement concluded in the same year further strengthened mutual trust and laid the 
groundwork for a more stable and cooperative border management framework. 
However, the Committee note that residual demarcation challenges, particularly in 
difficult terrain such as the Sundarbans, remain unresolved.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should expedite the completion of the 
residual boundary demarcation in a time-bound manner so as to consolidate the 
gains achieved through the Land Boundary Agreement and contribute to more 
effective border management.  The Committee are of the view that timely completion 
of the remaining sectors has become even more important in view of the prevailing 
situation in Bangladesh.” 
 
15. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“International boundary along the Bangladesh border has been demarcated in most 
areas. Demarcation in few remaining stretches is under consideration at the 
appropriate level. Pending issues of boundary demarcation continue to be discussed 
at the appropriate institutional mechanism created for the purpose: the Joint 
Boundary Conference (JBC). These issues were discussed at the 5th Joint Boundary 
Conference (JBC) between Bangladesh and India held in Dhaka between 21-23 
November 2022.”   
 
16. The Committee had noted that while the Land Boundary Agreement of 2015 was 
a landmark achievement in resolving one of the most complex and long-pending 
bilateral issues, residual demarcation challenges, particularly in difficult terrain such 
as the Sundarbans, remain unresolved. The Committee had recommended 
expeditious completion of residual boundary demarcation in a time-bound manner. 
The Committee note from the action taken reply that demarcation in a few remaining 
stretches is under consideration. No information has been furnished on the current 
status of pending demarcation. The Committee find it surprising that the most recent 
engagement cited dates back to the 5th Joint Boundary Conference held in Dhaka on 
5 November 2022, with no indication of any follow-up in the intervening period. The 
Committee expect a more detailed and updated response from the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that pending boundary demarcation, especially in 
sensitive areas such as the Sundarbans, which has direct implications for border 
management, local communities, and bilateral trust may be completed at the earliest. 

9 
The Committee urge the Ministry to convene the next Joint Boundary Conference at 
the earliest and to ensure that these discussions are conducted with greater 
regularity. A time-bound roadmap for the completion of residual demarcation should 
be drawn up and pursued with due urgency. The Committee desire to be kept 
informed of tangible progress in this regard. 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Strategic Communication Body to counter Anti-India Narratives 
17. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee observe persistent misinformation and anti-India rhetoric in certain 
sections of Bangladeshi media and digital platforms have created perception 
challenges. The Ministry of External Affairs has informed that it remains the nodal 
body for addressing perceptions and narratives through coordinated efforts involving 
other Ministries and agencies. Recognizing the growing influence of digital narratives, 
the Committee suggest that the MEA should establish a dedicated Strategic 
Communication and Perception Management Unit within the External Publicity & 
Public Diplomacy (XPD) Division which would coordinate with relevant Ministries 
such as Home, Defence, and Information & Broadcasting to monitor, analyze, and 
disseminate factual information, counter anti-India propaganda, and enhance India’s 
soft power.” 
 
 
18. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The Ministry of External Affairs constantly monitors, analyzes and counters anti-India 
propaganda and narratives in foreign media, including Bangladeshi news media, and 
social media outlets. The XPD Division has a mechanism in place towards achieving 
this objective. The Division counters fake news and false narratives through its fact-
check unit and pushes out positive stories about India on a constant basis, including 
through social media handles of the Ministry, Missions and Posts abroad, and other 
stakeholders. 
2. XPD Division actively participates in inter-agency efforts of the Government of India 
to counter fake narratives. The Division regularly participates in the meetings of the 
Inter-Departmental Committees (IDCs), constituted pursuant to section 69(A) of the 
Information Technology Act, led by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) 
and Ministry of Electronics, and Information Technology (MeitY) for countering 
disinformation and fake news in news media and social media platforms. The MIB-

10 
led IDC also has representatives from Ministry of Home, Defence, MeitY and FICCI. 
The Ministry through the IDC has taken actions to counter anti-India misinformation 
campaigns running on Bangladeshi news media, and social media accounts.  
3. In the recent past, the frequency of the MIB-led IDC meetings has increased from 
1-2 meetings in a month to 7-8 meetings now, as IDC is actively countering fake 
narratives and disinformation. XPD Division is involved with MeitY-led IDC on a daily 
basis. 
4. Going forward, XPD Division is in the process of updating its mechanism to counter 
anti-India propaganda and narratives in foreign media by adopting new tools and 
technologies, including the use of AI.” 
 
19. The Committee had observed that persistent misinformation and anti-India 
rhetoric in certain sections of Bangladeshi media and digital platforms have created 
significant perception challenges for India. The Committee had accordingly 
recommended that the Ministry should establish a dedicated Strategic 
Communication and Perception Management Unit within the External Publicity and 
Public Diplomacy (XPD) Division to monitor, analyze and counter anti-India narratives 
in a coordinated and systematic manner. The Committee have carefully considered 
the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry and acknowledge that the XPD 
Division undertakes fact-checking, participates in Inter-Departmental Committees 
and engages with other agencies. Participation in the Ministry of Information (MIB) 
led inter-Departmental Committee (IDCs) meetings and maintaining social media 
handles, however useful, should be reinforced by a clearly defined mandate, 
adequate resources and the agility to respond effectively in an era defined by social 
media and artificial intelligence, even if a separate unit is deemed necessary. 
In the considered view of the Committee, the information and digital landscape 
has transformed fundamentally where narratives are shaped rapidly, amplified 
algorithmically and consumed across borders in real time. In this environment, the 
Committee feel that the existing arrangements within the XPD Division may be 
upgraded to match the scale and sophistication of the challenges involved. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to equip itself with modern tools including AI-
based monitoring and analytics, have the capacity to operate across multiple 
languages and platforms, and maintain real-time coordination with the Ministries of 

11 
Home, Defence, and Information and Broadcasting as well as with India's Missions 
and Posts abroad. The Committee desire that concrete actions in this regard be 
undertaken expeditiously and communicated to the Committee. 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Leveraging Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) 
20. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee recognize that beyond bilateral engagement, regional cooperation 
groupings, particularly the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) offer a promising avenue to deepen connectivity, 
boost trade, and enrich cultural and people to people exchange with Bangladesh. 
With the BIMSTEC Secretariat headquartered in Dhaka and Bangladesh having 
taken over the chair of BIMSTEC for the next one year, the Committee view this as a 
timely opportunity for both the countries to strengthen diplomatic and technical 
cooperation. The Committee are given to understand that the BIMSTEC, with the help 
of Asian Development Bank, has come up with a ‘Master Plan’ on transport 
connectivity for the entire region, including Myanmar and Thailand.  The Committee 
recommend that India should extend full diplomatic and technical support to 
Bangladesh during its presidency and work closely towards implementing the 
BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport Connectivity with assistance from the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB).  The Committee may be kept apprised of all the 
developments in this regard.” 
 
21. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi met Professor Muhammad Yunus, Chief Adviser 
of the interim government of Bangladesh, on the sidelines of the BIMSTEC Summit 
in Bangkok on 4 April 2025. Prime Minister congratulated Bangladesh on assuming 
the Chair of BIMSTEC and looked forward to the forum further advancing regional 
cooperation under its leadership. Our Mission in Dhaka actively promotes this 
grouping in Bangladesh on various platforms in an effort to transform it into an active 
regional forum. 
 
2. The BIMSTEC Master Plan was formally adopted at the Fifth BIMSTEC Summit 
held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on 30 March 2022. Last year on March 6, 2025, a mid-
term review of the BIMSTEC Master Plan for transport connectivity was held to 
assess progress and to strategize future steps in improving regional transport 
networks. At the 6th BIMSTEC Summit held in Bangkok in April 2025, the BIMSTEC 

12 
Agreement on Maritime Transport Cooperation (AMTC), was adopted. India was the 
first country to ratify the AMTC, and during the 2nd BIMSTEC Ports Conclave held in 
Visakhapatnam in July 2025, Government of India announced setting up a BIMSTEC 
Centre of Excellence in Sustainable Maritime Transport (BSMarTC) in Mumbai to 
support implementation and build technical capacity in Bangladesh and other 
member states.” 
 
22. Recognizing the potential of BIMSTEC in deepening connectivity, trade and 
people-to-people ties with Bangladesh, the Committee had recommended that India 
should extend full diplomatic and technical support to Bangladesh during its 
presidency and work closely towards implementing the BIMSTEC Master Plan for 
Transport Connectivity with Asian Development Bank (ADB) assistance. The 
Committee take note of the action-taken reply and are broadly satisfied with the 
developments reported, including the bilateral meeting on the sidelines of the 
Bangkok Summit in April 2025, India's early ratification of the BIMSTEC Agreement 
on Maritime Transport Cooperation, and the announcement of the BIMSTEC Centre 
of Excellence in Sustainable Maritime Transport in Mumbai. The Committee, however, 
note that the reply does not furnish any substantive update on the status of 
implementation of the BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport Connectivity, which was 
central to the Committee's recommendation. A mid-term review having been held in 
March 2025, the Committee would have expected the reply to indicate what progress 
has been made. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry furnish a specific 
update on the implementation status of the BIMSTEC Master Plan, including the role 
being played by India and the support being extended to Bangladesh in this regard. 
The Committee also desire to be kept apprised of further developments. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 Border Fencing 
23. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that out of the total 4096 kms of India-Bangladesh border, 
approximately 3231 have been fenced while about 864 km remain unfenced due to 
difficult terrain and riverine conditions. The Committee have been informed that while 
fencing is feasible for about 689 kms, approximately 175 kms present significant 
challenge due to its difficult terrain. Issues such as the bilateral agreements which 

13 
restrict construction within 150 yards of the India-Bangladesh boundary and land 
acquisition hurdles further complicate the process. 
Recognizing that effective border management is vital for national security, 
regional stability, and socio-economic development, the Committee recommend that 
the Government of India prioritize completion of the remaining fencing work by 
engaging with Bangladesh, expediting processes of technical design, feasibility 
studies, and land acquisition. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, in coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and state 
governments, should adopt innovative engineering and technological solutions such 
as floating fences, laser-based intrusion detection systems, and smart sensors in 
difficult riverine and populated sectors, where conventional fencing is impractical.” 
 
24. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The relevant authorities of the Government of India regularly pursue cases of land 
acquisition with the concerned state authorities for completion of border fencing in 
feasible areas.  
2. As per MHA's directive, coverage of all gaps areas along the Indo-Bangladesh 
border is to be done through technological solutions. To this end, BSF has proposed 
comprehensive technological solutions which are under consideration.” 
 
25. The Committee had noted that out of the total 4,096 kilometres of the India-
Bangladesh border, approximately 864 kilometres remain unfenced due to difficult 
terrain and riverine conditions. The Committee had recommended that the 
Government should prioritize completion of the remaining fencing through expedited 
land acquisition and adoption of innovative technological solutions such as floating 
fences, laser-based intrusion detection systems and smart sensors in areas where 
conventional fencing is impractical. The Committee note from the action taken reply 
that land acquisition cases are being pursued and that BSF's proposed 
comprehensive technological solutions are "under consideration." No information 
has been provided on the pace of land acquisition, the extent of fencing completed, 
the nature of technological solutions proposed, or any timeline for implementation.  
The Committee are of the considered view that an unfenced border of 864 kilometres 
has direct implications for national security, infiltration and cross-border crime. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and urge the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, in coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and concerned state 
governments, should expedite land acquisition and secure early approval of the 
technological solutions proposed by BSF. A clear sector-wise timeline for completion 

14 
should be established. The Committee desire that a detailed update on progress be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
(Recommendation No. 22 & 23) 
Development Partnership 
26. The Committee in their report (Recommendation No. 22) has observed 
/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that infrastructure development and connectivity cooperation 
have emerged as a cornerstone of India-Bangladesh bilateral relations, 
encompassing not only physical connectivity through rail, road, and waterways, but 
also energy and digital linkages. India has extended developmental assistance of 
nearly USD 10 billion to Bangladesh in the form of Lines of Credit and grants for 
projects spanning infrastructure, energy, and community development. While 
acknowledging the tangible progress achieved through initiatives such as the 
completion of the Maitree Super Thermal Power Plant, the Khulna-Mongla, Agartala-
Akhaura Rail Lines, India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline and Maitri Bridge over 
Feni, the Committee express concern that certain projects continue to face delays 
owing to tendering constraints, procedural bottlenecks, and security-related 
constraints in project areas.  
The Committee further observe that these connectivity initiatives have yielded 
mutual dividends, facilitating trade expansion, improving access to regional markets, 
strengthening people-to-people contact, and contributing to broader regional stability 
and economic integration.  The Committee are pleased to know that recently an 
Indian delegation visited Dhaka to discuss concessional finance projects, leading to 
development of a mutually agreed roadmap to advance these projects.  Ongoing 
projects include Dhaka-Tongi Joydepur Railway line, Kulauru Shabhazpur Railway 
line, widening of Ramgarh to Baraiyarhat Road, evacuation lines at Rooppur Nuclear 
Plant, etc.  Tendering is also underway for various Engineering Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) projects, such as Khulna-Darshana Railway line, Parbatipur 
Kaunia Railway line, Bogra to Saheed M Mousur Ali Station Railway line, Ashugang 
Inland Container River Port Project, upgradation of Mongla Port Project, etc.   
While recognizing the fact that Bangladesh has been the recipient of robust 
developmental aid from the Government of India, the Committee concurs with the 
Ministry’s view that improved connectivity brings mutual benefits such as enhancing 
trade, regional integration and improved access to the North Eastern states.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should take all necessary 
steps for timely completion of the major ongoing projects in Bangladesh.” 
 

15 
27. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
 “India’s development cooperation with Bangladesh, extended through Lines of Credit 
(LoCs) and grant assistance, remains a key pillar of the bilateral relationship. Several 
major connectivity and energy projects undertaken under this framework have 
enhanced trade facilitation, regional integration and connectivity with India’s North 
Eastern Region.  
 2. To ensure timely execution of ongoing Government of India/LoC projects, a 
structured Project Monitoring Mechanism is in place. This includes Bilateral LoC 
Project Review Meetings, Project Monitoring Committee Meetings, Technical 
Committee Meetings, Project Steering Committee Meetings, and periodic Virtual 
Review Meetings convened by the Ministry of External Affairs. These mechanisms 
facilitate regular engagement with all stakeholders. In addition, joint site inspections 
are undertaken periodically by officials of the High Commission of India in Dhaka, 
India EXIM Bank, concerned project authorities, and Economic Relations Division, 
Ministry of Finance, Government of Bangladesh to assess progress on the ground 
and address implementation issues. The Government remains committed to the 
timely and effective implementation of development partnership projects in 
consultation with the Government of Bangladesh, with a view to strengthening 
connectivity, expanding trade, and supporting regional economic integration.” 
 
28. The Committee in their report (Recommendation No. 23) has 
observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is undertaking an internal 
review of various developmental projects, including in Bangladesh.  The Committee 
note that there have been instances where projects have not commenced despite the 
extension of the line of credit.  The Committee note that during the Foreign Office 
Consultation, both sides expressed a desire to continue the ongoing cooperation on 
developmental partnership projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should undertake a comprehensive review and rationalization of the existing Line of 
Credit portfolio to identify high-impact, viable projects and prioritize their timely 
completion. The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of this review 
exercise within three months. The Committee further suggest that the Government 
should proactively publicize successful development partnership initiatives through 
strategic communication and outreach efforts, thereby enhancing India’s image as a 
reliable development partner and reinforcing its soft power among the people of 
Bangladesh.” 
 

16 
29. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“A comprehensive review of Government of India-supported LoC projects was 
undertaken through established bilateral mechanisms. The 23rd bilateral LoC Review 
Meeting was held in Dhaka on 5–6 March 2025, during which all ongoing LoC projects 
were reviewed in detail. Challenges that have affected project execution, including 
security of Indian personnel and assets, lack of project readiness and frequent scope 
changes, etc.  were discussed with Bangladesh. Following mutual consultations, both 
sides agreed to delist twelve projects that were at the pre-execution stage.  Based on 
project viability and progress on the ground, eight ongoing LoC projects have been 
identified for prioritised and time-bound execution.  
 2. The overall perception of India’s development projects in Bangladesh remains 
positive since these projects deliver tangible benefits to the people of Bangladesh. 
Efforts continue to be taken by Indian Mission and Posts in Bangladesh to enhance 
visibility of successful development partnership initiatives through coordinated 
outreach, media engagement and public diplomacy initiatives. Government remains 
committed to ensuring effective utilisation of LoC resources, prioritising high-impact 
projects and strengthening the development partnership framework with 
Bangladesh.” 
 
30. Acknowledging the significance of connectivity and development partnership 
in furthering bilateral ties between India and Bangladesh, the Committee had 
recommended timely completion of major ongoing projects and a comprehensive 
review of the Line of Credit (LoC) portfolio to identify high-impact, viable projects for 
prioritized execution. The Committee are satisfied to note that a structured Project 
Monitoring Mechanism is in place and that the 23rd bilateral LoC Review Meeting was 
held in Dhaka in March 2025. The Committee also note that following mutual 
consultations, twelve pre-execution stage projects have been delisted and eight 
ongoing projects have been identified for prioritized and time-bound execution. 
These are steps in the right direction. The Committee note that the period of political 
transition in Bangladesh had inevitably introduced some uncertainty into the pace of 
development cooperation. With a democratically elected government now in place in 
Dhaka, the Committee express their hope that the development partnership will gain 
fresh momentum and intensify in the coming period. The Committee urge the Ministry 
to seize this opportunity, engage the new government proactively on the development 
cooperation agenda, and ensure that the prioritized projects are executed in a time-
bound manner. The Committee desire to be kept informed of progress on a regular 
basis. 

17 
 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
Human-Resource Development and Capacity Building under ITEC and ICCR 
31. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that human resource development and capacity-building 
initiatives, particularly through the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(ITEC) Programme and ICCR scholarships is a key component of India’s 
development cooperation efforts with Bangladesh. The Committee observe that over 
3,000 Bangladeshi students have been awarded ICCR scholarships in the last 
decade and around 500 scholarships are being processed for the academic year 
2025-26.  The Committee have been informed that these scholarships have been 
useful in strengthening people-to-people ties and providing opportunities to 
Bangladeshi students to better know and understand India.  The Committee also note 
that India has been providing training to Bangladeshi officials from civil services, 
police, judiciary, etc. at various premier training institutes in India. The Committee 
also note that in March 2021, India had announced 1000 ‘Suborno Jayanti 
Scholarships’ for Bangladeshi students.  So far, more than 900 scholarships have 
been awarded to Bangladeshi students between 2022-2024.  In addition, under the 
Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme, 24,018 scholarships have been awarded to wards 
of Bangladeshi war veterans. 
The Committee are glad to note that flagship initiatives such as ICCR 
scholarships and the ITEC courses continue to enjoy wide recognition among 
Bangladeshi students and professionals.  The Committee desire that more 
Bangladeshi youths, students and professionals are provided opportunities under 
ICCR and ITEC training programmes. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government of India to significantly upscale the number and diversity of ITEC and 
ICCR scholarships for Bangladesh, with particular focus on emerging sectors such 
as digital innovation, renewable energy, public health, and sustainable agriculture. 
The Committee also suggest that the Ministry should ensure that these programmes 
remain responsive to evolving needs and sectoral priorities. The Committee further 
desire that more scholarship to wards of war veterans may be provided under 
Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme. The Committee desire that increasing number of 
Bangladeshi professionals, researchers, and youth should benefit from various sector 
specific, skill oriented and other training modules.” 
 
32. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“Bangladesh remains one of the largest beneficiaries of India’s capacity building 
programmes. Under the ITEC framework, training is provided across traditional areas 

18 
of governance, public administration, police and judicial training, as well as emerging 
sectors such as digital innovation, renewable energy, sustainable agriculture and 
public health.  In FY 2024–25, 65 officials participated in ITEC courses in India, and 
in FY 2025–26 (till date), 25 participants have undergone training. Customized 
programmes, including courses conducted through institutions such as the National 
Centre for Good Governance (NCGG), continue to be designed in response to 
sectoral requirements conveyed by the Government of Bangladesh. 
 
2. ICCR scholarship programmes continue to receive strong participation from 
Bangladeshi students. In FY 2025–26, ICCR has awarded 497 scholarships under 
the Suborno Jayanti Scholarship Scheme, 46 under the Lata Mangeshkar Dance and 
Music Scholarship Scheme and 10 under the AYUSH Scholarship Scheme. Over 
2,161 Bangladeshi students have also been granted visas under self-financed 
admission to Indian institutions since January 2025. There is a proposal under 
consideration to revisit the current distribution of Suborno Jayanti scholarships to 
increase the share of STEM disciplines.   
3. Under the Scholarship scheme for Muktijoddhas, 2000 scholarships are provided 
every year to wards of Muktijoddhas to undertake Higher Secondary and 
Undergraduate studies in Bangladesh. So far, 24,018 scholarships have been 
awarded under this scheme. The ‘Muktijoddha Scholarship’ scheme is being 
reviewed with a view to increasing the impact of the scheme. Under the Muktijoddha 
Medical Scheme, since 2019, Muktijoddhas have been provided support to avail 
medical treatment in India.  
4. The Committee’s proposal to upscale the number and diversity of scholarships for 
Bangladesh has been noted for compliance.” 
 
33. The Committee had noted that human resource development and capacity-
building initiatives through Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) and 
ICCR scholarships constitute a key component of India's development cooperation 
with Bangladesh. The Committee had urged the Government to significantly upscale 
the number and diversity of ITEC and ICCR scholarships, with focus on emerging 
sectors such as digital innovation, renewable energy, public health and sustainable 
agriculture. The Committee had also desired that more scholarships be provided to 
wards of war veterans under the Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme. The Committee 
take note from the action-taken reply and are broadly satisfied with the progress 
reported. The continuation of ITEC training, award of 497 scholarships under the 
Suborno Jayanti Scheme and the proposal to increase the share of STEM disciplines 

19 
are positive steps. The Committee, however, note that ITEC participation numbers 
remain modest, with only 65 participants in FY 2024-25 and 25 so far in FY 2025-26. 
The Committee also note that the Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme is being reviewed 
with a view to enhancing its impact. The Committee desire that these numbers be 
meaningfully scaled up. The proposal to revisit the distribution of Suborno Jayanti 
Scholarships in favour of STEM disciplines is a welcome step and should be taken to 
its logical conclusion expeditiously. The review of the Muktijoddha Scholarship 
Scheme should similarly be completed without further delay and its outcomes 
communicated to the Committee. 
 
(Recommendation No. 30) 
Strengthening Institutional mechanism for water cooperation 
34. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that water sharing constitutes one of the most vital and 
sensitive aspects of India-Bangladesh bilateral relationship. India and Bangladesh 
share 54 transboundary rivers and have a water sharing Treaty, namely Ganga Water 
Treaty of 1996 on Ganga River along with Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) 
for withdrawal of water from Feni and Kushiyara rivers. The Indo-Bangladesh Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC), established in 1972, serves as the principal institutional 
mechanism for cooperation on shared water resources, including flood control, 
irrigation, cyclone warning, and flood forecasting. The Committee also note that a 
meeting of the JRC was held in Kolkata in March 2025. The Technical Level Meeting 
(TLM) of the JRC further enables experts from both sides to undertake detailed and 
issue-specific deliberations. 
The Ministry has further apprised the Committee that discussions are ongoing 
between both sides to finalize more water sharing treaties on Teesta, Manu, Khowai, 
and Dharla rivers. While the JRC and the Ganga Water Treaty remain the cornerstone 
of bilateral water cooperation, the Committee find that the absence of agreements on 
other major shared rivers, particularly the Teesta, continues to pose challenges.  
The Committee feel that the overall river water cooperation framework 
between the two countries ought to be given due importance and institutional 
regularity. The Committee recommend that the Government of India, in coordination 
with the Government of Bangladesh, should ensure that meetings of the Joint Rivers 
Commission, at both technical and ministerial levels, are convened on a regular and 
time-bound basis. The Committee also concur with expert opinion that bilateral water 
cooperation should move beyond water sharing of major rivers during dry-season, 

20 
and should include micro-level initiatives such as aquifer recharge, river rejuvenation, 
and technical collaboration. Both countries should also actively explore joint projects 
on smaller transboundary rivers such as the Manu, Khowai, and Dharla to promote 
localized water management, enhance climate resilience, and strengthen mutual 
trust.” 
35. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 
“The bilateral Institutional framework of India-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission 
(JRC) was set up in the year 1972. The bilateral meetings under the JRC framework 
are held as per the mutual convenience of both the countries. The Joint Committee 
Meetings for sharing of Ganga Water are held thrice a year. (Last meeting was held 
in September 2025). 
2. India and Bangladesh share 54 trans-boundary/ common-border rivers. As on date, 
the two countries have signed one Treaty (signed in 1996) on the sharing of Ganga 
waters at Farakka; apart from one MoU signed in 2019 for withdrawing water from 
Feni River for the drinking water supply scheme of Sabroom Town in the Indian state 
of Tripura and one MoU signed in 2022 for withdrawal of water from the common 
border river Kushiyara. 
3. The Technical Level Meeting under the JRC framework deliberates on other water 
resources related matters of mutual interest, apart from river water sharing on 
common-border / trans-boundary rivers. The agenda for deliberation in the Technical 
Level Meeting is mutually decided.” 
36. The Committee had observed that India and Bangladesh share 54 
transboundary rivers and that while the Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 and the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) remain the cornerstone of bilateral water cooperation, the 
absence of agreements on major shared rivers, particularly the Teesta, continues to 
pose challenges. The Committee had recommended regular and time-bound JRC 
meetings and had also urged that water cooperation be expanded beyond seasonal 
sharing of major rivers to include micro-level initiatives such as aquifer recharge, 
river rejuvenation and joint projects on smaller transboundary rivers such as the 
Manu, Khowai and Dharla. The Committee note that the action taken reply is confined 
largely to recounting the existing institutional framework. No substantive update has 
been furnished on the status of Teesta negotiations, the outcomes of JRC meetings, 
and the steps taken towards the broader water cooperation agenda recommended by 
the Committee, including micro-level initiatives and smaller river cooperation, which 
were a specific focus of the Committee's recommendation. 

21 
The Committee are of the view that water sharing is one of the most sensitive 
and consequential aspects of the bilateral relationship. The Teesta agreement has 
remained unresolved for far too long. With a new elected government in place in 
Bangladesh, the Committee urge the Government to impart fresh momentum to these 
negotiations. JRC meetings at both technical and ministerial levels should be held 
regularly with a clear agenda and measurable outcomes. The Committee also reiterate 
that water cooperation must move beyond major rivers. Joint initiatives on smaller 
transboundary rivers and micro-level measures such as aquifer recharge and river 
rejuvenation deserve equal attention. The Committee desire a comprehensive update 
on all these matters. 
 
(Recommendation No. 31) 
Renewal of the Ganga Water Treaty 
37. The Committee in their report has observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 is a bilateral agreement 
between India and Bangladesh governing the sharing of waters from the Ganga River 
at the Farraka Barrage for a period of 30 years. The Committee have been informed 
that the Ganga Water Treaty involved significant participation from the state of West 
Bengal, with the Finance Minister of West Bengal playing a key role in formulating 
the treaty provisions. The state government of West Bengal also participated in the 
most recent meeting of JRC held in Kolkata in March 2025. The Committee also note 
that this treaty is set to expire in 2026 and that bilateral discussions on its renewal 
have not yet commenced.  
The Committee recommend that the Government of India should initiate 
bilateral discussions with Bangladesh at the earliest, to avoid any vacuum in the post-
2026 period. The Committee further recommend that the renewal process should be 
guided by updated hydrological data, climate change projections, and the need for 
equitable and sustainable utilization of river waters. In this regard, the Committee 
emphasize that consultations with concerned State Governments, particularly West 
Bengal and Bihar, may be continued to ensure that national and state-level interests 
are aligned in formulating India’s position during the negotiation process. The 
Committee also underscore that the sharing of Teesta River waters is of critical 
importance to the State of West Bengal, and therefore, its concerns may be duly 
addressed by the Government of India during negotiations on the Teesta. 
38. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated as under: 

22 
“An Inter-Ministerial Committee was constituted by DoWR, RD&GR in July 2023 for 
carrying out an Internal Review of the Ganga Water Sharing Treaty.  Concerned 
stakeholders of the State Governments of West Bengal and Bihar are also members 
of this Committee.  Bilateral discussions are expected to commence under the new 
Government in Bangladesh.  
2. The endeavour of the Union Government is to arrive at an agreement on Teesta 
on a fair and equitable basis in consultation with our riparian States, which is 
acceptable to all the parties concerned and which protects the interest of all 
stakeholders.” 
39. Noting that the Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 is set to expire in 2026 and that 
bilateral discussions on its renewal had not yet commenced, the Committee had 
recommended early initiation of renewal discussions, guided by updated 
hydrological data and climate change projections, and in consultation with the state 
governments of West Bengal and Bihar. The Committee had also underscored the 
importance of addressing West Bengal's concerns on the Teesta during negotiations. 
The Committee note that an Inter-Ministerial Committee was constituted in July 2023 
for an internal review of the Treaty and that bilateral discussions are expected to 
commence under the new government in Bangladesh. While these are steps in the 
right direction, the Committee are concerned that with the Treaty due to expire in 
2026, time is running short.  
The Committee urge the Government to initiate bilateral discussions with 
Bangladesh without further delay. The internal review by the Inter-Ministerial 
Committee should be concluded expeditiously so that India's negotiating position is 
ready. Consultations with the state governments of West Bengal and Bihar must be 
sustained throughout the process. On Teesta, the Committee reiterate that a fair, 
equitable and mutually acceptable agreement remains a priority and that the 
concerns of West Bengal must be duly addressed. The Committee express hope that 
both sides will approach these negotiations constructively and conclude them in a 
timely manner.  
 
 
 

23 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Overall Approach to relationship with Bangladesh 
 The Committee recognize that India and Bangladesh share a relationship 
unparalleled in the South Asian region, rooted in shared history, language, culture, 
and sacrifices. Over the past five decades, this relationship has evolved into a 
comprehensive and multifaceted partnership encompassing political, security, 
economic, and cultural dimensions. Major milestones such as the Land Boundary 
Agreement (2015), maritime boundary settlement (2015), and Ganga Water Treaty 
(1996) have been instrumental in building mutual trust and institutionalizing 
cooperation. The Committee also note that Bangladesh occupies a pivotal position in 
India’s foreign policy architecture, lying at the intersection of the Neighbourhood 
First, Act East, and Indo-Pacific strategies. India’s development cooperation, 
capacity-building initiatives, and cross-border connectivity projects have further 
consolidated Bangladesh’s role as a key strategic and development partner.   
The Committee remain cognizant of the recent political developments in 
Bangladesh which have introduced new complexities into the bilateral relationship. 
The Committee express concern over the prevailing instability following the events 
of August 2024, which have been marked by incidents of violence, restrictions on 
democratic freedoms, growing radicalisation of certain sections of the society, 
attacks on minority communities, etc. The Committee note that the Government of 
India has adopted a calibrated policy of non-interference in Bangladesh’s internal 
political processes, while maintaining constructive engagement with the Interim 
Government and other democratic stakeholders.  The Committee also note India’s 
overall approach to its relationship with Bangladesh has remained unchanged 
following the events of August 2024. India continues to pursue a constructive, 
pragmatic, mutually-beneficial and forward-looking relationship with Bangladesh, 
engaging with the interim Government of Bangladesh, engaging with several issues 
of strategic interest as well as regional security.  The Committee also recognize that 

24 
there has been a sincere attempt by the Government of India to continue maintaining 
a cordial relationship with the new dispensation in Bangladesh. Such high-level 
engagements includes Indian Prime Minister’s congratulations to Prof. Yunus and 
inviting him to participate in the 3rd Voice of Global South Summit held in August 
2024; meeting between External Affairs Minister and Foreign Advisor of Bangladesh 
in New York on the sidelines of UNGA in September 2024 and in Muscat in February 
2025; visit of Foreign Secretary of India to Bangladesh on 9 December 2024.  The most 
recent and highest level of meeting between the two countries was held on 4 April 
2025 between Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi and Chief Advisor 
of Bangladesh, Prof. Mohammed Yunus at Bangkok on the sidelines of the 6th 
BIMSTEC Summit meeting.  Given these ongoing efforts, the Committee are hopeful 
that the bilateral engagement between the two countries will continue to grow. 
The Committee urge the Government to continue advocating a democratic, 
stable, peaceful, people-centric, forward-looking and inclusive Bangladesh, firmly 
anchored in the spirit of 1971 and mutual respect. The Committee further recommend 
that the Government should maintain sustained diplomatic engagement with all 
political, social, and civil society stakeholders in Bangladesh to foster an 
environment of trust and dialogue. Such engagement should be complemented by 
Track II and Track 1.5 diplomacy, involving Parliamentary exchanges, think tanks, 
academia, media, and cultural organizations, to strengthen people-to-people 
connections and counter misperceptions. The Committee also desire that India 
should leverage all forms of soft power to bridge gaps and continue to proactively 
engage with media, civil society, and various organizations in Bangladesh to address 
the anti-India narrative and counter misinformation on sensitive issues.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government had maintained a sustained dialogue with the interim Government 
of Bangladesh through high-level exchanges and meetings of established bilateral 
institutional mechanisms. India also consistently conveyed its support for a democratic, 
stable, peaceful, inclusive and people-centric Bangladesh, anchored in the shared history 
and values of 1971.  
 

25 
2. The Government has also clearly stated its willingness to engage with the 
Government that emerges from free, fair, credible and inclusive electoral process in 
Bangladesh. Following the electoral success of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), PM 
Modi congratulated BNP Chairman Tarique Rahman and was the first leader to hold a 
telephone conversation with him. Speaker of Lok Sabha, Shri Om Birla, represented India 
at the swearing-in ceremony of PM Tarique Rahman and handed over a personal letter 
written from the Prime Minister conveying support for further strengthening the bilateral ties 
and inviting PM Tarique Rahman to visit India as mutually convenient.  
 
3. Track II and Track 1.5 initiatives continue to be undertaken by both countries. India 
also hosted media delegations from Bangladesh in May 2024, December 2024 and October 
2025. Parliamentary exchanges may be resumed as the elections in Bangladesh have been 
completed. Our Mission and Posts continue to engage with media, civil society, think-tanks 
and stakeholders from a wide range of organizations to reinforce our endeavour to accord 
top priority to India–Bangladesh bilateral partnership anchored in people-centric 
development and with the aim of countering misinformation on sensitive issues.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Supporting Democratic Processes 
 
 The Committee note with concern the evolving political situation in Bangladesh 
since August 2024, particularly the uncertainty surrounding democratic elections, 
political violence and the rise of extremism. While India has consistently emphasized 
its commitment to a constructive and pragmatic relationship, these developments 
have strained certain aspects of bilateral ties, particularly in terms of security 
cooperation and people-to-people relations. The Committee observe that India’s 
response to Bangladesh’s internal political developments has remained diplomatic 
and non-interventionist.  The Committee note that India has reaffirmed its 
commitment in a democratic, stable, peaceful and inclusive Bangladesh and to that 
end India has been a strong supporter of a participatory and inclusive election 
process in Bangladesh, viewing it as a necessary step to restoring political stability.  

26 
The Committee commend the quiet diplomacy of the Indian Government during 
the period of such rapid and transformative change. While respecting the sovereignty 
of Bangladesh and refraining from interfering in its domestic politics, the Committee 
desire that India should continue to support Bangladesh’s democratic processes, 
encouraging free, fair, and inclusive elections.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government of India consistently conveyed its support for democratic processes 
in Bangladesh and underscored the importance of free, fair, credible and inclusive elections 
held in a peaceful atmosphere. The Government aims at sustaining the engagement in a 
manner that is constructive, pragmatic and supportive of a democratic and stable 
Bangladesh.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Attacks on Minorities 
 The Committee express serious concerns over the continuing attacks on 
minorities in Bangladesh following the events of August 2024. The attacks on places 
of worship, cultural institutions, and individuals have severely impacted the social 
fabric of Bangladesh and strained bilateral relations. While the Government of India 
has consistently conveyed its concerns to the Interim Government of Bangladesh, 
the lack of concrete measures to address these issues, combined with attempts by 
the Bangladeshi authorities to downplay the incidents as ‘political killings’, remains 
troubling. The Committee note that till 18 May 2025, 2446 attacks against minorities 
have been reported.  It was only after India raised the issue with the Bangladeshi side 
during the Foreign Office Consultations that 70 arrests have been made and 88 cases 
have been filed till December 2024.  
In the considered view of the Committee, the Ministry of External Affairs should 
continue to prioritize the protection of minorities in Bangladesh as a core element of 
its diplomatic engagement, urging the Bangladeshi authorities to take swift and 
effective action to safeguard the rights and security of all minority communities and 
to bring perpetrators of violence to justice.  

27 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government of  India has consistently raised the matter of safety and security of 
the minorities with the authorities in Bangladesh, at both political and diplomatic levels on 
several occasions. The issue was raised by Prime Minister during his meeting with Chief 
Advisor Muhammad Yunus on 04 April 2025 and by the External Affairs Minister during his 
meeting with Foreign Advisor Touhid Hossain on 16 February 2025. The issue has further 
been raised in relevant meetings with other foreign interlocutors. 
 
2. It is the expectation of the Government of India that the Government of Bangladesh 
will discharge its responsibilities by thoroughly investigating the incidents relating to 
minorities and bring all perpetrators of killings, arson and violence against minorities to 
justice without excuses. The primary responsibility for the protection of life and liberty of all 
citizens of Bangladesh, including minorities, rests with the Government of Bangladesh. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Release of prisoners with record of terrorism and extremist violence 
 The Committee express concern over the release of prisoners charged with 
terrorism and extremist violence, as well as the escape of convicted extremists and 
terrorists during jail breaks amid the chaos in Bangladesh during July and August 
2025.  The Committee have been informed that these individuals are now fomenting 
anti-India sentiments and narratives in Bangladesh. The Committee note that this 
poses a risk of further instability and law and order challenges with implications for 
India’s North East. The Committee desire that India should maintain vigilance in 
monitoring their activities and also engage with the Bangladeshi side to ensure that 
such developments do not negatively impact internal security, particularly in the 
Northeast region. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government of India is vigilant and closely monitors developments relating to 
extremism and terrorist activities in Bangladesh that may have implications for India’s 
security, particularly in the North-Eastern States, and continues to take all necessary 
measures to safeguard our national interests. Our expectations on the need to accord 

28 
priority to security and counter-terrorism-related cooperation as part of our bilateral 
engagement has also been conveyed to the Government of Bangladesh. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Recognition and preservation of the 1971 legacy 
 The Committee observe that the 1971 Liberation War remains the moral and 
historical foundation of India-Bangladesh relations, symbolizing shared sacrifices 
and solidarity. The Committee are glad to know that India has supported the war 
veterans through various initiatives, such as providing scholarships for their children 
and offering medical treatment upto INR 8 lakh for the veterans and their families. 
Even after the event of August 2024, both countries commemorated the Vijay Diwas 
on 16th December 2024 by organising reciprocal visits of veterans of armed forces 
from both countries in line with our long-standing tradition. However, the Committee 
are concerned to note the emergence of revisionist narratives and diminishing 
awareness, particularly among younger generations who may not have directly 
experienced the events of 1971 regarding India’s role in Bangladesh’s liberation. 
Underscoring the centrality of the 1971 legacy in India-Bangladesh relations, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should undertake proactive measures to 
preserve and promote this historical partnership through strategic public diplomacy.  
The Committee are of the view that India should continue to engage with Bangladesh 
and take various measures to ensure that the sacrifices and martyrdom of 1971 are 
not forgotten.  The Committee are hopeful that the legacy of 1971 will continue to 
foster goodwill between the two countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government continues to underscore the centrality of the shared legacy of 1971 
in India–Bangladesh relations through sustained public diplomacy and commemorative 
initiatives, including through the celebration of Maitri Diwas. India’s Mission and Posts 
regularly undertake events and outreach activities to highlight the historical partnership and 
shared sacrifices of 1971. The Government has also extended scholarships, medical 
assistance and other support measures to Liberation War veterans, reaffirming India’s 

29 
enduring commitment to preserving and promoting the legacy of 1971 as the wellspring for 
goodwill between the two countries.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Strengthening Bilateral and Diplomatic Engagement 
 
 The Committee note that India and Bangladesh benefit from an extensive 
diplomatic architecture comprising over 40 structured mechanisms operating at the 
Ministerial, Secretary, and technical levels.   At the apex of this framework is the Joint 
Consultative Commission (JCC), co-chaired by the External Affairs Minister of India 
and the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh.  This is followed by Foreign Office 
Consultations led by the Foreign Secretaries of both the countries.  Sector specific 
initiatives cover the breadth of bilateral cooperation including security and Border 
management, connectivity, trade and commerce, water resources, power and energy, 
development cooperation and people-people ties. The Committee acknowledge the 
significant outcomes from these engagements including the resolution of the Land 
Boundary Agreement, operationalization of cross-border power linkages, enhanced 
border management coordination, and expansion of trade and connectivity 
initiatives. The Committee recommend that India should continue to leverage and 
strengthen these mechanisms, ensuring regular engagement through Joint 
Consultative Commissions, Foreign Office Consultations, Home Secretary, 
Commerce Secretary level talks, Joint Rivers Commissions, etc. for timely resolution 
of concerns. The Committee hope that institutionalized dialogue will help address 
emerging challenges, dispel misinformation, and consolidate bilateral gains, even 
amid regional uncertainties. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Bilateral institutional mechanisms provide a structured framework to discuss issues 
of importance to both the countries. Such meetings have continued during the tenure of the 
interim Government. Government of India will continue to prioritize the conduct of such 
meetings with Bangladesh to discuss outstanding issues of importance.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 

30 
Recommendation No. 9 
Strategic Communication Body to counter Anti-India Narratives 
 The Committee observe persistent misinformation and anti-India rhetoric in 
certain sections of Bangladeshi media and digital platforms have created perception 
challenges. The Ministry of External Affairs has informed that it remains the nodal 
body for addressing perceptions and narratives through coordinated efforts involving 
other Ministries and agencies. Recognizing the growing influence of digital 
narratives, the Committee suggest that the MEA should establish a dedicated 
Strategic Communication and Perception Management Unit within the External 
Publicity & Public Diplomacy (XPD) Division which would coordinate with relevant 
Ministries such as Home, Defence, and Information & Broadcasting to monitor, 
analyze, and disseminate factual information, counter anti-India propaganda, and 
enhance India’s soft power. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of External Affairs constantly monitors, analyzes and counters anti-India 
propaganda and narratives in foreign media, including Bangladeshi news media, and social 
media outlets. The XPD Division has a mechanism in place towards achieving this objective. 
The Division counters fake news and false narratives through its fact-check unit and pushes 
out positive stories about India on a constant basis, including through social media handles 
of the Ministry, Missions and Posts abroad, and other stakeholders. 
 
2. XPD Division actively participates in inter-agency efforts of the Government of India 
to counter fake narratives. The Division regularly participates in the meetings of the Inter-
Departmental Committees (IDCs), constituted pursuant to section 69(A) of the Information 
Technology Act, led by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) and Ministry of 
Electronics, and Information Technology (MeitY) for countering disinformation and fake news 
in news media and social media platforms. The MIB-led IDC also has representatives from 
Ministry of Home, Defence, MeitY and FICCI. The Ministry through the IDC has taken actions 
to counter anti-India misinformation campaigns running on Bangladeshi news media, and 
social media accounts.  
 

31 
3. In the recent past, the frequency of the MIB-led IDC meetings has increased from 1-
2 meetings in a month to 7-8 meetings now, as IDC is actively countering fake narratives 
and disinformation. XPD Division is involved with MeitY-led IDC on a daily basis. 
 
4. Going forward, XPD Division is in the process of updating its mechanism to counter 
anti-India propaganda and narratives in foreign media by adopting new tools and 
technologies, including the use of AI. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Monitoring growing Chinese influence 
 The Committee observe with concern the increasing Chinese footprint in 
Bangladesh, particularly in infrastructure development, port expansion, and defence 
cooperation, including the Mongla Port project and Lalmonirhat airbase.  The 
Committee note that Bangladesh has signed  an agreement with China in March 2025 
to implement a USD 370 million expansion project at Mongla Port.  The Committee 
also note that Lalmonirhat Airbase is being developed with Chinese assistance 
although the Director of Military Operations of Bangladesh Army has stated that there 
are currently no plans to upgrade the airstrip for military use.  The Committee also 
note the recent visit of Jammat-e-Islami Party to China, which clearly indicates its 
broad engagement with various factions in Bangladesh, further solidifying its 
presence. Additionally, the Committee are concerned to know that a submarine base 
has been built by China at Pekua, capable of accommodating eight submarines when 
Bangladesh has only two. With regard to other infrastructure projects, the Committee 
have been informed that China has been present in Bangladesh for quite some time 
and is not necessarily an outcome of recent political development.  The Ministry has 
informed the Committee that to enhance port’s connectivity to hinterland India has 
financed and completed a key rail connectivity project, the Khulna-Mongla Railway 
Line.  India has also signed an agreement with Bangladesh on the use of Chattogram 
and Mongla Ports for transit access to secure our interests. While recognizing 
Bangladesh’s sovereign right to pursue diverse partnerships, the Committee 

32 
emphasize the importance of safeguarding India’s strategic and security interests, 
especially concerning the Siliguri Corridor and the Bay of Bengal region.  In this 
regard, the development of Lalmonirhat Airbase with Chinese assistance, which is 
just 15 kms from the international border, is a matter of concern to the Committee. 
The Committee recommend that the Government closely monitor the activities 
of foreign powers in Bangladesh, considering that any attempt by unfriendly 
countries to establish a military foothold in Bangladesh would pose serious security 
risks for our country.  The Committee further urge the Government to leverage India’s 
comparative advantage in development cooperation to strengthen trust and reinforce 
India’s position as Bangladesh’s most reliable partner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Government of India maintains a close watch on all developments in the 
neighborhood having a bearing on our national security and undertakes all necessary 
measures to safeguard our national interests.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Border Management 
 The Committee note that India shares its longest international border with 
Bangladesh, stretching approximately 4096 km, making it the fifth longest border in 
the world. This border runs through the five Indian states of Assam, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Tripura and West Bengal, encompassing diverse terrains including 
mountainous, forested, and riverine areas. The Committee recognize that such 
diverse topographical conditions pose unique challenges for effective border 
management and security, especially for the Northeastern states. The Committee note 
that India has worked with Bangladesh on joint operations against terrorism and 
extremist activities. Border guarding forces from both countries have a long-standing 
practice of joint patrols, especially in areas like riverine regions where border security 
is difficult. Regular meetings, border talks, and joint working groups are established 
to address border disputes, manage humanitarian concerns, and maintain peace 
along the border. The Ministry has informed the Committee that sustained bilateral 
engagement between the governments of the two countries remains a cornerstone of 

33 
India’s border management strategy. However, the Committee note that the 
deteriorating internal situation in Bangladesh during the past one year has 
necessitated heightened security preparedness along the shared border.  
The Committee are hopeful that the current challenges in bilateral relations 
between the two countries since August 2024 will not have an adverse impact on the 
established and ongoing cooperative mechanisms between the two countries for 
ensuring border security and management.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government of India should continue to pursue constructive bilateral 
engagement with Bangladesh on all border-related issues, ensuring that evolving 
political and security developments in Bangladesh do not undermine joint 
mechanisms for border management.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Relations between Border Security Force (BSF) and Border Guard Bangladesh 
(BGB) continue to be cordial. In the context of the Coordinated Border Management Plan 
(CBMP), the BSF and BGB have regular interactions which include coordinated day & night 
patrolling, pillar checking, flag meetings, reporting of border violations and sharing of 
information which aims to synergize efforts between both the forces to control cross-border 
crime and maintain peace. Post August 2024, two meetings of the Director General Level 
Talks have been held in the month of February 2025 and August 2025 in Delhi and Dhaka 
respectively, providing a structured platform to discuss all outstanding issues related to 
border management and security.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Challenges in Border Management 
  The Committee observe that while significant progress has been made, 
strategic focus remains required to address persistent challenges such as illegal 
migration, smuggling, radicalization and cross border crime along the India-
Bangladesh border. The Committee also note that socio-economic vulnerabilities, 
particularly lack of livelihood opportunities, make border communities susceptible to 
illegal cross border activities. The Committee acknowledge the pivotal role played by 

34 
the Border Security Force (BSF) and the Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB) in 
maintaining border security through joint patrols, coordinated intelligence sharing, 
and hotline communications.  Appreciating the vital role played by the Border 
Security Force (BSF) in safeguarding the border and maintaining stability along one 
of the longest international boundaries in the world, the Committee recommend that 
the coordination between BSF and BGB be further strengthened through 
institutionalized mechanisms such as regular Director General-level talks, joint task 
forces, and sector-level coordination mechanisms on counter-terrorism, narcotics, 
human trafficking, fake currency, and other transnational crimes. 
In addition, the Committee also feel that the Government should prioritize 
deployment of advanced modern surveillance tools such as drones, thermal cameras, 
motion sensors, and satellite-based systems to enhance real-time monitoring and 
deterrence. In addition, a multi-agency coordination framework involving State 
Governments, central intelligence and investigative agencies, and law enforcement 
authorities be developed to ensure prompt detection and action against cross-border 
crimes. The Committee further emphasize that effective border management must go 
beyond physical security, and adopt a humane people-sensitive approach 
incorporating socio-economic development initiatives and community engagement 
along the border to reduce local vulnerabilities to smuggling, illegal migration, and 
cross-border crimes.  In addition, the Committee would like the Government to 
consider implementing Border Area Development Programme in border areas to help 
reduce border crimes and improve social environment in the border areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India and Bangladesh collaborate closely on counter-terrorism, narcotics, and fake 
currency, particularly with a view to tackle extremist groups with transnational and cross-
border links. This cooperation is supported by regular intelligence-sharing mechanisms for 
tracking and preventing terrorist activities, and for sharing actionable intelligence on 
terrorism and extremism. 
2. This coordination is carried out through established bilateral mechanisms, including 
the Joint Working Group on Security and Border Management (led by India’s Ministry of 
Home Affairs), DG-level talks between BSF and BGB, the Joint Task Force on Fake 
Currency, and other relevant platforms. 

35 
3. At the operational level, BSF and BGB coordinate regularly to monitor border 
movements, in an effort to prevent infiltration by terrorist groups, and prevent the border 
from being used for arms smuggling, drug trafficking, and other illicit activities. Both the 
countries have also strengthened cooperation on legal and enforcement frameworks to curb 
terror financing, money laundering, and related crimes. 
4. Further, during the latest DG-level talks held in Dhaka from 25–28 August 2025, India 
raised all major concerns with the Bangladesh side. Both sides reiterated their commitment 
to work jointly to monitor the border, and to maintain peace and tranquility along the India–
Bangladesh border. 
5. BSF is taking measures to ensure effective border surveillance grid through smart 
border surveillance projects of CIBMS, ESVP, LCTS along Indo-Bangladesh Border in 
addition to utilization of other surveillance equipment to prevent illegal migration and other 
trans-border crimes. 
6. Beyond enforcement and monitoring, establishment of land ports contributes to 
livelihood generation and economic activity in border regions, which helps address socio-
economic vulnerabilities linked to illegal cross-border activities. Land ports generate direct 
employment within port operations and logistics, such as drivers, data entry operators, 
clearing agents, and service staff, and indirect employment across tourism, hospitality, 
transport, and allied sectors. In this manner, land port development complements 
enforcement efforts and aligns with broader border area development objectives by 
combining regulated infrastructure, surveillance, and employment generation.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 The Committee note that the developments in Bangladesh have huge security 
implications for the Northeast region of India. The Committee note that the Border 
Security Force from India and the Border Guard of Bangladesh have regularly 
coordinated to monitor movements along the border and prevent infiltration by 
terrorist group. The Committee recommend that India should continue to engage with 
the concerned authorities in Bangladesh and develop an appropriate intelligence 
sharing mechanism to track and combat terrorist activities. It is of utmost importance 

36 
that Bangladesh does not become a safe haven for various insurgency groups 
operating in Northeast region of India.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 India and Bangladesh collaborate closely on counter-terrorism, narcotics, fake 
currency, particularly to tackle extremist groups with transnational and cross-border links. 
This cooperation is supported by regular intelligence-sharing mechanisms for tracking and 
preventing terrorist activities, and for sharing actionable intelligence on terrorism and 
extremism. 
2. This coordination is carried out through established bilateral mechanisms, including 
the Joint Working Group on Security and Border Management (led by India’s Ministry of 
Home Affairs), DG-level talks between BSF and BGB, the Joint Task Force on Fake 
Currency, and other relevant platforms. 
3. In line with the Committee's recommendations, BSF continues close coordination with 
Border Guard Bangladesh through regular joint patrols, real time intelligence sharing, and 
monitoring of border movements to prevent infiltration and terrorism activities. Engagement 
with Bangladeshi authorities has been sustained through institutional mechanisms to ensure 
long-term security cooperation. These measures aim to strengthen mutual trust, prevent 
insurgent activities, and support a stable, secure, and forward-looking Indo-Bangladesh 
relationship. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
Coordination between Centre and bordering States 
 The Committee recognize that the security, stability, and economic 
development of India’s northeastern states are intricately linked with effective 
management of the India-Bangladesh border. The Ministry has apprised the 
Committee that the prevailing situation in Bangladesh has direct implications on the 
security of India’s Northeastern region. In response, Government of India is 
undertaking a comprehensive approach in dealing with cross border security 
challenges in coordination with State Governments of North Eastern States, border 

37 
guarding agencies, central investigation agencies and law enforcement.  As a result 
of these efforts, 14 terrorists affiliated with Ansarullah Bangla Team (a wing of Al 
Qaida in Indian subcontinent) have been arrested by State Government of Assam 
since December, 2024 in joint operation with police and state agencies.  The 
Committee have also been informed that several Bangladeshi nationals have been 
detained and narcotics amounting to 12,300 kg have been seized, owing to 
heightened security at the border in recent months. 
The Committee are of the considered view that enhanced coordination between 
various Ministries will help in formulating plans for economic growth in the North 
Eastern region.  Stressing the importance of a holistic and coordinated approach, the 
Committee urge closer coordination among the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry 
of Home Affairs, Ministry for the Development of North East Regions and the 
governments of border states to address interconnected issues such as illegal 
migration, smuggling, drug trafficking, and infiltration by extremist groups. The 
Committee further recommend that India should engage proactively with Bangladesh 
on managing potential refugee inflows and humanitarian challenges, including those 
emanating from Myanmar, to ensure that responses remain consistent with India’s 
security and humanitarian obligations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of External Affairs through the States Division coordinates with the Ministry 
of Development of North Eastern Region (MoDONER) for the implementation of various 
infrastructure developmental projects for enhancing the socio-economic and connectivity 
development of North Eastern Region.  These projects are undertaken in various sectors, 
including roads, healthcare, education, water supply, power, tourism, digital connectivity 
etc. under Central Sectors Schemes of (i) Prime Minister's Development Initiative for North 
East Region (PM-DevINE); (ii) North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme 
(NESIDS) - Roads; (iii) North East Special Infrastructure Development Scheme - Other 
Than Roads Infrastructure (NESIDS-OTRI); (iv) Schemes of North Eastern Council 
(SoNEC); and (v) Special Development Packages (SDPs).  

38 
2. Empowered Inter-Ministerial Committee (EIMC), is a co-ordination mechanism 
chaired by Secretary, MoDONER for overseeing implementation, progress monitoring and 
evaluation of these projects.  MEA and MHA are members of EIMC.  
3. MoDoNER has also been taking review meetings with the Chief 
Secretaries/concerned Secretaries of all 8 North-eastern states to address various issues 
including cross border issues pertaining to Bangladesh and Myanmar.  
4. The Government of India and the Government of Bangladesh are working together 
on issues such as border security and illegal migration. This cooperation includes 
intelligence sharing on regional security threats. During the 2017 influx of refugees from 
Rakhine state of Myanmar into Bangladesh, the Government of India, under Operation 
Insaniyat, provided humanitarian assistance, consisting of food, medicines, and essential 
supplies. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
Centre-State Coordination 
  The Committee note that five Indian states bordering Bangladesh- West 
Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram play an important role in shaping 
India’s approach towards Bangladesh, owing to their geographic proximity, cultural 
ties, and cross-border socio-economic interdependence. While acknowledging that 
foreign policy formulation remains the prerogative of the Union Government, the 
Committee emphasize that state governments should be regularly consulted on 
matters affecting bilateral relations and border management. The Committee note 
the existence of coordination mechanisms such as North Eastern Council (NEC), 
NITI Aayog’s Sub-Group of Chief Ministers (SSM) and the States Division of MEA. 
The Committee desire that the above mechanisms may function more proactively.  
 The Committee suggest that existing structured inter-governmental dialogue 
mechanisms and the States’ Division of MEA be revitalized as a proactive interface 
between the MEA and relevant state governments, holding regular consultations on 
matters concerning Bangladesh.  

39 
Reply of the Government 
 The Committee’s recommendation has been noted. The States Division functions as 
the nodal point within the Ministry for coordination on matters relating to the North Eastern 
Region, including through its engagement with the Ministry of Development of North 
Eastern Region and participation in the Empowered Inter-Ministerial Committee overseeing 
key infrastructure and connectivity projects. 
2. In examining externally-aided projects and other proposals from the region, the 
Division ensures that issues with potential implications for bilateral relations or border 
management are considered in consultation with respective territorial division. The Ministry 
will continue to strengthen such coordination to ensure a coherent and proactive approach 
in matters concerning Bangladesh. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
Tackling illegal migration 
 The Committee note that illegal migration from Bangladesh continues to 
remain a matter of serious concern, particularly in the border States of West Bengal 
and Assam. The Committee are aware that while the detection, identification, and 
deportation of illegal Bangladeshi nationals fall within the purview of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and respective State Governments under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (now 
the Immigration and Foreigners Act, 2025), the Ministry of External Affairs plays an 
important role in facilitating nationality verification and repatriation of Bangladeshi 
nationals detained in India. The Committee note that a total of 2,369 cases of 
suspected Bangladeshi nationals is presently awaiting nationality verification by the 
Government of Bangladesh.   
 The Committee recommend that a dedicated bilateral mechanism or joint 
working group be established between India and Bangladesh to monitor the 
progress of nationality verification and repatriation.  The Committee hope that this 
would help in expediting the verification process.  The Committee also urge that 
humane treatment and due legal process be ensured for all detained individuals, in 
accordance with India’s constitutional safeguards and international obligations, 

40 
while maintaining robust national security measures to prevent illegal migration. The 
Committee note that continued diligence is essential to ensure that Indian nationals 
are not deported to Bangladesh in error. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal ministry for implementation of matters connected 
with the issues of overstay and illegal migration of foreign nationals. State Governments/UT 
Administrations are fully empowered to take appropriate legal action regarding restriction 
on movement and deportation of illegal immigrants and illegally staying foreigners. Further, 
Ministry of Home Affairs has also issued revised guidelines regarding deportation of the 
illegal migrants. All cases of deportation of illegal migrants are carried out pursuant to these 
guidelines.  
2. The issue of pending Nationality verification applications with Mission and Posts of 
Bangladesh in India are raised at relevant bilateral mechanisms and during meetings with 
concerned authorities of Bangladesh. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
Strengthening overall bilateral economic and trade relations 
 The Committee note that India and Bangladesh share a robust and multi-
dimensional economic and trade relationship that has witnessed substantial 
expansion in the past decade. Bangladesh continues to be India’s largest trading 
partner in South Asia, while India is Bangladesh’s second largest trading partner in 
Asia. The Committee observe that bilateral trade between the two countries has seen 
significant growth over the past decade, from USD 7.07 billion in 2014-15 to over USD 
13.46 billion in 2024-25, with India exporting USD 11.45 billion and Bangladesh 
exporting USD 2.0 billion in goods. This results in a trade surplus for India. However, 
much of Bangladesh’s imports from India consist of components and interim goods 
that contribute to Bangladesh’s export earnings as well as essential commodities that 
help Bangladesh to manage inflation.  

41 
   The Committee observe that the trade between India and Bangladesh, 
denominated in INR since July 2023, is an aspect that may continue to grow in 
mutually beneficial areas such as trade, connectivity, energy cooperation, etc. The 
signing of the tripartite power-sharing agreement among India, Bangladesh, and 
Nepal for cross-border transmission of power marks a significant milestone in sub-
regional energy cooperation, symbolizing the growing interdependence and mutual 
trust between the nations. At the same time, the Committee observe that despite the 
positive trajectory of bilateral trade, several structural impediments continue to 
constrain the full realization of the trade potential between the two countries. These 
include infrastructural bottlenecks, imposition of tariff and non-tariff barriers like port 
restrictions and import duties by the Government of Bangladesh, congestion at land 
ports, high dependence on road transport, and inadequate last-mile connectivity to 
key trading centres. The Committee also note that deficiencies in warehousing 
facilities, quarantine arrangements, and digital trade infrastructure add to the overall 
transaction costs and affect the competitiveness of trade between the two nations. 
The Committee recommend that the Government of India should intensify 
engagement with the Government of Bangladesh to modernize and upgrade 
infrastructure at key border trade points through expansion of Integrated Check 
Posts (ICPs), improvement of road, rail, and inland waterways connectivity, 
establishment of modern logistics and warehousing facilities, running of more freight 
trains, etc. The Committee further recommend that greater emphasis should be 
placed on digital trade facilitation, including electronic data interchange systems, 
online customs clearance, and simplified trade documentation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Government has consistently taken efforts to modernize and upgrade border 
infrastructure, given the steady growth in bilateral trade between the countries. In FY 2024-
25, around 30% bilateral trade was facilitated through border land ports. At present, eight 
land ports are operational along the India–Bangladesh border, with plans for phased 
expansion of the network. Infrastructure upgrades at these locations include development 
of cargo yards, parking facilities, warehouse infrastructure, and a single institutional 
platform for coordination among border agencies have enabled reduced congestion and 

42 
transaction costs. To enhance process efficiency, the Land Port Management System is 
being implemented to digitize port-level operations, reduce manual documentation, and 
provide end-to-end visibility of cargo movement. Integration with ICEGATE has enabled 
online customs clearances.  
2. Recognizing the importance of multimodal connectivity, efforts are underway to 
diversify transport channels and reduce dependence on road transport. Multiple cross-
border rail links are operational across the western, northern, and eastern sectors, 
enhancing cargo movement efficiency. To improve connectivity, two railway infrastructure 
projects, the Dhaka–Tongi–Joydebpur Railway Line Project and the Rehabilitation of the 
Kulaura–Shahbazpur Railway Line Project are being implemented under Government of 
India’s Lines of Credit.  
3. Road connectivity is also being strengthened through Line of Credit projects, 
including the Ashuganj–Sarail–Dharkhar 4-Lane National Highway Project and the 
Bariyarhat–Heyanko–Ramgarh Road Widening Project in Bangladesh, which are expected 
to facilitate smoother cross-border trade flows. 
4. With respect to inland waterways, India is partnering with Bangladesh under the 
Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade for fairway development in the identified 
stretches of Ashuganj–Zakiganj of the Kushiyara River and Sirajganj–Daikhowa of the 
Jamuna River, to ensure year round navigability, thereby reducing logistics costs and 
improving connectivity with India’s North Eastern Region. 
5. Further, issues relating to tariff and non-tariff barriers are addressed through 
established bilateral mechanisms at appropriate levels with Bangladesh side. 
6. Government remains committed to working closely with Bangladesh to modernize 
border infrastructure, enhance multimodal connectivity, deepen digital trade facilitation, and 
unlock the full potential of bilateral economic cooperation in a mutually beneficial manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
 
 

43 
Recommendation No. 20 
Dumping of Chinese goods into India 
 The Committee note with concern the reported issue of dumping of Chinese 
goods, particularly fabrics, into India through Bangladesh under the cover of 
preferential market access provisions available to Bangladesh under the South Asian 
Free Trade Area (SAFTA). The Committee are of the view that such practices distort 
fair competition, undermine India’s manufacturing sector, and create asymmetries 
detrimental to domestic industry. The Committee also take note of the apprehensions 
regarding Bangladesh’s potential accession to the Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP), which will imply free trade between Bangladesh and 
China. The Committee concur with the Government’s assessment that such a 
development could indirectly facilitate preferential entry of Chinese goods into the 
Indian market through transshipment or value-addition loopholes, thereby adversely 
affecting India’s trade interests. 
The Committee recommend that the Government of India convey its 
reservations to Bangladesh at the highest diplomatic and trade policy levels, 
underlining the implications of such actions on the integrity of the bilateral trading 
framework. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, in coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs, adopt stringent rules-
of-origin verification mechanisms to ensure that preferential trade access under 
SAFTA or any future CEPA is not misused by third-country exporters. 
Reply of the Government 
 Trade under the South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) is governed by Rules of Origin 
provisions prescribing value addition and origin criteria for availing preferential access. To 
strengthen compliance, Government has rolled out an electronic Certificate of Origin 
(eCoO) verification mechanism enabling real-time authentication of Certificates of Origin 
issued by authorised agencies in India.  
2. The issue of preventing misuse of SAFTA provisions has also been raised in meetings 
of the Joint Group of Customs (JGC). Government has requested Bangladesh to establish 
an online verification facility to enable real-time authentication of Certificates of Origin and 
reduce the risk of transshipment of third-country goods. 

44 
3. Government has taken note of the committee’s recommendation to adopt stringent 
rules-of-origin verification mechanisms so that preferential trade access under any future 
CEPA is not misused by third-country exporters.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
Development Partnership 
 The Committee note that infrastructure development and connectivity 
cooperation have emerged as a cornerstone of India-Bangladesh bilateral relations, 
encompassing not only physical connectivity through rail, road, and waterways, but 
also energy and digital linkages. India has extended developmental assistance of 
nearly USD 10 billion to Bangladesh in the form of Lines of Credit and grants for 
projects spanning infrastructure, energy, and community development. While 
acknowledging the tangible progress achieved through initiatives such as the 
completion of the Maitree Super Thermal Power Plant, the Khulna-Mongla, Agartala-
Akhaura Rail Lines, India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline and Maitri Bridge over Feni, 
the Committee express concern that certain projects continue to face delays owing 
to tendering constraints, procedural bottlenecks, and security-related constraints in 
project areas.  
The Committee further observe that these connectivity initiatives have yielded 
mutual dividends, facilitating trade expansion, improving access to regional markets, 
strengthening people-to-people contact, and contributing to broader regional 
stability and economic integration.  The Committee are pleased to know that recently 
an Indian delegation visited Dhaka to discuss concessional finance projects, leading 
to development of a mutually agreed roadmap to advance these projects.  Ongoing 
projects include Dhaka-Tongi Joydepur Railway line, Kulauru Shabhazpur Railway 
line, widening of Ramgarh to Baraiyarhat Road, evacuation lines at Rooppur Nuclear 
Plant, etc.  Tendering is also underway for various Engineering Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) projects, such as Khulna-Darshana Railway line, Parbatipur 
Kaunia Railway line, Bogra to Saheed M Mousur Ali Station Railway line, Ashugang 
Inland Container River Port Project, upgradation of Mongla Port Project, etc.   

45 
While recognizing the fact that Bangladesh has been the recipient of robust 
developmental aid from the Government of India, the Committee concurs with the 
Ministry’s view that improved connectivity brings mutual benefits such as enhancing 
trade, regional integration and improved access to the North Eastern states.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should take all 
necessary steps for timely completion of the major ongoing projects in Bangladesh. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 India’s development cooperation with Bangladesh, extended through Lines of Credit 
(LoCs) and grant assistance, remains a key pillar of the bilateral relationship. Several major 
connectivity and energy projects undertaken under this framework have enhanced trade 
facilitation, regional integration and connectivity with India’s North Eastern Region.  
2. To ensure timely execution of ongoing Government of India/LoC projects, a structured 
Project Monitoring Mechanism is in place. This includes Bilateral LoC Project Review 
Meetings, Project Monitoring Committee Meetings, Technical Committee Meetings, Project 
Steering Committee Meetings, and periodic Virtual Review Meetings convened by the 
Ministry of External Affairs. These mechanisms facilitate regular engagement with all 
stakeholders. In addition, joint site inspections are undertaken periodically by officials of the 
High Commission of India in Dhaka, India EXIM Bank, concerned project authorities, and 
Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance, Government of Bangladesh to assess 
progress on the ground and address implementation issues. The Government remains 
committed to the timely and effective implementation of development partnership projects 
in consultation with the Government of Bangladesh, with a view to strengthening 
connectivity, expanding trade, and supporting regional economic integration. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is undertaking an internal 
review of various developmental projects, including in Bangladesh.  The Committee 
note that there have been instances where projects have not commenced despite the 
extension of the line of credit.  The Committee note that during the Foreign Office 

46 
Consultation, both sides expressed a desire to continue the ongoing cooperation on 
developmental partnership projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should undertake a comprehensive review and rationalization of the existing Line of 
Credit portfolio to identify high-impact, viable projects and prioritize their timely 
completion. The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of this review 
exercise within three months. The Committee further suggest that the Government 
should proactively publicize successful development partnership initiatives through 
strategic communication and outreach efforts, thereby enhancing India’s image as a 
reliable development partner and reinforcing its soft power among the people of 
Bangladesh. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A comprehensive review of Government of India-supported LoC projects was 
undertaken through established bilateral mechanisms. The 23rd bilateral LoC Review 
Meeting was held in Dhaka on 5–6 March 2025, during which all ongoing LoC projects were 
reviewed in detail. Challenges that have affected project execution, including security of 
Indian personnel and assets, lack of project readiness and frequent scope changes, etc.  
were discussed with Bangladesh. Following mutual consultations, both sides agreed to 
delist twelve projects that were at the pre-execution stage.  Based on project viability and 
progress on the ground, eight ongoing LoC projects have been identified for prioritised and 
time-bound execution.  
2. The overall perception of India’s development projects in Bangladesh remains  
positive since these projects deliver tangible benefits to the people of Bangladesh. Efforts 
continue to be taken by Indian Mission and Posts in Bangladesh to enhance visibility of 
successful development partnership initiatives through coordinated outreach, media 
engagement and public diplomacy initiatives. Government remains committed to ensuring 
effective utilisation of LoC resources, prioritising high-impact projects and strengthening the 
development partnership framework with Bangladesh. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 

47 
Recommendation No. 24 
Bangladesh-Bhutan-India-Nepal (BBIN) Motor Vehicles Agreement 
 The Committee note that the Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) Motor 
Vehicles Agreement, signed in 2015, represents a strategically significant sub-
regional initiative aimed at facilitating the seamless movement of goods, people, and 
services across borders, thereby fostering deeper economic integration in South 
Asia.  The Committee, however, observe with concern that the implementation of the 
Agreement has been impeded by delays in the finalization of the protocols for the 
movement of passenger and cargo vehicles.  The Committee note that BBIN MVA is 
currently under finalisation and is expected to streamline cargo movement between 
its participating countries viz Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal.  Currently, goods 
bound from Bangladesh to Nepal and Bhutan and vice-versa have to undergo 
transhipment at designated land ports.  Once BBIN is operationalized, it will allow for 
seamless movement of vehicles in the region contributing to increasing trade flows.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India should 
intensify its diplomatic and technical engagement with the Governments of 
Bangladesh, Nepal, and Bhutan to expedite the finalization and adoption of the 
pending Protocols. The Committee also desire that India may take the lead and 
consider extending capacity-building support and technical assistance to partner 
countries for harmonizing transport, customs, and regulatory frameworks, to ensure 
operational preparedness. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) Motor Vehicles Agreement (MVA) was 
signed in Thimphu, Bhutan on 15 June 2015 to facilitate and regulate the movement of 
passenger, personal and cargo vehicles among BBIN countries. Bangladesh, India and 
Nepal have ratified the Agreement, while ratification by Bhutan is pending. Bhutan has 
conveyed its consent to the remaining three countries to proceed with implementation. 
2. India and Bangladesh have conveyed their concurrence for signing a three-country 
(BIN) enabling MoU to operationalise the MVA, and concurrence from Nepal is awaited. As 

48 
the BBIN MVA is a framework agreement, detailed Protocols governing the movement of 
passenger and cargo vehicles are being developed jointly by the participating countries. 
3. The most recent meeting to review the implementation of BBIN MVA was held in 
Dhaka on 5–6 March 2024. Discussions were held on the draft Protocol for movement of 
cargo vehicles, modalities for trial runs, and members agreed to the draft Protocol on 
movement of passenger vehicles. Trial runs of cargo vehicles among India, Bangladesh 
and Nepal have been conducted. Progress has also been made in upgrading connectivity 
infrastructure and Integrated Check Posts to support operationalisation. 
4. India is committed to engage actively at diplomatic and technical levels to facilitate 
early operationalisation of the Agreement. The Government supports the BBIN framework 
through institutional coordination and capacity-building initiatives with member countries. 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding further extension of capacity building and 
technical assistance has been noted.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
Cultural Ties and Shared Civilizational Heritage 
 The Committee note that India and Bangladesh share profound civilizational, 
linguistic, and cultural affinities, rooted in centuries of shared history, literature, and 
artistic expression. This shared heritage, reflected through figures such as 
Rabindranath Tagore and Kazi Nazrul Islam, people-to-people ties and through 
common festivals, music, and cinema continues to serve as a bridge of goodwill and 
understanding between the two countries. The Committee observe that initiatives 
such as joint cultural festivals, literary collaborations, and youth exchange 
programmes have contributed to strengthening of mutual empathy, preserving the 
spirit of the 1971 Liberation War, and the moral and emotional foundation of bilateral 
ties.  The Committee, however, express concern that the recent developments in 
Bangladesh have temporarily eroded the atmosphere of trust and goodwill between 
the two peoples. The Committee are of the considered view that cultural diplomacy 
and people-to-people initiatives can act as a potent instrument for rebuilding 
confidence and deepening mutual understanding at this crucial juncture.  

49 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India should 
intensify efforts to institutionalize annual joint cultural events, including Tagore-
Nazrul literary festivals, joint film retrospectives, and cross-border art residencies, in 
collaboration with cultural institutions, universities and civil society organizations 
from both countries. The Committee further recommend that the Government of India 
should closely work with the Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and West 
Bengal to promote sub-national cultural linkages, leveraging their shared linguistic 
and historical heritage to advance deeper people-to-people engagement. The 
Committee are of the view that bordering states, especially West Bengal can play a 
supportive role in advancing India’s strategic goals in Bangladesh particularly in 
people-to-people connectivity and trade facilitation considering deep cultural and 
geographical linkages. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 India and Bangladesh share deep civilizational, linguistic and cultural linkages that 
continue to form an important foundation of bilateral relations. Government has made 
sustained efforts to promote cultural diplomacy in Bangladesh in coordination with the High 
Commission of India and Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre (IGCC), Dhaka. 
2. Recent initiatives include participation of Bangladeshi cultural troupes in major 
festivals in India, hosting of Bangladeshi artists and writers under exchange programmes, 
and facilitation of cross-border cultural performances. A Hindi Chair has also been 
established at the University of Dhaka under a five-year MoU valid up to 2027. IGCC, Dhaka 
regularly organises cultural events including observance of Tagore and Nazrul 
anniversaries, Lalon Sandhya, Maitri Diwas, film screenings, exhibitions, and celebrations 
of common festivals such as Pohela Boishakh, Durga Puja and Buddha Purnima. 
 
3. Collaboration with Bangladeshi universities, cultural institutions and civil society 
organisations continues. Sub-national cultural linkages are being strengthened through 
programmes reflecting shared traditions of India’s North-Eastern and bordering States. 
Under the Cultural Exchange Programme framework, proposals for enhanced cooperation, 
including exhibitions, performing arts exchanges and academic collaboration, are under 
consideration in consultation with relevant institutions. 
 

50 
4. The Government remains committed to further advancing cultural diplomacy with 
Bangladesh, with a view to promoting people-to-people engagement as an important means 
of rebuilding confidence, enhancing mutual understanding, and sustaining the historical ties 
underpinning bilateral relations. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
Human-Resource Development and Capacity Building under ITEC and ICCR 
 The Committee note that human resource development and capacity-building 
initiatives, particularly through the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(ITEC) Programme and ICCR scholarships is a key component of India’s development 
cooperation efforts with Bangladesh. The Committee observe that over 3,000 
Bangladeshi students have been awarded ICCR scholarships in the last decade and 
around 500 scholarships are being processed for the academic year 2025-26.  The 
Committee have been informed that these scholarships have been useful in 
strengthening people-to-people ties and providing opportunities to Bangladeshi 
students to better know and understand India.  The Committee also note that India 
has been providing training to Bangladeshi officials from civil services, police, 
judiciary, etc. at various premier training institutes in India. The Committee also note 
that in March 2021, India had announced 1000 ‘Suborno Jayanti Scholarships’ for 
Bangladeshi students.  So far, more than 900 scholarships have been awarded to 
Bangladeshi students between 2022-2024.  In addition, under the Muktijoddha 
Scholarship Scheme, 24,018 scholarships have been awarded to wards of 
Bangladeshi war veterans. 
The Committee are glad to note that flagship initiatives such as ICCR 
scholarships and the ITEC courses continue to enjoy wide recognition among 
Bangladeshi students and professionals.  The Committee desire that more 
Bangladeshi youths, students and professionals are provided opportunities under 
ICCR and ITEC training programmes. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government 
of India to significantly upscale the number and diversity of ITEC and ICCR 
scholarships for Bangladesh, with particular focus on emerging sectors such as 

51 
digital innovation, renewable energy, public health, and sustainable agriculture. The 
Committee also suggest that the Ministry should ensure that these programmes 
remain responsive to evolving needs and sectoral priorities. The Committee further 
desire that more scholarship to wards of war veterans may be provided under 
Muktijoddha Scholarship Scheme. The Committee desire that increasing number of 
Bangladeshi professionals, researchers, and youth should benefit from various 
sector specific, skill oriented and other training modules. 
Reply of the Government 
 Bangladesh remains one of the largest beneficiaries of India’s capacity building 
programmes. Under the ITEC framework, training is provided across traditional areas of 
governance, public administration, police and judicial training, as well as emerging sectors 
such as digital innovation, renewable energy, sustainable agriculture and public health.  In 
FY 2024–25, 65 officials participated in ITEC courses in India, and in FY 2025–26 (till date), 
25 participants have undergone training. Customized programmes, including courses 
conducted through institutions such as the National Centre for Good Governance (NCGG), 
continue to be designed in response to sectoral requirements conveyed by the Government 
of Bangladesh. 
 
2. ICCR scholarship programmes continue to receive strong participation from 
Bangladeshi students. In FY 2025–26, ICCR has awarded 497 scholarships under the 
Suborno Jayanti Scholarship Scheme, 46 under the Lata Mangeshkar Dance and Music 
Scholarship Scheme and 10 under the AYUSH Scholarship Scheme. Over 2,161 
Bangladeshi students have also been granted visas under self-financed admission to Indian 
institutions since January 2025. There is a proposal under consideration to revisit the current 
distribution of Suborno Jayanti scholarships to increase the share of STEM disciplines.   
 
3. Under the Scholarship scheme for Muktijoddhas, 2000 scholarships are provided 
every year to wards of Muktijoddhas to undertake Higher Secondary and Undergraduate 
studies in Bangladesh. So far, 24,018 scholarships have been awarded under this scheme. 
The ‘Muktijoddha Scholarship’ scheme is being reviewed with a view to increasing the 
impact of the scheme. Under the Muktijoddha Medical Scheme, since 2019, Muktijoddhas 
have been provided support to avail medical treatment in India.  

52 
 
4. The Committee’s proposal to upscale the number and diversity of scholarships for 
Bangladesh has been noted for compliance. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
Visa Facilitation and Consular Cooperation 
 The Committee recognize that visa and consular facilitation constitute the most 
visible and people-centric dimension of India–Bangladesh relations, directly 
impacting the movement of tourists, patients, students, and businesspersons. In 
2023, India issued over 1.6 million visas to Bangladeshi nationals, making it one of 
India’s largest visa operations abroad. However, following the events of 5 August, 
2024, visa services were significantly scaled down, and consular personnel were 
withdrawn from Bangladesh. The Committee observe that essential visa categories 
have continued to function despite temporary disruptions resulting from the security 
situation post-August 2024. Bangladesh remains one of India’s major visa operations, 
processing approximately 1,500 visas daily, with medical visas accounting for around 
80% of the total.  
The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s commitment to prioritizing medical 
visas, underscoring India’s responsiveness to the healthcare needs of Bangladeshi 
people. However, the Committee express concern that reduced visa processing 
volumes and the security-related disruptions may adversely affect public perception 
and impede people-to-people engagement, which is vital for fostering bilateral ties. 
Recognizing the importance of sustained inter-personal contact for preserving 
mutual trust and confidence, the Committee urge that the Ministry of External Affairs, 
in coordination with concerned security agencies, should progressively normalize 
visa operations in Bangladesh as soon as the situation permits. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to develop a bilateral consular cooperation mechanism to 
periodically review visa policy, address grievances, and ensure that legitimate 

53 
travellers are not subjected to various inconveniences, while maintaining necessary 
security safeguards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Bangladesh remains among the countries whose nationals are eligible for visas on a 
gratis basis. It also continues to be one of India’s largest visa operations, notwithstanding 
the decrease in the number of visas issued in the wake of the events of August 2024.  
 
2. Close to 1,500 visas are currently being issued each day across five centers in 
Bangladesh with Medical visas accounting for approximately 80% of the total visas issued. 
The evolving security situation is under continuous review, and any decision on increasing 
daily issuance of visas or operationalizing additional visa centers will be taken in 
coordination with the relevant Ministries of the Government of India. 
 
3. A structured mechanism for discussion and review of visa policies exists through the 
Bilateral Consular Dialogue. The next meeting of the dialogue will be considered in 
coordination with the relevant Ministries in India and the Bangladesh authorities. 
 
4.  Our Mission and Posts in Bangladesh are continuously taking steps to streamline 
processes and to address applicants’ grievances, while ensuring necessary safeguards in 
line with existing visa guidelines. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 30 
Strengthening Institutional mechanism for water cooperation 
 The Committee observe that water sharing constitutes one of the most vital and 
sensitive aspects of India-Bangladesh bilateral relationship. India and Bangladesh 
share 54 transboundary rivers and have a water sharing Treaty, namely Ganga Water 
Treaty of 1996 on Ganga River along with Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) for 
withdrawal of water from Feni and Kushiyara rivers. The Indo-Bangladesh Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC), established in 1972, serves as the principal institutional 
mechanism for cooperation on shared water resources, including flood control, 

54 
irrigation, cyclone warning, and flood forecasting. The Committee also note that a 
meeting of the JRC was held in Kolkata in March 2025. The Technical Level Meeting 
(TLM) of the JRC further enables experts from both sides to undertake detailed and 
issue-specific deliberations. 
The Ministry has further apprised the Committee that discussions are ongoing 
between both sides to finalize more water sharing treaties on Teesta, Manu, Khowai, 
and Dharla rivers. While the JRC and the Ganga Water Treaty remain the cornerstone 
of bilateral water cooperation, the Committee find that the absence of agreements on 
other major shared rivers, particularly the Teesta, continues to pose challenges.  
The Committee feel that the overall river water cooperation framework between 
the two countries ought to be given due importance and institutional regularity. The 
Committee recommend that the Government of India, in coordination with the 
Government of Bangladesh, should ensure that meetings of the Joint Rivers 
Commission, at both technical and ministerial levels, are convened on a regular and 
time-bound basis. The Committee also concur with expert opinion that bilateral water 
cooperation should move beyond water sharing of major rivers during dry-season, 
and should include micro-level initiatives such as aquifer recharge, river 
rejuvenation, and technical collaboration. Both countries should also actively explore 
joint projects on smaller transboundary rivers such as the Manu, Khowai, and Dharla 
to promote localized water management, enhance climate resilience, and strengthen 
mutual trust. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The bilateral Institutional framework of India-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission 
(JRC) was set up in the year 1972. The bilateral meetings under the JRC framework are 
held as per the mutual convenience of both the countries. The Joint Committee Meetings 
for sharing of Ganga Water are held thrice a year. (Last meeting was held in September 
2025). 
  
2. India and Bangladesh share 54 trans-boundary/ common-border rivers. As on date, 
the two countries have signed one Treaty (signed in 1996) on the sharing of Ganga waters 
at Farakka; apart from one MoU signed in 2019 for withdrawing water from Feni river for the 

55 
drinking water supply scheme of Sabroom Town in the Indian state of Tripura and one MoU 
signed in 2022 for withdrawal of water from the common border river Kushiyara. 
 
3. The Technical Level Meeting under the JRC framework deliberates on  other water 
resources related matters of mutual interest, apart from river water sharing on common-
border / trans-boundary rivers. The agenda for deliberation in the Technical Level Meeting 
is mutually decided. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
Enhancing Climate Resilience and Environmental Cooperation 
 The Committee note that climate change is increasingly impacting river flows 
and rainfall patterns, leading to environmental challenges in both India and 
Bangladesh, particularly in coastal and flood-prone regions. The Sundarbans, a vast 
mangrove delta shared by both countries, is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change, including rising sea levels, increased salinity, and loss of 
biodiversity. Recognizing the shared ecological vulnerability of the Sundarbans 
region, the Committee note with satisfaction the establishment of the India-
Bangladesh Joint Working Group on Conservation of the Sundarbans. The 
Committee appreciate the fact that this platform provides an avenue for cooperation 
on biodiversity mapping, water quality monitoring, and ecosystem management in 
the deltaic region shared by both countries. The Committee recommend that this 
mechanism be further strengthened to include joint initiatives on climate adaptation, 
biodiversity conservation, salinity management, and livelihood resilience for local 
populations. The Committee further suggest that the two countries should explore 
the feasibility of developing a comprehensive bilateral framework on climate and 
riverine ecosystem management, integrating aspects of water quality, flood 
forecasting, and sustainable delta management. The Committee are of the view that 
cooperation on climate change and disaster management offers a politically neutral 
domain for deepening bilateral trust between the two countries. The Ministry may also 
apprise the Committee on the progress of implementation of MoU signed by India and 
Bangladesh in 2011 for conservation of Sundarbans. 
 

56 
Reply of the Government 
 India and Bangladesh signed a “Shared Vision for India-Bangladesh Green 
Partnership” document in 2024 as a comprehensive framework for discussion and review of 
bilateral cooperation on climate and riverine ecosystem management, environmental 
degradation, and sustainable development. Key areas of cooperation included disaster risk 
reduction, management of 54 common trans-boundary rivers, and Sundarbans 
conservation. A Joint Working Group on Conservation of Sundarbans was established under 
the MoU, which last met in 2016 in New Delhi. Discussions under the framework may be 
resumed in coordination with the relevant Ministries in both countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
Flood Management and Data Sharing 
 The Committee observe that since 1972, India and Bangladesh have 
successfully engaged in flood forecasting and hydrological data exchange under the 
aegis of the Joint River Commission. This cooperation has played an important role 
in mitigating the impact of floods and enhancing preparedness in both countries. The 
Committee recommend that this cooperation be modernized and expanded through 
the integration of modern technologies such as satellite-based rainfall estimation, 
remote sensing, and digital hydrological modelling, to improve transboundary water 
management and enhance the resilience of both nations to climate variability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Since 1972, there are existing arrangements for transmission of agreed flood-related 
data (water level, discharge and rainfall) for identified stations/ sites on 
Ganga, Brahmaputra, Barak, Manu, Gumti, Teesta, Jaldhaka, Torsa and Mahananda to 
Bangladesh by e-mail for flood forecasting and warnings. Point-to-point flood data of 
identified stations is also transmitted to Bangladesh by wireless and e-mail. During the flood 
season of 2023, a digital communication group of concerned officers from India and 
Bangladesh had also been activated for transmitting flood data-related information timely in 
a seamless manner to Bangladesh. During the flood season of 2025, Flood Forecasting 
Centre of Bangladesh Water Development Board, started providing (w.e.f. 6.10.2025), the 

57 
flood related data of three rivers (Upper Atrai, Punarbhaba and Tangon flowing from 
Bangladesh to West Bengal) to the Central Flood Control Room of IW&D, Govt of West 
Bengal. 
 2. Central Water Commission is formulating 7-day advisories of flood using Satellite 
based real – time rainfall estimates, and seven days rainfall forecast through Numerical 
Weather Prediction models being shared by IMD on a seamless fashion. Mathematical 
model has been used for formulation of advisories, and these advisories are available in 
public domain through a dedicated website https://aff.india-water.gov.in/home.php. In 
addition to that, hourly data of all stations is available online on real time basis in the 
separate dedicated websites which is also available in public domain at https://ffs.india-
water.gov.in.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
  

58 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

59 
CHAPTER- IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Stay of  Sheikh Hasina in India 
 
 The Committee note that the stay of former Prime Minister of Bangladesh, 
Sheikh Hasina in the country and India’s approach in this regard is guided by its 
civilizational ethos and humanitarian tradition of offering refuge to individuals facing 
circumstances of grave distress or existential threat.  The Committee have also been 
informed that the Government of India do not provide her with a political platform or 
any space to undertake political activity from Indian territory. The Committee also 
note that while extending such humanitarian consideration, India has strictly adhered 
to the principle that no political activity is directed against any other country from our 
territory. The Committee recommend that the Government should continue to uphold 
its principled and humanitarian approach, consistent with India’s values and 
international responsibilities, while ensuring that such situations are managed with 
due sensitivity. The Committee have taken note of the Bangladesh Government’s 
extradition request following the pronouncement of a death sentence on Sheikh 
Hasina in absentia, and urge the Government to keep the Committee apprised of its 
consideration of the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The extradition request is being examined by the competent authorities of the 
Government of India in accordance with applicable law and established procedures. The 
recommendation is noted for compliance.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Completion of Land Boundary Agreement and Border Demarcation 
 The Committee note that the Land Boundary Agreement (LBA) between India 
and Bangladesh, signed in 2015, was a landmark achievement that resolved one of 

61 
the most complex and long-pending issues in bilateral relations through the 
exchange of enclaves and rationalization of the land boundary. Alongside, the 
maritime boundary settlement concluded in the same year further strengthened 
mutual trust and laid the groundwork for a more stable and cooperative border 
management framework. However, the Committee note that residual demarcation 
challenges, particularly in difficult terrain such as the Sundarbans, remain 
unresolved.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
expedite the completion of the residual boundary demarcation in a time-bound 
manner so as to consolidate the gains achieved through the Land Boundary 
Agreement and contribute to more effective border management.  The Committee are 
of the view that timely completion of the remaining sectors has become even more 
important in view of the prevailing situation in Bangladesh. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 International boundary along the Bangladesh border has been demarcated in most 
areas. Demarcation in few remaining stretches is under consideration at the appropriate 
level. Pending issues of boundary demarcation continue to be discussed at the appropriate 
institutional mechanism created for the purpose: the Joint Boundary Conference (JBC). 
These issues were discussed at the 5th Joint Boundary Conference (JBC) between 
Bangladesh and India held in Dhaka between 21-23 November 2022.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Leveraging Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) 
 The Committee recognize that beyond bilateral engagement, regional 
cooperation groupings, particularly the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral 
Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) offer a promising avenue to deepen 
connectivity, boost trade, and enrich cultural and people to people exchange with 
Bangladesh. With the BIMSTEC Secretariat headquartered in Dhaka and Bangladesh 
having taken over the chair of BIMSTEC for the next one year, the Committee view 
this as a timely opportunity for both the countries to strengthen diplomatic and 
technical cooperation. The Committee are given to understand that the BIMSTEC, 

62 
with the help of Asian Development Bank, has come up with a ‘Master Plan’ on 
transport connectivity for the entire region, including Myanmar and Thailand.  The 
Committee recommend that India should extend full diplomatic and technical support 
to Bangladesh during its presidency and work closely towards implementing the 
BIMSTEC Master Plan for Transport Connectivity with assistance from the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB).  The Committee may be kept apprised of all the 
developments in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi met Professor Muhammad Yunus, Chief Adviser 
of the interim government of Bangladesh, on the sidelines of the BIMSTEC Summit in 
Bangkok on 4 April 2025. Prime Minister congratulated Bangladesh on assuming the Chair 
of BIMSTEC and looked forward to the forum further advancing regional cooperation under 
its leadership. Our Mission in Dhaka actively promotes this grouping in Bangladesh on 
various platforms in an effort to transform it into an active regional forum. 
 
2. The BIMSTEC Master Plan was formally adopted at the Fifth BIMSTEC Summit held 
in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on 30 March 2022. Last year on March 6, 2025, a mid-term review 
of the BIMSTEC Master Plan for transport connectivity was held to assess progress and to 
strategize future steps in improving regional transport networks. At the 6th BIMSTEC 
Summit held in Bangkok in April 2025, the BIMSTEC Agreement on Maritime Transport 
Cooperation (AMTC), was adopted. India was the first country to ratify the AMTC, and during 
the 2nd BIMSTEC Ports Conclave held in Visakhapatnam in July 2025, Government of India 
announced setting up a BIMSTEC Centre of Excellence in Sustainable Maritime Transport 
(BSMarTC) in Mumbai to support implementation and build technical capacity in Bangladesh 
and other member states. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Border Fencing 
 The Committee note that out of the total 4096 kms of India-Bangladesh border, 
approximately 3231 have been fenced while about 864 km remain unfenced due to 
difficult terrain and riverine conditions. The Committee have been informed that while 

63 
fencing is feasible for about 689 kms, approximately 175 kms present significant 
challenge due to its difficult terrain. Issues such as the bilateral agreements which 
restrict construction within 150 yards of the India-Bangladesh boundary and land 
acquisition hurdles further complicate the process. 
Recognizing that effective border management is vital for national security, 
regional stability, and socio-economic development, the Committee recommend that 
the Government of India prioritize completion of the remaining fencing work by 
engaging with Bangladesh, expediting processes of technical design, feasibility 
studies, and land acquisition. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, in coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and state 
governments, should adopt innovative engineering and technological solutions such 
as floating fences, laser-based intrusion detection systems, and smart sensors in 
difficult riverine and populated sectors, where conventional fencing is impractical. 
 
Reply of the Government 
      The relevant authorities of the Government of India regularly pursue cases of land 
acquisition with the concerned state authorities for completion of border fencing in feasible 
areas.  
 
2. As per MHA's directive, coverage of all gaps areas along the Indo-Bangladesh border 
is to be done through technological solutions. To this end, BSF has proposed 
comprehensive technological solutions which are under consideration. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
Bangladesh’s graduation from LDC Status and future trade architecture 
 The Committee take note of Bangladesh’s impending graduation from the 
category of Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in 2026 and recognize that this 
development will have significant implications for bilateral trade. The Committee 
observe that Bangladesh currently enjoys duty-free and quota-free market access to 
India for nearly all products under SAFTA as part of its LDC benefits. Upon 

64 
graduation, Bangladesh will cease to qualify for several preferential treatments which 
could affect its export competitiveness and alter the existing trade dynamics. 
The Committee appreciate that both countries have initiated negotiations on a 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) to establish a forward-
looking framework for trade and investment cooperation post-graduation in line with 
India’s Neighbourhood First policy. The Committee, therefor, recommend that the 
Government of India should expedite the conclusion of CEPA negotiations well before 
the end of 2026 to ensure continuity, predictability, and stability in the bilateral 
economic relationship.  As India has a much larger economy, the Committee are of 
the view that the CEPA should include provisions for continued preferential treatment 
for select sectors of the Bangladeshi economy, while also safeguarding India’s 
domestic interests and providing a balanced framework for long-term cooperation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government has taken note of the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee regarding Bangladesh’s graduation from Least Developed Country (LDC) status 
and the proposed Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA). Discussion 
towards commencement of negotiations had been initiated prior to August 2024, which is 
expected to pick pace under the new Government in Bangladesh.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
Role of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
 The Committee note that the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), 
through the Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre (IGCC) in Dhaka, has played a pivotal role 
in promoting India’s cultural diplomacy in Bangladesh, offering training in Yoga, 
Hindustani classical music, Kathak, and Hindi, and organizing collaborative 
performances by eminent artists from both countries. The Committee commend 
ICCR’s initiatives such as the International Dance and Music Festival and its efforts 
to sustain cultural engagement even during periods of political uncertainty. The 

65 
Committee are hopeful that the cultural programs of renowned artists of India and 
Bangladesh will contribute in promotion of people-to-people contacts. 
Recognizing the increasing demand and positive response, the Committee are 
of the considered view that the scope and geographical reach of ICCR’s activities 
should be substantially expanded beyond Dhaka to other major cultural hubs of 
Bangladesh. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the ICCR, in coordination 
with the Government of Bangladesh, expand its cultural footprint by establishing 
satellite cultural centres in other cities, as well as by organizing mobile cultural 
troupes and developing digital cultural platforms to reach wider audiences. The 
Committee further suggest that the ICCR and Bangladesh’s Shilpakala Academy 
jointly develop a Cultural Exchange Roadmap focusing on joint training programmes, 
artist residencies, youth festivals, and academic collaborations to deepen the cultural 
foundation of the bilateral relationship.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee regarding the 
role of ICCR in expanding cultural engagement with Bangladesh. To expand outreach 
beyond Dhaka, ICCR and IGCC are leveraging digital platforms, including official social 
media channels and curated online content. Selected cultural programmes such as Lalon 
Sandhya and Maitri Diwas are recorded and disseminated digitally to reach wider audiences. 
Interactive initiatives, including online engagements targeted at youth, are also undertaken 
to broaden participation and visibility of cultural activities. IGCC continues to collaborate with 
universities and cultural institutions in Bangladesh, including through literary events, 
exhibitions, commemorative programmes and performances.  
2. The proposal for expanding ICCR’s footprint through satellite cultural centres and 
outreach initiatives in other cities has been noted for compliance. Committee’s suggestion 
that the ICCR and Bangladesh’s Shilpakala Academy jointly develop a Cultural Exchange 
Roadmap focusing on joint training programmes, artist residencies, youth festivals, and 
academic collaborations to deepen the cultural foundation of the bilateral relationship is also 
noted for compliance. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 

66 
Recommendation No. 28 
 The Committee recognize that tourism and localized cross-border trade are 
powerful drivers for strengthening socio-economic and cultural engagement between 
India and Bangladesh.  The Committee commend the establishment of Border Haats 
along the India-Bangladesh border in Meghalaya and Tripura for promoting localised 
trade among people living along the border areas.  The Committee notes that these 
Border Haats are designed to improve the well-being of people living in remote 
regions on both sides of the border. The Committee suggest that the Ministry should 
conduct a feasibility study to explore the possibility of establishing additional Border 
Haats between the two countries. The Committee are hopeful that expanding the 
network of Border Haats will serve as effective, community-based models for informal 
trade and cultural exchange. Such initiatives will not only revitalize trade in border 
areas but also foster stronger people-to-people ties. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee regarding 
cross-border tourism and expansion of Border Haats. Border Haats along the India–
Bangladesh border have contributed to facilitating localized trade and improving livelihoods 
in border communities. Prior to the events of August 2024, six Border Haats were operational 
on the Indo-Bangladesh border. Additional Border Haats are at various stages of 
development, and related issues continue to be taken up with the Government of 
Bangladesh. Proposals for establishing additional Border Haats are considered in 
consultation with concerned State Governments and subject to feasibility, infrastructure 
readiness and mutual agreement.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 31 
Renewal of the Ganga Water Treaty 
 The Committee note that the Ganga Water Treaty of 1996 is a bilateral 
agreement between India and Bangladesh governing the sharing of waters from the 
Ganga River at the Farraka Barrage for a period of 30 years. The Committee have been 
informed that the Ganga Water Treaty involved significant participation from the state 
of West Bengal, with the Finance Minister of West Bengal playing a key role in 

67 
formulating the treaty provisions. The state government of West Bengal also 
participated in the most recent meeting of JRC held in Kolkata in March 2025. The 
Committee also note that this treaty is set to expire in 2026 and that bilateral 
discussions on its renewal have not yet commenced.  
The Committee recommend that the Government of India should initiate 
bilateral discussions with Bangladesh at the earliest, to avoid any vacuum in the post-
2026 period. The Committee further recommend that the renewal process should be 
guided by updated hydrological data, climate change projections, and the need for 
equitable and sustainable utilization of river waters. In this regard, the Committee 
emphasize that consultations with concerned State Governments, particularly West 
Bengal and Bihar, may be continued to ensure that national and state-level interests 
are aligned in formulating India’s position during the negotiation process. The 
Committee also underscore that the sharing of Teesta river waters is of critical 
importance to the State of West Bengal, and therefore, its concerns may be duly 
addressed by the Government of India during negotiations on the Teesta. 
Reply of the Government 
 An Inter-Ministerial Committee was constituted by DoWR, RD&GR in July 2023 for 
carrying out an Internal Review of the Ganga Water Sharing Treaty.  Concerned 
stakeholders of the State Governments of West Bengal and Bihar are also members of this 
Committee.  Bilateral discussions are expected to commence under the new Government in 
Bangladesh.  
 
2. The endeavour of the Union Government is to arrive at an agreement on Teesta on a 
fair and equitable basis in consultation with our riparian States, which is acceptable to all 
the parties concerned and which protects the interest of all stakeholders. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/102/2025 dated 26/02/2026] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
21 July, 2026                                                                                         Chairperson,                                
30 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                              Committee on External Affairs 

68 
APPENDIX- I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2025-26) HELD ON 21 JULY 2026 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 21 July 2026 from 1730 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Secretariat 
 1. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Director 
 2.  Ms. Shanta Banerjee Datta  - Deputy Secretary 
 3. Dr. Smita Singh             - Committee Officer 
   
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the 
Committee on the subject ‘Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship’ 
 Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
4   Shri Arun Govil 
5  Shri Naveen Jindal 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
8  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
9  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 Rajya Sabha 
10  Dr. John Brittas 
11  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
12  Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narayan Singh 
13  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

69 
4. The Chairperson, invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft 
Report with minor modifications suggested by the Members.  
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
APPENDIX- II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report)  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 
23. 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 32 and 33,  
 Total- 25 
Percentage : 75.75 % 
 
(ii)   Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
  Recommendation No.    NIL                                             
        Total- 0 
Percentage : 0 % 
 
(iii)  Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos.  9 
Total- 0 
Percentage : 0 % 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation Nos.  5, 8, 10, 13, 21, 26, 28 and 31 
Total- 8 
Percentage : 24.24 % 
 
 