 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Seventh Report on the subject ‘India’s Engagement with G20 Countries’ 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
02 
 

 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh 
Report on the subject ‘India’s Engagement with G20 Countries’ 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 03 December, 2024 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03 December, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………      1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….......................................................    15 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………   63 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..    64 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………     65 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on 25 October, 2024.              68                                                                  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………....          70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
29.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   _  Under Secretary 
 
 
(ii) 

 
  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Seventh Report of the Committee on External Affairs (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘India’s 
Engagement with G20 Countries’ 
2. The Twenty Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha on 20 December, 2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 22 February, 2024 
(English Version) and 06 August, 2024 (Hindi Version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on 
25 October, 2024. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
25 November, 2024                                                                                                  Chairperson,                                
04 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                           Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
      (iii) 

1 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Twenty Seventh 
Report on the subject ‘India’s Engagement with G20 Countries’ which was presented to the 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2023. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on 
all the 32 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
  
 (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32 
 Total- 30 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
NIL 
Total- 0 
Chapter-III 
  
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
NIL 
Total- 0  
Chapter-IV 

2 | P a g e 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
  Recommendation Nos. 5 and 30 
Total-2 
Chapter-V 
 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
  
 Recommendation No. 5 
  
5.        The Committee in their Twenty Seventh Report had observed/recommended as 
under:           
  
  The Committee note that over 30,000 delegates from G20 Member countries and 
invitee countries / international organizations participated in over 200 meetings held 
during India’s G20 Presidency. During the Presidency, India engaged with all the 
G20 countries throughout the year bilaterally at ministerial and Leader’s levels which 
helped in gaining consensual support on difficult and critical issues. The Committee 
further note that meetings of 40 different G20 mechanisms were held, including 13 
Sherpa Track Working Groups, 8 Finance Track work streams, 11 Engagement 

3 | P a g e 
 
Groups, 6 Initiatives and 2 stand-alone Ministerial tracks. The Committee have been 
informed that G20 Members and guest countries wholeheartedly participated in 
these meetings/ deliberations and supported their outcome documents. The 
Committee are quite sure that these interactions at both working and Ministerial 
levels have paved way for deepening India’s relationship with all G20 and Guest 
countries. The Committee, hence, urge the Ministry to actively work on a mechanism 
to proactively carry forward the ties formed during these interaction to next level and 
further strengthen India’s diplomatic relations and engagement with the G20 and 
Guest countries. 
6.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  ‘The G20 Presidency provided a unique opportunity to take forward 
our relations with the G20 and the invitee countries at different levels of 
government, thus deepening mutual understanding and paving the way for 
deepening bilateral cooperation with them in diverse fields.  
  After our successful G20 Presidency, India is building upon its 
relationships and strengthening its partnerships with G20 Members and 
Invitees in areas of common interest  on a number of global issues, including 
in bilateral or regional discussions. Areas of new or stronger cooperation 
include digital public infrastructure; health; agriculture; education; energy 
transition; migration and mobility partnerships; culture; science and 
technology; and other fields of mutual interest covered in the G20.’ 
  
7.      The Committee in their Twenty Seventh Report had urged the Ministry to 
actively work on a mechanism to carry forward the ties formed during G20 
interactions to next level and strengthen further India’s diplomatic relations and 
engagement with the G20 and Guest countries. The Committee note that though the 
Ministry, in its reply has assured that India is building upon its relationships and 
strengthening its partnerships with G20 Members and Invitees in areas of common 
interest on a number of global issues, including bilateral or regional discussions, 
they have not elaborated on the actions taken by them in this regard. It appears that 

4 | P a g e 
 
the Ministry still do not have any clear blueprint prepared about how they intend to 
go ahead in future. The Committee strongly believe that it is imperative that the 
Government take active interest in building on the relationships and partnerships 
formed during G20 and feel that an actively thought out policy plan in this regard 
would help in furthering the interests of the nation. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry actively work on preparing an action plan in this regard. Committee 
would also like to be kept apprised of action oriented steps taken or proposed to be 
taken by the Ministry in building and strengthening relations with G20 members. 
Recommendation No. 11 
  
8.        The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
  ‘India’s G20 Presidency saw several new initiatives and one among them was 
the Disaster Risk Reduction Working Group. Recognizing that the current economic 
choices and development pathways are not in line with the commitments to reduce 
risk contained in the Sendai Framework as well as the 2030 Agenda and the Paris 
Agreement and, given the immense adverse economic impact of natural disasters 
nationally and globally, India took the initiative to establish this Working Group. The 
Indian Presidency of G20 recognized that disaster risk reduction is one of the central 
development issues of the 21st century. The Committee note that the Working Group 
aimed to integrate risk reduction measures into public and private sector investment 
decisions and policy making. Through sharing expertise and good practice, 
development of guidance documents and common approaches, the Disaster Risk 
Reduction Working Group supports G20 countries to develop and implement 
national policies that reduce risk today and build resilience against future shocks. 
The Committee have been informed that the DRR WG was led by NDMA from 
India’s side. The Committee are of the considered view that focus on disaster risk 

5 | P a g e 
 
reduction is a prerequisite for not only achieving the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) but also for successfully implementing other climate responsive policies such 
as implementing the energy transition. The Committee are hopeful that the future 
presidencies are able to carry forward the key takeaways of the G20 DRR WG and 
bring about concrete implementation strategy for the same.’ 
9.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 ‘Under India’s G20 Presidency, G20 member countries reaffirmed the 
importance of investing in multi-hazard early warning systems that enable and 
deliver early and anticipatory action as an essential component of disaster 
preparedness. G20 leaders committed to seeking universal coverage of early 
warning systems, welcoming the efforts of all actors and stakeholders.  G20 
member countries also urged for accelerating progress on Early Warning and 
Early Action through strengthening national and local capacities, innovative 
financing tools, private sector investment, and knowledge sharing. As a follow 
up, knowledge sharing compendium and case studies have already been 
action upon with contribution from the G20 Member Countries and 
International Organizations. 
 
  Brazil is continuing with the DRR Working Group and has retained the 
5 priorities that were listed by the Indian Presidency. Hence, it is expected 
that work in this important field will retain the momentum that was gained 
under the Indian Presidency.’ 
 
10. Recognizing that disaster risk reduction is one of the central development 
issues of the 21st century, during its presidency, India had formed Disaster Risk 
Reduction Working Group with an aim to reducing the adverse economic impact of 
natural disasters nationally and globally and building resilience against future 
shocks. The Committee had hoped that the future presidencies would carry forward 
the key takeaways of Disaster Risk Reduction Working Group meetings and work out 
a concrete implementation strategy for the same. The Committee are encouraged to 
note that Brazil, during its presidency, is continuing with the DRR Working Group 
and has retained the 5 priorities that were listed by the Indian Presidency. The 

6 | P a g e 
 
Committee are hopeful that this initiative would, in the long run, assist India as well 
as the member countries to develop and implement national policies that reduce risk 
today and build resilience against future shocks. The Committee desire that they may 
be kept abreast of the developments and decisions taken in the meetings of Disaster 
Risk Reduction Working Group.  
 
Recommendation No. 15 
  
11.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
 The Committee are happy to note that India has taken its G20 presidency 2023 as a 
significant opportunity to showcase the country's rich heritage of traditional medicine 
and its potential to contribute to global health and well-being. The New Delhi 
Leaders’ Declaration recognized the potential role of evidence-based Traditional and 
Complementary Medicine in health and took note of international efforts in this 
direction. A G20 Traditional Medicine Compendium, which is a digital repository of 
traditional medicine knowledge and practices from G20 countries has also been 
launched during the presidency. The Committee, while welcoming the initiatives 
taken during the presidency to provide thrust to traditional medicine, urge that the 
Government boost its efforts to raise global awareness of the potential benefits of 
traditional medicine and promote its safe and effective use. The Committee further 
urge the Government to work on action-oriented plans to encourage integration of 
traditional medicine into mainstream healthcare systems both at national and 
international levels and also promote global cooperation on traditional medicine by 
entering into MoUs with other countries. 
  

7 | P a g e 
 
12.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 ‘The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration recognized the potential role of evidence-
based Traditional and Complementary Medicine (T&CM) and took note of 
international efforts in this direction, including WHO’s global and collaborating 
centres, and clinical trial registries. 
  T&CM is a high priority area for the Government, which is being taken forward 
at bilateral and multilateral fora, including through the Global Centre for Traditional 
Medicine, Jamnagar.’  
 
13.      With a view to raising global awareness of the potential benefits of traditional 
medicine and promoting its safe and effective use, the Committee had urged the 
Government to work on action-oriented plans to encourage integration of traditional 
medicine into mainstream healthcare systems both at national and international 
levels and also promote global cooperation on traditional medicine by entering into 
MoUs with other countries. The Committee, however, note that the Ministry in their 
reply have merely stated that Traditional and Complementary Medicine is a high 
priority area for the Government, which is being taken forward at bilateral and 
multilateral fora and have not given any details regarding the steps taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee are 
of the view that Traditional medicine systems have been contributing in new drug 
discoveries and have the potential to benefit mankind. They can be a cost-effective 
and accessible option for communities, especially in primary healthcare settings and 
there is indispensible need to preserve them as also make them modern, authentic, 
and global. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government work on action-
oriented plans to encourage integration of traditional medicine into mainstream 
healthcare systems. The Committee also desire that they may be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
  
 

8 | P a g e 
 
 Recommendation No. 16 
  
14.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
  The Committee understand that MAHARISHI initiative, mooted during India’s 
Presidency aims to bolster research and awareness concerning agro-biodiversity, 
food security and nutrition aligning with the International Year of Millets 2023 (IYoM 
2023) programme initiated by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). The 
focus was on millets and other underutilized grains with a view to providing an 
optimistic pathway for all nations to attain agricultural efficiency and food security. 
With the nations reeling under the catastrophic effects of COVID-19, conflicts, 
slowdowns and downturns, and climate change, India’s additional vision to focus on 
agriculture production and consumption of millets is commendable. While 
appreciating the initiative, the Committee urge the Government to make concerted 
efforts to promote production and consumption of millets and other ancient grains 
within the country so that food security is assured for Indian citizens too. The 
Committee also hope that the successive presidencies too stress upon the need to 
build policies encouraging the production and consumption of millets and other 
ancient grains. 
  
15.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                         
 ‘The G20 Deccan High Level Principles (Deccan HLPs) on Food Security and 
Nutrition 2023, adopted under our G20 Presidency, emphasized the need to 
enhance availability and access to nutritious food and strengthening food safety 
nets. The G20 Millets and Other Ancient Grains International Research Initiative 
(MAHARISHI) was adopted under India's G20 Presidency with an international R&D 
Centre hosted at IIMR, Hyderabad.  

9 | P a g e 
 
  The Deccan HLPs served as an input for the work of the Task Force to launch 
a “Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty”, to be created during the Brazilian 
presidency. The MAHARISHI initiative will also be taken forward by IIMR, 
Hyderabad, under the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare.’  
  
16.      In their Twenty Seventh Report, the Committee had urged the Government to 
make concerted efforts to promote production and consumption of millets and other 
ancient grains within the country so that food security is assured for Indian citizens 
too. They had also hoped that the successive presidencies too would stress upon the 
need to build policies encouraging the production and consumption of millets and 
other ancient grains. The Committee are enthused to note that the Deccan High Level 
Principles on Food Security and Nutrition adopted during India’s G20 Presidency 
have assisted the Task Force to launching a “Global Alliance against Hunger and 
Poverty”, which is to be created during the Brazilian presidency. The Committee 
desire to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard during the Brazilian 
Presidency. The Committee are also hopeful that the MAHARISHI initiative will be 
successful in achieving goals of enhancing food security and nutrition not just in 
India but also globally.  
Recommendation No. 17 
  
17.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:                          
         
 India assumed G20 Presidency at a time when the world was riven by conflicts, 
chaos and crisis. Mindful of the challenges being faced, India set the agenda for 

10 | P a g e 
 
global policy cooperation to address these multifarious concerns. The Committee 
observe that the New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration (NDLD) reflects the action-oriented 
approach taken by the Government as is evident from the range of outcomes that 
have come through in the document. While the G20 Outcome Documents of the 
previous years are heavily dominated by the agenda of the developed countries, the 
New Delhi Leaders Declaration has been successful in capturing the causes, 
priorities and concerns of the developing countries. The Committee are enthused to 
note that India has been successful in bringing together all G20 countries on the 
same page and have delivered 100 per cent consensus on the priorities set. With 83 
paragraphs, 87 outcomes, 118 documents adopted, i.e. a total of 205 outcomes and 
documents, no dissent, no footnotes or Chair’s Summary, New Delhi Leaders’ 
Declaration symbolises an unprecedented global consensus on all key issues. The 
declaration reflects a uniquely Indian perspective of emphasizing universal, equitable 
and inclusive solutions to today’s problems. The Committee underscore that NDLDs 
consensual nature is not only a testament to the trust India enjoy with all G20 
partners but also a message for peace, dialogue, diplomacy and hope. The 
Committee, therefore, hope that it shape the global narratives in the coming years 
through the future Presidencies and bridge divides leading to a more inclusive 
human-centric development. 
  
18.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                         
 ‘The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration (NDLD) set the way forward on a wide 
range of global issues, in the following areas: 
 Strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth; 
 Accelerating progress on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); 
 Green development pact for a sustainable future; 
 Multilateral Institutions for the 21st century; 

11 | P a g e 
 
 Technological Transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure; 
 International Taxation; 
 Gender Equality and Empowering All Women and Girls; 
 Financial Sector Issues; 
 Countering Terrorism and Money Laundering; and 
 Creating a More Inclusive World.  
 
  By bringing consensus in 83 paragraphs of the NDLD, India’s G20 Presidency 
brought multilateralism back to the centre stage and demonstrated its ability to bring 
developing and developed countries together on pressing issues confronting the 
world.  The consensus arrived at in New Delhi on development, climate and 
environment, energy transitions, health, agriculture, digital economy, trade and 
investment, disaster risk reduction, employment, education, tourism and anti-
corruption, as well as on building multilateral institutions for the 21st century and 
global financial architecture, will leave a lasting impact. During its G20 Presidency, 
India also amplified the priorities and voice of the Global South in the G20. At the 
New Delhi G20 Summit, the African Union was inducted into the G20 as a permanent 
member.  
Some of the decisions taken in New Delhi are already fructifying. For example, G20 
achievements on energy and climate in New Delhi, on tripling RE, developing 
hydrogen, and scaling up climate and energy finance, were echoed and carried 
forward at COP28 in UAE. The G20 message on AI on pro-innovation governance 
and regulation, has been cemented at subsequent international gatherings. MDB 
reforms, to help scale up climate and developmental finance, and making MDBs 
more representative, is now at the heart of the agenda of the international financial 
institutions. Mechanisms on women-led development, disaster risk reduction and 
Startups, created during our Presidency, are Brazilian priorities as well. G20 has 
emerged stronger and more purposeful during India’s Presidency, shaping the global 
agenda more effectively. 
  The Brazilian G20 Presidency priorities are the following: 
 Social inclusion and the fight against hunger and poverty 
 The Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty 
 Sustainable development and energy transitions 
 The Global Mobilization against Climate Change 
 Energy Transitions 
 The Initiative on Bioeconomy 

12 | P a g e 
 
 Reform of global governance institutions 
  Brazil is also continuing with all G20 mechanisms of the Indian Presidency, 
including all Working Groups and Engagement Groups.  In addition, Brazil has 
convened the Empowerment of Women Working Group and has created a new 
Engagement Group “Judiciary20”.  Thus, Indian G20 Presidency outcomes and 
Brazilian Presidency priorities are well aligned, and are being taken forward.  
  Brazil has also taken up some new initiatives, such as Triangular 
Cooperation, Task Force on Climate Change and Task Force on Hunger & Poverty, 
which were agreed to by G20 members during the first Sherpa meeting.  This reflects 
G20’s commitment to bridging divides leading to more inclusive human centric 
development.’ 
 
19. The Committee are aware that with the adoption of the New Delhi Leaders’ 
Declaration (NDLD) with 100 per cent consensus on the priorities set, India had 
successfully brought together all G20 countries and set the way forward on a wide 
range of global issues. The Committee have been informed that some of the 
decisions taken in NDLD are already fructifying. The Committee are also satisfied to 
note that various priorities which were created during Indian Presidency such as 
Mechanisms on women-led development, disaster risk reduction and Startups are 
being followed through by Brazil. The Committee would like to kept apprised of the 
outcomes of the various priorities initiated by India and carried forward during the 
Brazilian Presidency as also of the new initiatives taken up by Brazil.  
 
Recommendation No.30 
  
20.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
 
 The Committee find that a $20 billion India-Middle East-Europe Corridor 
(IMEC), which is an ambitious multi-pronged network aiming to connect goods and 
services between Europe and Asia—via the Middle East, was launched during G20 

13 | P a g e 
 
Summit in New Delhi. It has been informed that the said strategic project will 
comprise two separate corridors, the east corridor connecting India to the Arabian 
Gulf and the northern corridor connecting the Arabian Gulf to Europe. It will include a 
railway that, upon completion, will provide a reliable and cost-effective cross-border 
ship-to-rail transit network to supplement existing maritime and road transport routes 
– enabling goods and services to transit to, from, and between India, the UAE, Saudi 
Arabia, Jordan, Israel, and Europe. Along the railway route, participants intend to 
enable the laying of cable for electricity and digital connectivity, as well as pipe for 
clean hydrogen export. While looking at IMEC as a secure addition to trans-regional 
connectivity architectures, the Committee underscore that the global economic order 
is becoming more multipolar. Since the signatories of the MoU are mandated to meet 
soon to develop and commit to an action plan, the Committee  desire to be apprised 
about the project outlays, the funding mechanisms, the monitoring systems, the 
implementation modalities and relevant timetables. The Committee further look 
forward to seeing the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor functional within 
the timelines and stimulate economic integration between Asia, the Arabian Gulf, 
and Europe.  
 
 21.       The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  ‘ On the sidelines of the G20 Leaders’ Summit, Leaders of India, European 
Union, France, Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia, UAE and US announced an MoU 
committing to work together to develop a new India-Middle East Economic Corridor 
(IMEC). 
 The IMEC will comprise of two separate corridors, the east corridor connecting India 
to the Gulf and the northern corridor connecting the Gulf to Europe. 
 The corridor intends to increase efficiency, reduce costs, secure regional supply 
chains, increase trade accessibility, enhance economic unity, generate jobs, and 
lower greenhouse gas emission-resulting in a transformative integration of Asia, 
Europe and the Middle East. Its implementation and IMEC project details are in the 
process of being worked out.’ 

14 | P a g e 
 
                         
 22.      The Committee in their Twenty Seventh Report had desired to be kept 
apprised about the project outlays, the funding mechanisms, the monitoring 
systems, the implementation modalities and relevant timetables of the India-Middle 
East-Europe Economic Corridor. The Ministry, in their reply, have submitted that the 
implementation and the project details of the IMEC are being worked out. The 
Committee desire that they may be kept abreast of the progress made on the project.  
 

15 | P a g e 
 
Chapter-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED Y THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
 
The Committee note that the G20, founded in 1999 after the Asian Financial crisis of 
1997-98 as an informal forum for the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
to discuss global economic and financial issues, was upgraded in 2008 to the level of 
the Heads of State/Government and, in 2009, designated as the ‘premier forum for 
international economic cooperation’. Though the forum initially focused largely on 
broad macroeconomic issues, along the years, it has expanded its mandate of 
discussion and action to include almost all pertinent challenges that the world 
continues facing. The Committee are of the considered view that, over the years, the 
G20 has filled an important gap in the governance structure of the global economic 
system and acted as a catalyst for advancing action. The Committee are hopeful that 
the G20 Forum would continue to play an important role in shaping and 
strengthening the global architecture and governance on all international socio-
economic issues of importance and get them linked to demonstrable policy action. 
       
Reply of the Government 
 
G20 has emerged stronger and more purposeful after India’s successful G20 Presidency in 
2023 and the unanimous adoption of a substantive G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration 
(NDLD).  The NDLD set out the way forward on a wide range of areas of global priority, as 
follows: 
 
 Strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth; 

16 | P a g e 
 
 Accelerating progress on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); 
 Green development pact for a sustainable future; 
 Multilateral Institutions for the 21st century; 
 Technological Transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure; 
 International Taxation; 
 Gender Equality and Empowering All Women and Girls; 
 Financial Sector Issues; 
 Countering Terrorism and Money Laundering; and 
 Creating a More Inclusive World.  
 
India continues to remain closely engaged with the G20, even after the New Delhi Leaders’ 
Summit in September 2023.  A virtual G20 Leaders’ Summit, under the chairship of the 
Prime Minister, was held on 22 November 2023, to review the NDLD outcomes and 
accelerate progress on them.  Following the virtual Summit, the following way forward for 
the G20 was articulated: 
 
 Support the development agenda 
 Fulfil aspirations and priorities of Global South 
 Promote reforms in global economic and governance structure to make them bigger, 
better, effective, representative and future ready 
 Affordable finance to developing countries 
 Undertake Debt Restructuring in transparent manner 
 Implementation of Action Plan for 2030 SDGs 
 Prioritize food security, health security and sustainable development 
 Climate action and just, easy and affordable climate finance 
 Focus on women-led development, skilled migration pathways and development of 
MSMEs 

17 | P a g e 
 
 Working together with the spirit of One Earth One Family One Future for global peace 
and prosperity 
 
Following concrete steps on Global South’s climate priorities were also outlined at the virtual 
Summit: 
 Climate Action and Climate Justice, with greater focus on Adaptation 
 Easy and affordable Climate Finance for  vulnerable countries 
 Raising climate finance from billions to trillions 
 Just, inclusive and affordable energy transition 
 Focus on Alternate fuels, including through Global Biofuels Alliance 
 G20 High-level Principles on Hydrogen  
 Tripling of Renewable energy capacity by 2030 
 Promotion of Pro-planet approach, including Mission LiFE 
 
Brazil assumed the G20 presidency on 1 December, 2023 and is continuing with all the G20 
mechanisms, including all Working Groups and Engagement Groups, of India’s G20 
Presidency.  The main G20 priorities outlined by Brazil are (i) social inclusion and the fight 
against hunger and poverty, (ii) energy transitions and the promotion of sustainable 
development in its economic, social, and environmental dimensions and (iii) reform of global 
governance institutions.  These are well aligned with India’s G20 Presidency priorities and 
outcomes.  
 
Overall, G20 is indeed taking forward specific and demonstrable policy actions in diverse 
areas, towards which India is lending its full support.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 

18 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.2) 
 
The Committee note that the Group of Twenty (G20) comprises of 19 countries 
(namely Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, 
Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South 
Africa, Türkiye, United Kingdom and United States) and two regional bodies: the 
European Union and the African Union (as of 2023). Thus, the G20 members 
represent around 85% of the global GDP, over 75% of the global trade, and about two-
thirds of the world population. In addition to the member countries, each G20 
Presidency invites other guest countries and international organizations (IOs) to 
participate in the G20 meetings and Summit. Each year, one country from a different 
group assumes the G20 Presidency and steers the G20 agenda for one year and 
hosts the Summit. The Committee are given to understand that the presidency plays 
a key role in shaping the agenda and the host country typically identifies a set of 
priorities/ issues to be discussed during its term after seeking inputs from other 
member countries to ensure that the agenda reflects a broad consensus and 
addresses the most pressing global economic challenges. The Committee note that 
every country during its Presidency tries to give a special character and orientation 
to the G20 reflecting its own priorities. According to the Committee, what makes G20 
a unique forum is that no one country dominates the agenda and the developing 
countries too can display their political, economic and intellectual leadership on a 
par with the most powerful countries. Having each country hold the presidency from 
time to time also increases ownership and trust between the countries. The 
Committee, hence, hope that building broad consensus within the G20 and gathering 
technical support from key international organizations will help in successful 
implementation of resolutions during subsequent presidencies. 

19 | P a g e 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The consensus achieved in New Delhi among all G20 members on a wide range of global 
challenges will continue to be reinforced by India and further developed during the Brazilian 
Presidency and beyond.  A number of International Organizations are invited regularly to 
G20 meetings, including the UN, IMF, WB, WHO and WTO, and will continue to be involved 
in the G20, to participate in its deliberations and to help implement G20 outcomes.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.3) 
 
The theme of India’s G20 Presidency was “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” or “One Earth · 
One Family · One Future”. The colours in the G20 Logo – saffron, white and green, 
and blue have been drawn from the vibrant colours of India’s national flag and the 
logo juxtaposed planet earth with the lotus, India’s national flower. The Earth reflects 
India’s pro-planet approach to life, one in perfect harmony with nature. The 
Committee note that the logo and the theme together conveyed a powerful message 
of India’s G20 Presidency by upholding just and equitable growth for all in the world. 
The Committee appreciate that the Government has been able to successfully steer 
discussions as well as build consensus on global agenda under its G20 theme of 
‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’ towards creating a more inclusive world, which is quite 
evident in the various outcomes of the New Delhi Leaders Declaration. The 
Committee, while complimenting the Government on having delivered the message 
of unity to the world, despite numerous divisive challenges the world has been 

20 | P a g e 
 
facing, desire that the message championed by India during her presidency is taken 
forward with more passion in future presidencies too. 
Reply of the Government 
 
During its Presidency, India has been able to steer discussion as well as build consensus 
on global agenda under its G20 theme of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam including on (i) Strong, 
Sustainable, Balanced and Inclusive Growth; (ii) Accelerating Progress on SDGs; (iii) Green 
Development Pact for a Sustainable Future; (iv) Multilateral Institutions for the 21st Century, 
(v) Technological Transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure; (vi) Gender Equality and 
Empowering All Women; (vii) Financial Sector Issues; (viii) International Taxation; (ix) 
Countering Terrorism and Money Laundering; and (x) Creating a More Inclusive World. 
India as a member of the Troika during the Brazilian Presidency is fully supportive of 
building consensus on the key priorities of G20, especially those of developing countries, 
while steering through the geo-political situation. During its Presidency, India championed 
the voice of the global south and will continue to do so during the Brazilian and the South 
African Presidency. 
During the first G20 Sherpa meeting held in Brasilia from 11-13 December 2023, the 
importance of working unanimously to amicably resolve the differences and keep the focus 
on tackling contemporary socio-economic challenges was highlighted. Brazilian side also 
conveyed their intention of convening two G20 Foreign Ministers meetings, one in February 
2024 and another in September 2024. These will deliberate on the way forward in the G20 
substantive discussions, while discussing the impact of geopolitical disputes, in order to 
enable G20 to function fully and effectively. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 

21 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.4) 
The Committee have learnt that over 200 meetings were held during India’s G20 
Presidency of which 21 were Ministerial meetings, 4 Sherpa meetings, 75 Working 
Group meetings, 50 Engagement Groups and Initiatives meeting and 70 Side Events. 
These meetings were held in 60 Indian cities covering all 28 States and 8 Union 
Territories. The States, in collaboration with the Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR), curated and organized cultural programmes for the delegates showcasing 
their local music and dance forms. The delegates were also taken on excursions 
which generally included cultural and heritage sites demonstrating the rich and 
ancient cultural history of India. 300+ cultural events involving 18000+ artists were 
organized during the G20 Presidency. Additionally, delegates were presented with 
gifts and memorabilia, which notably featured products emblematic of the "One 
District, One Product" (ODOP) initiative from their respective regions. Various 
exhibitions were also organized on the sidelines of working group meetings, 
ministerial meetings, Sherpa meetings and the Summit. The Committee are 
appreciative of the ‘Pan India’ approach taken by the Government whereby unique 
opportunity was provided to showcase the culture, food, tradition and vibrancy of 
each region. The Committee feel that this overall endeavour reflects the 
Government’s commitment to cooperative federalism. The Committee are of the 
considered view that beyond the immediate advantages of this grand international 
affair, this Pan India approach has paved the way for giving global visibility to the 
Indian States and Cities. The upgraded infrastructure, enhanced connectivity, and 
elevated service standards established for conducting the events can become lasting 
assets which, in the long run, would bring about enduring impact transcending 
fleeting economic advantages. The Committee urge upon the Government to 
proactively consider a plan of action to channel the benefits that India would reap in 
the coming years. 

22 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under India’s Presidency, G20 meetings were held in 60 cities across the country covering 
all States and UTs.  The cities and meeting venues were suitably spruced up by concerned 
local authorities for the meetings.  
The various G20 meeting venues, including the Bharat Mandapam for the G20 Leaders’ 
Summit, Yashobhoomi for the P20 Summit, as well as conference facilities across the 
country, are being promoted and utilized on priority for other national and international level 
meetings. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
 (Recommendation (Sl. No.6) 
 
The Committee note that a key element of India’s G20 Presidency was taking the G20 
closer to the public and making it truly a ‘People’s G20’. To realize this, the 
Government had planned and organized various Jan Bhagidari (people’s 
participation) activities throughout the year which involved citizen engagement and 
large-scale public participation. The Committee are given to understand that the 200 
plus meetings scheduled across 60 cities of all the States and Union Territories saw 
the involvement of nearly 30,000 delegates and over 100,000 participants in related 
side events. The Committee also note that numerous ‘Jan Bhagidari’ activities were 
held across universities, institutions and civil society, touching more than 7 crore 
people. These activities included programs in educational institutions, festivals, 
awareness rallies, selfie with monument contests, essay & quiz competitions, 
workshops, marathons, cleanliness drives and Yuva Samvaad. Civil 20 alone touched 
more than 45 lakh people worldwide. Several Working Groups and Engagement 

23 | P a g e 
 
Groups made collective endeavours to boost public involvement. The Committee 
appreciate that these efforts have led to two world records as a testament to the 
strengthened public engagement. The first record was set when 125,000 students 
from 800 schools in Varanasi participated in the G20 quiz, making it a global 
achievement. Simultaneously, 450 Lambani artisans demonstrated their exceptional 
skills and craftsmanship by crafting an impressive collection of approximately 1,800 
distinct patches, showcasing the dynamic and inclusive spirit of India's G20 
Presidency. The Committee are pleased to note that through the active participation 
of people from all States and UTs, India’s G20 has truly been a People’s G20. The G20 
events have brought together not only civil society but also self-help groups, small 
rural initiatives and local action groups, hitherto delinked to global dialogue and 
narratives. The Committee are truly appreciative of India’s citizen-centric model of 
Jan-Bhagidari mooted as a new diplomatic tool which succeeded in realizing the 
essence of ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’ with active public participation. The 
Committee urge the Government to continue with its efforts to conduct more and 
more such Jan Bhagidari activities involving active public participation in future too 
so that the true spirit of democracy trickles down to the grass root level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India’s Presidency was truly a ‘People’s G20’ exemplified through numerous ‘Jan Bhagidari’ 
activities, held across universities, institutions, civil society, youth and women, touching 
more than 7 crore people. These activities included programs in educational institutions, 
festivals, awareness rallies, selfie with monument contests, essay & quiz competitions, 
workshops, marathons, cleanliness drives and Yuva Samvaad. Civil 20 alone touched more 
than 45 lakh people worldwide. 
 

24 | P a g e 
 
Citizen participation in various events and activities on G20 themes, such as LiFE, climate 
change, sustainable development and cultural heritage, as well as modules on G20 subjects 
in educational institutions, are being constantly encouraged.  A total of 7 large webinars on 
G20 NDLD outcomes and takeaways, involving think tanks, students, private sector and 
state governments, were held by concerned GOI Departments/Institutions (DEA, NITI, 
MEITY, MHA and MoWCD, with participation by MEA) in November-December 2023. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.7) 
The Committee note that the G20 India consisted of two parallel tracks - the Finance 
Track and the Sherpa Track. The Sherpa Track consisted of 13 working groups that 
focused on socio-economic issues such as agriculture, anti-corruption, climate, 
digital economy, education, employment, energy, environment, health, tourism, trade 
and investment, culture and disaster risk reduction. The Committee find that a new 
Working Group on Empowerment of Women was decided during India’s Presidency. 
The Finance Track had 8 working Groups which focused on fiscal and monetary 
policy issues such as the global economy, infrastructure, financial regulation, 
financial inclusion, international financial architecture, and international taxation. 
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors lead the Finance Track while Sherpa 
lead the Sherpa Track. The representatives from the relevant ministries of the 
member countries as well as from invited/guest countries and various international 
organisations participate in such thematically oriented working groups. The Sherpa 
oversees negotiations over the course of the year, discussing agenda items for the 
Summit and coordinating the substantive work of the G20. In addition, there were 
Engagement Groups which brought together civil societies, parliamentarians, think 
tanks, women, youth, labour, businesses and researchers of the G20 countries. 
These Engagement Groups, comprising nongovernment participants from each G20 

25 | P a g e 
 
member country provide recommendations to the G20 Leaders and contribute 
towards the policy-making process. The Committee desire that the priorities set by 
India through these working groups and engagement groups are picked up by the 
member countries and relate them with their aspirations while drawing from India’s 
core strengths. 
Reply of the Government 
G20 is a premier agenda setting body of the World. G20 declarations and commitments 
resonate across the world and are carried forward by concerned international organisations 
and sovereign governments, through specific actions and concrete steps. Though G20 
declarations are not legally binding, some indicative timelines, such as tripling of renewable 
energy globally from current levels by 2030, halving the gender digital divide by 2030 and 
setting of a New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG) for Climate finance in 2024 are 
mentioned in the G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Document (NDLD) itself. Deliverables and 
outcomes of G20 are implemented domestically by sovereign governments or internationally 
through various bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral agreements and commitments, while 
taking into account national circumstances. India will continue to advocate and emphasize 
on the importance of full and timely implementation of NDLD outcomes at various bilateral 
and multilateral fora. 
From the issues and priorities set forth by the Brazilian G20 Presidency, it is evident that 
many important priorities discussed during our Presidency and the related outcomes are 
being taken forward meaningfully. These include progress on SDGs, DPIs, women 
empowerment, reform in multilateral institutions, and just energy transitions. Several of 
these, such as DPI, affordable energy transition and responsible consumption and 
production, draw upon India’s strength. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 

26 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.8) 
The Committee understand that G20 has no permanent secretariat and is chaired 
annually by the rotating Presidency. Accordingly, on assuming Presidency, India set 
up a full-fledged Secretariat of about 80 people with Shri Harsh Shringla, former 
Foreign Secretary, as the Chief Coordinator. Shri Amitabh Kant was India’s Sherpa. 
India’s G20 Secretariat which operated out of Sushma Swaraj Bhawan in New Delhi 
was responsible for organising and coordinating G20 meetings across the country 
during the course of India’s Presidency. The Committee have also been apprised of 
the important role played by all other Ministries under the Government of India and 
the support they provided to the G20 secretariat. The Committee note that the 
resounding success of India’s G20 Presidency owes a lot to the officials who took 
every challenge they faced as opportunities to shape the needs of the G20 
Presidency. The Committee, while wholeheartedly appreciating and acknowledging 
the tireless efforts and efficiency of the Indian officials, look forward to similar team 
efforts in future also in taking India to further heights in the international arena. 
Reply of the Government 
As noted by the Committee, our G20 Presidency’s success can be attributed to the entire 
G20 team working with singularity of purpose, under the overall guidance from Hon’ble 
Prime Minister and the External Affairs Minister. 
A number of officers at different levels of seniority of the Union and State governments were 
involved in the substantive and logistical aspects of our G20 meetings, and have gained 
experience.  It would be Government’s endeavour to put in similar efforts in future 
international events.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 

27 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.9) 
The Committee note that the 18th G20 Summit was successfully conducted at Bharat 
Mandapam in New Delhi during 9-10 September, 2023. It was the culmination of all the 
G20 processes and meetings held throughout the year among ministers, senior 
officials, and civil societies. The G20 Leaders’ Declaration was adopted at the G20 
New Delhi Leaders’ Summit, stating their commitment towards the priorities 
discussed and agreed upon. 26 Leaders at HOS/G level, five others at 
Premier/Ministerial level and 11 Heads of International Organizations participated in 
Leaders’ Summit, including all P5 countries and accounting for 85% of global GDP, 
75% of world trade and 2/3rd of world population. G20 India 2023 was the highest 
profile international gathering independent India have had in her history. The theme 
of our G20 Presidency “One Earth, One Family, One Future”, drawing upon our age-
old belief of ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’, was endorsed by all. With over 200 meetings 
in 60 Indian cities in all our States and UTs, across 40 different mechanisms 
including Sherpa and Finance Track Working Groups, as well as Engagement Groups 
and 30,000 delegates, the size, scale and scope of India’s G20 Presidency was truly 
unprecedented. The Committee are extremely happy to find that around 70 bilateral 
meetings were held with the G20 countries by India on the sidelines of the G20 
summit. The Committee recommend that the engagement with the G20 countries 
during its presidency may be pursued further at bilateral and multilateral fora 
towards mutual benefit on issues of common interest. 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 Presidency provided a unique opportunity to take forward our relations with the 
G20 and the invitee countries at different levels of government, thus deepening the 
understanding at a functional level.  

28 | P a g e 
 
India continues to participate actively in various G20 meetings under the Brazilian 
Presidency and will do so in the future as well. 
After our successful G20 Presidency, India is building upon its relationships and 
strengthening its partnerships with G20 Members and Invitees in areas of common interest  
on a number of global issues, including in bilateral and multilateral discussions, these 
include diverse areas like on Digital Public Infrastructure; health; agriculture; education; 
energy transition; migration and mobility partnerships; culture; women-led development; and 
science and technology. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.10) 
The Committee note that India’s G20 Presidency priorities were inclusive and 
grounded, with broad areas of substantive deliberations comprising inclusive and 
resilient growth; progress on SDGs; green development and LIFE; technological 
transformation and public digital infrastructure; reforming multilateral institutions; 
women-led development; and international peace and harmony. Our G20 priorities 
were rooted in our national developmental priorities and India could take a cross-
cutting, action-oriented approach to interconnected issues, including gender 
equality, education, health and environmental sustainability. The Committee 
appreciate the vision behind the priorities and hope that all the member countries 
have had their share of takeaways from our Presidency. 
Reply of the Government 
While the G20 agenda and priorities under our G20 Presidency were broadly set by us, they 
were taken forward with the agreement of all the G20 members, taking into account 
positions, concerns and aspirations of all Members. These priorities, while being of 

29 | P a g e 
 
importance to India, resonated with the countries of the global South and, found support 
from all the G20 Members. 
The declarations and outcome documents were drafted through deliberations and 
negotiations between the G20 countries with inputs from international organisations, thereby 
ensuring that different interests and positions were adequately incorporated, and decisions 
and outcomes were adopted by consensus.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.11) 
India’s G20 Presidency saw several new initiatives and one among them was the 
Disaster Risk Reduction Working Group. Recognizing that the current economic 
choices and development pathways are not in line with the commitments to reduce 
risk contained in the Sendai Framework as well as the 2030 Agenda and the Paris 
Agreement and, given the immense adverse economic impact of natural disasters 
nationally and globally, India took the initiative to establish this Working Group. The 
Indian Presidency of G20 recognized that disaster risk reduction is one of the central 
development issues of the 21st century. The Committee note that the Working Group 
aimed to integrate risk reduction measures into public and private sector investment 
decisions and policy making. Through sharing expertise and good practice, 
development of guidance documents and common approaches, the Disaster Risk 
Reduction Working Group supports G20 countries to develop and implement national 
policies that reduce risk today and build resilience against future shocks. The 
Committee have been informed that the DRR WG was led by NDMA from India’s side. 
The Committee are of the considered view that focus on disaster risk reduction is a 
prerequisite for not only achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) but 
also for successfully implementing other climate responsive policies such as 

30 | P a g e 
 
implementing the energy transition. The Committee are hopeful that the future 
presidencies are able to carry forward the key takeaways of the G20 DRR WG and 
bring about concrete implementation strategy for the same. 
Reply of the Government 
Under India’s G20 Presidency, G20 member countries reaffirmed the importance of 
investing in multi-hazard early warning systems that enable and deliver early and 
anticipatory action as an essential component of disaster preparedness. G20 leaders 
committed to seeking universal coverage of early warning systems, welcoming the efforts of 
all actors and stakeholders.  G20 member countries also urged for accelerating progress on 
Early Warning and Early Action through strengthening national and local capacities, 
innovative financing tools, private sector investment, and knowledge sharing. As a follow up, 
knowledge sharing compendium and case studies have already been action upon with 
contribution from the G20 Member Countries and International Organizations. 
 
Brazil is continuing with the DRR Working Group and has retained the 5 priorities that were 
listed by the Indian Presidency. Hence, it is expected that work in this important field will 
retain the momentum that was gained under the Indian Presidency. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12) 
The Startup 20 Engagement Group is another addition to the G20 under India’s 
presidency. The group is a dedicated platform within the G20 framework that focuses 
on facilitating dialogue, promoting innovation, and fostering growth in the startup 
ecosystem. Comprised of representatives from various countries, the group strives 
to develop and implement policies that support startups, entrepreneurs, and 
ecosystem builders worldwide. The Committee are aware that earlier in the G20 

31 | P a g e 
 
meetings, the Business20 engagement group handled all discussions related to 
startups. Since the G20 nations are at the forefront of innovation and 
entrepreneurship with over a million startups, the Committee hail the Government’s 
initiative to bring about first of its kind dedicated platform for startups under the G20 
umbrella. The Committee are enthused to note that apart from being accepted by the 
world leaders for continuation in the G20 architecture, Brazil, the country that holds 
the next presidency of the G20 has announced at the Gurugram Shikhar Summit that 
they will take the group of Startup 20 forward wholeheartedly. The Committee are 
hopeful that this initiative will enhance collaborations with other G20 countries in 
scaling up Indian innovations, promote the Indian startups’ sector and usher in 
infrastructure development. The Committee desire to see the formation of an 
international network of entrepreneurs, investors and mentors helping new 
businesses grow by providing them with a platform for exchange of ideas, best 
practices and R&D partnerships. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
developments in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Startup20 Engagement Group initiated under India’s G20 Presidency, emerged as the 
voice of the global startup ecosystem bringing together varied stakeholders on a common 
platform. Startups need a thriving and favourable environment to scale up rapidly. Policies, 
frameworks, and regulations at the national and international platforms need to keep pace 
with innovation. The Startup20 EG fostered a global narrative for enabling synergies 
between startups, corporates, investors, innovation agencies and other key ecosystem 
stakeholders. It brought startups from G20 member countries together, to develop 
actionable guidance in the form of building capacities, identification of funding gaps, 
enhancement of employment opportunities, achievement of SDG targets & climate 
resilience, and growth of an inclusive ecosystem. 

32 | P a g e 
 
The Brazilian Presidency is continuing with the Startup20 Engagement Group, and it is 
expected that it will continue to act as an effective international network of entrepreneurs 
and garner support of investors and mentors helping new businesses grow by providing 
them with a platform for exchange of ideas, best practices and R&D partnerships. “Atal 
Innovation Mission”, the Indian lead in StartUp20, supported by DPIIT, will continue to 
emphasize the importance of a robust international StartUp ecosystem, and advocate and 
support the implementation of the outcomes of “StartUp20” deliberations. [DPIIT to convey 
concurrence/comments] 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.13) 
Taking note of the complex challenges posed by AI generated cyber-attacks, 
malware, information manipulation, scams, etc. and the rising need to protect 
individuals, organizations and society from the same by framing robust rules coupled 
with digital infrastructure, the Ministry of Home Affairs conducted the Cyber Security 
Conference wherein, for the first time, the G20 Members held discussions on new 
and emerging threats in the area of non-fungible tokens, crypto assets, AI and 
metaverse. The Committee note that the Conference adopted an outcome document 
in which G20 countries have agreed to strengthen international cyber security 
cooperation including mutual assistance, sharing of experiences and shared cyber 
standards for the private sector. The Committee feel that to deal with new and 
emerging traditional and nontraditional challenges, brought about by terrorism, terror 
financing, radicalization, narco-terror links, etc., capabilities of nations and 
international organizations to deal with AI generated concerns required to be 
strengthened. Since technology has transcended all conventional geographical, 
political and economic boundaries, it is essential to create a robust operational 

33 | P a g e 
 
system using a coordinated and cooperative approach on the use of various virtual 
assets. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to organize more such 
conferences to address the challenges of AI generated cyber attacks through sharing 
of information by nations, organizations and stakeholders. 
Reply of the Government 
In July 2023, India’s G20 Presidency successfully organized a G20 Conference on “Crime 
and Security in the Age of NFTs, AI and Metaverse”.  The importance of international 
cooperation to tackle new and emerging threats was also emphasized in the G20 Foreign 
Ministers’ Meeting in March 2023.   
Under the Brazilian G20 Presidency, as part of the Digital Economy Working Group, a 
seminar on information integrity and trust in the digital environment will be held in April/May 
2024.  
Government has regularly held conferences, seminars and outreach events on cyber 
security and cyber crime challenges.  The need to counter deepfake attacks was also 
voiced at the G20 virtual Summit in November 2023, and a GPAI (Global Partnership on 
Artificial Intelligence) Summit was organised by MEITY in December 2023. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.14) 
Recognizing the important role that women play in driving sustainable and equitable 
development, India, during her Presidency, have shifted focus from ‘gender equality 
and women’s empowerment’ to ‘women-led development’. The Committee welcomes 
the initiative and note with immense satisfaction that all G20 members have agreed to 
encourage women-led development and remain committed to enhancing women’s 
full, equal, effective and meaningful participation as decision makers for addressing 

34 | P a g e 
 
global challenges inclusively. The Committee have been informed that G20 also 
agreed to halve the global digital gender divide; drive gender-inclusive climate 
action; secure women’s food security, nutrition and well-being. The Committee 
understand that the first meeting of this new Working Group on Empowerment of 
Women will be convened during the Brazilian G20 Presidency. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the women-led development agenda can be further 
escalated only through formulation and implementation of specific transformative 
solutions and policies at both at national and global levels. This requires a multi-
pronged approach that addresses structural barriers, promotes women’s economic 
participation and ensures access of women to quality education, health care and 
digital resources. While appreciating the strong precedent set during the Indian 
Presidency, the Committee hope that the subsequent presidencies further develop 
this focus by recognising women not just as beneficiaries, but as active agents of 
change. The Committee also desire to be apprised about the first meeting of the 
working Group which will be convened in the near future during the Brazilian G20 
Presidency. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Indian G20 Presidency had identified Women-led Development as one of its key 
priorities. Under the section on “Gender Equality and Empowering all women and girls”, the 
New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration encouraged women-led development and reiterated 
commitment to enhancing women’s full, equal, effective, and meaningful participation as 
decision makers. The G20 also agreed on creating a new Working Group on Empowerment 
of Women to support the G20 Women’s Ministerial during the Brazilian G20 Presidency. 
 
The Brazilian G20 Presidency, in its Issue note on Empowerment of Women Working Group 
(EWWG), outlined its EWWG priorities as Equality, Confronting Misogyny and Violence, and 

35 | P a g e 
 
Climate Justice, thereby mainstreaming the discussions recognising women not just as 
beneficiaries, but as active agents of change. The first meeting of the EWWG was held in 
virtual mode on 17-18 January, 2024, and the Women Ministerial meeting is planned for 
10th October, 2024 in Brasilia. Equality; Confronting misogyny and violence; and, Climate 
Justice are the three priorities of this Working Group under which deliberations happened 
during the first EWWG meeting. India was represented by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development in this meeting.  Brazil invited India to commence the discussion and India 
presented its Country Statement on the themes, outlining Government of India’s initiatives 
and reaffirming its efforts in endeavour to achieve equality, confront misogyny and violence 
and climate justice, whileunderscoring the foundationslaid during India’s presidency on 
women-led development.The meeting was attended by all G-20 members as well as 
observers, including Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal, Nigeria and international organizations 
such as UNDP, UNFPA, WHO, FAO, UNESCO, ILO, OAS (Organization of American 
States) and ECLAC. It was conveyed during the meeting that the potential dates of the 2nd 
meeting of EWWG will be intimated soon. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.15) 
The Committee are happy to note that India's has taken its G20 presidency 2023 as a 
significant opportunity to showcase the country's rich heritage of traditional 
medicine and its potential to contribute to global health and well-being. The New 
Delhi Leaders’ Declaration recognized the potential role of evidence-based 
Traditional and Complementary Medicine in health and took note of international 
efforts in this direction. A G20 Traditional Medicine Compendium, which is a digital 
repository of traditional medicine knowledge and practices from G20 countries has 
also been launched during the presidency. The Committee, while welcoming the 
initiatives taken during the presidency to provide thrust to traditional medicine, urge 

36 | P a g e 
 
that the Government boost its efforts to raise global awareness of the potential 
benefits of traditional medicine and promote its safe and effective use. The 
Committee further urge the Government to work on action-oriented plans to 
encourage integration of traditional medicine into mainstream healthcare systems 
both at national and international levels and also promote global cooperation on 
traditional medicine by entering into MoUs with other countries. 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration recognized the potential role of evidence-based 
Traditional and Complementary Medicine (T&CM) and took note of international efforts in 
this direction, including WHO’s global and collaborating centres, and clinical trial registries. 
T&CM is a high priority area for the Government, which is being taken forward at bilateral 
and multilateral fora, including through the Global Centre for Traditional Medicine, 
Jamnagar. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.16) 
The Committee understand that MAHARISHI initiative, mooted during India’s 
Presidency aims to bolster research and awareness concerning agro-biodiversity, 
food security and nutrition aligning with the International Year of Millets 2023 (IYoM 
2023) programme initiated by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). The 
focus was on millets and other underutilized grains with a view to providing an 
optimistic pathway for all nations to attain agricultural efficiency and food security. 
With the nations reeling under the catastrophic effects of COVID-19, conflicts, 
slowdowns and downturns, and climate change, India’s additional vision to focus on 
agriculture production and consumption of millets is commendable. While 

37 | P a g e 
 
appreciating the initiative, the Committee urge the Government to make concerted 
efforts to promote production and consumption of millets and other ancient grains 
within the country so that food security is assured for Indian citizens too. The 
Committee also hope that the successive presidencies too stress upon the need to 
build policies encouraging the production and consumption of millets and other 
ancient grains. 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 Deccan High Level Principles (Deccan HLPs) on Food Security and Nutrition 
2023, adopted under our G20 Presidency, emphasized the need to enhance availability and 
access to nutritious food and strengthening food safety nets. The G20 Millets and Other 
Ancient Grains International Research Initiative (MAHARISHI) was adopted under India's 
G20 Presidency with an international R&D Centre hosted at IIMR, Hyderabad.  
The Deccan HLPs served as an input for the work of the Task Force to launch a “Global 
Alliance against Hunger and Poverty”, to be created during the Brazilian presidency. The 
MAHARISHI initiative will also be taken forward by IIMR, Hyderabad, under the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.17) 
India assumed G20 Presidency at a time when the world was riven by conflicts, chaos 
and crisis. Mindful of the challenges being faced, India set the agenda for global 
policy cooperation to address these multifarious concerns. The Committee observe 
that the New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration (NDLD) reflects the action-oriented approach 
taken by the Government as is evident from the range of outcomes that have come 
through in the document. While the G20 Outcome Documents of the previous years 

38 | P a g e 
 
are heavily dominated by the agenda of the developed countries, the New Delhi 
Leaders Declaration has been successful in capturing the causes, priorities and 
concerns of the developing countries. The Committee are enthused to note that India 
has been successful in bringing together all G20 countries on the same page and 
have delivered 100 per cent consensus on the priorities set. With 83 paragraphs, 87 
outcomes, 118 documents adopted, i.e. a total of 205 outcomes and documents, no 
dissent, no footnotes or Chair’s Summary, New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration 
symbolises an unprecedented global consensus on all key issues. The declaration 
reflects a uniquely Indian perspective of emphasizing universal, equitable and 
inclusive solutions to today’s problems. The Committee underscore that NDLDs 
consensual nature is not only a testament to the trust India enjoy with all G20 
partners but also a message for peace, dialogue, diplomacy and hope. The 
Committee, therefore, hope that it shape the global narratives in the coming years 
through the future Presidencies and bridge divides leading to a more inclusive 
human-centric development. 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration (NDLD) set the way forward on a wide range of 
global issues, in the following areas: 
 Strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth; 
 Accelerating progress on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); 
 Green development pact for a sustainable future; 
 Multilateral Institutions for the 21st century; 
 Technological Transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure; 
 International Taxation; 
 Gender Equality and Empowering All Women and Girls; 
 Financial Sector Issues; 

39 | P a g e 
 
 Countering Terrorism and Money Laundering; and 
 Creating a More Inclusive World.  
 
By bringing consensus in 83 paragraphs of the NDLD, India’s G20 Presidency brought 
multilateralism back to the centre stage and demonstrated its ability to bring developing and 
developed countries together on pressing issues confronting the world.  The consensus 
arrived at in New Delhi on development, climate and environment, energy transitions, 
health, agriculture, digital economy, trade and investment, disaster risk reduction, 
employment, education, tourism and anti-corruption, as well as on building multilateral 
institutions for the 21st century and global financial architecture, will leave a lasting impact. 
During its G20 Presidency, India also amplified the priorities and voice of the Global South 
in the G20. At the New Delhi G20 Summit, the African Union was inducted into the G20 as a 
permanent member.  
Some of the decisions taken in New Delhi are already fructifying. For example, G20 
achievements on energy and climate in New Delhi, on tripling RE, developing hydrogen, 
and scaling up climate and energy finance, were echoed and carried forward at COP28 in 
UAE. The G20 message on AI on pro-innovation governance and regulation, has been 
cemented at subsequent international gatherings. MDB reforms, to help scale up climate 
and developmental finance, and making MDBs more representative, is now at the heart of 
the agenda of the international financial institutions. Mechanisms on women-led 
development, disaster risk reduction and Startups, created during our Presidency, are 
Brazilian priorities as well. G20 has emerged stronger and more purposeful during India’s 
Presidency, shaping the global agenda more effectively. 
The Brazilian G20 Presidency priorities are the following: 
 Social inclusion and the fight against hunger and poverty 
 The Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty 

40 | P a g e 
 
 Sustainable development and energy transitions 
 The Global Mobilization against Climate Change 
 Energy Transitions 
 The Initiative on Bioeconomy 
 Reform of global governance institutions 
Brazil is also continuing with all G20 mechanisms of the Indian Presidency, including all 
Working Groups and Engagement Groups.  In addition, Brazil has convened the 
Empowerment of Women Working Group and has created a new Engagement Group 
“Judiciary20”.  Thus, Indian G20 Presidency outcomes and Brazilian Presidency priorities 
are well aligned, and are being taken forward.  
Brazil has also taken up some new initiatives, such as Triangular Cooperation, Task Force 
on Climate Change and Task Force on Hunger & Poverty, which were agreed to by G20 
members during the first Sherpa meeting.  This reflects G20’s commitment to bridging 
divides leading to more inclusive human centric development. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.18) 
 
The Committee note that the first of its kind ‘Voice of the Global South Summit’ 
convened by India which saw the participation from 125 countries, heralded a new 
dawn of multilateralism. The Committee further note with immense satisfaction that 
during her Presidency, India has effectively utilized the G20 platform to successfully 
mainstream the concerns of the global south in international discourse. Moreover, 
the NDLD have clearly highlighted India’s ability to bridge and straddle across 

41 | P a g e 
 
geopolitical divides, between the West and the East, between developing and 
developed countries. The Committee are aware that the latest IMF forecast has 
confirmed that in the foreseeable future, over two-thirds of the global growth will 
come from the Global South as this is the region that will provide the labour force 
and the investment opportunities to drive the bulk of global growth for the rest of the 
century. As such, addressing the concerns of the Global South would contribute 
towards greater global resilience and strengthening of the international order. The 
Committee, hence, desire that the New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration become a 
springboard for the developing countries to take their rightful place in shaping the 
global narrative. The Committee also desire India to continue its bilateral and 
multilateral engagements in the G20 platform and play a greater role in global affairs 
in future too.                                         
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During its G20 Presidency, India constantly amplified the Voice of the Global South.  The 
G20 virtual Leaders’ Summit on 22 November 2023 was preceded by the second Voice of 
the Global South Summit on 17 November 2023, attended by around 130 countries of the 
Global South.   
The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration articulated solutions to key issues of interest to 
developing countries, such as welcoming the African Union as a permanent member of the 
G20; deliberations on ways to advancing financial inclusion; unlocking trade for growth; 
accelerating progress on achievement of SDGs; strengthening Global Health and delivering 
quality education; emphasis on climate and sustainable finance, mainstreaming sustainable 
development including through Mission LiFE; a call for reinvigorating multilateralism; 
working towards implementing clean, sustainable, just, affordable and inclusive energy 

42 | P a g e 
 
transitions; emphasizing on technological transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure, 
gender equality and women-led development, and creation of a more inclusive world. 
The NDLD has amplified the voice of the Global South significantly. Focus on LiFE, climate 
finance, MDB reforms, SDG Action Plan and digital public infrastructure are some 
examples. 
After the Italian presidency in 2021, four consecutive global south countries (Indonesia, 
India, Brazil, South Africa) are steering the G20 agenda and focussing on issues of 
significance of the global south. The approach of the Indian Presidency is being taken 
forward by the Brazilian Presidency and can be expected to be continued by the South 
African Presidency as well. The priorities of Brazil are well aligned with the NDLD outcomes 
that India has delivered on the issues of priorities to the developing world. As a member of 
the Troika, India will continue to support Brazil and play a constructive role in shaping the 
G20 narrative going forward. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.19) 
With an aim to creating a more inclusive world, where the voice of the Global South 
would no longer be overlooked, India, during its Presidency, had proposed for 
inclusion of African Union, one of the largest regional groupings comprising of 
developing countries in the G20. With the acceptance of India’s proposal to welcome 
the African Union as a permanent member, the G20 has encompassed 80% of the 
global population. The Committee hope that the inclusion of the AU as a member of 
G20 would be the first step towards amplifying the voice of the developing countries 
in the G20 and fosters a more comprehensive dialogue on global challenges and 
opportunities. The Committee further desire that India’s efforts towards inclusion of 
African Union in G20 would go a long way in strengthening our multifaceted relations 

43 | P a g e 
 
with African countries which in turn would reflect in positive outcomes for India 
during our political campaigns in the global arena. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The inclusion of African Union, one of the largest regional groupings of developing 
countries, in the G20 at the New Delhi Summit, reflected India’s endeavour of championing 
the voice of the Global South.  
African Union, with 55 African Member States, plays a pivotal role in driving political and 
economic development on the continent, with its primary aim being the promotion of African 
integration and increased collaboration among African nations, all in pursuit of peace, 
security, and prosperity for the people of the continent. AU’s inclusion in the G20 as a 
permanent member will further strengthen India’s multifaceted relations with African 
countries, and contribute towards growing support for Indian initiatives at multilateral fora. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.20) 
At the time of India taking over Presidency of G20, amongst other political, economic 
and social crisis, the Russia-Ukraine crisis was the most disruptive global 
geopolitical event. Prior to the Summit itself, differences were mounting among the 
G20 members on a range of issues but most intensely on the situation in Ukraine. 
Given the fact that 14 Ministerial meetings had failed to bring about a consensus on 
the issue, the biggest challenge of the New Delhi Summit was to come up with a 
consensus based joint communiqué at the end of the gathering. The Committee note 
with immense satisfaction that India has successfully achieved the historic 
consensus on this geo-political issue at the G20 New Delhi Summit. The consensus 

44 | P a g e 
 
marked a historical reversal of the growing divergence and dissonance among the 
members and demonstrated the implicit desire of the global community to avoid 
conflict and reach resolutions through negotiations. The Committee are enthused to 
note that what could not be achieved at the United Nations and at the United Nations’ 
Security Council could be achieved by India during her Presidency. India could also 
bring on to the table, countries from G7, Russia and China. The Committee are of 
view that the NDLD, on the issue, has demonstrated to the world, the ability of the 
Indian negotiators and the Government to drive consensus among the most powerful 
countries in the world. The Committee, while appreciating the herculean efforts on 
the part of the Indian team of negotiators, hope that India’s role as the consensus 
builder would act as a catalyst towards securing permanent seat in the UNSC and 
enable India to play a greater role in the global politics in the coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India, during its Presidency of the G20, brought to the forefront the need for multilateral 
reforms, including reforms of international financial institutions as well as UN reforms, 
including in the context of achieving Agenda 2030. A reference to UNGA 75/1, on UN 
reforms, was agreed for the first time in a G20 Leaders’ Summit by consensus.   
The Indian Presidency also amplified the voice of the Global South, and inducted the AU as 
a permanent member of the G20. By doing so, India’s G20 Presidency and outcomes have 
buttressed India’s international position and credentials for its due and greater say in 
international fora. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 

45 | P a g e 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.21) 
The Committee note with immense satisfaction that India’s Presidency has 
successfully brought to the forefront the need for multilateral reforms, including 
reforms of international financial institutions as well as UN. It has brought out the 
gap between the needs of the 21st century multilateral setting and the institutions of 
the 20th century. The Committee have been informed that the reference to UNGA 75/1 
(call for UN reforms) was agreed to for the first time in the G20. The Committee while, 
welcoming the move, desire that the upcoming chairs of the grouping, Brazil and 
South Africa too, carry forward the call for multilateral reforms and place them as 
their presidential priorities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Brazilian G20 Presidency priorities include multilateral reforms, are well aligned with 
India’s priorities and outcomes, and are listed as below: 
 Social inclusion and the fight against hunger and poverty 
 The Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty 
 Sustainable development and energy transitions 
 The Global Mobilization against Climate Change 
 Energy Transitions 
 The Initiative on Bioeconomy 
 Reform of global governance institutions 
Given the amplification of the voice of the Global South and the induction of the AU in the 
G20 during India’s Presidency, and given the shared agenda and outcomes of India and 

46 | P a g e 
 
Africa voiced at various multilateral fora, the broad alignment between India’s G20 
Presidency outcomes and South Africa’s priorities can be expected to continue. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.22) 
The Committee note that the G20 Common Framework for Debt Treatments is an 
agreement between the G20 and Paris Club countries to coordinate and cooperate on 
debt treatments on request for 73 low-income countries that are eligible for it. Since 
its launch in 2020, till the beginning of India’s G20 Presidency in December 2022, 
three countries namely, Chad, Zambia and Ethiopia have requested for debt 
restructuring under the Common Framework and each of these cases are at various 
stages of formalization. The Committee find that under the Indian Presidency, efforts 
were taken to explore options for providing debt treatment for middle-income 
countries facing debt vulnerabilities too, though not eligible for debt restructuring 
under the Common Framework. The Committee have been informed that, as proof of 
its commitments towards this initiative, an official creditor committee for Sri Lanka 
was set up in April 2023, co-chaired by India, Japan, and France. The Committee 
welcome the initiative and feel that this coordination has the potential to serve as an 
effective model for addressing debt challenges in other similarly placed middle-
income countries. The Committee, hence, desire that the resolution during India’s 
Presidency become a driving force against global debt vulnerabilities. 
Reply of the Government 
The fourth meeting of the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors (FMCBG) 
under India’s Presidency, held in Marrakesh in October 2023, provided a clear mandate to 
step up the implementation of the Common Framework in a predictable, timely, orderly and 

47 | P a g e 
 
coordinated manner. Ministers called for continued discussion on policy-related issues 
linked to the implementation of the Common Framework for making appropriate 
recommendations.  The FMCBG also encouraged the efforts of the Global Sovereign Debt 
Roundtable (GSDR) participants to strengthen communication and foster a common 
understanding among key stakeholders, both within and outside the Common Framework, 
for facilitating effective debt treatment.  
Building on the progress achieved on the debt agenda during the Indian Presidency, the 
Brazilian Presidency in 2024 plans to take forward the work areas under the priority 
“Addressing sovereign debt issues”. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.23) 
 
One of the key achievements of the G20 Finance Track was on strengthening 
Multilateral Developing Banks and reforming the multilateral financing architecture to 
address the shared global challenges of the 21st Century. During India’s Presidency 
year, a roadmap for an updated MDB ecosystem with milestones and timelines, 
touching upon all aspects of MDB evolution, including incentive structure, 
operational approaches and financial capacity for making MDBs better equipped to 
finance a wide range of SDGs was arrived at. The Committee find that this initiative, 
which had started under the previous presidency, has got a huge impetus and 
successful achievement under our presidency with the release of a report of the 
Independent Expert Group which touches upon the extent of financing required by 
the world to meet shared prosperity goals and global challenges as well on how 
Multilateral Development Banks can catalyse private capital to take care of 
development needs and global challenges. The Committee further note that in the 

48 | P a g e 
 
fourth meeting of the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors held in 
Marrakesh in October 2023, there was a complete consensus about the New Delhi 
Leaders’ Declaration. In order to take further the vision that the Indian presidency 
articulated for the future of the Multilateral Development Bank architecture, the 
Committee urge the Government to deliberate on the Independent Expert Group (IEG) 
recommendations and suggest a way forward to implement them under the 2024 
Presidency of Brazil. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the Indian Presidency, focused discussions were held on several aspects of MDB 
evolution, including incentive structure, operational approaches, and financial capacity for 
making MDBs better equipped to address the global challenges of the 21st century and the 
development needs of low and middle-income countries. 2 key deliverables of the Indian 
Presidency were the Report of the G20 Independent Expert Group (IEG) on Strengthening 
MDBs and the G20 Roadmap for the implementation of the recommendations of the G20 
Independent Review of Multilateral Development Banks’ Capital Adequacy Frameworks 
(CAF).  
The two volumes of the IEG Report provide recommendations to make MDBs better, bigger 
and bolder by, inter alia, suitably modifying their operating models, mobilising more private 
capital, and scaling up financing at an affordable cost. The CAF Roadmap, endorsed by 
G20 Leaders atthe New Delhi Summit, provides an update on the efforts undertaken by the 
MDBs to improve their capital adequacy frameworks for boosting their investing capacities. 
At the G20 FMCBG meeting in October 2023, the Ministers welcomed the Report of the 
G20 Independent Expert Group on Strengthening MDBs and called on the International 
Financial Architecture Working Group of the G20to deliberate on the IEG recommendations 

49 | P a g e 
 
in consultation with MDBs and suggest a way forward for better, bigger and more effective 
MDBs, including ways to work together better as a system.   
Building on this mandate and the outcomes of the Indian Presidency, namely, the two 
volumes of the Report of the G20 Independent Expert Group on Strengthening MDBs and 
the 
G20 Capital Adequacy Framework (CAF) Roadmap, the Brazilian Presidency has 
developed the contours of their MDB agenda for the G20 in 2024 witha G20 Roadmap for 
better, bigger, and more effective MDBs as the proposed deliverable.. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.24) 
 
The Committee note that the world is sliding back on Sustainable Development Goals 
and only 12 per cent of the SDGs are on track. Recognizing the lagging progress on 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), India, during its G20 Presidency has taken 
up ‘Accelerating Sustainable Development Goals’ as one of the key priorities. The 
G20’s 2023 Action Plan calls for the G20 countries to undertake very strong steps 
towards achievement of all SDGs, including digital transformation; gender equality 
and empowerment of women; and implementing sustainable, inclusive and just 
transitions globally. The Action Plan seeks to accelerate achievement of all SDGs in 
all regions by promoting collaboration among G20 work streams and aims to 
enhance international partnerships with all developing countries, the UN and other 
relevant International Organisations. The Committee hope that this would help 
address the challenges faced by developing countries, including bottlenecks in 
financing for development, and help in fostering strong collective actions for 
powering sustainable development, climate and environment actions in an 

50 | P a g e 
 
interconnected manner around the world. The Committee also note with immense 
satisfaction the launch of Global Biofuel Alliance during India’s Presidency to ensure 
reliable supply of critical minerals for clean energy transition. The Committee hope 
the initiative would go a long way in building a sustainable and equitable global 
ecosystem. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the Indian presidency, G20 Development Ministers deliberated upon ways of 
accelerating achievement of SDGs and synergies between the development, environment 
and climate agendas. The G20 2023 Action Plan to Accelerate Progress on SDGs, 
envisaged as a multi-year living document, highlights the need for addressing the SDG’s 
financing gap with adequate resource mobilization.  Going forward, the G20, under the 
extended leadership of developing countries - Indonesia, India, Brazil, and South Africa – 
and with the support of developed countries, will continue with efforts towards making 
speedy progress in achieving the SDGs and fostering a more interconnected and resilient 
global community. 
 
The Global Biofuels Alliance (GBA), launched at the G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Summit, 
envisages collaboration among GBA members and with relevant existing regional and 
international agencies in the fields of bioenergy, bioeconomy, and energy transition. 
 
The Brazilian Presidency has prioritized Biofuels under the energy transition agenda, and 
has also created a new Bioeconomy initiative. India will engage with partner countries of 
GBA, as well as relevant G20 mechanisms, on global adoption of biofuels.  
 

51 | P a g e 
 
The G20 voluntary proposal on Critical Minerals, are also being pursued by the Government 
at relevant bilateral and multilateral fora with identified partner countries around the globe.  
 
Thus, the deliverables of the Indian Presidency on SDGs, Biofuels and critical minerals are 
being taken forward in the G20, as well as at other relevant fora. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.25) 
The Committee note with immense satisfaction that during the Indian G20 
Presidency, the trade and investment group has successfully built consensus on five 
concrete action-oriented outcomes. The highlights of the G20 trade and investment 
outcome documents were regarding building resilient and sustainable global value 
chains, promoting and fostering link between foreign enterprises and domestic 
companies, integrating the micro and medium enterprises in global trade by creating 
one-stop hub for MSMEs, underscoring the importance of reduced entry barriers on 
digital platforms, and recognition of importance of WTO’s aid for trade initiatives to 
enable developing countries and LDCs to effectively participate in the global trade. 
The Committee have been informed that all but one para pertaining to geo-political 
issues were adopted unanimously. The Committee find that in comparison with the 
outcomes of earlier presidencies, India’s Presidency has proven to be the most 
successful since inception of the trade working group in 2016, with five outcomes 
and three endorsements, making it a total of eight. The Committee are sure that the 
agreed outcomes would have positive impact on India’s bilateral trade with our 
partners. The Committee, hence, urge the Government to actively utilize the leverage 
gained during the G20 deliberations to foster cooperation and build consensus on 

52 | P a g e 
 
trade and investment related matters and work on mutually beneficial trade 
agreements. 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 Trade and Investment working group under the Indian Presidency accomplished 
consensus on Indian TIWG deliverables of G20 Generic Framework for Mapping Global 
Value Chains (GVCs), High Level Principles on Digitalization of Trade Documents, Jaipur 
Call for Action for enhancing MSMEs’ access to information, Presidency’s Compendium on 
MRAs for Professional Services, G20 Standards Dialogue. Notably, Presidency’s 
Compendium on MRAs was prepared by collating the best practices from G20 members 
and was made available at https://commerce.gov.in/wp-
content/uploads/2023/10/Compendium-of-Best-Practices-on-MRAs-for-Professional-
Services-Indias-G20-Presidency.pdf Moreover, a G20 Standards Dialogue was also held on 
2nd& 3rd November 2023. Around 750 delegates from global standard setting bodies 
participated in the two-day event. Further, India is supporting the initiatives taken by 
International Trade Center, Geneva in upgrading the Global Trade Helpdesk into a One 
Stop Hub. A G20 webinar in this regard was organized on 6th November, 2023 in which 
national and international experts including representatives from ITC participated in a panel 
discussion. Over 2000 in-person and virtual attendees joined the webinar from MSMEs, 
industry bodies, think tanks and academia. 
Currently, as part of G20 Troika,India is working closely with the Brazilian Presidency to 
carry forward the work done under the Indian Presidency. 
Besides, India is leveraging its accomplishments in the G20 to work on mutually beneficial 
trade agreements with identified partner countries/regions including EU, UK. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 

53 | P a g e 
 
 (Recommendation (Sl. No.26) 
 
The Committee note that, as per the World Bank Report, India will need to invest $840 
billion over the next 15 years—or an average of $55 billion per annum—into urban 
infrastructure if it is to effectively meet the needs of its fast-growing urban 
population. Currently, the central and state governments finance over 75 per cent of 
city infrastructure, while urban local bodies (ULB) finance 15 per cent whereas only 5 
per cent of the infrastructure needs of Indian cities are being financed through 
private sources. The Committee understand that to meet the increasing demand for 
infrastructure investments, extra budgetary contributions from Multilateral 
Development Banks (MDBs), Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and the private 
sector are also essential. The Committee note that the principles for financing cities 
of tomorrow as formulated by the G20, and endorsed by the Leaders in the New Delhi 
Declaration, provide for 23 principles spread over five broad areas of planning and 
financing, namely, planning, maximising investment efficiency, creating a conducive 
environment for attracting private investment, strengthening institutional 
preparedness and augmenting technical and institutional capacities. The Committee 
hope that these principles will be instrumental in guiding the global infrastructure 
agenda and desire that the same would provide the thrust needed to build capacity, 
create bankable projects, provide for transparency in procurement process etc. 
which would ultimately facilitate the flow of finance for financing smart cities of 
tomorrow. 
Reply of the Government 
G20 Finance Ministers met during the fourth FMCBG meeting at Marrakech in October 
2023, and endorsed the G20/World Bank report on Enablers of Inclusive Cities. They noted 
the updated 2023 Infra Tracker tool and the report on Infrastructure taxonomies.  

54 | P a g e 
 
The discussion on the global infrastructure agenda on the basis of the principles on 
financing cities of tomorrow, adopted during India’s Presidency, are expected to be taken 
forward in the Infrastructure Working Group of the G20. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
 (Recommendation (Sl. No.27) 
 
Cognisant of the pivotal role that Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) can play in 
accelerating financial inclusion, the G20 India Presidency identified DPI as one of its 
priority areas. Accordingly in the G20 Finance Track, the Global Partnership for 
Financial Inclusion (GPFI) working group steered the priority of leveraging DPI for 
advancing financial inclusion and productivity gains. Using the lessons learnt from 
India’s success with India Stack and building on evidence from global examples, the 
GPFI developed the G20 Policy Recommendations for Advancing Financial Inclusion 
and Productivity Gains through Digital Public Infrastructures. The Committee 
understand that the 2023 G20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan endorsed by the G20 
Leaders identifies the promotion of open, interoperable, reliable, inclusive and secure 
digital infrastructures, including DPI, for rapidly advancing financial inclusion of 
individuals and MSMEs. The Committee view this as a major achievement especially 
in view of the fact that these policy recommendations will be filling a global vacuum 
by successfully bringing in a framework on digital public infrastructure which will 
allow countries across the world to develop and deploy digital public infrastructure. 
The Committee are also enthused to note that the Government has been successful 
in showcasing India’s digital public infrastructure with its identity system Aadhar 
along with the payment platform UPI, as role model throughout our G20 Presidency. 
The committee hope and desire that India’s efforts would, in the long run, help in 

55 | P a g e 
 
lowering transaction costs, catalyse innovation, foster competition and 
interoperability, enhance individual user experiences and choice, and provide 
avenues to address the risks inherent to Digital Financial Services (DFS). The 
Committee also desire that India's plan to build and maintain a Global Digital Public 
Infrastructure Repository (GDPIR), a virtual repository of DPI voluntarily shared by 
G20 members and beyond, too take shape at the earliest and strengthen the financial 
well-being of G20 countries. 
Reply of the Government 
India has already developed Global DPI Repository (GDPIR) (www.dpi.global) to host DPI 
solutions from different countries and enable their easy discoverability and adoption. At 
present, the repository has more than 50 DPI solutions from 16 countries. 
At the virtual G20 Summit in November 2023, Hon’ble Prime Minister had announced 
creation of the GDPIR and a Social Impact Fund (SIF) for DPI implementation in global 
south countries. The SIF is proposed as a government-led, multi-stakeholder effort to 
accelerate DPI systems implementation in the global south, to which India has committed 
an initial USD 25 million3. Brazilian G20 Presidency is continuing to pursue Digital Public 
Infrastructure as a priority in the Digital Economy Working Group. Our efforts to further 
promote DPI bilaterally and multilaterally at relevant fora are continuing. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.28) 
The Committee note that at present, a comprehensive crypto regulatory framework is 
not in place in most G20 countries. G20 member countries vary in their levels of 
crypto asset regulation. The Committee further note that prior to India taking over G-
20 Presidency, the G20 discussions on potential risks associated with crypto assets 

56 | P a g e 
 
were limited to addressing concerns related to financial stability and financial 
integrity. The Committee find that India, during its G20 Presidency, has played a 
crucial role in building consensus on internationally coordinated policies for crypto 
assets. During India's G20 presidency, discussions on potential risks were 
significantly broadened to encompass macroeconomic risks arising from crypto 
assets especially the risks specific to emerging markets and developing economies 
(EMDEs) with inputs from the IMF, UNCTAD and the BIS. The Committee note with 
immense satisfaction that these collective efforts have culminated in the G20's 
adoption of a Synthesis Paper prepared by the IMF and the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB). The policy and regulatory recommendations in this Synthesis Paper, the 
Committee note, would serve as the global baseline for any regulatory framework on 
crypto assets. The Committee also note that the Synthesis Paper contains a ‘Policy 
implementation roadmap’. The Committee are of the view that the paper provides 
valuable guidance, not just to the G20 but also to the non-G20 jurisdictions in moving 
forward with clearer policies on crypto assets. In such a backdrop, the Committee 
urge the Government to evaluate these recommendations and bring about a 
comprehensive regulatory framework for crypto assets at the earliest and strive with 
G20 members for swift implementation of the reporting framework for crypto assets 
to make sure that such non-financial assets are not used by tax evaders to conceal 
their unaccounted wealth. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration (NDLD) had welcomed the IMF-FSB Synthesis 
Paper on crypto-assets.  Thereafter, at the fourth G20 FMCBG meeting at Marrakech in 
October 2023, G20 Finance Ministers adopted the Roadmap proposed in the Synthesis 
Paper as a G20 Roadmap on Crypto Assets. This detailed and action-oriented Roadmap 

57 | P a g e 
 
aspires to achieve the common goals of macro-economic and financial stability and to 
ensure effective, flexible, and coordinated implementation of the comprehensive policy 
framework for crypto assets.   
The G20 Finance Ministers also supported the ongoing work and global implementation of 
FATF standards on crypto assets. 
These outcomes are being implemented nationally by Governments, subject to national 
circumstances, and are being taken forward at relevant international financial fora.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.29) 
 
The Committee note that India, along with Singapore, Bangladesh, Italy, USA, Brazil, 
Argentina, Mauritius and UAE, have launched the Global Biofuel Alliance on the 
sidelines of the G20 Summit in New Delhi. This alliance of Governments, International 
Organizations and Industry has been initiated by India as G20 Chair with the intention 
to expedite the global uptake of biofuels through facilitating technology 
advancements, intensifying utilization of sustainable biofuels, shaping robust 
standard-setting and certification through the participation of a wide spectrum of 
stakeholders. The alliance will also act as a central repository of knowledge and an 
expert hub. The Committee, while noting that the alliance has brought together the 
biggest consumers and producers of biofuels, consider it as a paradigm shift in 
sustainable energy and economic strategy. The Committee are sure that the alliance 
will help accelerate India’s existing biofuel programme, ease the fiscal strain imposed 
by oil imports, provide for additional opportunities for growth of Indian industries in 
the form of export of technology, expertise and equipment. The Committee note that 
the global ethanol market is predicted to grow at a fast pace and hence foresee a very 

58 | P a g e 
 
strong potential for growth of biofuels in the future creating a huge opportunity for 
India. The Committee urge the Government to address the challenges that might 
come in the way of the sustainability of the alliance through constant engagement 
with the member countries and strive towards placing itself in a position to 
successfully reap the benefits of this growth in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Global Biofuels Alliance (GBA) was launched in presence of the leaders of 9 countries 
i.e. India, Singapore, Bangladesh, Italy, USA, Brazil, Argentina, Mauritius and UAE and with 
the support of additional 10 countries, on the sidelines of the G20 Summit held in New 
Delhi, in September 2023. Since its launch, through our efforts, GBA has continued to grow 
in stature and is receiving multifaceted and multistakeholder support from producers and 
consumers, nascent yet interested countries. As a result of these efforts the Alliance now 
boasts a membership of 23 countries.  
The GBA is aimed at facilitating cooperation and intensifying the use of sustainable biofuels, 
including in the transportation sector. It places emphasis on strengthening markets, 
facilitating global biofuels trade, development of concrete policy lesson-sharing and 
provision of technical support for national biofuels programs worldwide. 
The GBA envisages work in collaboration with and to complement relevant existing regional 
and international agencies as well as initiatives in the bioenergy, bioeconomy, and energy 
transition fields more broadly, including the Clean Energy Ministerial Biofuture Platform, the 
Mission Innovation Bioenergy initiatives, and the Global Bioenergy Partnership (GBEP). 
GBA has strived to work with countries and international stakeholders to identify challenges 
faced by the various stakeholders of the alliance. In this context, two meetings of the GBA 
Temporary Executive Committee (TEC) (comprising of country members of the alliance has 
been convened and three meetings with the other stakeholders including an  “Industry 

59 | P a g e 
 
perspectives on expectations from GBA” on 3rd December 2023 at COP28 in Dubai, 
multistakeholder roundtable at the World Economic Forum chaired by Union Minister, 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Housing and Urban Affairs and at India Energy 
Week 2024. These events attracted participation from diverse international organizations 
specializing in biofuels. The Brazilian Presidency has prioritized biofules with Energy 
Transitions Working Group and has started a new Bioeconomy initiative. India is also 
advocating and is engaging with partner countries on global adoption of biofuels through 
these mechanisms of the G20. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.31) 
The Committee understand that the effectiveness of G20 resolutions largely depend 
on how the member countries implement them. Since the G20 serves as a platform 
for dialogue and coordination, its impact varies based on the specific issues and the 
actions taken by its member states in response to emergent global situations. In G20, 
arriving at a consensus is very critical as what has been agreed to in G20 will then be 
quoted for every other multilateral discussion. The Committee further find that that 
G20 resolutions in the past have had very major global impact, whether it was in 
handling the 2007 financial crisis, avoiding competitive currency devaluation, 
ensuring equitable distribution of vaccines, diagnostics, and treatments during Covid 
19 pandemic; addressing debt situation in several countries through Debt Service 
Suspension Initiative; addressing climate change or promoting sustainable 
development, etc. Since G20, as a forum for major economies, has the potential to 
influence global economic policies, the Committee hope and desire that the 
relevance and impact of G20 resolutions in addressing pressing global issues will 
amplify in the future. 

60 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
Important outcomes on SDGs, LiFE, digital public infrastructure, food security and nutrition, 
renewable energy, critical minerals, global health, skilled migration pathways, climate and 
development finance, MDB Reforms and many more, were achieved in New Delhi. These 
need to be taken forward and implemented, domestically by national governments, and 
globally by concerned international organizations, as well as through various bilateral and 
multilateral agreements. The priorities of the Brazilian G20 Presidency are well aligned with 
the G20 NDLD, and continue to amplify the concerns and voice of the Global South.  
 
Since G20 is a gathering of world Leaders of leading economies comprising 85% of the 
global GDP, 75% of world trade and 2/3rd of the world population, its decisions carry a lot of 
weight. The momentum we achieved in New Delhi, in the form of a very substantive 
Leaders’ Declaration adopted by consensus on all its 83 paragraphs, reinforcing 
multilateralism, will continue to be sustained and built upon, under the collective guidance of 
G20 Leaders. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.32) 
The Committee understand that G20 being a premier agenda setting body of the 
world, its declarations and commitments resonate across the world and are carried 
forward by concerned international organisations and sovereign governments 
through specific actions and concrete steps. Though G20 New Delhi Leaders’ 
Declaration (NDLD) is not a legally binding document, it is seen that some indicative 
timelines, such as tripling of renewable energy globally from current levels by 2030, 
halving the gender digital divide by 2030 and setting of a New Collective Quantified 
Goal for Climate finance in 2024 are mentioned in the NDLD itself. The Committee 

61 | P a g e 
 
hope that India being a member of the troika, alongside South Africa and Brazil, can 
ensure the continuity and definitely strive for implementation of resolutions 
especially as developing countries have a lot of synergy with the priorities that India 
had chosen for her Presidency. In 2026, the Presidency will move to the USA which 
has also been supportive of India’s priorities and of the issues concerning the 
developing countries. As regards other deliverables and outcomes, these are 
implemented domestically by sovereign governments or internationally through 
various bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral agreements and commitments, while 
taking into account national circumstances. The Committee, hence, recommend that 
G20 related Ministries of Government of India follow up on NDLD outcomes in their 
respective functional areas and participate actively in future Presidencies to take the 
agreed NDLD agenda forward. The Committee also desire that India’s bilateral 
engagement with each of the G20 countries should be escalated availing of all 
opportunities for the same. 
Reply of the Government 
The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration (NDLD) and its specific Ministry-wise outcomes 
have been circulated to concerned line/nodal ministries (Annex I), in order to take them 
forward and push for their implementation. Several inter-ministerial meeting are being 
regularly held to follow up on the G20 NDLD. The Brazilian G20 Presidency’s Issues note 
and G20 Calendar have been circulated to all concerned ministries and stakeholders 
(Annex II), in order to enable and ensure their active participation in G20 meetings.   
All G20-related Ministries are expected to follow up Indian G20 Presidency outcomes in 
their respective working group/track, as well as actively participate in future G20 meetings 
under successive Presidencies, to pursue NDLD objectives. 

62 | P a g e 
 
The achievements and takeaways of G20 NDLD are also being regularly pursued at 
relevant bilateral and multilateral fora. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 

63 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

64 | P a g e 
 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 | P a g e 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
 
The Committee note that over 30,000 delegates from G20 Member countries and 
invitee countries / international organizations participated in over 200 meetings held 
during India’s G20 Presidency. During the Presidency, India engaged with all the G20 
countries throughout the year bilaterally at ministerial and Leader’s levels which 
helped in gaining consensual support on difficult and critical issues. The Committee 
further note that meetings of 40 different G20 mechanisms were held, including 13 
Sherpa Track Working Groups, 8 Finance Track work streams, 11 Engagement 
Groups, 6 Initiatives and 2 stand-alone Ministerial tracks. The Committee have been 
informed that G20 Members and guest countries wholeheartedly participated in these 
meetings/ deliberations and supported their outcome documents. The Committee are 
quite sure that these interactions at both working and Ministerial levels have paved 
way for deepening India’s relationship with all G20 and Guest countries. The 
Committee, hence, urge the Ministry to actively work on a mechanism to proactively 
carry forward the ties formed during these interaction to next level and further 
strengthen India’s diplomatic relations and engagement with the G20 and Guest 
countries. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The G20 Presidency provided a unique opportunity to take forward our relations with the 
G20 and the invitee countries at different levels of government, thus deepening mutual 
understanding and paving the way for deepening bilateral cooperation with them in diverse 
fields.  

66 | P a g e 
 
After our successful G20 Presidency, India is building upon its relationships and 
strengthening its partnerships with G20 Members and Invitees in areas of common interest  
on a number of global issues, including in bilateral or regional discussions. Areas of new or 
stronger cooperation include digital public infrastructure; health; agriculture; education; 
energy transition; migration and mobility partnerships; culture; science and technology; and 
other fields of mutual interest covered in the G20. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.30) 
The Committee find that a $20 billion India-Middle East-Europe Corridor (IMEC), 
which is an ambitious multi-pronged network aiming to connect goods and services 
between Europe and Asia—via the Middle East, was launched during G20 Summit in 
New Delhi. It has been informed that the said strategic project will comprise two 
separate corridors, the east corridor connecting India to the Arabian Gulf and the 
northern corridor connecting the Arabian Gulf to Europe. It will include a railway that, 
upon completion, will provide a reliable and cost-effective cross-border ship-to-rail 
transit network to supplement existing maritime and road transport routes – enabling 
goods and services to transit to, from, and between India, the UAE, Saudi Arabia, 
Jordan, Israel, and Europe. Along the railway route, participants intend to enable the 
laying of cable for electricity and digital connectivity, as well as pipe for clean 
hydrogen export. While looking at IMEC as a secure addition to trans-regional 
connectivity architectures, the Committee underscore that the global economic order 
is becoming more multipolar. Since the signatories of the MoU are mandated to meet 
soon to develop and commit to an action plan, the Committee desire to be apprised 
about the project outlays, the funding mechanisms, the monitoring systems, the 
implementation modalities and relevant timetables. The Committee further look 
forward to seeing the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor functional within 
the timelines and stimulate economic integration between Asia, the Arabian Gulf, and 
Europe. 

67 | P a g e 
 
Reply of the Government 
On the sidelines of the G20 Leaders’ Summit, Leaders of India, European Union, France, 
Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia, UAE and US announced an MoU committing to work together 
to develop a new India-Middle East Economic Corridor (IMEC). 
The IMEC will comprise of two separate corridors, the east corridor connecting India to the 
Gulf and the northern corridor connecting the Gulf to Europe. 
The corridor intends to increase efficiency, reduce costs, secure regional supply chains, 
increase trade accessibility, enhance economic unity, generate jobs, and lower greenhouse 
gas emission-resulting in a transformative integration of Asia, Europe and the Middle East. 
Its implementation and IMEC project details are in the process of being worked out. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/103/2023 dated 22/02/2024] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
25 November, 2024                                                                         Chairperson,                                
04 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                    Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68 | P a g e 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) HELD ON 25 OCTOBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, 25 October, 2024 from 1430 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
     Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
 3. Shri Arun Govil 
 4. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
 5. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
 6. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 7. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 8. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 
     Rajya Sabha 
 9.  Dr. John Brittas 
 10. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
 11. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
 12. Dr. K. Laxman 
 13. Shri A. D. Singh 
 14. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
 15. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Ms. Maya Menon    - Under Secretary 

69 | P a g e 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1.  Shri Vikram Misri   : Foreign Secretary 
2.  Shri Randhir Kumar Jasiwal  : JS(XP) 
3.  Shri Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur  : JS(AMS) 
4.  Ms. Pratibha Parkar   : JS (Parl & Coord.) 
5.  Dr. Suresh Kumar   : JS (WANA) 
6.  Ms. Priyanka Sohoni   : DS (FSO) 
7.  Shri Abhishek Upadhyay  : DS (FSO) 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
3. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
4.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Seventh Report of the Committee on External Affairs (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘India’s Engagement with G20 Countries’ and adopted the same without any modifications. 
5. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
6. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
7. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
8. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
9. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
10. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 

70 | P a g e 
 
Appendix II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (18TH LOK SABHA) 
                                     
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                32                 
              
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32,  
          Total-30 
Percentage:- 93.75% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
  
  Nil 
  
 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Nil                                           
  
 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply of 
 Government is still awaited. 
 
Total-02 
           Percentage: 6.25% 
                           
 
  