 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2024-25)'] 
 
 
FOURTEENTH  REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
14 
 


 
 
FOURTEENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2024-25)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           24.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on             24.07.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 July 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
CCIT No. 415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 20 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 49 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 52 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 53 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee held on 26.06.2025............................ 64 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Shri Amrish Kumar                 — Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Salil Saroj  — Under Secretary  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Fourteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ relating to the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2024.  The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report on 21st March, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sittin g held on         
26th June, 2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
       21 July, 2025  Chairperson, 
       30 Asadha, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Communications and  Information 
Technology (2024 -25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ relating to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok  Sabha/laid in Rajya  Sabha on          
18th December, 2024. It contained 29 Observations/Recommendations. 
3.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:— 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,3,4,5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,  27 and 28. 
      Total:  22 
       Chapter:II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government:— 
Rec. Sl.  No.: 2 and 29.                  
Total:02 
Chapter:III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration:— 
Rec. Sl. No.: NIL                      
     Total: NIL 
            Chapter:IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government are of 
interim in nature:—  
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 6, 7, 10, 11 and 20.              
Total:05 
             Chapter:V 

2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for any reason to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spir it, the matter shall be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee further desire 
that Action Taken Statement on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the Observations/Re commendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their  Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
 
Budget Overview and Demands for Grants (2024-25) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended asunder:— 
“Demand No.27 pertaining to the Ministry of Electronics & IT has been allocated 
a total outlay of Rs. 21,936.90 cror e for the Financial Year (FY) 2024 -25.  Out of 
the total outlay, Rs. 21,355.89 crore has been earmarked for Revenue 
Expenditure and Rs.581.01 crore under Capital Expenditure. A comparative 
analysis of the Budget Estimate of the Ministry from FY 2020 -21 to FY 2024-25 
shows an increasing trend of allocation viz.Rs.6,899.03 crore, Rs.9,720.66 crore, 
Rs.14,300 crore, Rs.16,549.04 crore and Rs.21,936.90 crore, respectively. The 
Financial Year -wise allocation percentage indicates variations from 3.68% in 
2020-21, 40.90% in 2021 -22, 47.11% in 2022 -23, 15.73 % in 2023 -24 and 
32.56% in 2024-25.  
The Committee note that during FY 2023 -24 even though the Budget Estimate 
was Rs.16,549.04 crore and Revised Estimate was Rs.14,421.25 crore, the 
Ministry could utilize Rs.12 ,847.12 crore only thereby surrendering Rs.1,574.13 
crore from the Revised Estimate. Similarly, under Modified Programme for 
Development of Semi -Conductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in 
India, during FY 2023 -24, out of Rs.1503.36 crore allocated, the Actual 
Expenses as on 31 -3-2024 indicates that the Ministry could spend only 
Rs.681.11 crore, thus surrendering a staggering 55% of the allotted fund.  

3 
 
Surrendering of funds beyond 50% of the funds allocated reflects upon improper 
planning by the Minis try. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for 
non- utilization of precious allocated funds which could have been allotted to 
other Ministries for its effective utilisation. The Committee therefore urge the 
Ministry to ensure that realistic projecti ons are made in future as far as possible 
and ensure optimal utilization of funds by way of better planning and robust 
monitoring mechanism with learnings from past experience.” 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The esteemed Committee has rightly pointed out that there is an under -utilisation 
of fund amounting to Rs.1574.13 crore w.r.t. RE during the FY 2023 -24. It is 
submitted that the total unutilised amount of Rs.1574.13 crore inc ludes 
Rs.1097.73 crore that remained unutilised under two schemes, viz. ‘Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)’ (Rs.275.48 crore) and ‘Modified Programme for 
Development of Semi-Conductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India’ 
(Rs.822.25 crore). Hence, about 70% of the total unutilized fund belongs to these 
two schemes. It is noteworthy that expenditure/disbursement of incentives under 
these two schemes is dependent upon what the private companies are able to 
deliver. So, it is beyond the control  of the Ministry to ensure optimal utilisation of 
the allocated fund under these schemes. However, keeping in view of the 
underutilisation of funds during the last 2 -3 years and to ensure optimum 
utilisation of funds under PLI and Semiconductor schemes, the estimates received 
from industrial units are being reduced substantially at the Budget Estimate stage 
itself. The progress of expenditure under all the schemes of MeitY is also being 
reviewed on weekly basis in the Group Coordinators’ meeting under the 
chairmanship of Secretary (MeitY).” 
8. The Committee in their recommendation had called upon the Ministry to 
ascertain reasons for non - utilization of funds allocated to it and had urged to 
make realistic projections so that optimal utilization of funds cou ld be ensured. In 
their reply, the Ministry has stated that Rs.1097.73 crore remained unutilised under 
two schemes, viz. ‘Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)’ (Rs.275.48 crore) 
and ‘Modified Programme for Development of Semi -Conductors and Display 
Manufacturing Ecosystem in India’ (Rs.822.25 crore), which was about 70% of the 
total unutilized funds of the Ministry. The Ministry further added that the 

4 
 
expenditure/disbursement of incentives under these two schemes is dependent 
upon what the private compa nies are able to deliver and hence, it is beyond the 
control of the Ministry to ensure optimum  utilization of the funds  allocated under 
these schemes. The Committee have been apprised that to mitigate under -
utilization of funds in these Schemes, the estima tes received from industrial units 
are being reduced substantially at the Budget Estimate stage itself and the 
progress of expenditure under all the schemes of MeitY is also being reviewed on 
weekly basis in the Group Coordinators’ meeting under the Chairm anship of 
Secretary (MeitY). The Committee opine that the Ministry has a larger  role and 
responsibility towards proper monitoring, facilitation and effective implementation 
of the above mentioned schemes i.e. PLI and Modified Programme for 
development of S emi- conductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India 
which cannot be solely let to private companies. Hence, the submission of the 
Ministry that the expenditure/disbursement of incentives is dependent upon what 
the private companies are able to del iver and that it is beyond the control of the 
Ministry is not understandable. The Committee would like to emphasize that the 
lacunae and any lack of concerted efforts in non -utilization of funds under the 
aforesaid Schemes be examined at the earliest throu gh coordination meetings 
with private companies &stakeholders for reaching realistic and reasonable 
decisions. The Committee be apprised of the measures adopted in the Group 
Coordinators’ meeting to ensure optimum utilization of funds in future and the 
Minutes of last five such meetings may be provided to the Committee along with 
the steps taken to address the problems related to non -utilization of funds under 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)’ and ‘Modified Programme for 
Development of Semi -Conductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India 
Scheme. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 9.The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended asunder:— 
 “The Committee do note that primary challenges faced for implementation of 
Electronics Governance Sche me are digital literacy, digital connectivity, 
accessibility to services, ease in availing the digital services and the awareness/ 
readiness amongst the Departments to adopt the services and besides these 
challenges, the digital divide gap is also attribut ed to the fact that many citizens 
belonging to the weaker sections are deprived of availing the digital services. The 

5 
 
Committee were given to understand that Common Services Centres (CSCs) 
have been set up under  the initiative of the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology to deliver e -services to rural citizens through CSCs and expand the 
CSC network till the Gram Panchayat level and as on August 2024, 5.88 lakh 
CSCs are functional across the country in rural and urban areas, out of which 4.67 
lakh CSCs are functional at the Gram Panchayat/village level (rural). The 
Committee would like to know the latest status of operationalization of CSCs all 
across the country. Further, the Committee recommend that apart from current 
services delivered by CS Cs, the Ministry should include more number of services 
taking into account proliferation of technological changes in day -to-day lives of 
common man.” 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“Review committee of the project CSC 2.0 i.e. PRSG noted that the objective of 
the CSC 2.0 was to expand the network of CSC till 2.50 Lakhs GP, however, the 
total no. of GPs has been increased from 2.50 Lakhs to 2.59 Lakhs during the 
project implementation. Out of these 2.59 Lakhs GPs, 2.57 Lakhs GPs have been 
covered with at least one registered CSC. The remaining GPs could not be 
covered due to certain circumstances as highlighted by the implementing agency 
and the same were noted by the Reviews Commi ttee. PRSG noted that these 
GPs are being served through the existing CSCs in the nearby GPs. In view of 
this, PRSG noted that the objective of setting up of CSCs in 2.5 Lakhs GPs has 
been achieved. 
CSC e -Governance Services India Limited has apprised that  as on December 
2024, 6,04,825 CSCs are functional across the country (rural + urban), out of 
which 4,79,449 CSCs are functional at the Gram Panchayat(rural) level. Further, 
in order to improve the number of services, the PRSG noted that integration of 
CSC’s portal with the state e -services has been completed in 12 States and 2 
UTs. In this regard, MeitY has also written DO letter to all States dated 20th Jan 
2025 to expedite the integration of e -Services of State/e - District 
services/MunicipaI services wit h the Digital SevaPortaI of Common Service 
Centres.” 
 

6 
 
 
11. The Committee in their recommendation had sought from the Ministry 
the latest status of operationalization of Common Service Centres (CSCs) across 
the Country and had recommended to include more number of services apart from 
the existing services that were offered by CSCs by taking into account 
proliferation of technological changes in day-to-day lives of the common man. The 
Ministry has submitted that  out of 2.59 Lakh Gram Panchayats (GPs), 2.57 La kh 
GPs have been covered with at least one registered CSC and the remaining GPs 
could not be covered due to certain circumstances as highlighted by the 
implementing agency. Further, it has been submitted that these issues were noted 
by the Review Committee. The Ministry has also stated that in order to improve the 
number of services, the Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG) has noted that 
integration of CSC’s portal with the state e-services has been completed only in 12 
States and 2 UTs. MeitY has writ ten DO letter to all States on 20th Jan 2025 to 
expedite the integration of e -Services of State/e - District services/Municipal 
services with the Digital Seva  PortaI of Common Service Centres. The Committee 
may be apprised of the issues faced by the Ministr y in operationalization of CSCs 
in remaining GPs and the steps taken by/contemplated by the Review Committee 
to expedite integration of e -services. Further, the Committee would like to know 
whether one registered CSC is enough to meet the Digital expectati ons and 
exigencies of a GP. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome in response to 
the DO letter of the Ministry and also call upon them to hold meetings with States 
and UTs periodically so that the process could be expedited.  
National Informatics Centre (NIC) – Issues and Challenges 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended asunder:— 
“Observing that the Operating System developed by India is not as popular and in 
use as Windows and Android, the Committee  would like to be apprised of the 
possibilities of India developing its own operating system at par with the popular 
ones so that dependency on other nations can be reduced and protect our vital 
security documents. Further the Committee would like to be in formed about the 
feasibility of Mobile Voting as India is amongst the largest manufacturer and user 
of mobile phones.” 

7 
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The observation of the Comm ittee with regard to development of India’s own 
operating system at par with popular ones so as to reduce dependency on other 
nations and protect our vital security documents has been noted for further 
examination and necessary action. So far as Mobile Vot ing is concerned, the 
subject matter pertains to Election Commission of India.” 
14. The Committee in their Original Report had desired  that the Ministry 
explore the possibilities of India developing its own Operating System at par with 
the popular ones so that dependency on other nations could be reduced and our 
vital security documents could be protected. The Committee also wanted to be 
apprised of the feasibility of Mobile Voting as India is amongst the largest 
manufacturer and user of mobile phones. The Ministry in its submission, with 
regard to possibilities of India developing its own Operating System, has stated 
that it has been noted for further examination and necessary action. The 
Committee may be apprised of the future course of action planned or e nvisaged 
by the Ministry in this regard along with the planning and design of a proper 
ecosystem. They further wish to be apprised about the role of Artificial Intelligence 
Technology would expedite development of India’s own Operating System. 
 
Standardisation, Testing & Quality Certification (STQC) – Establishment and 
Manpower 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended asunder:— 
“Standardization, Testing & Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate, an attached 
office of the Ministry, provides testing, calibration, training and certification 
services to the industry and Government for assuring quality and reliability of 
electronics and Information Technology (IT) products. The Ministry informed the 
Committee, while deliberating on targets and measures taken to achieve those in 
Financial Year 2024 -25, that approx. 150 Science and Technology (S&T) and 
Non-S&T candidates are to be recruited in upcoming year on direct recruitment 
basis and the vacancies have already be en forwarded to NIELIT and SSC.  The 
Committee were further informed that in order to construct STQC Building at 

8 
 
Sector, 62, Noida that Structure Stability test has already been completed and 
CPWD is scheduled to complete the building by November, 2025. Fu rther, a 
STQC Lab automation project is planned and a New STQC Website to comply 
with GIGW 3.0 is under development.  
 The Committee observe that STQC plays a crucial role in assuring quality and 
reliability of IT products. Considering the shortfall in hum an resource, the 
Committee would like to know since when the request for recruitment of 150 
Science and Technology and Non - Science and Technology candidates is 
pending before NIELIT and SSC and action taken by them to follow it up. The 
Committee desire that the matter may constantly be pursued with them. They may 
also be informed of the measures contemplated by the Ministry to achieve the set 
targets under STQC.” 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“Recruitment process of 76 S&T positions under Group “C” category has been 
completed. 
Approximately 100 vacant Group “B” S&T positions have been identified for 
recruitment through NIELIT. STQC intends to fill Group “A” vacancies caused by 
retirements up to 31.12.2025. The matter is regularly being followed with NIELIT 
&SSC for S&T and non S&T posts recruitment respectively.” 
17. The Committee in their Original Report had  emphasized upon the human 
resource management in STQC. The Committee not e that the recruitment process 
of 76 S&T positions under Group “C” category has been completed and 
approximately 100 vacant Group “B” S&T positions have been identified for 
recruitment through NIELIT. The Ministry has also informed the Committee that 
STQC intends to fill Group “A” vacancies caused by retirements up to 31.12.2025 
and the matter is regularly being followed up with NIELIT & SSC for S&T and non 
S&T posts recruitment respectively. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite 
recruitments in each category so that STQC would be able to optimize its 
achievements and targets. The Committee may also  be apprised about the latest 
status of construction and completion of STQC Building at Sector 62, Noida, STQC 
Lab Automation Project and completion of New STQC Website. 
 

9 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that:— 
“The Committee note that in STQC, process of filling up of 78 posts of Scientific 
Assistants is underway and 76 Group ‘C’ (Technical) recruitmen t is in process. 
The Committee recommend that these posts should be filled up at the earliest as 
these posts are technical in nature and in absence of technical manpower, STQC 
is unlikely to deliver the desired results/outputs.” 
19. In their Action Taken R eply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“STQC has completed recruitment process of 24 Scientist “C”, 4  Scientist “D”  
and 76 Group ‘C’ (Technical)  posts during FY 2024 -25.  Process of filling up of 
100 posts of S cientific Assistants is underway through NIELIT.  (Additional 
vacancies of 22 SA’s have been identified   during the year 2025 due to 
resignation and superannuation during this year.)  Advertisement of recruitment is 
expected in the 3rd week of February, 2025.” 
20. The Committee in their Original Report had observed that in STQC, 
process of filling up of 78 posts of Scientific Assistants was underway and 76 
Group ‘C’ (Technical) recruitmentwas under process. The Committee 
hadrecommended that these posts be filled up at the earliest as these posts were 
technical in nature and in absence of technical manpower, STQC was unlikely to 
deliver the desired results/outputs. The Ministry in the Action Taken Notes has 
stated that the process of filling up of 100 posts of Scientific Assistants is 
underway through NIELIT.  The Ministry has also informed that additional 
vacancies of 22 Scientific Assistants (SA’s) have been identified during the year 
2025 due to anticipated resignation and superannuation during the year an d 
advertisement of recruitment was expected in the 3rd week of February, 2025. The 
Ministry may apprise the Committee about the latest status of filling up of 100 
posts of Scientific Assistants and also with respect to advertisement of 
recruitment which was expected in the 3rd week of February, 2025.  
 
 

10 
 
CERT-In and the issues of Manpower 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
21. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that:— 
“The Committee are also given to understand that CERT -In has operationalize d 
the National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) project in order to generate 
situational awareness of existing and potential Cyber Security threats for enabling 
timely information sharing for proactive, preventive and protective actions by 
individual entit ies. Under Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP), the Ministry 
has initiated two projects for setting up of digital office and awareness and 
planning an R&D scheme for DPDP followed by a few brainstorming sessions with 
academicians and eminent experts to  filter-in the industry oriented viable areas. 
Given the need of the hour, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry 
to implement these projects in right earnest and ensure that the intended 
objectives are achieved on time.” 
22. In their Action  Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“Beta version of Digital Office envisaged under the said project has been 
developed and 20 awareness workshops on DPDP Act, 2023 and 9 consultation 
workshops on Draft  DPDP Rules, 2025 have been conducted till now. With 
respect to R&D Scheme, 4 brainstorming sessions were organised with eminent 
experts in various IITs and it has been found that it is niche area, which need 
Industry participation for developing potential  and promising applications which 
may further support to various stakeholders towards DPDP compliance in terms of 
security safeguards etc.  
The objective of NCCC project is to generate necessary situational awareness of 
existing and potential cyber securit y threats and enable timely information sharing 
among stakeholders for proactive, preventive and protective actions by individual 
entities.  
The phase-I of NCCC has been operationalized in July 2017. Work is in progress 
for integrating 250 sites with NCCC under phase II of NCCC to be completed by 
end of FY 2024 -25. Project for Collection, Storage and Analysis of Traffic Flows 

11 
 
(1:1) data from ISP Gateways (phase III) is approved in November 2023 and is 
under implementation.” 
23. The Committee in their Original Report had emphasized on implementing 
National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) project and Digital Personal Data 
Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023 in right earnest to ensure that the intended objectives 
were achieved on time. The Ministry has submitted that the phase-I of NCCC has 
been operationalized in July 2017 and work was in progress for integrating 250 
sites with NCCC under phase II of NCCC and was expected to be completed by the 
end of FY 2024 -25. Project for Collection, Storage and Analysis of Traffic  Flows 
(1:1) data from ISP Gateways (phase III) was approved in November 2023 and is 
currently under implementation. The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the progress made in integrating 250 sites with NCCC under phase II of NCCC 
which was schedul ed to be completed by the end of FY 2024 -25. The Committee 
may also be enlightened whether the targets set under NCCC have been met, and 
if not, what steps have been taken by the Ministry to breach the gaps. 
Scheme For Promotion Of Manufacturing Of Electro nics Components And 
Semiconductors (SPECS) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
24. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that:— 
“The Committee also learn that under the EMC/EMC 2.0 Scheme, 19 Greenfield 
EMCs and 3 Common Facility Centres with a  project cost of Rs. 3,499 crore 
including Central Grant -in-aid of Rs. 1,470 crore were accorded approval in 15 
States across the country with projected targeted investment of Rs. 46,619 crore 
from units and employment generation of over 6 lakh persons. Th e Committee 
wish to know the status of approved Greenfield EMCs and 3 Common Facility 
Centres in the said 15 States. The Committee also desire to be enlightened about 
the experience of the Ministry with the Greenfield EMCs and constraints, if any, 
being fa ced in such projects along with the number of people who have been 
given employment against the said target of 6 lakh persons.” 
25. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“To create quality infrastructure along with common facilities and amenities for 
attracting electronics manufacturing units, Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY) 

12 
 
notified Electronics Manufacturing Cluster (EMC) Scheme in October, 2012 with 
receipt of applications up to Octob er, 2017 and further period up to March 2026 is 
available for disbursement of funds to the approved projects. Under the scheme, 
19 Greenfield EMCs and 3 CFCs admeasuring an area of 3,464 acres with project 
cost of Rs. 3,499 crore including Central Grant -in-aid of Rs. 1,470 crore accorded 
approval in 15 States across the country. These EMCs were poised to attract an 
investment of Rs. 46,619 crore and are expected to generate 6.30 lakh 
employment opportunities once fully operational. As of now, a Grant -in-aid of 
Rs.845.38 crore has been released to these projects. The infra work in all 3 
approved CFCs has been completed. 2 CFCs have become fully operational and 
1 CFC has also started its commercial activity partially. Further, about 85% infra 
work has beencomp leted in approved Greenfield EMCs and also at verge of 
completion. About 78.3% of land parcel have been allotted to 394 companies with 
their projected investment commitment of Rs. 54,617 crore and employment 
generation of 2.70 Lakh persons (Direct & Indire ct). Out of these, 140 companies 
have started its production and another 113 companies are in various stages of 
construction and mobilized an investment of Rs. 19,743 crore and provided 
employment to 70,242 persons. Further, about 1.5 crore man -days have a lso 
been generated in infra development. 
Greenfield EMCs are more prone towards infrastructure development and provide 
ready land for the investors for setting up of their electronics manufacturing 
activity. Success of such projects is dependent on complet ion of infra 
development timely and attaching special provision by State Governments to 
facilitate the industry to set up their production facility through such clusters. The 
infra development depends on various associated factors like climatic condition, 
labour and raw material availability, soil strength, adequate vendor’s 
participation(s) for competitive bids selection, GRAP applicability / NGT Norms (as 
applicable) etc. Eﬀective implementation of single window clearance with 
simplified land allotment procedure plays critical role for attracting electronics units 
in such clusters. The progress of the projects is being reviewed and monitored 
with concerned implementing agencies as well as State Government to sort out 
the issue wherever requires.” 
26. The C ommittee in their Original Report had entreated the Ministry to 
provide the status of Greenfield Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMCs) and 3 

13 
 
Common Facility Centers  which were approved in 15 States. The Committee had 
also desired to be enlightened abou t the experience of the Ministry with the 
Greenfield EMCs and constraints, if any, being faced in such projects along with 
the number of people who have been given employment against the said target of 
6 lakh persons. The Ministry in its reply has stated t hat the success of Electronics 
Manufacturing Cluster (EMC) Scheme was dependent on completion of infra 
development timely and attaching special provision by State Governments to 
facilitate the industry to set up their production facility through such clust ers 
along with various associated factors like climatic conditions, labour and raw 
material availability, soil strength, adequate vendor’s participation for competitive 
bids selection, GRAP applicability / NGT Norms (as applicable) etc. The Ministry 
has fu rther stated that eﬀective implementation of single window clearance with 
simplified land allotment procedure plays critical role for attracting Electronics 
Manufacturing Units in such clusters and the progress of the projects was being 
reviewed and monito red with concerned implementing agencies as well as State 
Governments to sort out the issues wherever required. The Committee have also 
been apprised that about 85% infra work has been completed in approved 
Greenfield EMCs and the same was also on the verg e of completion. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the current status of completion of approved 
Greenfield EMCs along with the solutions found as a result of review meetings 
which could negate the factors which delay the completion of such crucial 
projects on time. 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
27. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that:— 
“The Committee were given to learn that under PLI Scheme for Large Scale 
Electronics Manufacturing (LSE M) and under the Domestic Category for Mobile 
phones, only 2 applicants are performing out of 5 approved applicants, while in 
Specified Electronics Category (SEC), only 1 out 6 applicants from Round I and 
11 out of 16 applicants from Round II are performin g. The Committee were further 
informed that MeitY is actively engaging with the applicants to enhance 
performance and achieve the set targets under the scheme. The Committee may 
be apprised of the reason for such a dismal performance of PLI in both the abo ve-

14 
 
mentioned categories and efforts made by them to ascertain the reasons for the 
same and to improve the performance of PLI. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
inform about the progress made in engaging with applicants to achieve the set 
target.” 
28. In t heir Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“MeitY has been actively engaging with the applicants through various one -to-one 
meetings, workshops and stakeholder consultations. It is observed that und er PLI 
Scheme for LSEM, under the domestic category of mobile phones, only 2 
applicants are performing out of 5 approved applicants. The other 3 companies 
have cited that they do not have partnerships with ODMs/OEMs for manufacturing 
of mobile phones in In dia. However, the companies have also informed that they 
are exploring partnerships with the OEMs/ODMs and are hopeful of achieving 
their targets in the upcoming financial years. Under the Specified Electronic 
Components, the applicants have attributed the  underperformance due to 
declining demands from European markets, and other geo -political situations. 
MeitY is regularly engaging with the applicants and issues being faced by them, 
vis-à-vis facilitation of visas, customs and other stakeholders in the gov ernment 
machinery are addressed.” 
29.  The Committee in their Original Report had sought reasons for dismal 
performance of PLI in Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing (LSEM) and under 
the Domestic Category for Mobile phones categories and also the efforts  made by 
the Ministry to improve the performance of PLI. The Committee had also sought 
the progress made in engaging with applicants to achieve the set targets. The 
Ministry, in this regard, has stated that under PLI Scheme for LSEM, under the 
domestic cat egory of mobile phones, out of 5 approved applicants  only 2 
applicants are performing and the other 3 companies have cited lack of 
partnerships with ODMs/OEMs for manufacturing mobile phones in India. Further, 
the Ministry has conveyed that the companies w ere exploring partnerships with 
the OEMs/ODMs. The Ministry was hopeful of achieving its targets in the 
upcoming financial years. And, under the Specified Electronic Components, the 
underperformance has been due to declining demands from European markets, 
and other geo -political situations. The Ministry has stated that it was regularly 
engaging with the applicants and issues like facilitation of visas, customs and 

15 
 
other stakeholders in the Government machinery are being addressed. The 
Committee take note of  the efforts made by the Ministry at each level and about 
holding regular talks with stakeholders to address their grievances. The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the latest status on achieving targets set and 
further suggest that challenges and constr aints faced by mobile companies be 
addressed timely and effectively. They also feel that the assessment of the 
Scheme by an Expert Consultancy Firm may be considered by the Ministry to find 
out the challenges and reasons for dismal performance and for sugg esting 
possible solutions to make it successful through value addition and component 
ecosystem.  
Artificial Intelligence – The Future Ahead 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
30. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that:— 
“The Committee urge  the Ministry that they should make concerted efforts for 
roping in the State Governments, IITs, IIMs, IISc etc. to develop Artificial 
Intelligence in India. It will help them to keep abreast of the best practices in terms 
of what they need to work on, how  they need to ramp up their Information 
Technology Departments so as to create a conducive atmosphere and make a 
dedicated strategy for developing Artificial Intelligence in our country.” 
31. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Inf ormation 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology is collaborating with 
multiple State Governments, Academic institutes, Industry partners, researchers 
and entrepreneurs to develop a robust and inclusive AI ec osystem aligned with 
India's development goals. Some of the initiatives, MeitY is working on involving 
other stakeholders are mentioned below. 
• IndiaAI has launched a Call for Proposals to support the development of 
foundational AI models, inviting startu ps, researchers, and entrepreneurs to 
collaborate on creating state -of-the-art AI models using Indian datasets. This 
initiative aims to establish indigenous AI models, which can be Large Multimodal 
Models, Large Language Models (LLM), or Small Language Mod els (SLM), to 
address India-specific challenges across various sectors. 

16 
 
• Under IndiaAI Application Development Initiatives, IndiaAI Innovation 
challenge was launched to seek and advance the development, deployment, and 
adoption of AI applications in criti cal sectors. The challenge was open to Indian 
innovators, startups, non -profits, students, academic/R&D organizations, and 
companies. Over 900 applications have been received across the five focus 
areas- Healthcare, Improved Governance, Agriculture, Assist ive Technology for 
Learning Disabilities and Climate Change and Disaster Management, out of which 
30 AI solutions have been shortlisted across themes for refinement, development, 
and scaling. Additionally, IndiaAI also launched the CyberGuard AI Hackathon:  
Cybercrime prevention in collaboration with the Indian Cybercrime Coordination 
Centre (I4C). Participants were expected to develop sophisticated AI solutions 
leveraging Natural Language Processing (NLP) models that can be used to 
analyse, classify, and im prove the accuracy of citizen -reported cybercrime 
incidents on NCRP (National Cybercrime Report Portal). Top three teams are 
taken in the final stage of evaluation. 
• IndiaAI is offering IndiaAI Fellowships to students pursuing relevant 
undergraduate and p ostgraduate programs at Private / Centrally Funded 
Technical Institutes (CFTI) under the Government of India or recognized either by 
the All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) / National Board of 
Accreditation (NBA) / National Assessment and Acc reditation Council (NAAC) of 
the University Grants Commission (UGC) or as per the extant norms. IndiaAI 
Fellowships are designed for students who have undertaken projects associated 
with AI/ML or other allied domains, thereby bridging the gap between theor etical 
knowledge and practical application and ensuring a workforce proficient in 
essential AI skills. Till date, 150 UG students and 48 PG students have been 
selected for the IndiaAI Fellowship and the first tranche of the fellowship amount 
has been released to these students. 
• All the 36 States and Union Territories (UTs) have been requested to 
submit their nominated list of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs)/Polytechnics 
located in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities for setting up of IndiaAI Data Labs. Additio nally, 
IndiaAI in collaboration with NIELIT plans to establish 27 data labs in Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 cities across the country. 
• With this vision of developing a modern platform centered around the 
requirements of the AI innovation ecosystem, the IndiaAI Data sets Platform(IDP) 

17 
 
has been conceptualized under the IndiaAI Mission. IDP will function as a unified 
data platform, integrating datasets from all existing data platforms as well as 
onboarding non -government data contributors and providing new -age AI -centric 
features. AIKosh- the IndiaAI Datasets Platform was launched on 6th March 2025 
to improve access, quality, and use of public sector datasets to make it AI ready. 
National e -Governance Division (NeGD), MeitY in collaboration with industry 
partners (Intel & Meta), has launched ‘YUVAi: Youth for Unnati and Vikas with AI’ - 
A National Programme for School Students with an objective of enabling school 
students from classes 8th to 12th with AI tech and social skills in an inclusive 
manner. A total of 1200+ stude nts were oriented on the basics of AI and the top 
200 students were shortlisted. Further, in next phase of the programme MeitY 
along with All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) targets to empower 
100,000 students and young developers aged 18 -30 across critical sectors such 
as healthcare, education, agriculture, smart cities, and financial inclusion. 
Additionally, this initiative will also include the establishment of a Gen AI Resource 
Hub with courses, case studies, and open datasets; an LLM for Young Developers 
Course designed by Meta; and Master Training Activation Workshops to introduce 
participants to foundational AI concepts. 
• IndiaAI is establishing Center for Generative AI, Srijan ( सृजन) at IIT Jodhpur 
in collaboration with Meta, for the a dvancement of open -source artificial 
intelligence (AI) in India. This GenAICoE aims to advance research and 
development in AI while fostering the growth of responsible and ethical AI 
technologies in India. It will support and enhance open science innovatio n across 
the AI technology landscape. Through education, capacity building, and policy 
advisory, the centre will be empowering the next generation of researchers, 
students, and practitioners with the knowledge and tools necessary for the 
responsible development and deployment of GenAI technologies. 
• India’s initiative to promote transparency and accountability in AI algorithms 
as AI continues to permeate various sectors of society, India is committed to 
invest in agile mechanisms for developing indigenous governance tools, 
frameworks, and guidelines that are contextualised to Indian socio -economic 
realities and reflect its unique challenges, opportunities, and datasets. To support 
this vision, 8 ‘Safe & Trusted’ AI projects have been selected to promote 
Responsible AI across a range of critical themes. These include Machine 

18 
 
Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, AI Bias Mitigation, Ethical AI Frameworks, 
Privacy-Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, and Algorithm 
Auditing Tools. 
• MeitY has launched Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme in 2014, with the objective 
of enhancing the number of PhDs in the country to compete globally in the 
knowledge intensive sectors of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES). Under the scheme, financial 
support is provided to Full -time & Part -time PhD candidates and Young Faculty 
who are undertaking research and technology development. The Scheme also 
provides infrastructure support to institutions. Under the Visvesvaraya PhD 
Scheme: Phase -I (2014 -2023), a total of 1423 PhD candidates have been 
supported. With the objective of covering more scholars, Phase - II of 
Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme (2021 -2030) has been initiated for a duration of 9 
years to support 1000 Full -time PhD candid ates, 150 Part -time PhD candidates, 
50 Young Faculty Research Fellowships and 225 Post-Doctoral Fellowships.” 
32. The Committee in their Original Report had urged the Ministry to make 
concerted efforts to develop Artificial Intelligence in India to keep ab reast with the 
best practices in the world. The Ministry in their reply has informed that  all the 36 
States and Union Territories (UTs) have been requested to submit their nominated 
list of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs)/Polytechnics located in Tier  2 and Tier 3 
cities for setting up of India  AI Data Labs. Additionally, India  AI in collaboration 
with NIELIT plans to establish 27 Data Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across the 
Country. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made with  
respect to submissions of nominated list of Industrial Training Institutes 
(ITIs)/Polytechnics located in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities for setting up of India  AI Data 
Labs. The Ministry may furnish details with respect to establishment of 27 Data 
Labs in Tier  2 and Tier 3 Cities in each part of the Country and also their 
operational status. 
33.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Notes has submitted that India’s 
initiative to promote transparency and accountability in AI continues to permeate 
various sectors of society. India is committed to invest in agile mechanism for 
developing indigenous governance tools, frameworks and guidelines that are 
conceptualized to Indian socio -economic realities and reflect its unique 
challenges, opportunities and datasets. In orde r to materialize the above vision 

19 
 
and to promote Responsible AI across the ranges of critical themes eight ‘safe and 
Trusted’ AI projects have been selected. Keeping in view the fact that quantum 
machines can solve problems in minutes that would take class ical computers  
millennia, the Committee would like to be enlightened about the steps taken by the 
Ministry to encourage study and development of quantum computing in our 
Country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEE N 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)  
 Demand No.27 pertaining to the Ministry of Electronics & IT has been allocated a 
total outlay of Rs. 21,936.90 crore for the Financial Year (FY) 2 024-25.  Out of the total 
outlay, Rs. 21,355.89 crore has been earmarked for Revenue Expenditure and 
Rs.581.01 crore under Capital Expenditure. A comparative analysis of the Budget 
Estimate of the Ministry from FY 2020 -21 to FY 2024 -25 shows an increasing trend of 
allocation viz.Rs.6,899.03 crore, Rs.9,720.66 crore, Rs.14,300 crore, Rs.16,549.04 crore 
and Rs.21,936.90 crore, respectively. The Financial Year -wise allocation percentage 
indicates variations from 3.68% in 2020 -21, 40.90% in 2021 -22, 47.11% in 2 022-23, 
15.73 % in 2023-24 and 32.56% in 2024-25.  
 
The Committee note that during FY 2023 -24 even though the Budget Estimate was 
Rs.16,549.04 crore and Revised Estimate was Rs.14,421.25 crore, the Ministry could 
utilize Rs.12,847.12 crore only thereby sur rendering Rs.1,574.13 crore from the Revised 
Estimate. Similarly, under Modified Programme for Development of Semi -Conductors 
and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India, during FY 2023 -24, out of Rs.1503.36 
crore allocated, the Actual Expenses as on 31 -3-2024 indicates that the Ministry could 
spend only Rs.681.11 crore, thus surrendering a staggering 55% of the allotted fund.  
Surrendering of funds beyond 50% of the funds allocated reflects upon improper 
planning by the Ministry. The Committee may be appr ised of the reasons for non - 
utilization of precious allocated funds which could have been allotted to other Ministries 
for its effective utilisation. The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to ensure that 
realistic projections are made in future as far as possible and ensure optimal utilization of 
funds by way of better planning and robust monitoring mechanism with learnings from 
past experience. 
Reply of the Government 
The esteemed Committee has rightly pointed out that there is an under -utilisation of fund 
amounting to Rs.1574.13 crore w.r.t. RE during the FY 2023 -24. It is submitted that the 
total unutilised amount of Rs.1574.13 cr includes Rs.1097.73 cr that remained unutilised 
under two schemes, viz. ‘Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)’ (Rs.275 .48 cr) and 

21 
 
‘Modified Programme for Development of Semi -Conductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem in India’ (Rs.822.25 cr). Hence, about 70% of the total unutilized fund 
belongs to these two schemes. It is noteworthy that expenditure/disbursement of 
incentives under these two schemes is dependent upon what the private companies are 
able to deliver. So, it is beyond the control of the Ministry to ensure optimal utilisation of 
the allocated fund under these schemes. However, keeping in view of the 
underutilisation of funds during the last 2 -3 years and to ensure optimum utilisation of 
funds under PLI and Semiconductor schemes, the estimates received from industrial 
units are being reduced substantially at the Budget Estimate stage itself. The progress of 
expenditure under all the schemes of MeitY are also being reviewed on weekly basis in 
the Group Coordinators’ meeting under the chairmanship of Secretary (MeitY). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 The Committee observe that under Digital India Programme, one of the flagship 
programmes of Govt of India, shows a gradual decrease in allocation of funds from 
Budget Estimate 2021 -22 to BE 2024 -25 and underu tilization by the Ministry over the 
years.  For the financial year 2024 -25, the Committee observe that out of proposed 
amount of Rs 5592.75 crores, only Rs 4768.26 crores have been made available. The 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for such reduc ed allocation of funds under 
the Digital India Programme and underutilization by the Ministry. Since Digital India 
Programme is an important flagship programme of the Ministry, the Committee would like 
to know how this reduced allocation is going to affect the digital India Movement. 
Reply of the Government 
  The allocation and expenditure under Digital India Umbrella Programme during 
the last four years (2021-22 to 2024-25) is as under: 
(Rupees in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Exp Actual Exp as % of RE 
2021-22 6806.33 6388.00 4504.36 70.5% 
2022-23 5376.18 5400.50 3863.13 71.5% 
2023-24 4795.24 4428.01 4174.14 94.3% 
2024-25 4768.26 4173.00 3621.82 
(as on 17.03.2025) 
86.8% 
(as on 17.03.2025) 

22 
 
 
The reasons for gradual decrease in allocation of funds from BE 2021 -22 to BE 2024-25 
and under utilisation by the Ministry are as under: 
 Actual expenditure in FY 2021-22 under Digital India Programme was got affected 
due to post Covid-19 impacts 
 Due to less expenditure in FY 2021 -22, allocation for the FY 2022 -23 was got 
affected. Further, in view of implementation of Revised Procedure for Flow of 
Funds for Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the actual 
expenditure was even less than the previous year. 
 Due to launching of two separate incentive schemes, viz. Pr oduction Linked 
Incentive Scheme(PLI) and Modified Programme for Development of 
Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India in FY 2023 -24, 
which were earlier part of Promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware 
Manufacturing Scheme, the provisi on for Digital India Programme was got 
reduced. 
 Transfer of Promotion of Digital Payments to Ministry of Finance also caused 
reduction in allocation under Digital India Programme. 
 Allocations under Digital India Programme also corresponds to the total appr oved 
amount for the continuation of schemes under this umbrella programme for the 
XVth Finance Commission period. 
 
However, the reduced allocation is not affecting implementation of the ongoing schemes 
under this programme as MoF has allocated requisite fu nds as and when required under 
any scheme.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 The Committee  do note that primary challenges faced for implementation of 
Electronics Governance Scheme are digital literacy, digital connectivity, accessibility to 
services, ease in availing the digital services and the awareness/ readiness amongst the 
Departments to adopt the services and besides these challenges, the digital divide gap is 
also attributed to the fact that many citizens belonging to the weaker sections are 

23 
 
deprived of availing the digital services. The Committee were given to understand that 
Common Services Centres (CSCs) have been set up by the initiative of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology to deliver e -services to rural citizens through 
CSCs and expand the CSC network till the Gram Panchayat level and as on August 
2024, 5.88 lakh  CSCs are functional across the country in rural and urban areas, out of 
which 4.67 lakh CSCs are functional at the Gram Panchayat/village level (rural). The 
Committee would like to know the latest status of operationalization of CSCs all across 
the countr y. Further, the Committee recommend that apart from current services 
delivered by CSCs, the Ministry should include more number of services taking into 
account proliferation of technological changes in day-to-day lives of common man. 
Reply of the Government 
 Review committee of the project CSC 2.0 i.e. PRSG noted that the objective of the 
CSC 2.0 was to expand the network of CSC till 2.50 Lakhs GP, however, the total no. of 
GPs has been increased from 2.50 Lakhs to 2.59 Lakhs during the project 
implementation. Out of these 2.59 Lakhs GPs, 2.57 Lakhs GPs have been covered with 
at least one registered CSC. The remaining GPs could not be covered due to certain 
circumstances as highlighted by the implementing agency and the same were noted the 
reviews committee. PRSG noted that these GPs are being served through the existing 
CSCs in the nearby GPs. In view of this, PRSG noted that the objective of setting up of 
CSCs in 2.5 Lakhs GPs has been achieved. 
 
CSC e -Governance Services India Limited has appraised that as  on December 2024, 
6,04,825 CSCs are functional across the country (rural + urban), out of which 4,79,449 
CSCs are functional at the Gram Panchayat  (rural) level. Further, In order to improve the 
number of services, the PRSG noted that integration of CSC’s  portal with the state e -
services has been completed with 12 States and 2 UTs. In this regard, MeitY has also 
written DO letter to all states dated 20th Jan 2025 to expedite the integration of e -
Services of State/e - District services/Municipal services with the Digital Seva PortaI of 
Common Service Centres. 
  (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 

24 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC) - ISSUES AND CHALLENGES 
  NIC has been responsible for country -wide implementation of various e -
Governance projects including many Mission Mode Projects of the Department.  Jeevan 
Pramaan Portal, e -Shram, e -Challan, e -Invoice system, One Nation One Card,  PM 
Kisan, e-Hospital, e-Office, National Generic Document Registration System (NGDRS), 
e-Courts, Case Information System (CIS), National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) , e -Filing 
3.0, National e-Vidhan Application (NeVA), Digital Sansad etc are some of the major ICT 
initiatives taken up by NIC. The Ministry informed the Committee about the upgradation 
of Data Centres, procurement of ICT equipment for cyber security initiatives by NIC for 
setting up of Security Operation Centres a nd security audit of all ICT assets of the 
Ministry. Further, NIC is making best efforts for utilizing the funds allocated for up -
gradation of Data Centres, procurement of ICT equipment for cyber security, setting up 
of Security Operation Centres and security initiatives during the Financial Year 2024-25. 
 
The Committee observe that the Capital provision in BE 2024 -25 has been increased by 
Rs.212.33 crore from that provided in BE 2023 -24 due to projection of more funds by 
NIC for the abovesaid requirements.  The Committee recommend that the increased 
amount must be used optimally and surrender of funds be avoided to the maximum 
extent possible. The Ministry may submit a copy of existing policy guidelines regarding 
E-mails and also update regarding latest developments in this field. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Copy of the policy guidelines for emails along with PPT showing latest development is 
enclosed at Annexure-I.     
 
                                          (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC) - ISSUES AND CHALLENGES 
 As NIC is implementing many important schemes of the Government of India 
under the digital India Programme, the C ommittee desire that the Ministry may look into 
the possibility of creating a separate IT Cadre under it for effective supervision and 
implementation of the schemes and also to augment skilled IT professionals who can 
develop and manage advanced ICT projec ts and support Digital initiatives of the 
Government. 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
 National Informatics Centre (NIC) is an Attached Office of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) having sanctioned strength of 4831 
employees. It has be en the Government of India’s technology partner since its 
establishment in 1976. Expanding to state and district levels in 1988, NIC provides 
technology-driven solutions across key areas including core ICT infrastructure, whole of 
Government oriented digit al services, cyber and information security, sectoral 
applications, and propagates the adoption of emerging technologies. The mandate for 
NIC includes: 
 Technology partner of the Government 
 Design and develop IT systems for the Government 
 Provide ICT infrastructure to the Government 
 Explore & advise on the use of emerging technologies 
 
NIC already has a separate scientific cadre of officers specialised in IT.  In fact, Meity is 
attempting to embed NIC officials in different Ministries as embedded internal IT  teams 
similar to the Internal Finance Division.  In this context, there is perhaps no need to 
create a separate IT cadre for NIC as it already exists. 
 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER  
  
 Standardization, Testing & Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate, an attached 
office of the Ministry, provides testing, calibration, training and certification services to the 
industry and Government for assuring quality and reliability of electronics and Information 
Technology (IT) products. The Ministry informed the Committee, while delib erating on 
targets and measures taken to achieve those in Financial Year 2024 -25, that approx. 
150 Science and Technology (S&T) and Non -S&T candidates are to be recruited in 
upcoming year on direct recruitment basis and the vacancies have already been 
forwarded to NIELIT and SSC.  The Committee were further informed that in order to 
construct STQC Building at Sector, 62, Noida that Structure Stability test has already 
been completed and CPWD is scheduled to complete the building by November, 2025. 

26 
 
Further, a STQC Lab automation project is planned and a New STQC Website to comply 
with GIGW 3.0 is under development.  
 The Committee observe that STQC plays a crucial role in assuring quality and 
reliability of IT products. Considering the shortfall in human reso urce, the Committee 
would like know since when the request for recruitment of 150 Science and Technology 
and Non- Science and Technology candidates is pending before NIELIT and SSC and 
action taken by them to follow it up. The Committee desire that the matter may constantly 
be pursued with them. They may also be informed of the measures contemplated by the 
Ministry to achieve the set targets under STQC. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recruitment process of 76 S&T positions under Group “C” category has been 
completed. 
 Approximately 100 vacant Group “B” S&T positions have been identified for 
recruitment through NIELIT. STQC intends to fill Group “A” vacancies caused by 
retirements up to 31.12.2025. The matter is regularly being followed with NIELIT & 
SSC  for S&T and non S&T posts recruitment respectively. 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER  
 The Committee note that in STQC, process of filling up of 78 posts of Scientific 
Assistants is underway and 76 Group ‘C’ (Technical) recr uitment is in process. The 
committee recommend that these posts should be filled up at the earliest as these posts 
are technical in nature and in absence of technical manpower, STQC is unlikely to 
deliver the desired results/outputs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  STQC has completed recruitment process of 24 Scientist “C”, 4  Scientist “D”  and 
76 Group ‘C’ (Technical)  posts during FY 2024 -25.  Process of filling up of 100   post of 
Scientific Assistants is underway through NIELIT.  (Additional vacancies of 22  SA’s have 

27 
 
been identified   during  the year 2025  due to resignation and superannuation during this 
year.)  Advertisement of recruitment is expected in the 3rd week of February, 2025. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER  
 
 The Committee observe that STQC is in  the process of seeking exemption from 
“Make in India” in GFR for high value procurements. The Committee urge to be apprised 
of developments made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 STQC has been consolidating a list of Test/Calibration facilities and  IT tools for 
getting “Make in India” exemption from the competent authority.   
 
 (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
CERT-IN AND THE ISSUES OF MANPOWER 
 According to the Ministry, CERT -In is a Government Organisation designated to 
serve as a national agency for incident response. It operates 24*7 incident response 
Help Desk for providing timely response to reported Cyber Security incidents. It is to 
provide Incident Prevention and Response Services as well as Security Quality 
Management Services. For performing functions in the area of Cyber Security  it collects, 
analyses and disseminates information on Cyber Security incidents; forecasts and alerts 
Cyber Security incidents; formulates emergency measures for handling Cyber Security 
incidents, co -ordinates Cyber Security incident response activities; issues guidelines, 
advisories, vulnerability notes and white papers relating to information security practices,  
procedures, prevention, response and reporting of cyber incidents. To the query of the 
Committee regarding the major impediments that were being encountered by the Ministry 
in respect of its functioning, it was stated that CERT -In is in urgent need of add itional 

28 
 
manpower to keep up with rapid increase in the incidents of Cyber Security 
attacks/threats.  Further, the Ministry also submitted that manpower crunch has been felt 
owing to the urgent nature of incident response activities including onsite respons e, to 
sustain key current as well as planned new activities/projects and to address Cyber 
Security issues pertaining to emerging technologies and areas. The Committee are given 
to understand that in order to meet the challenge, CERT -In has moved a proposal  for 
creation of additional posts at various levels. Further, the Committee are also informed 
that Department of Expenditure after examining the proposal has sought certain details 
from MeitY which has been submitted. The Committee are of the view that a l ot more 
need to be done to improve our cyber security through several initiatives and policies 
including capacity building and training programmes. However, these efforts would 
remain inadequate and fragmented unless India is equipped with adequate technic al 
staff, cyber forensics facilities, cyber security standards and coordination amongst 
various stakeholders. The Committee therefore, urge the Ministry to pay adequate 
attention to these suggestions take timely action and update them accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 For capacity building in cyber security, CERT -In regularly conducts trainings / 
workshops to train officials of Government, Public and Private sector organizations 
across all sectors on focused topics of Cyber Security. The training/work shop programs 
focus on technical topics with technology presentations & demonstration/Hands -on 
sessions for technical cyber community. A total of  12,014 officials have been trained 
in 23 training programs in 2024. 
Under Security Quality Management Services , Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT -In) has empanelled 200 ‘IT security auditing organizations’ for auditing, 
including vulnerability assessment and penetration testing of computer systems, 
networks & applications of various organizations of the Government, critical infrastructure 
organizations and those in other sectors of Indian economy. 
CERT-In has also setup State-of-the art Cyber Forensic lab to support incident response 
operation of CERT -In as well as the needs of various Law Enforcement a gencies. The 
Cyber Forensics Laboratory at the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-
In) has been notified as 'Examiner of Electronic Evidence' under section 79A of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 

29 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
CERT-IN AND THE ISSUES OF MANPOWER 
  The Committee are also given to understand that CERT -In has operationalized 
the NCCC project in order to generate situational a wareness of existing and potential 
Cyber Security threats for enabling timely information sharing for proactive, preventive and 
protective actions by individual entities. Under Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP), 
the Ministry has initiated two project s for setting up of digital office and awareness and 
planning an R&D scheme for DPDP followed by a few brainstorming sessions with 
academicians and eminent experts to filter -in the industry oriented viable areas. Given the 
need of the hour, the Committee w ould like to impress upon the Ministry to implement 
these projects in right earnest and ensure that the intended objectives are achieved on 
time. 
Reply of the Government 
 Beta version of Digital Office envisaged under the said project has been 
developed an d 20 awareness workshops on DPDP Act, 2023 and 9 consultation 
workshops on Draft DPDP Rules, 2025 have been conducted till now. With respect to 
R&D Scheme, 4 brainstorming sessions were organised with eminent experts in various 
IITs and it has been found t hat it is niche area, which need Industry participation for 
developing potential and promising applications which may further support to various 
stakeholders towards DPDP compliance in terms of security safeguards etc.  
 
The objective of NCCC project is to generate necessary situational awareness of existing 
and potential cyber security threats and enable timely information sharing among 
stakeholders for proactive, preventive and protective actions by individual entities.  
The phase -I of NCCC has been opera tionalized in July 2017. Work is in progress for 
integrating 250 sites with NCCC under phase II of NCCC to be completed by end of FY 
2024-25. Project for Collection, Storage and Analysis of Traffic Flows (1:1) data from ISP 
Gateways (phase III) is approved in November 2023 and is under implementation. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I) 
 
 

30 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
CERT-IN AND THE ISSUES OF MANPOWER 
 
 The Ministry apprised the Committee that CERT -In has setup State -of-the art 
Cyber Forensic Lab to support incident response operation of CERT -In as well as the 
needs of various Law Enforcement agencies. The Committee wish to k now how far this 
Lab has been able to meet the pre -requisite demand. Further, the Committee wish to 
know whether the private agencies as well as an individual can also have the benefit of 
incident response operation done by Cyber Forensic Lab. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Cyber Forensics Laboratory, Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In) was earlier notified under section 79A of the IT Act 2000 in the year 2020 with 
Mobile Forensics and Disk Forensics as the scope. With the ever increasing and 
dynamic scope of digital forensics, the Central Government had notified the Cyber 
Forensics Laboratory, CERT -In vide S.O. 5191(E). dated  27th November, 2024, as 
Examiner of Electronic Evidence in exercise of the powers conferred by section 79A of 
the informa tion Technology Act, 2000 having Mobile Forensics, Disk Forensics, Cloud 
forensics, DVR forensics and Drone Forensics as the scope.  
 
The Cyber Forensic Lab of CERT -In supports analysis of computer hard discs, mobiles 
etc for cyber security incidents handl ed by CERT -In as well as for critical cyber crime 
cases investigated by Law Enforcement agencies.   
 
Cyber crimes reported by citizens are investigated by state police / Law Enforcement 
agencies which are supported by central and state Cyber Forensic Labs. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
CERT-IN AND THE ISSUES OF MANPOWER 
 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that CERT -In has setup 
National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) to generate necessary situational 
awareness of existing and potential cyber security threats and enable timely information 
sharing for proactive, preventive and protective actions by individual entities. The phase I 

31 
 
of NCCC has been operationalized in July 2017. The Committee note that it has been 8 
years since the operationalization of phase I of NCCC and in view of that, the Committee 
wish to know whether the Ministry have any plan to roll out next phases of NCCC. The 
Committee also would like to know the experience of the Ministry about Phase I of NCCC 
and a few cases where the common man could be benefitted by this initiative.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The phase-I of NCCC project has been operationalized in July 2017. Wo rk is in 
progress for integrating 250 sites with NCCC under phase II of NCCC to be completed 
by end of FY 2024 -25. Project for Collection, Storage and Analysis of Traffic Flows (1:1) 
data from ISP Gateways (phase III) is approved in November 2023 and is un der 
implementation. 
 
NCCC is has enabled to strengthen the cyber security ecosystem in the country by 
helping in prevention and detection of cyber -threats. NCCC facilitates coordination 
among different agencies by sharing with them the metadata from cybers pace for taking 
actions to mitigate cyber security threats. NCCC is generating alerts to various Internet 
Service Providers, State Data Centres and organisations across sectors to enable 
detection and prevention of malware outbreaks, Distributed Denial of Service attacks, 
phishing, scanning and probing of internet facing systems etc. NCCC systems have been 
leveraged to detect cyber attacks on financial institutions, energy sector entities and 
government websites and preventive and response measures coordina ted by CERT -In 
with concerned entities to ensure essential services are available to citizens.   NCCC has 
played a crucial role in threat detection during various national level events like during 
G20 Presidency of India, Elections, Mahakumbh 2025 etc.  
 
   (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II) dated 21.03.2025 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE AND THE FUTURE COURSE OF ACTION  
 While examining Electronic Governance in India, the Ministry i nformed that it is 
currently facing multipronged problems i.e., the issues of digital literacy, digital 
connectivity, accessibility to services, and ease in availing the digital services and the 
awareness / readiness amongst the Departments to adopt the se rvices. Besides these 

32 
 
challenges, the digital divide gap is also attributed to the fact that many citizens 
belonging to the weaker sections are deprived of availing the digital services. 
 
 The Committee note that the Government has already taken necessary measures 
to tackle these challenges through implementing “Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital 
Saksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA)” to usher in digital literacy in rural India and BharatNet 
project with the aim to connect all 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in the countr y with 
100 Mbps connectivity. Along with it, the Government is also providing the services in 
assisted mode through Common Service Centres (CSCs) to digitally illiterate people and 
taking steps through various other channels also. Moreover, Government is s triving hard 
to create awareness amongst citizens through various modes including social media 
platforms as well as the departments for on boarding and consumption of the digital 
services. The Committee also observe that as on August 2024, 5.88 lakh CSCs a re 
functional across the country in rural and urban areas, out of which 4.67 lakh CSCs are 
functional at the Gram Panchayat/village level (rural). 
 
 To transform India into a digitally empowered society and knowledge economy, 
the Committee understand the i mportance of the role of Electronic Governance Scheme 
which is not only pivotal but also inevitable. Taking into cognizance the fact that the 
Ministry is implementing myriad schemes for digital empowerment of the citizens of the 
country, they would like to  know by when all the Gram Panchayats of the country would 
be provided with Net Connectivity and how the Ministry intends to overcome the resultant 
challenges. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry may look into the feasibility 
of using popular me ans of communications like street plays, folk arts and cultural 
programmes so as to attract and digitally empower common man. Further, the 
Committee would like to call upon the Ministry to expedite the process of making CSCs 
functional in all 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats in the country within a stipulated time frame.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  Review and steer committee of the project CSC2.0 i.e. PRSG, in its meeting held 
on 29.11.2024 noted that the Implementation agency and MeitY are making continuous 
effort to cover the remaining GP’s with at least one registered CSC. Further PRSG noted 
that these remaining GP’s are being covered through the CSC’s present in the nearby 
GP’s. It is also submitted that the project has been completed as on March 2024. 
 
 (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 

33 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING & SKILL DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 
 
 The Committee note that u nder the Capacity Building & Skill Development 
Scheme, the activities are targeted to ensure availability of trained human resources for 
the manufacturing & service sectors of Electronics and IT industry. The initiatives taken 
by the Ministry in this regard include identifying gaps emerging from the formal sec tor 
and planning programmes in non- formal and formal sectors for meeting these gaps. This 
includes Skill Development in the domain of Electronics & IT and related areas. The 
Ministry has submitted that various schemes/projects pertaining to Human Resource  
Development for Electronics and IT sector were approved/under implementation. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to implement the schemes/projects that have been 
approved at the earliest and those that are under implementation, be completed within 
the set timelines. Further, with respect to challenges regarding connectivity and 
availability of infrastructure in hilly/sparse/remote areas, the Committee have been 
apprised that Wifi -Chaupals have been established at remote locations, rural schools 
have been engaged for training and the promotional and awareness activities have been 
scaled through workshops. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of 
those measures and how far the challenges have been overcome. 
 
Reply of the Government 
[ 
 Capacity Building & Skill Development Scheme  activities of MeitY are targeted to 
ensure availability of trained human resources for the manufacturing & service sectors of 
electronics and IT industry. Initiatives include identifying gaps emerging from the forma l 
sector and planning programmes in non -formal and formal sectors for meeting these 
gaps. This includes Skill Development in the domain of Electronics & IT and related 
areas. In the succeeding sections, brief details about various ongoing initiatives inclu ding 
skill development and indicative list of major Schemes/Projects are presented. The Skill 
Development activities of the Ministry are primarily being taken up by its two autonomous 
societies viz. National Institute of Electronics and Information Technol ogy (NIELIT) and 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC). In addition, the various 
organizations / attached offices under the Ministry viz. ERNET India, Media Lab Asia, 
CSC E-Governance Services India Limited, STQC, NIC etc. are also engaged i n training 
of various stakeholders in small numbers.  So far 55,19,071 beneficiaries are trained 
under E&IT domain in last 5 years. Also, more than 6 Crore beneficiaries trained in 

34 
 
Digital Literacy  and More than 5 Crore Citizen covered under Information Sec urity 
Awareness through direct/indirect mode in 5 years. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE NETWORK 
 The Ministry apprised the Committee that the National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
aimed to encourage sharing of resources and collaborative resear ch by inter-connecting 
all knowledge institutions across the country through a high -speed data communication 
network and as of now, there are total 1796 institutes under NKN with 96 core links and 
620 district links. The Committee would like to know what p rogress has been made to 
bring all the districts of India under NKN and whether the institutes based in rural areas 
are given priority to gain from this scheme. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure 
that all the stakeholders and beneficiaries should ha ve access to high -speed data 
communication network to get benefit of NKN Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 NKN carries the digital-traffic of National/state Data Centres (NDCs/SDCs), State -
Wide Area Networks (SWANs) and provides connectivity to various Digi tal India 
initiatives, and carry digital-traffic of various G2G (Government to Government) and G2C 
(Government to Citizen) services, District Connectivity, etc. NKN also inter -connect all 
knowledge institutions across the country through high -speed data co mmunication 
network to encourage sharing of resources and collaborative research. A high -speed 
data communication network has been established to interconnect Institution of higher 
learning, and research. Eventually, NKN fulfils the needs of the government  network 
[National Government Network (NGN)], and the Research & Education Network (REN) 
both. Status as on 31st January, 2025:  
 
 1,809 links to Institutions have been commissioned and made operational 
under NKN.  (this includes 371 links to institutions m igrated from NMEICT 
[National Mission on Education through Information and Communication 
Technology a project of Ministry of Education] to NKN). 
 651 NKN links have been connected to NIC District Centers across India. 
This facilitates the Digital Governance data-traffic to ride over NKN. 
 
NKN is a pan India project, hence agnostic to rural/ urban bifurcation. Accordingly, it 
interconnects Institution of higher learning, and research all over India.  
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 

35 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
SCHEME FOR PROMOTION OF MANUFACTURING OF ELECTRONICS 
COMPONENTS AND SEMICONDUCTORS (SPECS) 
 
 The Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronics Components and 
Semiconductors (SPECS) was notified way back on 1 st April, 2020 to offset disability in 
the Electronics Components Manufacturing Ecosystem in India. The scheme provides 
subsidy for capital expenditure of 25% for identified list of electronic goods. The scheme 
envisaged New Investment in the electronics sector to the tune of Rs. 20,000 crore and 
generation of nearly 1.5 lakh jobs. The scheme duration is till 31.03.2029.  
 
Further, Electronics Manufacturing Clusters Scheme was notified on 22nd October, 
2012 and the modifie d EMC was notified on 1 st April, 2022 to provide financial support 
for development of quality infrastructure along with common facilities and amenities for 
attracting electronics manufacturing units in the country through such clusters. The 
scheme duration is up to March, 2028 and is expected to provide employment to about 
10.00 lakh persons. Submitting measures taken to achieve the targets, the Ministry has 
stated that workshop/meeting with applicant to address their disbursement/appraisal 
issues are being  organized. While being aware of the needs and importance of the 
Semiconductor industry the Committee desire that the focus should be centred on 
training and creating the highly skilled human resources required for the industry with an 
emphasis on R&D and strengthening partnership with countries for necessary supply of 
raw material and exchange of technology and encourage production of semi -conductors 
in India. The Committee may be apprised of the achievements made and conducive 
environment created in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Inputs related to SPECS: The scheme provided capex subsidy to help oﬀset the 
disability in manufacturing of electronics components and semiconductors. Under  the 
vertical, "Engineering, R&D, Testing and Tool Prototyping for capital 
goods for manufacturing o f semiconductors / displays covered under SPECS"  two 
applications with project investment of Rs. 348 crore have been approved with total 
employment generation potential of 785 persons creating the highly skilled human 
resources required for the semiconductor industry. 
 
 

36 
 
Status: As on February 2025, 58 applications have been approved under the scheme 
with total proposed investment of Rs.22,081  crore. Further, the SPECS scheme is 
closed to receive new applications on 31.03.2024. The achievements under the 
scheme are as under (as per the Quarterly progress report submitted by applicant): 
 
 Investment by units covered under the Scheme (in Rs. crore): 10,368.45  
Production by units covered under the scheme (in Rs. crore):  26693.56  
Employment generated by units covered under the scheme: 37243 
 Taxes Paid to Government (in Rs. crore): 1226.57 
 
Inputs w.r.t. Semicon India programme: Government has approved Semicon India 
programme with a total outlay of Rs. 76,000 crore for the development of semiconductor 
and display manufacturing ecosystem in the country. Semiconductor manufacturing is 
very complex and Technology intensive sector which requires specialized skilled 
manpower. To address this, the following measures have been taken by the 
Government: 
1. All India Coun cil for Technical Education (AICTE) has launched the new 
curriculum for B. Tech in Electronics Engineering (Very Large -Scale Integration 
(VLSI) Design and Technology), Diploma in Integrated Circuit (IC) manufacturing 
and Minor Degree in Electronics Enginee ring (VLSI Design and Technology), as 
a step towards creation of Talent pool in Semiconductor domain. 
2. Government has launched the Chips to Startup (‘C2S’) programme which 
plans to train 85,000 industry ready workforce at about 113 participating 
institutions in VLSI and Embedded System Design. More than 43,000 engineering 
students have been onboarded for training at 113 organizations under C2S 
Programme till date. 
3. A Skilled Manpower Advanced Research and Training (SMART) Lab has 
been setup in NIELIT Calicut in 2022 with an aim to train one lakh engineers 
nation-wide within 5 years in VLSI and Embedded System design. More than 
42,000 engineers have been trained nationwide using the SMART Lab. 
4. Further, the following collaborations/ partnerships have been entered into by 
India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) to encourage skill development: 
i. MoU between ISM with IISc and Lam Research:  To train ~60,000 Indian 
engineers in the upcoming 10 years through Lam Research’s Semiverse 
platform. 


37 
 
ii. MoU between ISM and IBM:  To facilitate Indian students/professionals to build 
a broad skill base by gaining access to laboratories and research focal centers 
and establishing internship and fellowship programs. 
iii. MoU between ISM with Purdue University: To promote the cutting -edge 
research and development and commercialization thereof, curating skilled talent 
pool and investment opportunities in India enabling the Indian professionals to 
explore their potential in the semiconductor and display space. 
                          (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II) dated 21.03.2025 
 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
SCHEME FOR PROMOTION OF MANUFACTURING OF ELECTRONICS 
COMPONENTS AND SEMICONDUCTORS (SPECS) 
 The Committee also learn that under the EMC/ EMC 2.0 Scheme, 19 Greenfield 
EMCs and 3 Common Facility Centres with a project cost of Rs. 3,499 crore including 
Central Grant-in-aid of Rs. 1,470 crore were accorded approval in 15 states across the 
country with projected targeted investment of Rs. 46,61 9 crore from units and 
employment generation of over 6 lakh persons. The Committee wish to know the status 
of approved Greenfield EMCs and 3 Common Facility Centres in the said 15 States. The 
Committee also desire to be enlightened about the experience of the Ministry with the 
Greenfield EMCs and constraints, if any, being faced in such projects alongwith the 
number of people who have been given employment against the said target of 6 lakh 
persons. 
Reply of the Government 
 To create quality infrastructure a long with common facilities and amenities  for 
attracting electronics manufacturing units, Ministry of Electronics & IT (MeitY) notified 
Electronics Manufacturing Cluster (EMC) Scheme in October, 2012 with receipt of 
applications up to October, 2017 and fur ther period up to March 2026 is available for 
disbursement of funds to the approved projects. Under the scheme,  19 Greenfield 
EMCs and 3 CFCs admeasuring an area of 3,464 acres with project cost of Rs. 3,499 
crore including Central Grant -in-aid of Rs. 1,47 0 crore accorded approval in 15 states 
across the country. These EMCs were poised to attract an investment of Rs. 46,619 
crore and are expected to generate 6.30 lakh  employment opportunities once fully 
operational. As of now, a Grant-in-aid of Rs.845.38 crore has been released to these 
projects. The infra work in all 3 approved CFCs has been completed. 2 CFCs have 

38 
 
become fully operational and 1 CFC has also  started its commercial activity partially. 
Further, about 85% infra work has been completed in approved Greenfield EMCs and 
also at verge of completion. About 78.3% of land parcel have been allotted to 394 
companies with their projected investment commitment of Rs. 54,617 crore and 
employment generation of 2.70 Lakh persons (Direct & Indirect).  Out of the se, 140 
companies have started its production and another 113 companies are in various 
stages of construction and mobilized an investment of Rs. 19,743 crore and provided 
employment to 70,242 persons. Further, about 1.5 crore man -days have also been 
generated in infra development. 
 Greenfield EMCs are more prone towards infrastructure development and 
provide ready land for  the investors for setting up of their electronics manufacturing 
activity. Success of such projects is dependent on completion of infra d evelopment 
timely and attaching special provision by State Governments to facilitate the industry to 
set up their production facility through such clusters. The infra development depends 
on various associated factors like climatic condition, labour and raw  material 
availability, soil strength, adequate vendor’s participation(s) for competitive bids 
selection, GRAP applicability /  NGT Norms (as applicable) etc. Eﬀective 
implementation of single window clearance with simplified land allotment procedure 
plays critical role for attracting electronics units in such clusters. The progress of  the 
projects is being reviewed and monitored with concerned implementing agencies as 
well as State Government to sort out the issue wherever requires. 
                                          (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.24) 
PRODUCTION  LINKED INCENTIVE SCHEME (PLI) 
 The Committee were given to learn that under PLI Scheme for Large Scale 
Electronics Manufacturing (LSEM) and under the Domestic Category for Mobile phones, 
only 2 applicants are performing out of 5 approved applicants, while in Specified 
Electronics C ategory (SEC), only 1 out 6 applicants from Round I and 11 out of 16 
applicants from Round II are performing. The Committee were further informed that 
MeitY is actively engaging with the applicants to enhance performance and achieve the 

39 
 
set targets under t he scheme. The Committee may be apprised of the reason of such a 
dismal performance of PLI in both the above -mentioned categories and efforts made by 
them to ascertain the reasons for the same and to improve the performance of PLI. The 
Committee urge the M inistry to inform about the progress made in engaging with 
applicants to achieve the set target.  
Reply of the Government 
 MeitY has been actively engaging with the applicants through various one-to-one 
meetings, workshops and stakeholder consultations. It  is observed that under PLI 
Scheme for LSEM, under the domestic category of mobile phones, only 2 applicants are 
performing out of 5 approved applicants. The other 3 companies have cited that they do 
not have partnerships with ODMs/OEMs for manufacturing o f mobile phones in India. 
However, the companies have also informed that they are exploring partnerships with the 
OEMs/ODMs and are hopeful of achieving their targets in the upcoming financial years. 
Under the Specified Electronic Components, the applicant s have attributed the 
underperformance due to declining demands from European markets, and other geo -
political situations. MeitY is regularly engaging with the applicants and issues being 
faced by them, vis -à-vis facilitation of visas, customs and other st akeholders in the 
government machinery are addressed. 
 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 25) 
PRODUCTION  LINKED INCENTIVE SCHEME (PLI) 
 The Ministry informed the Committee that the PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT Hardware is 
in its nascent phase and companies are taking longer time to meet the threshold criteria . 
However, MeitY is actively engaging with stakeholders to improve performance and 
ensure the achievement of the set targets under the PLI Scheme 2.0. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should think for out of box ideas to improve performance of 
PLI Scheme 2.0 for I.T. Hardware and get the targets in stipulated time period without 
any further delay. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the course of action 
planned by them. 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
 PLI Scheme 2.0 for IT hardware was notified o n 29.05.2023 with an objective to 
boost domestic manufacturing and attract large investments in the value chain.  In a 
short span of time, i.e. till March 2024, this scheme was able to achieve cumulative 
Investment of ₹427.63 crore against projected investment of ₹40 crore. This investment 
resulted in Production of  ₹8,967.58 crore against projected investment of ₹375 crore. 
Further, the scheme also generated employment of  3,854 against projected 
employment of 132. Major companies, i.e Dell and HP, are yet to start production under 
the scheme and will start production in the year FY 2025 -26. MeitY is proactively 
resolving the issues being faced by the companies, including Dell and HP, to enhance 
performance and drive the successful achievement of the targets outlined under the PLI 
Scheme 2.0 for IT hardware. 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 26)  
UIDAI – EACH ONE, REACH ONE  
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry is facing a huge challenge of Mandatory 
Biometric Update (MBU), a lternative mode of authentication for individuals who were 
unable to use their fingerprint or IRIS due to worn -out finger minutiae (common with 
manual labours) and IRIS template issues. The Committee also note that a study was 
conducted to find the best pr actices in finger print biometric authentication. The 
Committee learn that the Ministry has chalked out targets under UIDAI like a) to map 
100+ DBT and Good Governance based Schemes under Central and State 
Governments based Ministries, Departments and othe r entities; b) to aim to cover and 
onboard respective Department of each and every State/ UT as AUA/KUA - 
Authentication User Agency/e -KYC User Agency; and c) to effectively implement 
Demographic de -duplication (DDC) as part of enrolment processing used pr imarily to 
catch trivial duplicates (non -fraudulent cases where certain demographic fields are 
identical) that are inadvertently submitted to the system, e.g., when a resident has not 
received Aadhaar number in a few days and decides to re -enrol at an enro lment station 
again. It is also used to de-duplicate children under the age of 5 years as biometrics data 
is not captured for children of that age and residents for whom no biometrics data is 
captured (genuine biometric exception cases). Taking note of the  abovementioned 
issues, the Committee would like to be apprised of the strategies of the Ministry to issue 

41 
 
Aadhaar cards to only genuine citizens of India and freezing duplicate and forged 
Aadhaar cards. The Committee would also like to know about the acti on taken against 
forged Aadhar cards being made/issued in connivance with the staff/agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
 UIDAI will map more DBT and Good Governance based Schemes under Central 
and State Government based ministries, departments and other entities and aim to cover 
and onboard respective department of every state/UT as AUA/KUA. 
  So far as demographic de-duplication (DDC) as part of enrolment processing used 
primarily to catch trivial duplicates is concerned, UIDAI has taken the following actions: 
a) AI-based face de -duplication has been deployed since  January 2023  as an 
additional means of biometric de -duplication, in addition to fingerprints and iris 
based de-duplication. 
b) As against the earlier practice of use of only one biometric identification system to 
check a particular set of biometrics in the enrolment process, since  April 2023, 
three distinct biometric identification systems are being used to de -duplicate an 
individual adult enrolment packet. 
c) AI-capable infrastructure has been installed in  August 2024  and an exercise 
initiated to de -duplicate past enrolments using improved de -duplication 
technology. 
 
UIDAI’s strategy to strengthen the de -duplication process for enrolment of an under -five-
year-old children consists of the following three prongs: 
 
a) As against the Aadhaar number of one parent, since  April 2024 Aadhaar numbers 
of both parents are being captured at the time of enrolment. 
b) The list of documents acceptable for enrolment of such children has been 
rationalised in January 2023 to restrict it to only birth certificate, passport and legal 
guardianship document. Further, pursuant to an amendment to the Registration of 
Births and Deaths Act, 1969 and related amendments to the Aadhaar enrolment 
regulations, the birth certificate is now the sol e document relating to date of birth 
that is accepted for Aadhaar issuance in respect of children born on or after 
1.10.2023. As a result, almost all such enrolments are now based on the birth 
certificate, which, since 2020, are being issued using the Civil Registration System 
of the Registrar General of India, which has in -built checks to avoid issuance of 

42 
 
duplicate birth certificates. Further, such birth certificates are verifiable online and 
UIDAI is now issuing Aadhaar only after verifying the same. 
 
 As against the demographic de -duplication undertaken earlier on the basis of 
name, gender, date of birth and State, since 2020, such de-duplication is being done with 
the address PIN, details contained in the “C/o” [care of] portion of the address field as 
well. Further, a technological superior matching solution is being used for the de -
duplication. 
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) takes necessary actions against 
fraudulently obtained Aadhaar numbers. 
 
a. Aadhaar numbers obtained on the basis of fabricated/ forged documents or on the 
basis of capture of biometrics in a manner that violates the law applicable to 
Aadhaar enrolment/ update and procedures specified by UIDAI, such Aadhaar 
numbers are deactivated under Regulation 28 of the Aadhaar (En rolment and 
Update) Regulations, 2016. Till date UIDAI has deactivated 52,086 Aadhaar 
numbers under afore-mentioned regulation. 
b. In addition, wherever UIDAI is satisfied that the Aadhaar number has been 
generated without capturing the biometrics of an indiv idual above 5 years of age 
at the time of enrolment, such Aadhaar numbers are omitted under Regulation 27 
2 (b) of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016. Till date UIDAI 
has omitted 767 Aadhaar numbers under afore-mentioned regulation. 
c. Aadhaar number holders (ANHs) are intimated of the deactivation/omission of 
their Aadhaar numbers under Regulation 30 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and 
Update) Regulations, 2016. 
d. The deactivation/omission under the above mentioned regulations shall not result 
into automatic reactivation. In case of deactivation, if on receipt of valid supporting 
documents and justification, UIDAI is satisfied that the grounds which led to the 
deactivation have changed then such Aadhaar numbers are reactivated under 
Regulation 31(2) of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016. 
e. However, in case of omission under the afore -mentioned regulation, individuals 
are required to re -enrol under Regulation 31(1) of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and 
Update) Regulations, 2016. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 

43 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 27) 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE – THE FUTURE AHEAD 
 
 Noting that Artificial Intelligence (AI) is making inroads in modern day owing to its 
efficiency, accuracy, quick decision making and automating repetitive tasks, the 
Committee observe that in order to keep pace with global competitiveness and to 
encourage growth of Artificial Intelligence startups and R&D in India, the Government of 
India have  approved the IndiaAI Mission on 7 th March, 2024.  Accordingly, a new 
scheme, IndiaAI Mission  has been initiated during financial year 2024 -25.  The 
Committee would like to be enlightened about IndiaAI Mission for development of AI in 
the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Union Cabinet has approved the IndiaAI Mission on March 7, 2024. IndiaAI 
Mission aims to propel innovation and build domestic capacities to ensure the tech 
sovereignty of India. It will also create highly skilled employment opportuniti es to harness 
the demographic dividend of the country. IndiaAI Mission will help India demonstrate to 
the world how this transformative technology can be used for social good and enhance 
its global competitiveness. 
 
This strategic initiative is designed to  build a robust and inclusive AI ecosystem aligned 
with India's development goals. The mission emphasizes India's tech sovereignty 
through seven foundational pillars: 
 
IndiaAI Compute Capacity : The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building a high -end 
scalable AI computing ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of 10,000 or 
more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). 
Under this initiative, an invitation for application for empanelment of AI services on cloud 
was published on August 16th,2024. The bid subm ission closed on 28th of November 
2024 and bids were opened on 2nd December 2024. 19 bidders had submitted a 
proposal oﬀering AI services including GPUs and AI platforms for developing AI 
solutions. Post technical evaluation, 10 bidders have been empaneled  at discovered L1 
rates have been for all the AI cloud services. 
 
IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC): The AI Innovation Centre aims to develop and deploy 
indigenous Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on India-specific data. 

44 
 
A Call for Proposals has been published by IndiaAI on 30th Jan 2025, inviting proposals 
from startups, researchers, and entrepreneurs to collaborate on building state -of-the-art 
foundational AI models trained on Indian datasets. In the first month, IndiaAI Mission has 
received a total of 67 proposals till February 15. 
 
IndiaAI Datasets Platform : The IndiaAI Datasets Platform (IDP) seeks to enhance 
access, quality, and utilization of public sector datasets to make them AI-ready. 
AIKosh- the IndiaAI Datasets Platform was launched on 6th M arch 2025 to improve 
access, quality, and use of public sector datasets to make it AI ready 
 
IndiaAI Application Development Initiative : The IndiaAI Application Development 
Initiative aims to develop, scale, and promote the adoption of impactful AI solutio ns to 
tackle significant problem statements effectively. 
Under the IADI pillar, IndiaAI has launched the IndiaAI innovation challenge, which seeks 
to promote impactful AI solutions in critical sectors. The challenge has received over 
900applications, out o f which 30 AI solutions have been shortlisted across themes for 
refinement, development, and scaling. 
 
IndiaAI FutureSkills : IndiaAI Future Skills  Pillar envisions to augment the number of 
graduates, post-graduate and PhDs in AI domain. Further, it envisio ns setting up Data 
and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational -level courses 
in Data and AI. 
 
IndiaAI Fellowships are being oﬀered to students pursuing relevant undergraduate and 
postgraduate programs at Private / Centrally  Funded Technical Institutes (CFTI) under 
the Government of India or must be recognized either by the All -India Council for 
Technical Education (AICTE) / National Board of Accreditation (NBA) / National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) of the Un iversity Grants Commission 
(UGC) or as per the extant norms. Till date, 150 UG students and 48 PG students have 
been selected for the IndiaAI Fellowship and the first tranche of the fellowship amount 
has been released to these students. Additionally, India AI in collaboration with NIELIT is 
establishing 27 IndiaAI data labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across the country. 
 
IndiaAI Startup Financing : The IndiaAI Startup Financing Pillar envisions for providing 
support to AI startups at all stages. 
The IndiaAI Mission in collaboration with Station F (Paris, France) and HEC Paris, had 
announced an ambitious acceleration program for Indian AI startups. This program will 

45 
 
support 10 Indian AI startups in scaling globally by leveraging the European market’s 
vast opportunities. 
 
Safe & Trusted AI: This pillar enables the implementation of Responsible AI projects 
including the development of indigenous tools and frameworks, self -assessment 
checklists for innovators, and other guidelines and governance frameworks. 
 
A call for Expression of Interest (EOI) for building tools and frameworks on Responsible 
AI, with a focus on 10 themes was launched and over 2000 responses were received for 
the first Expression of Interest (EoI) from which eight Responsible AI Projects have be en 
selected. IndiaAI has launched the 2nd EoI for Safe & Trusted AI Projects, inviting 
organizations to submit proposals on key themes, including Watermarking and Labelling, 
Ethical AI Frameworks, AI Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and 
Deepfake Detection Tools. 
  (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 28) 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE – THE FUTURE AHEAD 
 The Committee urge the Ministry that they shoul d make concerted efforts by for 
roping in the State Governments, IITs, IIMs, IISc etc. to develop Artificial Intelligence in 
India. It will help them to keep abreast of the best practices in terms of what they need to 
work on, how they need to ramp up thei r information Technology Departments so as to 
create a conducive atmosphere and make a dedicated strategy for developing Artificial 
Intelligence in our country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology is collaborati ng with 
multiple state governments, Academic institutes, Industry partners, researchers and 
entrepreneurs to develop a robust and inclusive AI ecosystem aligned with India's 
development goals. Some of the initiatives, MeitY is working on involving other 
stakeholders are mentioned below. 
 
 IndiaAI has launched a Call for Proposals to support the development of 
foundational AI models, inviting startups, researchers, and entrepreneurs to 
collaborate on creating state -of-the-art AI models using Indian datasets. This 

46 
 
initiative aims to establish indigenous AI models, which can be Large Multimodal 
Models, Large Language Models (LLM), or Small Language Models (SLM), to 
address India-specific challenges across various sectors. 
 Under IndiaAI Application Development In itiatives, IndiaAI Innovation challenge 
was launched to seek and advance the development, deployment, and adoption 
of AI applications in critical sectors. The challenge was open to Indian 
innovators, startups, non -profits, students, academic/R&D organizati ons, and 
companies. Over 900 applications have been received across the five focus 
areas- Healthcare, Improved Governance, Agriculture, Assistive Technology for 
Learning Disabilities and Climate Change and Disaster Management, out of 
which 30 AI solutions have been shortlisted across themes for refinement, 
development, and scaling. Additionally, IndiaAI also launched the CyberGuard 
AI Hackathon: Cybercrime prevention in collaboration with the Indian 
Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C). Participants were ex pected to develop 
sophisticated AI solutions leveraging Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
models that can be used to analyse, classify, and improve the accuracy of 
citizen-reported cybercrime incidents on NCRP (National Cybercrime Report 
Portal). Top three teams are taken in the final stage of evaluation. 
 IndiaAI is offering IndiaAI Fellowships to students pursuing relevant 
undergraduate and postgraduate programs at Private / Centrally Funded 
Technical Institutes (CFTI) under the Government of India or reco gnized either 
by the All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) / National Board of 
Accreditation (NBA) / National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) of 
the University Grants Commission (UGC) or as per the extant norms. IndiaAI 
Fellowships are designed for students who have undertaken projects associated 
with AI/ML or other allied domains, thereby bridging the gap between theoretical 
knowledge and practical application and ensuring a workforce proficient in 
essential AI skills. Till date, 15 0 UG students and 48 PG students have been 
selected for the IndiaAI Fellowship and the first tranche of the fellowship amount 
has been released to these students. 
 All the 36 States and Union Territories (UTs) have been requested to submit 
their nominated l ist of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs)/Polytechnics located in 
Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities for setting up of IndiaAI Data Labs. Additionally, IndiaAI in 
collaboration with NIELIT plans to establish 27 data labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 
cities across the country. 

47 
 
 With this vision of developing a modern platform centered around the 
requirements of the AI innovation ecosystem, the IndiaAI Datasets Platform(IDP) 
has been conceptualized under the IndiaAI Mission. IDP will function as a unified 
data platform, inte grating datasets from all existing data platforms as well as 
onboarding non-government data contributors and providing new -age AI-centric 
features. AIKosh - the IndiaAI Datasets Platform was launched on 6th March 
2025 to improve access, quality, and use of public sector datasets to make it AI 
ready. National e -Governance Division (NeGD), MeitY in collaboration with 
industry partners (Intel & Meta), has launched ‘YUVAi: Youth for Unnati and 
Vikas with AI’ - A National Programme for School Students with an obje ctive of 
enabling school students from classes 8th to 12th with AI tech and social skills in 
an inclusive manner. A total of 1200+ students were oriented on the basics of AI 
and the top 200 students were shortlisted. Further, in next phase of the 
programme MeitY along with All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) 
targets to empower 100,000 students and young developers aged 18 -30 across 
critical sectors such as healthcare, education, agriculture, smart cities, and 
financial inclusion. Additionally,  this initiative will also include the establishment 
of a Gen AI Resource Hub with courses, case studies, and open datasets; an 
LLM for Young Developers Course designed by Meta; and Master Training 
Activation Workshops to introduce participants to foundational AI concepts. 
 IndiaAI is establishing Center for Generative AI, Srijan (सृजन) at IIT Jodhpur in 
 collaboration with Meta, for the advancement of open -source artificial 
intelligence (AI) in India. This GenAI CoE aims to advance research and 
development i n AI while fostering the growth of responsible and ethical AI 
technologies in India. It will support and enhance open science innovation 
across the AI technology landscape. Through education, capacity building, and 
policy advisory, the center will be empow ering the next generation of 
researchers, students, and practitioners with the knowledge and tools necessary 
for the responsible development and deployment of GenAI technologies 
 India’s initiative to promote transparency and accountability in AI algorithms  as 
AI continues to permeate various sectors of society, India is committed to invest 
in agile mechanisms for developing indigenous governance tools, frameworks, 
and guidelines that are contextualised to Indian socio -economic realities and 
reflect its unique challenges, opportunities, and datasets. To support this vision, 
8 ‘Safe & Trusted’ AI projects have been selected to promote Responsible AI 

48 
 
across a range of critical themes. These include Machine Unlearning, Synthetic 
Data Generation, AI Bias Mitigati on, Ethical AI Frameworks, Privacy -Enhancing 
Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, and Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
 MeitY has launched Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme in 2014, with the objective of 
enhancing the number of PhDs in the country to compete global ly in the 
knowledge intensive sectors of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES). Under the scheme, financial 
support is provided to Full-time & Part-time PhD candidates and Young Faculty 
who are undertaking research and technology development. The Scheme also 
provides infrastructure support to institutions. Under the Visvesvaraya PhD 
Scheme: Phase -I (2014 -2023), a total of 1423 PhD candidates have been 
supported. With the objective of covering more scholars, Phase- II of 
Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme (2021 -2030) has been initiated for a duration of 9 
years to support 1000 Full -time PhD candidates, 150 Part -time PhD 
candidates, 50 Young Faculty Research Fellowships and 225 Post -Doctoral 
Fellowships. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 32 & 33 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE  DO  NOT  DESIRE  TO 
PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)  
 A comparison of the allocation of funds for the Unique Identification Authority of 
India (UIDAI) from Budget Estimates duri ng last five years shows a gradual decline. 
While comparing BE  2023 -24 with the BE  2024 -25, it is observed that the percentage 
reduction is from Rs.940 crore to Rs.600 crore which comes to 36%. In the light of this 
observation, the Committee not only wou ld like to know the reasons for such a huge 
reduction in allocation of funds under UIDAI but also advise the Ministry to have better 
planning so that such a steep reduction be countered in coming Financial Years. The 
Committee would also like to know how this steep reduction under this Head would affect 
the performance of the Ministry under various components of this scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The budget allocation in respect of UIDAI was reduced from Rs.940 cr in BE 
2023-24 to Rs.600 cr in BE 2024 -25. The reason for such steep reduction in budget is 
due to the decision taken by Ministry of Finance, based on Pre -Budget discussions, to 
adopt gap funding procedure for UIDAI. It is stated that UIDAI generates revenue 
receipts amounting to approx. Rs.100 0 crore per year through the services like 
authentication, enrolment, etc being rendered by them. Hence, MeitY would provide only 
the balance requirement of funds so that the functioning and performance of UIDAI 
would not be affected. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II) dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation No.29) 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE – THE FUTURE AHEAD 
 The Committee understand that AI technologies are already revolutionizing almost 
every sector today and huge amount of money involved in promoting and developing this 
technology, would like to know about the action plan of the Government to rope in   
Private Sector willing to contribute by investing in fundamental research in AI. The 
Committee also urge the  Government to enhance expenditure in R& D activities in the 

50 
 
field and engage some of the best brains of the country for research purposes with 
attractive packages. The Committee desire to know whether the Ministry propose to build 
a research innovations o n the lines of IIT, in near future to foster innovation through 
research. The Committee may also be apprised of the highlights and the gains attained 
by India during two Summit meetings on AI held recently in India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The IndiaAI Innovation Center aims to enable the development and deployment of 
indigenous Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) and domain-specific foundational models in 
critical sectors. India presently has a thriving ecosystem of innovators working on 
creating India-first foundational models that are contextualized to our social, cultural, and 
linguistic diversity. 
 
A Call for Proposals was published by IndiaAI on 30th Jan 2025, inviting proposals from 
startups, researchers, and entrepreneurs to collaborate on building stat e-of-the-art 
foundational AI models trained on Indian datasets. This initiative aims to establish 
indigenous AI models that align with global standards while addressing unique 
challenges and opportunities within the Indian context. In the first month, Indi aAI Mission 
has received a total of 67 proposals till February 15 aimed at building India's foundation 
models, with contributions from both established startups and new teams of researchers 
& academia. 22 are focused on Large Language Models (LLMs) & Large  Multimodal 
Models (LMMs), while the remaining 45 are centered on domain -specific models (SLMs). 
The majority of SLMs target key sectors such as healthcare, education, and financial 
services. Along with funding support, a wide range of GPUs have been reque sted by 
teams submitting these proposals. 
 
India, the Chair of the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) , 
successfully hosted the GPAI Summit from December 12 - 14, 2023, at the Bharat 
Mandapam in New Delhi. Over the past three days, around 30 sessions were organized, 
which were graced by the global AI experts from GPAI, International Organizations, 
Industry / Startups, and Academia. Some of these sessions were held in closed door 
meetings having delegates and experts of GPAI. Other sessions were held in public and 
live streamed for the wider participation. More than 22,000 persons attended the summit 
and out of these 15,000+ AI enthusiasts participated in the summit virtually. 
 

51 
 
The Global IndiaAI Summit was held at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi from July 3 -4, 
2024. This year, the summit saw the participation from more than 13,500+ attendees 
from over 50 countries, including Global South. The summit played host to 100+ high - 
level speakers from governments, multilateral organizations, industry, ac ademia and 
research institutions across 12 inspiring sessions. 16 Deep -tech startups showcased 
their AI applications and products during the Summit. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS I IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  REPLIES  OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE  NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  COMMITTEE  
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPEC T OF WHICH REPLIES  OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC) – ISSUES AND CHALLENGES 
 Observing that the Operating System developed by India is not as popular and in 
use as Windows and Android, th e Committee would like to be apprised of the 
possibilities of India developing its own operating system at par with the popular ones so 
that dependency on other nations can be reduced and protect our vital security 
documents. Further the Committee would li ke to be informed about the feasibility of 
Mobile Voting as India is amongst the largest manufacturer and user of mobile phones. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee with regard to development of India’s own 
operating system at par wit h popular ones so as to reduce dependency on other nations 
and protect our vital security documents, has been noted for further examination and 
necessary action. So far as Mobile Voting is concerned, the subject matter pertains to 
Election Commission of India. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC) – ISSUES AND CHALLENGES 
 The Committee were apprised by the Ministry that NIC is trying its level best for 
utilizing the funds allocated for up -gradation of Data Centres, procurement of ICT 
equipments for cyber security, setting up of Security Operation Centres and securi ty 
initiatives during the Financial Year 2024 -25. The Committee feel that NIC needs 
sufficient funding to maintain its ICT infrastructure and support constant innovations. 
Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry may seek additional funds as and when 
required so as to ensure seamless flow of work under these schemes.  The Committee 

54 
 
also desire to know how many Data Centres have been upgraded and whether the 
equipments procured for cyber security have been fully utilized and operationalized. If 
not, the Ministry may furnish a detailed reply highlighting the reasons and the corrective 
measures taken/proposed to be taken by them. The Committee further seek to know the 
details of working of Security Operation Centres and security initiatives undertaken 
during financial year 2024-25 by the Ministry. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 Existing Cloud capacity at three NDCs  at Delhi, BBSR and Pune were increased 
in terms of Compute servers and Storage under Meity funded Cloud enhancement 
project. 
 
 Racks were installed a t NDC Hyderabad and BBSR and have been populated 
with infrastructure as required for "pay as you use" model cloud. 
 
 National Data Centre - North-Eastern Region (NDC -NER) is likely to be 
operational at Guwahati with Cloud service by June this year.  
 
 A co mprehensive tender for procuring equipments for cyber security is under 
process on GEM. 
 
Status of cyber security equipment procured by NIC Cyber and Information Security 
Group for FY 2024-25: 
Sr. 
No 
Equipment  Details Status 
1 Threat Intelligence Feed Fully utilised by NIC 
CERT 
2 Batch data feed (IP and Web reputation 
feed) 
Fully utilised by NIC 
CERT 
3 Unified Intelligence Platform 
(Darkwe/Deepweb monitoring and Attack 
surface management tool) 
Fully utilised by NIC 
CERT 
4 50 No. of Laptops and 120 No. of PCs Fully utilised by NIC 
Cyber Security Group. 
 
 

55 
 
 
Details of working of of Cyber and Information Security Group and security initiatives 
undertaken during financial year 2024-25 are as given below: 
 
1. NIC-CERT 
NIC-CERT operates round the clock to detect, analyse, and respond to security incidents 
in real-time. The other key activities undertaken by the NIC-CERT  team are as follows: 
(a). Continuous Monitoring: NIC’s CERT actively monitors security event logs, network 
traffic, and endpoint activities 24/7. Thi s ensures early detection of any suspicious 
activities, unauthorized access attempts, or security threats across the NIC network. 
(b). Threat Detection: Leveraging machine learning, behavioural analytics, and threat 
intelligence platforms, NIC’s CERT proactivel y identifies emerging cyber threats. 
Automated threat correlation techniques help detect potential attacks before they 
escalate, allowing for swift mitigation. 
(c). Incident Response: NIC’s CERT follows a structured incident response framework to 
address securi ty incidents promptly and effectively. The response process includes 
identifying threats, containing the impact, mitigating risks, and ensuring system 
recovery to minimize operational disruption. 
(d). Incident Classification: Incidents are classified based on s everity, impact, and urgency 
to ensure proper prioritization and response. 
(e). Incident reporting: NIC’s CERT ensures continuous coordination with IT teams, 
government agencies. Alerts, advisories, and reports are shared with stakeholders 
regularly to enhance overall security awareness and response readiness. 
(f). Red team: The Red Team under NIC CIS assessment division performs comprehensive 
security assessments of critical applications to detect potential threats, simulate real -
world attack scenarios, and evaluate  system resilience against adversarial tactics. This 
proactive approach helps in strengthening the overall security posture of NIC’s digital 
infrastructure. 
2. Leveraging Operational Tools and Technologies:  
Various advanced security tools including Threat In telligence Platform has been deployed 
by NIC to identify the security issues associated with Government network. AI and 
Machine Learning (ML) -based predictive analytics to identify and counter cyber threats 
proactively. To ensure robust cybersecurity monit oring and incident management, NIC 
CERT employs a range of advanced security tools and technologies: 

56 
 
(a). Security Information and Event Management (SIEM):  NIC’s SIEM solutions 
aggregate, analyse, and store security event logs from multiple sources, enabling re al-
time threat detection, correlation, and forensic analysis for proactive security 
monitoring. 
(b). Threat Intelligence Platform:  CERT leverages threat intelligence platforms to gather, 
analyse, and disseminate real -time information about emerging cyber threat s, 
vulnerabilities, and attack indicators, enhancing threat detection and response 
capabilities. 
(c). Forensic Analysis:  Dedicated forensic capabilities allow CERT to conduct in -depth 
investigations using forensic image acquisition and analysis. These enable th e 
examination of compromised systems, malware behaviour, and attack footprints for 
evidence-based response and security reinforcement. 
(d). VA & PT: Periodic Vulnerability Assessment & Penetration Testing (VAPT) and 
Risk Assessments of NIC's ICT infrastructure. 
3. The Request for Proposal (RFP)  "Empanelment of Managed Service Providers for 
providing Cyber Security Professionals and Cyber Security Services" was floated with 
the objective of enhancing the cybersecurity posture of the Government and to provide 
Cybersecurity Services in coordination with NIC Cyber and Information Security Group. 
The empanelled MSPs are responsible for managing security monitoring, cybersecurity 
incident monitoring and resolution for assigned tickets and, facilitating application 
security, and ensuring compliance activities (such as security and performance audit), 
develop business continuity and disaster recovery plans for the portals and applications 
of the respective ministries/departments through respective stakeholders in that 
Organisation. 
 
In this regard, tentatively 47 teams of Cybersecurity Professionals were envisaged to 
be deployed at ministries/departments covering the First Schedule to the Government 
of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 listed in tender document.  In itially 17 
teams of Cybersecurity Professionals from various empanelled MSPs have been 
deployed to provide cybersecurity service to 50+ ministries/departments and 
deployment of teams for remaining ministries/departments is under process. 
 
4. Log Management:  
 
Collecting, processing and analysing logs from various sources for following: 
 

57 
 
a. Threat Detection: Cyber threat detection across log sources for uncovering threats 
b. AI/ML Research (DHRISTI): Developing custom models for finding anomalies and 
behavioural patterns 
c. Compliance Adherence: Extracting & sharing raw logs with law enforcement 
agencies 
d. Threat Intelligence Platform (TIP) : Integrating cyber intelligence feeds from govt. 
agencies etc 
e. Incident Response : Providing actionable insights and reports based on log data 
analysis 
f. Backend API Services: Providing custom log analytics support (via API) to various 
platforms 
g. Infrastructure :Managing, administrating & monitoring ICT infra belonging to CIS 
group  
h. Hardening :Hardening and auditing of ICT infra based on CIS benchmarks 
 
SN Function Current Status 
1. 
Log 
Management 
• Log Collection : 4.2 Petabytes  
• Log Analysis & Dashboarding 
• Threat Detection & Incident Response from NIC 
firewall, DNS, 1000+ web portals, end -points 
through EDR logs, application, SSO, email 
• Enabling real-time security alerting 
• 8 AI/ML models in production  
• Accuracy of models between 72-88% 
• Custom API for providing log insights 
• TIP integrated with various feeds 
• SIEM solutionarelimitedto  only security devices 
that include firewalls, WAF ,IPS and a few other 
servers like antivirus and update servers deployed 
in NDC (Shastri Park, Bhuvneshwar, Hyderabad, 
Pune), bhawans in New Delhi and a few security 
devices in states  

58 
 
2. 
Compliance 
Adherence  
• Completed 200 log requests in 2024  
• 17TB data shared with LEAs 
• Sharing live Email logs with LEAs 
4. 
ICT 
Infrastructure  
• Asset Management, provisioning, patching and 
audit of 140 Servers, 15 Devices, 700 VMs & 396 
Endpoints 
• 218 hardened & 160 audited endpoints 
• Monitoring, administrating & deployment of ICT 
infra under CIS group 
 
 Procurement of ICT to setup log analytics platform through GeM 
 On-boarding of new log sources. On-boarding for Tamil Nadu firewall in process 
 On-boarding of email logs from new Email setup (Zoho) 
 Central Logging policy is being drafted 
 R&D using AI/ML for log analytics and threat detection 
 Custom dashboard for querying multiple threat intelligence (TIs) available with NIC 
 
The EDR/UEM are mandatory cybersecurity requirements that are required to be 
implemented to protect their digital assets from cyber threats. 
 
Sr. No Equipment  Details Status 
1 Renewal of  UEM licenses Fully utilised   
2 Renewal of EDR licenses Fully utilised   
  
5. Data Centre Security 
 
 Strategic Planning & Implementation: Develop and execute security strategies to 
safeguard NIC’s network perimeter. 
 Security Infrastructure Management: Oversee deployment, configuration, and 
maintenance of security tools, including Anti-DDoS, Firewalls, SSL Offloaders, 
IPS, Anti-APT, and WAF. 
 Capacity Building & Training: Provide guidance and training to cybersecurity 
personnel on best practices and emerging security technologies. 

59 
 
 Collaboration & Coordination: Work with ministries, NIC Cybersecurity teams, and 
government agencies to enhance security measures, including firewall port 
openings and vulnerability assessments. 
 Technology Demonstration: Conduct Proof of Concept (PoC) evaluations for 
emerging security technologies. 
 ICT Infrastructure Testing: Perform rigorous testing of the ICT infrastructure to 
ensure security and performance. 
 Procurement & Policy Management: Prepare and evaluate RFPs and tender 
documents for perimeter security ICT infrastructure. 
 Process Improvement: Optimize security processes and procedures. 
 Cyber Threat Analysis & Mitigation:Analyze intelligence from NIC-CERT, CERT-
IN, and the Cybersecurity Division to prevent cyberattacks. 
i. Major Technology Solutions Managed to Secure Data Centres by CISG 
The CISG oversees the implementation and management of various security 
technologies across different locations. Below is a breakdown: 
 
Technology Quantity Locations 
DDoS Protection 6 NDC Shastri Park, Hyderabad, Pune 
Next-Generation Firewalls 
(NGFW) 
119 NDCs, CGO, LNDC, States 
Web Application Firewall (WAF) 18 NDCs 
Intrusion Prevention System 
(IPS) 
34 NDCs, States 
SSL Offloaders 12 NDCs 
UTM Devices 42 NDCs, States 
APT Devices 10 NDC Shastri Park 
Vulnerability Assessment 30,000+ Across all NDCs 
Deep Security 7,500 Across all NDCs 
Total 241 
ii. Major Activities & Impact (2024-2025) 
Activity Impact 
Firewall Rule Implementation 1.5 lakh rules reviewed and implemented 

60 
 
Web Application Firewall (WAF) Prevented 20 million attacks 
Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) Blocked 61 million attacks (approx. 2 lakh/day) 
DDoS Mitigation Prevented 7.4 million attacks 
APT Protection Blocked 104,672 attacks 
Vulnerability Assessments Conducted 42,000 reports generated 
Malware Detection & Quarantine 1.5 million threats mitigated 
Host-based Intrusion Prevention Prevented 1.75 million attacks 
Geolocation-Based IPS Policies 185 policies implemented 
CVE Signatures Created 690 CVE IDs provided for signature creation 
SSL/TLS Offloading 1,500+ certificates managed 
DDoS Signature Deployment 510 gnatures implemented 
 
iii. Key Upgrades & Optimizations 
 Firewall Upgrades: Migration of multiple firewall setups, enhancing throughput 
from 20G to 40G. 
 DDoS Protection Enhancements: Increased capacity from 50Gbps to 100Gbps, 
deployed new signatures, and conducted firmware upgrades. 
 IPS Improvements: Deployed 3,280 new signatures in Trellix and Radware IPS 
devices. 
 Automation & Monitoring: Implemented Zabbix for real-time Web Application 
monitoring behind WAF. 
 Enhanced Security Policies: Segregation of policies for audited and unaudited 
websites (15,000+ sites optimized). 
 Election Security Support: Provided cybersecurity measures on election counting 
days (08/10/2024, 23/11/2024 and 08/02/2025) 
iv. Innovations in Cybersecurity 
 Evaluated PoC for innovative security technologies, including Wi-Jungle IPS, 
FourCore and AlgoSec 
 Created 22 user-defined security signatures. 
 Developed 118 custom IPS & DDoS signatures based on emerging cyber threats. 
 Identified 5,870 IoCs, 500+ vulnerabilities, and 100+ critical threats. 
 Discovered over 3,000 unique vulnerabilities. 
 Provided 690 CVE IDs for signature development. 

61 
 
 Established a Zabbix-based real-time security monitoring system for critical web 
applications 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTI FICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER  
 The Committee would also like the Ministry to update about the status of work of 
STQC Building in Noida as it is scheduled to be completed by November, 2025. Further, 
the status of constitution of autonomous p roject of STQC Lab and STQC website may 
also be furnished along with the launching of Data Centres Certification Scheme. The 
Committee would also like to know whether the Ministry would be able to complete these 
important projects within the allocated fund s or they require additional funds for the 
same. In latter case, the Committee desire that the matter may be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance timely so that there is no time and cost overrun. 
Reply of the Government 
 The construction of the STQC building in Sector 62, Noida by CPWD, is underway 
and is expected to be completed by February 2026. 
 
 Administrative approval for implementation of Lab Automation Process has been 
obtained from Competent Authority for an amount of Rs.7.0 Crore and work order 
has been issued to Implementing Agency i.e. CDAC, Noida. Phase I roll out is 
expected in July, 2025   followed up by Phase 2 roll out by the end of next 
Financial Year 2025-26. 
 
 Data Centres Certification Scheme has been formulated & submitted to MeitY for 
its approval and Launching will be planned accordingly. 
 
Further, as the current financial year (2024 -25) is closing soon, the budget provision 
required for completion of the above-mentioned activities has been reflected in the BE for 
the next FY .  As desired by the Committee requisite action for seeking funds for these 
activities beyond allocation would be taken up with MoF in a timely manner. 
  
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 

62 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER 
 The Committee observe that under STQC, procurement of environmental test 
facilities for 11 centres is in progress and remaining test facilities such as EMI/EMC 
(Electromagnetic Interference/ Electromagnetic Compatibility), safety, smart energy 
meter are proposed to be procured during this year. The Committee wish to know about 
the progress made in this regard in all 11 centres and the status of remaini ng test 
facilities at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Procurement of environmental test facilities for 11 centres is in progress. Tender 
has been floated for procurement of Environmental Test facilities for an amount of Rs.5.0 
Crore(appx), Procurem ent of Test/Calibration facility at a cost of Rs.1.5 Cr. Has been 
completed.  STQC aims to procure remaining Environmental Test facilities in the second 
phase, with an investment of Rs. 12.0 Crores in the next FY 2025 -26.  An upgrade of 
EMI/EMC   Safety Te st and Smart Energy Meter facilities is planned, amounting to Rs. 
8.0 Crore in the next FY 2025-26. 
  
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II)  dated 21.03.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
NATIONAL  KNOWLEDGE  NETWORK 
 National Knowledge Network (NKN) approved by Cabinet Committee of 
Infrastructure (CCI) in March, 2010, is an innovative, cutting -edge, robust and secured 
network. It aims to provide a centralized multi -gigabit high -speed digital connectivity 
backbone for research and educational institutions and Government organisations 
spread across India. NIC is the implementing agency and it was to be implemented over 
a period of 10 years at an outlay of Rs. 5990 crore. Subsequently, it has been extended 
till 31st March, 2025 with a revised outlay of Rs. 6956.88 crore. Further, it is seen that 
during Financial Year 2024 -25, against the proposed BE of Rs. 925.00 crore, only Rs. 
240.26 crore has been allotted. The Ministry has informed the Committee that in orde r to 
ensure adequate availability of funds, efforts would be made to seek additional funds in 
RE 2024-25. The Committee opine that this Network should be adequately funded and 
the intended objectives be achieved. Since the proposed deadline is 31 st March, 2025, 

63 
 
the Committee would like to be enlightened about the present status of the Network and 
the expected time of its completion. 
Reply of the Government 
 During the FY 2024-25, a provision of Rs 240.26 crore was made at BE level, The 
fund to the tune of R s 925 cr was required for minimum operational expenses & for 
replacement of end -of-life equipment [like: routers/ switches (for core, distribution and 
edge connectivity), data centre equipment, DDoS Protection System - & Firewalls, the 
hardware required for  making the network 100G ready etc. During the RE FY 2024 -25 
effective allocation was enhanced to Rs 490.26 cr.  
 
 The file is under process for further one year extension of the NKN project (i.e. 
from 01.04.2025 to 31.03.2026). The network consisting of c ore links, over 1800 links to 
Institutions, and over 650 links to districts would be kept operational.  The proposal for 
NKN phase II is under process of approval. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 2(1)/2024- Budget (Vol.II) dated 21.03.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
      21 July, 2025  Chairperson, 
 30 Asadha, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

64 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th June, 2025 from 1100 hours to 1410 hours 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS  
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
6. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
7. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
8. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
10. Shri Devesh Shakya 
11. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Saket Gokhale 
13. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
16. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
 Welcoming member s to the sitting of the Committee, the Chairperson drew their 
attention to the Agenda for the sitting which included consideration and adoption of the 4 
Draft Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on DFG (2025 -26) and evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Power on the Subject ‘Impact of emergence of Artificial 
Intelligence and related issues’.  
 
 The Committee then considered and adopted  the foll owing Draft Action Taken 
Reports:- 
 
(i) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(ii) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in t heir Fourth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
(iv) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
 
2. The Committee also authorized Chairperson to finalize the reports and present/lay 
them in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha during the Monsoon Session of Parliament.  
   3.        XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX….XXXX Matter not related to the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
ANNEXURE II  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FOURTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:–  
Recommendation S.l No. 
1,3,4,5,8,9,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,21,22,23,24,25,26,27 and 28   
 
22 
 Percentage of total: 75.86% 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:– 
Recommendation Sl. No.: 2 and 29 
 
02 
 Percentage of total: 6.90% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:–  
Recommendation Sl. Nos.: NIL 
 
  00 
 Percentage of total: 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature:– 
Recommendation Sl. Nos.: 6,7,10,11 and 20 
 
05 
 Percentage of total: 17.24% 
 
 